Nepal
Nepal’s political and peace processes remained stalled in 2010, resulting in instability,
weak governance, and no progress on accountability for human rights violations.
Prime Minister Madav Kumar Nepal of the Unified Marxist-Leninist party
(CPN-UML) resigned on June 30, under pressure from the Maoists who demand a
unity government with themselves at the helm. At this writing the parliament has
failed to form a new government, despite 16 rounds of parliamentary votes. The
Constituent Assembly missed the May 28 deadline to draft a new constitution. In
a last-minute deal, political parties concluded a three-point agreement to extend
the Constituent Assembly by another year.
The government made little progress in 2010 on realizing people’s economic,
social, and cultural rights though economic development. Reports of lawlessness
persist in many parts of the country, especially in the southern plains of the Terai
and the eastern hills. Armed groups and ethnically based organizations have
been involved in killings and extortion with impunity.
Accountability for Past Abuses
The government and political parties still fail to show the will to establish
accountability for human rights violations committed during the war. No one from
the security forces or among the Maoists has been held criminally responsible for
abuses committed during the conflict. In many cases, those accused of violations
actively receive protection from the security forces or political parties.
In October the Nepal Army extended the tenure of Colonel Raju Basnet by two
years, though he was at the Maharajgunj army barracks in 2003 and 2004 when
various cases of torture, arbitrary detention, and enforced disappearance took
place. The National Human Rights Commission (NHRC) and the UN Office of the
High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) have repeatedly requested that
the government start proceedings against Basnet.
In spite of a court order, the army refused to hand over Major Niranjan Basnet,
accused in 2004 of the torture, rape, and murder of 15-year-old Maina Sunwar.
After Basnet was returned at the request of the UN from a peacekeeping mission in late 2009, the army took him into its custody. In July a military tribunal, established
to probe the circumstances of Basnet’s return from Chad, concluded he
was “innocent.”
The Unified Communist Party of Nepal (Maoist) (UCPN-M) leadership has likewise
failed to cooperate with criminal investigations into alleged crimes committed by
Maoists during and after the conflict.
Although the Comprehensive Peace Agreement does not provide a broad amnesty
for serious crimes, the government continues to discuss the withdrawal of cases
deemed “political,” including cases of murder. In January the Supreme Court
upheld the conviction of Maoist Constituent Assembly member Balkrishna
Dhungel for the 1998 murder of Ujjwal Kumar Shrestha. However, police have
failed to arrest him, and Maoists claim the case is against the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement and interim constitution.
In September police and the NHRC exhumed the bodies of four people in
Dhanusha district. The four are believed to be among five students that security
forces allegedly disappeared and killed in 2003. So far, the police have failed to
question officials and claim they are waiting for DNA results to pursue further
investigations.
The draft bills to establish a Truth and Reconciliation Commission and a
Disappearances Commission have been tabled in parliament but await debate by
the Statute Committee. While the bills are a step towards ensuring justice for war
victims, several provisions remain that are inconsistent with international law.
Integration of Maoist Combatants
For more than four years, 19,602 Maoist former combatants have been held in
UN-monitored cantonment sites. In January 2010 the process began of discharging
4,008 of them, who were disqualified as children (2,973 of them) and as late
recruits. A UN monitoring mechanism was formed to scrutinize UCPN-M compliance
with its commitment to a 2009 action plan with the government and the UN
representatives, including a provision on the non-recruitment of children. A special
committee established in mid-2009 to address the integration of Maoist combatants into the security forces was unable to function for several months due to
the continuous absence of UCPN-M from meetings.
Dalits
Dalits (“untouchables”) suffer from discrimination in economic, social, and cultural
spheres. In September 2009 Nepal announced its support for the UNagreed-
upon guidelines on the elimination of caste discrimination. However,
Nepal has yet to implement recommendations made in 2004 by the Committee on
the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, including adopting relevant statutory law
to enable the National Dalit Commission–a state agency–to fulfill its mandate.
Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity
The Nepal government has made significant strides towards ensuring equality for
lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender people in recent years. The government
has promised that the 2011 national census will allow citizens to identify themselves
as male, female, or transgender.
Yet progress remains tenuous. According to local NGOs, there are 280 discriminatory
legal provisions affecting the LGBT community. In September sexual minorities
alleged that the Home Minister refused to issue citizenship cards to transgender
people, contravening a Supreme Court directive three years ago. In response,
dozens of LGBT individuals staged protests in the capital. Police detained some
protesters without charge for several hours.
Women’s Rights
While women have constitutional guarantees and a strong representation in the
Constituent Assembly, women and girls continue to face widespread discrimination.
Violence and exploitation, including trafficking, domestic violence, dowryrelated
violence, rape, and sexual violence remain serious problems. Sexual violence
cases are often settled in private, and even when complaints are filed,
police rarely carry out effective investigations.
Female members of the Constituent Assembly have formed a caucus to pressure
committees to discuss women’s concerns. Some of the members’ demands
include for women’s perspectives to be included on the issues of citizenship and
property, and for the government to reserve positions for women in administration
and the judiciary, and to provide dedicated public services for sexual and
reproductive health.
Many women migrate to the Middle East as workers through recruitment agencies;
once they arrive in these countries, they are often vulnerable to abuse and
have very few legal protections.
Terai
Tensions persist over the rights of the different ethnic groups, including Madheshi
communities near the Indian border in the Terai, who want greater autonomy and
proportionate representation in government jobs. Public security remains a major
concern in many districts of the Terai. The UN secretary-general, in his periodic
report to the UN Security Council expressed concern that the extortion of officials,
teachers, and business people by armed groups and ethnic organizations is on
the rise despite increased police patrols.
According to human rights groups, the government’s special security policy,
which aims to address the deteriorating security situation, has led to increased
human rights violations. For instance, OHCHR documented 57 cases of deaths as
a result of the unlawful use of lethal force by security forces between January
2008 and June 2010. In several Terai districts, armed groups have recruited children
as messengers for extortion notes and ransom collection, and for enforcing
bandhs (strikes) called by the armed groups.
Tibetan Refugees
The current administration continued to endorse the “One China Policy” and
Tibetan refugees faced increased harassment by Nepali authorities in efforts to
appease China. Several instances of arrests, criminalization of entry, detention,
refoulement, and attempted refoulement of Tibetan refugees were reported in
2010. In June Nepali authorities forcefully deported three Tibetan new arrivals from Humla district. Two of them are believed to be in detention in China. In
October police in Kathmandu confiscated ballot boxes during annual elections
held by Tibetan refugees to nominate candidates for the government in exile. The
Home Minister reportedly issued a statement saying the polling “violated Nepal’s
foreign policy and existing laws of the host country.”
Key International Actors
Nepal is dependent on aid and relies heavily on its traditional donors, such as
Japan, the United States, the United Kingdom, India, and the European Union. It
has to maintain a balance in its relations with its two powerful neighbors, India
and China. In an effort to correct their heavy dependency on India, Nepali political
parties–particularly the Maoist-led government–have attempted to strengthen
ties with China. In December 2009 China provided military aid of about US$3 million,
including training for the Nepal Army.
In December 2009 the US president signed into law the 2010 Consolidated
Appropriations Act, which includes a prohibition on assistance to the Nepal army
unless, among other things, it fully cooperates with investigations and prosecutions
by civilian judicial authorities of violations of internationally recognized
human rights.
India played a positive role in bringing about the comprehensive peace agreement
between political parties to end the Maoist conflict. But since then, India
stands accused of meddling in the selection of a consensus prime minister,
adding to the political instability.
The UK continues to provide military assistance to Nepal. In October Nepal’s army
chief, Gen. Chhatraman Gurung, visited the UK to boost military ties.
The UCPN-M remains on the US list of banned terrorist organizations. In June, the
US embassy in Kathmandu denied a visa to Agni Sapkota, a senior Maoist member,
for his alleged involvement in the extrajudicial killing of Arjun Bahhadur
Lama during the Maoist insurgency.
Nepal continues to be a key troop-contributing country to UN peacekeeping missions.
In June the government renewed OHCHR’s mandate for a year but demanded a
phased closure of all offices outside Kathmandu, thus weakening human rights
monitoring in the field.
The mandate of the UN Mission in Nepal is ending in January 2011. UN Under
Secretary-General for Political Affairs B. Lynn Pascoe visited Nepal in October to
discuss the peace process with the prime minister.