 NEPAL
 Nepal is a constitutional monarchy with a parliamentary form of government. In
 1990 the King, formerly an absolute monarch, legalized political parties and an in-
 terim government promulgated a new Constitution. The King retains important re-
 
 
 1238
 sidual powers but has dissociated himself from the day-to-day exercise of governing.
 The democratically elected Parliament consists of the House of Representatives and
 the National Council. A parliamentary election was held on November 15. Observers
 considered it free and fair. The election resulted in a victory for the United Marxist
 and Leninist party (UML), which formed a new government.
 The national police force maintains internal security, assisted as necessary by the
 Royal Nepalese Army. Local officials have wide discretion in maintaining law and
 order. A positive development was police exercise of considerable restraint in han-
 dling violent political demonstrations. However, police mistreatment of criminal sus-
 pects continued.
 Nepal is an extremely poor country, with an annual per capita gross domestic
 product estimated at around $210. Over 80 percent of its 20 million people support
 themselves by subsistence agriculture. The export of carpets and garments, along
 with tourism are the major sources of foreign exchange. Foreign aid covers more
 than half of the development budget. The Government seeks to liberalize the econ-
 omy and provide a greater role for the private sector.
 Since the beginning of political reform in 1990, Nepal has progressed in its transi-
 tion to a more open society with greater respect for human rights. However, prob-
 lems remain. Police continue to torture detainees. The Government's unwillingness
 to investigate allegations of police brutality or take actions against those involved
 remains a serious concern. The Government continues to impose some restrictions
 on freedom of expression, and trafficking in women and child labor remain serious
 problems. Women and the lower castes also suffer widespread discrimination.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-In January an angry crowd attacked
 police after a police subinspector poured boiling water on a woman shopkeeper in
 apa. The po ice fired on the crowd, killing 1 person and wounding 30. The au-
 thorities later suspended the subinspector but took no other actions against him or
 other officers.
 The Government refused to investigate police officers responsible for the 1993 kill-
 ing of more than two dozen persons in leftist-inspired political demonstrations and
 strikes. However, the Government has compensated the families of some of the vic-
 tims.
 Killings by political groups increased during and after the November 15 general
 elections. In September several members of the radical leftist United People's Front
 killed a Nepali Congress Party (NCP) worker on his way to a party meeting in
 Rukum District. On October 27, unknown assailants killed an NCP worker in Dang
 District. One week later, eyewitnesses claim that senior NCP workers were among
 those who shot dead three Communist Party workers marching in a procession to-
 ward the NCO~s office in Dang District. An NCP worker was shot dead on November
 5 in 11am District; the authorities arrested eight members of the National Demo-
 cratic Party for the killing. According to unconfirmed reports, the police killed two
 members of the radical United Peoples Front on November 27, after they fired on
 the police officers in Rolpa District.
 Reported political killin  continued after the election. In December the NCP re-
 ported that six of its workers were killed in political violence after the formation
 of the new Government.
 b. Disappearance.-In June police removed from a Kathmandu hospital a student
 on a hunger fast in protest over government inaction on pollution; the student has
 not been seen since. In October the Supreme Court issued a writ of habeas corpus,
 but the police maintained that they were not holding the student. The case remains
 unsolved. The case of a student activist taken into custody by police in June 1993
 also remains unsolved, despite an ongoing inquiryby the Supreme Court.
 The Government continues to refuse to publish the report of the Disappearances
 Commission, a body established to investigate all disappearances in the period from
 December 1960 to the beginning of the political transformation in 1990. Human
 rights monitors remain skeptical of the Government's claim that the report's find-
 ings do not warrant governmental action. They eress concern that persons respon-
 sible for disappearances remain in positions of authority.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 Although the Constitution prohibits torture the law does not define torture as a
 criminal offense. The police commonly use physical abuse to punish suspects or ex-
 tract confessions. The Government failed to conduct thorough and independent in-
 vestigations of reports of police brutality, nor did it take significant disiplinary ac-
 tion against officers involved. The Constitution provides for compensation for vic-
 
 
 1239
 tims, but a compensation bill introduced in Parliament in 1993 remains in commit-
 tee.
 Charges of cruel treatment by police continued in 1994. During periods of political
 unrest m the spring and summer the police reportedly abused several persons ar-
 rested at leftist-sponsored political protests. However, there were several clear inci-
 dents of torture. Police in Patan headquarters kicked and beat on the soles of the
 feet a foreigner arrested in January for drug trafficking. Several policemen held a
 stick across his thighs and jumped on it repeatedly, causing temporary paralysis.
 Police denied that any such abuse occurred, but a doctor examined the man and
 judged that his allegations were credible.
 In January a group of policemen beat the hand and leg joints of a man from Bara
 who filed a complaint against a police officer who allegedly had had an affair with
 the man's mother. In response an angry crowd gathered outside the station. The
 police opened fire and wounded six persons. The authorities transferred the police
 officer involved in the affair but took no other action.
 In October the authorities arrested a man in Ilam District and charged him with
 illegally cutting wood. To extract a confession forest guards reportedly beat the
 man, inserted pins under his fingernails, and beat the soles of his feet. The man
 was released from custody after a court found him not guilty.
 The authorities continued to harass Tibetan asylum seekers who tried to cross the
 border from China. In February security forces badly beat a Tibetan apprehended
 crossing the border near Kodari. Approximately a dozen soldiers repeatedly kicked
 the man in the face and beat him with rifle butts, which resulted in temporary
 blindness and the loss of several teeth (see Section 2.d.).
 Political groups also engaged in physical abuse. Shopkeepers and bus drivers were
 stoned and beaten by members of leftist opposition parties after they refused to
 honor nationwide strikes.
 Overcrowding is common in prisons and authorities sometimes handcuff or fetter
 detainees. Women are incarcerated separately from men, in equally poor conditions.
 The Government has not implemented a provision in the 1992 Children's Act calling
 for the establishment of a juvenile home and juvenile court. Consequently, children
 are sometimes incarcerated with adults-either as criminals or with an incarcerated
 parent. In May the Jail Management Department reported that 83 children below
 the age of 12 years were in prison.
 There has been improvement in prison conditions. The authorities are more likely
 to transfer sick prisoners to hospitals than they were in the past. However, because
 of the inadequacy of medical facilities in the country, the authorities often place the
 mentally ill in jails under inhumane conditions.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The Constitution provides that a suspect
 must be arraigned or released within 24 hours of arrest, but the police often violate
 this provision. Under the Public Offenses Act of 1970, the police must obtain war-
 rants for an arrest unless a person is caught in the act of committing a crime. For
 many offenses, the case must be filed in court within 7 days of arrest. If the court
 upholds detention, the police are authorized up to 25 days, with a possible 7-day
 extension, to complete their investigation. The Supreme Court on occasion has or-
 dered the release of detainees held longer than 24 hours without a court appear-
 ance.
 Detainees do not have the legal right to be visited by family members and are
 permitted access to lawyers only after the authorities file charges. Instead, the
 granting of access is haphazard and varies from prison to prison. There is a system
 of bail, but bail is too expensive for most citizens.
 Under the Public Security Act, the authorities may detain persons who allegedly
 threaten domestic security and tranquility, amicable relations with other states, and
 relations between citizens of different classes or religions. Persons detained under
 the Act are considered in preventive detention and are not brought to trial. In 1994
 the authorities used the Act primarily to detain groups of youths and mob leaders
 in advance of scheduled demonstrations. They released most detainees within 48
 hours.
 Human rights groups report that supporters of the leftist parties are sometimes
 arrested and detaine arbitrarily and subjected to unwarranted criminal investiga-
 tions because of their political affiliation.
 Under the 1991 amendments to the Public Security Act, the police are authorized
 to extend periods of detention after submitting written notices to the Home Min-
 istry. The district court must be notified of a detention within 24 hours and may
 order an additional 6 months of detention before official charges must be filed.
 Other laws, including the Public Offenses Act, permit arbitrary detention. This
 Act and its many amendments cover such crimes as disturbing the peace, vandal-
 ism, rioting, and fighting. Under this Act, the Government detained hundreds of
 
 
 1240
 
 civil servants during a 55-day antigovernment strike in 1991. Human rights mon-
 itors express concern that the Act vests too much discretionary power in the Chief
 District Officer (CDO), the highest ranking civil servant in each of the 75 districts.
 Under the Act, he is authorized to order detentions, issue search warrants, and
 specify fines and other punishments for misdemeanors without judicial review. De-
 tainees may appeal the decisions of the CDO's.
 The Constitution prohibits exile, and it is not practiced.
 e. Denial of Fair Public TriaL-.-The judicial system consists of three levels: dis-
 trict courts, appellate courts, and the Supreme Court. The King appints the judges
 on recommendations from the Judicial Council, a constitutional body chaired by the
 Chief Justice. The Council is also responsible for the assignments of judges, discipli-
 nary action, and other administrative matters.
 The Constitution provides for the right to counsel, protection from double jeopardy
 and retroactive application of the law, and public trials, except in some security and
 customs cases. All lower court decisions, including acquittals, are subject to appeal.
 The Supreme Court is the court of last appeal, but the King may grant pardons or
 suspend, commute, or remit any sentence.
 The Supreme Court has increasingly demonstrated its independence. It has ruled
 that important provisions in the 1992 Labor Act and the 1991 Nepal Citizenship Act
 are unconstitutional. Appellate and district courts have become increasingly inde-
 pendent, although they sometimes bend to political pressure.
 Military courts adjudicate cases concermng military personnel who are immune
 from prosecution in civilian courts. In 1992 the Supreme Court ruled that civilians
 may no longer be tried in military courts for crimes involving the military.
 The authorities may prosecute terrorism or treason cases under the Treason Act.
 Such trials are closed and are heard by specially constituted tribunals. However,
 there were no such trials in 1994.
 There is no credible evidence that the Government holds political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Government generally respects the privacy of the home and family. Search warrants
 are required before search and seizure, except in cases involving suspected security
 and narcotics violations. Under the Police Act of 1955, as amended, the police are
 authorized to issue warrants for search and seizure. Such warrants must be ap-
 proved within 24 hours by the Chief District Officer in misdemeanor cases and court
 judges in felony cases.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution specifies that all citizens shall
 have freedom of thought and expression, and that no news article or any other read-
 ing material shall be censored. Nevertheless, the Constitution prohibits speech and
 writings that would threaten the sovereignty and integrity of the Kingdom; disturb
 the harmonious relations among people of different castes or communities; promote
 sedition, defamation, contempt of court, or instigation to commit crime; or contradict
 decent public behavior or morality.
 The Press and Publications Act provides for the licensing of publications and the
 granting of credentials to journalists. The Act includes penalties for violating these
 requirements. The Act also prohibits publication of material that, inter alia, pro-
 motes disrespect toward the King or royal family or undermines the dignity of the
 King, the integrity and sovereignty of the Kingdom, and security, peace, and order,
 creates animosity among the different castes amd religions; or adversely affects the
 good conduct or morality of the public. In 1992 the Government issued regulations
 amending the Act which established requirements for education and work experi-
 ence to hold particular jobs in journalism. The regulations also provide a basis for
 banning foreign publications.
 There are scores, if not hundreds, of independent newspapers representing points
 of view across the political spectrum. The two dailies with the largest circulation
 are government sponsored. Their editors generally reflect government policy, but
 they occasionally publish articles critical of the Government and recommend alter-
 native policies. The Ministry of Communication occasionally provides editors with
 guidance. The Government subsidizes newsprint materials to allow un-profitable pa-
 pers to stay in business.
 The Government owns and controls the sole radio and television stations. Pro-
 gramming currently reflects a broader range of interests and political viepints
 than before the beginning of the political transformation in 1990, but still closely
 follows the government lie. The Government does not restrict access to foreign
 radio broadcasts or to the purchase of television satellite dishes. The Broadcast Act
 of 1993 allows private parties to broadcast television and FM radio. No private FM
 radio license was granted in 1994 although an application has been pending for
 
 
 1241
 months. Two private television cable services began operations in Kathmandu in
 1994, csrrying foreign entertainment programs only.
 The Government limits academic freedom to the same parameters as the media.
 No overt efforts to enfore these limitations were reported in 1994.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Asociation.-Although the Constitution pro-
 vides for freedom of assembly, this right may be restricted by law on such vague
 grounds as undermining the sovereignty and integrity of the State or disturbing law
 and order. There were no reports of arrests or detentions for exerci  these free-
 doms in 1994. However, hundreds of persons were arrested before and during vio-
 lent strikes and demonstrations organized by lefist parties. Protest leaders from
 radical leftist groups were placed n preventive detention before scheduled dem-
 onstrations on a number of occasions. Most were released aftr the demonstrations
 finished.
 . Freedom of Rigion-The mority of citizens are Hindu. The Constitution de-
 scribes Nepal as a Hindu kingdom, although it does not establish Hinduism as the
 state reigion. The Constitution permitsgthe practice of all reigions and prohibits
 discrimination on the basis of caste except for traditional reigious practices at
 Hindu temples. The Government has not interfered with the practice of other reli-
 gions. There is concern among non-Hindus, however, that a constitutional prohibi-
 tion against converting another person could be used to limit expression of religious
 beliefs. The authorities arrested 11 Christians in 1am District n October for pros-
 elytizing near the entrance of a Hindu temple and blocking public access.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Countiy, Foreign Trvel, Emigration, and Re-
 sateriation.-The Constitution provides for freedom of movement and residence, and
 the Government generally does not restrict travel abroad. However, the Government
 restricts travel to some areas on thce cese border to foreign tourists and foreign
 residents, such as Tibetan refugees. The Government allows citizens abroad to re-
 turn home and is not known to revoke citizenship for political reasons.
 The Government has no official refugee policy and istnot party to the 1967 Proto-
 col Relating to the Status of Refugees. However, in the past, the Government accept-
 ed and assimilated apprximately 18,000 Tibetan refugees who still reside in Nepal.
 In the mid-1970's, the Government ceased issuing identification cards to over 12,000
 Tibetan residents. They do not have legal proof that they live in Nepal. Some of
 these undocumented residents who wished to travel abroad in 1994 faced difficulties
 from authorities.
 The United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHo   R) has maintained
 an office in Kathmandu since 1989. The Government aids UNHCR's efforts by facili-
 tating access to refugees from both China and ehutan.
 The Governments of Nepal and China tightened movement across their border in
 1986, but beth sides observe such restrictions haphazardly. The authorities contin-
 ued to harass Tibetan asylum seekers who tried to cross the border with China. In
 some cases, border officials demand bribes from would-be refugees (see Section 1.c.).
 In some instances fighting has occurred between would-be refugees and the poice.
 In August the police fired on a group of 10 Tietans who crossed the border in
 the Humla District, injuring 3 persons. One man was wounded by gunfire below the
 knee and his leg was later amputated. The police claim that they were forced to
 open fire after the Tibetans attacked them and grabbed their weapons in an attempt
 to escape The Tibetans claim that the police attempted to rob them.
 As in previous years the Government continued to use force to repatriate Tibet-
 ans to China against their will. Reliable information is unobtainable, but some re-
 ports suggest the problem increased in 1994.
 Ethnic Nepalese fleeing Rhutan continued to arrive in 1994 (see the report on
 Bhutan). At year's end, tecamp in southeastern Nepal housed 86,000 refugees,
 with another 15,000 to 20,000 residing outside the camps. These residents represent
 over one-sixth of Bhutan's estimated population before the exodus.
 The UNHCR monitors the condition of the Ehutanse refugees and provides as-
 sistance for their basic needs. The Government accepts the refugee presence on hu-
 manitarian grounds but is able to offer little more than a place to stay. Living condi-
 tions in the camps have improved dramatically since 1992. Adequate clean water
 is available and health, sanitation, and nutrition standards are acceptable. Condi-
 tions are actually somewhat better than those found in nearby areas. Consequently
 violence has sometimes broken out between camp residents and the local population.
 Relief organizations working in the camps sometimes distribute token relief supplies
 to local communities to defuse the situation.
 In 1993 the Governments of Nepal and Bhutan formed a joint committee to re-
 solve the refugee problem and to determine different categories of refugees in prepa-
 ration for their future repatriation to Bhutan. However, four rounds of talks have
 led to little concrete progress.
 
 
 1242
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 After a parliamentary defeat in July, the Prime Minister requested the dissolution
 of Parliament and called for new elections. The second parliamentary election in
 three decades was held on November 15. Citizens exercised their right to change
 their government by voting out the NCP and returning the UML party to power.
 Although there were some irregularities, observers concluded that overall the elec-
 tions were free and fair. The UML won 88 seats, the NCP 83, the National Demo-
 cratic Party 20, the Nepali Workers and Peasants Party 4, and Sadbhavana Party
 3, and independents 7. The King invited the UML to form a new government in No-
 vember.
 The people, through their elected representatives, have the right to amend the
 Constitution with the exception of certain basic principles which they may not
 changed-sovereignty vested in the people, the nultiparty system, fundamental
 rights, and the constitutional monarchy.
 Parliamentary elections are scheduled every 5 years. Midterm elections may be
 called if the ruling party loses its majority, or loses a vote of no confidence, or if
 it calls for elections. Suffrage is universal to all citizens of age 18 and over.
 The House of Representatives, the lower house, may send legislation directly to
 the King by a 50-percent vote. The upper house, or the National Council, may
 amend or reject lower house legislation-although it may introduce legislation and
 send it to the lower house for consideration.
 The King exercises certain powers with the advice and consent of the Council of
 Ministers. These powers include exclusive authority to enact, amend, and repeal
 laws relating to succession to the throne. The King's income and property are tax-
 exempt and inviolable, and no question may be raised in any court about any act
 performed by the King. The Constitution also permits the King to exercise emer-
 gency powers in the event of war, external aggression, armed revolt, or extreme eco-
 nomic depression. In such an emergency, the King may suspend without judicial re-
 view many basic freedoms including the freedoms of expression and assembly, free-
 dom from censorship, and freedom from preventive detention. However, he may not
 suspend the right to form associations and of habeas corpus. The King's declaration
 of a state of emergency must be approved by a two-thirds majority of the lower
 house of Parliament. If the lower house is not in session, the upper house exercises
 this power. A state of emergency may be maintained for up to 3 months without
 legislative approval and up to 6 months, renewable only once for an additional 6
 months, if legislative approval is granted.
 The Constitution bars the registration and participation in elections of any politi-
 cal party based on "religion, community, caste, tribe or region," or that does not op-
 erate openly and democratically.
 There are no specific laws that restrict indigenous peoples, women, or minorities
 from participating in the Government or political parties,1but lingering conservative
 traditions limit the influence of women and some castes and tribes in the political
 process. The Constitution requires that each registered party must nominate at
 least 5 percent of its candidates for the House of Representatives. Women con-
 stituted 5 percent of party candidates in the November election. Seven of 250 Mem-
 bers of Parliament are women.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 There are a dozen nongovernmental human rights organizations, including the
 Human Rights Organization of Nepal (HURON) and the Informal Sector Services
 Center (INSEC). The Nepal Law Society also monitors human rights problems, and
 a number of single-issue nongovernmental organizations (NGO's) focus on specific
 problem areas such as torture, child labor, women's rights, or ethnic minorities.
 The police regularly lend vehicles to human rights monitors to observe political
 demonstrations. However, human rights organizations contend that at times the
 Government interferes with their operations. For example, in May government per-
 sonnel entered and inspected the offices of the Kathmandu chapter of Amnesty
 International. The authorities claimed that they carried out a survey of the office
 in accordance with administrative norms, but several human rights groups main-
 tained that a warrant was required for such a survey and organized a protest
 march.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution specifies that the State shall not discriminate against citizens
 on grounds of religion, race, sex, caste, or ideology. However, there is a caste sys-
 
 
 1243
 tern. Discrimination against lower castes and women is common, especially in the
 rural areas of western Nepal
 Women.-Although the Constitution strengthened provisions regarding women, in-
 cluding equal pay for equal work, the Government has not taken effective action to
 implement this provision. Women have benefited from various changes in marriage
 and inheritance laws. In 1994 the Supreme Court struck down as unconstitutional
 provisions of the Citizenship Law that discriminated against foreign spouses of Nep-
 alese women. However, many laws remain discriminatory. The law grants women
 the right to divorce-but on narrower grounds than those applicable to men. The
 Law on Property Rights also favors men in a number of ways, including the division
 of family property, inheritance, and land tenancy.
 Women face discrimination, particularly in rural areas, where religious and cul-
 tural tradition, lack of education, and ignorance of the law remain severe impedi-
 ments to their exercise of basic rights, such as the right to vote or hold property
 in their own names.
 According to the 1991 census, the literacy rate among females is 26 percent, com-
 pared with 57 percent among males. Human rights groups report that girls attend
 secondary schools at a rate half that of boys.
 Women's rights groups report that wife beating is common. Little public attention
 is given to violence against women in the home and the Government made no spe-
 cial efforts to combat it.
 Trafficking in women is a deeply ingrained social problem in several of the poorest
 areas. Estimates of the number of Nepalese girls and women workin as rostitutes
 in India range between 150,000 to 200,000, although prostitution in the Kathmandu
 Valley is also a problem. A children's human rights group states that 20 percent
 of the prostitutes are younger than 16 years old. Women and girls are usually co-
 erced into prostitution, but the extent of coercion is difficult to determine. News-
 papers occasionally report the arrest of those attempting to abduct young women
 or dupe them into going to India. Economic incentives entice many other women.
 In many cases, parents or relatives sell women and young girls into sexual slavery.
 Among the Badini and Devaki of western Nepal, religious prostitution is a continu-
 ing problem.
 The Government prosecutes some cases of coercive trafficking but takes few meas-
 ures to stop it. The spread of the acquired Immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) in
 India's red-light districts has discouraged the Government from promoting the re-
 turn and rehabilitation of Nepalese prostitutes.
 Government efforts focus more on preventing voluntary prostitution than on reha-
 bilitation or prevention of coercive trafficking. The Mimstry of Labor and Social
 Welfare sponsors job and skill training programs in several poor districts known for
 sending prostitutes to India. Several NGO's have similar programs.
 There is a growing number of women's advocacy Ioups, and nearly all political
 parties have their own women's groups. Female Members of Parliament have begun
 working for the passage of tougher laws for crimes of sexual assault, but have had
 little success so far.
 Children.-The Child Act of 1992 provides legal protection for children in the
 workplace and in criminal proceedings. Although it calls for the establishment of
 child welfare committees and orphanages, few such facilities have been established.
 The Labor Act of 1992 prohibits employment of minors under 14 years of age, but
 employees widely ignored the law.
 Children under the age of 16 work in all sectors of the economy. Children's rights
 groups estimate that up to half of Nepal's children are engaged in income-generat-
 ig activities. At the be g    of 1994, child labor in the carpet industry was prev-
 alent, but the problem lessened by year's end. Government officials and carpet man-
 ufacturers concerned about negative publicity moved to eliminate child labor and
 some factories are establishing schools to retrain child laborers (see Section 6.d.).
 Prostitution and trafficking m young girls are serious problems (see Section 5.).
 Approximately 80 innocent children under the age of 12 are incarcerated with
 their parents because the Government has not established juvenile homes (see Sec-
 tion l.c.).
 National/Racial/Ethnic Minorities.-Nepal has over 75 ethnic groups seaking
 50 languages. The Constitution provides that each community "shall have the right
 to preserve and promote its language, script, and culture." It further specifies that
 each community has the right to operate schools up to the primary level in its moth-
 er tongue.
 Discrimination against lower castes is especially common in the rural areas of
 western Nepal. Although the public shunning of "untouchables" has been outlawed,
 an exception was retained for traditional practices at Hindu religious sites. Eco-
 nomic, social, and educational advancement tend to be a function of historical pat-
 
 
 1244
 terns, geographical location and caste The spread of education and higher levels
 of prsperity, especially in the Katbmandu valley, are slowly reducin  caste distinc-
 tions and increasing opt    ties for lower socioeconomic groups. Although higher
 and better educated urban-oriented castes (Brahmin Cbheti and certain elements
 of the Newar community) continue to dominate in politics and senior administrative
 and military positions, the representation of other castes and ethnic groups is slowly
 increasing.
 The Government has moved slowly in establishing programs for ethnic minorities
 and has not enacted any legislation to safeguard their rights. Most government offi-
 cials are Brahmin, Cbhetri, or Newar. Other groups or castes not in the governing
 elite are unable to participate fully in decisions affecting their lands, cultures, tradi-
 tions, and the allocation of natural resources in their territories.
 In remote areas, school lessons and national radio transmissions are often con-
 ducted in the local language. However, in areas with nearby municipalities, edu-
 cation at primary, secondary, and university levels is conducted almost exclusively
 in Nepali. Human rights groups report that the languages of the small Kusunda,
 Dura, and Meche communities are nearly extinct, and that non-Hindu peoples are
 losing their culture.
 People With Disabilities.-There are no government programs specifically de-
 signed to deal with the problems faced by disabled persons, nor has legislation been
 enacted to mandate accessibility to publc buildings or to employment, education,
 and other state services. Persons who are physically disabled normally rely on fam-
 ily members to assist them.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Associaton.-The Constitution provides for the freedom to estab-
 lish and join unions and associations. It permits restrictions of unions only in cases
 of subversion, sedition, or similar conditions. Following the beginning of the political
 transformation in 1990, trade unions are still developing their adminstrative struc-
 tures to organize workers, bargain collectively, and conduct worker education pro-
 grams. Although trade unions were initially associated with political parties, they
 are becoming increasingly independent.
 Union participation in the formal sector is significant, but this sector employs a
 very small portion of the labor force. In 1992 the Parliament passed the Labor Act
 and the Trade Union Act and formulated enabling regulations. However, the laws
 have not yet been fully implemented. The Trade Union Act establishes the proce-
 dures for establishing trade unions, associations, and federations. It also protects
 unions and officials from lawsuits arising from any actions taken in the discharge
 of union duties, including collective bargaining.
 The law permits strikes except by employees in "essential services" such as water
 supply, electricity, and telecommunications. The Government is empowered to halt
 a strike or suspend a union's activities if the union disturbs the peace or adversely
 affects the natioin's economic interests. Under the Labor Act, a legal strike must be
 approved by 60 percent of a union's membership in a vote by secret ballot. However,
 several illegal strikes took place in 1994, especially to protest retrenchment in pub-
 lic enterprises under the Government's administrative reform program. Most re-
 ceived little publicity and were ineffective.
 Even though implementing legislation is not yet in place, some unions are moving
 ahead quickly. The Nepal Trade Union Congress, a national federation representing
 nearly 200,000 members, held its first national convention in February.
 The Government does not restrict unions from joining international labor bodies.
 Several trade federations and union organizations maintain a variety of inter-
 national affiliations.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The Labor Act provides for
 collective bargaining. Although the organizational structures (e.g., labor courts) to
 implement the Act's provisions have not been established, collective bargaining has
 been the primary mechanism for setting wages since April 1990. An estimated 20
 percent of wage earners in the organized sector are covered by agreements.
 Other than the Trade Union Act, there are no legal provisions prohibiting dis-
 crimination against union members or organizers by employers. There are no export
 processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The Constitution prohibits traffic
 in human beings, slavery, serfdom, or forced labor in any form. The Department of
 Labor enforces laws against forced labor in the small formal sector but is unable
 to enforce the law outside that sector.
 Large numbers of women are forced to work against their wills as prostitutes (see
 Section 5). Bonded labor is a continuing problem, especially in agricultural work.
 Bonded laborers are usually members of lower castes. Over 25,000 ethnic Tharu
 
 
 1245
 families are estimated to be under the "Kamaiya" or bonded labor system in the
 Terai region. The Government has not yet enacted legislation or taken other signifi-
 cant steps to address the problem.
 d. Mihimum Age for Employment of Children.-The Constitution stipulates that
 children shall not be employed in factories, mines, or similar hazardous places. The
 law establishes a minimum age for employment of minors at 16 in industry and 14
 in agriculture. Children between the ages of 14 and 16 are limited to a 36-hour
 workweek. Despite the law, child workers are found in all sectors of the economy
 (see Section 5).
 Up to half of Nepal's children are engaged in income generating activities, mostly
 in agriculture. At the beginning of 1994, children constituted as much as one-third
 of the workers in the export-oriented carpet industry. This figure dropped to about
 5 percent at year's end after negative publicity prompted the Government and man-
 ufacturers to move to eliminate child labor in carpet factories. The Government is
 working with the carpet industry to establish a certification for carpets made with-
 out child labor.
 The Department of Labor's enforcement record is improving. In the urban formal
 sector, it has had some success in enforcing laws relating to permanency, minimum
 wage and holidays. Government inspectors are also increasing their monitoring of
 the abuse of child labor in carpet factories.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The Labor Act sets a minimum monthly wage
 of $23 '1,150 rupees) in factories and in the organized labor sector. This wage is
 sufficient only for the most minimal standard of living. Rates in the unorganized
 service sector and in agriculture are often as much as 50 percent lower. The Inter-
 national Labor Organization has noted that the Government has undertaken an ef-
 fort to ensure that female workers receive equal pay for equal work.
 The Labor Act calls for a 48-hour workweek, with 1 day off per week, and limits
 overtime to 20 hours per week. Health and safety standards, and other benefits
 such as a provident fund and maternity benefits, are also established in the Act.
 Implementation of the new Labor Act has been slow, as the Government has not
 created the necessary regulatory or administrative structures to enforce its provi-
 sions. Workers do not have the right remove themselves from dangerous work situa-
 tions. Although labor officers are authorized to order employers to rectify unsafe
 conditions, enforcement of safety standards has been minimal.
