 NEPAL
 Nepal's Constitution specifies that the King (Chief of State)
 is the sole source of authority for all government institutions
 in Nepal. The King exercises ultimate control over all major
 facets of government in fact as well as in name.
 Recently, some signs of change have been developing. In the
 spring of 1979, a round of student demonstrations and
 anti-regime activities resulted in a call by King Birendra for
 a national referendum to decide on the nature of Nepal's
 government - either the continuation of the Panchayat system
 (tradition-based partyless system) or the establishment of a
 multi-party system. In a December 1979 speech, the King
 promised to amend the Constitution, and, in the event the
 Panchayat system was retained, to further democratize it.
 The referendum was held in May 1980, and the partyless
 Panchayat system won. As he had promised, the King reformed
 the Panchayat system, providing among other things for direct
 election to the National Panchayat of most members on the basis
 of universal suffrage, and doing away with the previous
 indirect or tiered electoral system. The amendments also
 granted to the National Panchayat greater power than it
 previously had. A second round of voting, held in the spring
 of 1981, elected a new National Panchayat. The election was
 boycotted by most of the major political groups which had
 expressed dissatisfaction with the King's political reforms.
 Nevertheless, the election attracted a broad array of
 candidates and participation of 53 percent of eligible voters.
 Local and district elections were held throughout Nepal in May
 1982.
 The Council of Ministers (cabinet) functions as the executive
 arm of the government and gives policy advice to the King.
 Since 1980, the National Panchayat has been empowered to select
 a prime minister provided a candidate is able to win the
 support of 60 percent of the members. If no candidate receives
 that support, the Panchayat provides the King with a list of
 three names from which to choose the Prime Minister. In
 addition, the Council of Ministers is considered answerable to
 the Panchayat and the King.
 Nepal is one of the world's poorest countries, with limited
 communications and significant development problems.
 Nonetheless, the current human rights situation has some
 encouraging elements. In recent years there has been a
 discernible, but gradual trend toward a society whose members
 enjoy most basic human rights. Citizens have been given the
 right to vote, enjoyed open elections with open debate, and now
 have access to newspapers which present opposition views.
 Criticism of the monarch or royal family is not permitted, but
 open criticism of the Government is. Nepalese politics has not
 been affect by a significant level of political violence.
 During the past year, press coverage of the National Panchayat
 was permitted for the first time and extensive articles
 concerning the proceedings appeared in the local press. In
 July, the Government made no attempt to supress widespread
 public and press reaction to the death of B.P. Koirala, former
 Prime Minister, founder of the Nepal Congress Party, and
 
 
 1231
 leading opponent of the Panchayat system. Koirala had served
 several jail terms and had been in exile in India for advocacy
 of parliamentary democracy prior to his final release from
 prison in 1976. In recent months, the Government has placed
 increased priority on the decentralization of many governmental
 functions in an apparent move to make them more responsive to
 the people on a local basis.
 The process of achieving a society where basic human rights are
 enjoyed is not yet complete, and there is room for considerable
 progress.
 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom froms
 a. Killing
 Despite a few unconfirmed reports of prisoners being killed
 while in custody, killing or political violence in general is
 not a major factor in Nepali politics. Neither police nor
 terrorist violence by the opposition is considered to be a
 national problem although rare incidents have occurred in
 earlier anti-government protests.
 b. Disappearance
 Opposition members have charged that some persons have
 disappeared while in custody, but these charges have not been
 confirmed. The Public Security Act of 1961 permits six months
 preventive detention before charges must be filed. In April,
 1980 prior to the national referendum, King Birendra issued a
 general amnesty to those accused of political crimes;
 approximately 100 were released. In addition, 28 opposition
 leaders returned from exile. Oppositon critics claim that
 about 50 political prisoners remained in prison following the
 amnesty, although most of those were being held on criminal
 charges. About 70 political activists are believed to be still
 in exile.
 c.   Torture
 Torture is prohibited implicitly by the Prison Act.
 Unsubstantiated allegations of torture of prisoners during the
 first days of incarceration have been made in the past by
 friends and fellow inmates. Close scrutiny of police practices
 is lacking and no known punishment has resulted from alleged
 acts of police brutality.
 d. Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment
 Police brutality and disappearance while in custody have been
 alleged by press articles and opposition members, but no
 summary executions have been confirmed. Places of detention
 reflect the generally low standard of living in one of the
 poorest developing countries; jail conditions vary according to
 the crime committed and the person's status, but all prisoners
 have access to medical attention and to the traditonal
 Nepalesediet. They are permitted visitors and goods from the
 outside. Generally, political prisoners have fared better than
 those convicted of criminal acts. Separate facilities are
 maintained for women and the criminally insane.
 e. Arbitrary Arrest and Imprisonment
 
 
 1232
 
 Nepal does not have the right of habeas corpus, but according
 to the Constitution, a suspect must be brought before a court
 within twenty-four hours and must be provided with the general
 grounds for the arrest or be released. An extension of seven
 days may be granted for completion of the police investiga-
 tion. Those held in preventive detention are not accorded
 these rights, but must be charged within six months. Strict
 adherence to these principles is not the norm.
 f. Denial of a Fair Public Trial
 The law provides for the right to a fair public trial in most
 cases (some security and customs cases excepted), and this
 right is usually honored in practice. Except for those held in
 preventive detention, constitutional guarantees exist for the
 right to counsel and protection from double jeopardy and ex
 post facto laws. Nationwide implementation of these stated
 guarantees remains a goal, but it is not always met. There is
 an association of lawyers. There are military and civilian
 courts with provisions for appeal. Civilians are not tried by
 military courts, although special courts may be established to
 try specific cases. Judges are appointed by the Government and
 decisions in political and security cases can reflect the
 opinion of the government. The Supreme Court is the court of
 last appeal. The King may grant pardons and set aside
 judgements.
 g.   Invasion of the Home
 Except for those suspected of narcotics or security violations,
 search warrants issued by central district officers are
 required before search and seizure. Nepalese law and tradition
 bolster privacy of the home.
 2. Respect for Civil and Political Rights, Including:
 a.   Freedom of Speech and Press
 Freedom of speech and press, as set forth in the Constitution
 cannot be exercised in support of a political party or if those
 rights are judged by local authorities to be detrimental to the
 common good, the monarch, or members of the royal family.
 Journals and newspapers which overstep these guidelines are
 suspended from publication. In 1982, four publications were
 suspended, ostensibly for licensing violations or irregular
 appearance, but in fact for the political content of their news
 or editorials. Most newspapers have been allowed to carry on
 spirited criticism of the Government as distinct from the
 monarchy. The two largest circulation dailies in English and
 Nepali are government organs, but carry reports of some
 opposition activities and viewpoints. In the latter part of
 1982 the Government followed a very liberal policy regarding
 the licensing of new newspapers. Scores of new weeklies and
 dailies have been licensed; they now number some 180 in the
 Kathmandu Valley alone. The circulation of many of these is
 very small (less than 100 issues). Although international news
 magazines are banned occasionally for articles considered
 derogatory to the Government or to the monarchy, the relatively
 large number of travelers to and from India and the West makes
 effective control of foreign reading material impossible.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly ad Association
 
 
 1233
 Regulations promulgated in 1980 by King Birendra permit local
 authorities to prohibit meetings, speeches, and posters if they
 are not found to be "for the convenience or good of the general
 public." They also cannot be in support of a political party
 or detrimental to the monarchy, relations among the people, or
 national security. As in the 1981 National Panchayat
 campaigns, the 1982 local and district panchayat contests
 included large numbers of speeches, rallies, and posters with
 little interference from local authorities. Enforcement
 procedures have tended to preserve the freedoms enjoyed during
 the 1980 referendum campaign. During 1982 there were
 occasional reports of student arrests related to public
 demonstrations; it remains unclear as to why such arrests were
 ordered. These arrests became an issue in the National
 Panchayat when members publicly called for an explanation,
 which was not provided.
 Unions are prohibited by statute although associations
 approaching union status have been formed. Despite government
 and business opposition, these groups have achieved some
 limited gains. They have staged several group actions,
 including a widespread strike in 1981 by elementary and
 secondary school teachers. More recently, the Association of
 Bus and Taxi Drivers threatened to strike, with one of its key
 demands being recognition of the Association. This strike
 failed to materialize, although the demands were not met.
 c.   Freedom of Religion
 Religious toleration is a Nepalese tradition even though
 officially the country is a Hindu kingdom. Any religion may be
 freely practiced in Nepal; however, conversion from Hinduism or
 Buddhism is against the law as is foreign proselytization.
 Non-indigenous religious literature is confiscated if
 distributed free of charge, but may be purchased in book
 stores. Hinduism is generally viewed by the Government as a
 means of creating and maintaining national unity. During the
 last Nepalese census there were complaints concerning census
 takers who reported families as Hindu without inquiring about
 their actual beliefs. The religiously-based caste system has
 been legally abolished. However, the military and civil
 service continue to be dominated by upper caste Nepali-speaking
 Hindus whose socio-economic position gives them greater access
 to education and influence than lower caste groups and ethnic
 and religiou minorities.
 d. Freedom of Movement within the Country, Foreign,
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation.
 There are no general restrictions on travel within the country
 for Nepalese citizens although several areas have been
 restricted for travel by foreigners. Voluntary repatriation of
 Nepali citizens is not hampered by government interference.
 Passport issuance is tightly controlled by means of slow
 processing, short validity, and country restrictions.
 Twelve thousand Tibetans are estimated to have entered Nepal
 since the 1950's. Most have settled in camps throughout the
 country with the largest located near Kathmandu and Pokhara.
 The Government of Nepal, the United Nations, and foreign
 governments have assisted in their resettlement. Many have
 become successful businessmen. Although many have met the
 
 
 1234
 
 twelve-year residency requirement for Nepalese citizenship, the
 number who have become Nepali citizens remains small, and those
 who have acquired citizenship continue to complain that they
 are discriminated against, particularly in the issuance of
 travel documents. Tibetans may travel freely in both
 directions across the Tibet-Nepal border.
 e. Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 Heeding the results of the 1980 national referendum, which
 endorsed continuation with reforms of the partyless Panchayat
 system, the King announced reforms to the Constitution which
 allow voters to select 112 members of the Rastriya Panchayat
 (National Assembly) while the King appoints an additional 28.
 Electoral districts are based on geographical divisions
 providing over-representation for the hill districts-in
 comparison with the more populous valley and Terai (southern)
 districts.
 Nationwide local and district elections were held in May and
 June 1982 in accordance with provisions of the third amendment
 to the Constitution. For the first time in Nepalese history,
 directly-elected representatives filled the seats of the
 various levels of the panchayat system. Local issues dominated
 the polling which drew slightly fewer voters than the 1981
 elections in which 53% of elegible voters chose among 1,096
 candidates for the 112 National Panchayat seats. Candidates
 ran as individuals.
 Political parties are banned by the Constitution, although
 opposition groups exist and publicize their opinions in the
 press. The largest opposition groups, the Nepal Congress Party
 and the pro-Chinese factions of the Nepal Communist Party
 boycotted the 1981 election, although many supporters of these
 parties participated in the 1982 local elections, in some cases
 as candidates. Women's legal and social status in Nepal is a
 reflection of the conflict between modern and traditional
 values. Unexpectedly large numbers of women cast votes in the
 general election, but only two of thirty-four women candidates
 were elected to the Rastriya Panchayat. The only woman
 minister holds the portfolio of Minister of State for Labor and
 Social Welfare. Approximately ten percent of the members of
 the local panchayats are women. The limited participation of
 women in politics seems to be a result of social values and
 lack of education and time rather than of official repression
 or discrimination.
 The Constitution prohibits discrimination on the basis of sex
 but supports laws based on traditional values. Nepalese women
 made legal gains during the International Women's Year when the
 national Government liberalized divorce and child custody laws
 and strengthened protection of women's inheritance and property
 disposal rights. The third amendment to the Constitution
 provided for naturalization of foreign spouses of Nepali men
 for the first time. The gap between legal provisions and
 reality persists,with women unaware of their rights and with
 continuing inequities, especially in family law, the area most
 resistant to legislative change. Current development plans
 call for increasing female primary school enrollment from its
 present 27 percent and for improving the lives of rural women
 through the cottage industry, family planning, and health
 service programs.
 
 
 1235
 3. Government Attitude Regarding International and Non-
 governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations of
 Human Rights
 No international human rights organization is known to have
 requested permission to come to Nepal since the visit of
 Amnesty International representatives in 1977. Amnesty
 International has expressed concern in the past about the state
 of human rights in Nepal and has sponsored political prisoners,
 some of whom were subsequently released.
 There are two human rights organizations in Nepal which work
 with Amnesty International, regional human rights groups, and
 other minor groups. They disseminate their views in public
 meetings, newspapers, and pamphlets. There are no reports of
 attempts to suppress them.
 4. Economic, Social, and Cultural Situation
 Nepal's economic development has been hampered by geographical
 and demographic problems compounded by self-imposed isolation
 before 1951. These problems are offset only partially by the
 country's major resources -- cheap labor, tourist attractions.
 and largely undeveloped hydroelectric power. Eighty percent of
 Nepal's land is hilly or mountainous, creating a high
 population density on its arable land. Population pressure on
 the country's limited resources has resulted in recent years in
 rapid deforestation, serious erosion, and loss of soil
 fertility.
 Nepal's current population is estimated to be approximately 15
 million people. Current population growth is estimated at
 approximately 2.7 per cent annually, increasing the pressure on
 food supplies and social services. Nepal's ratio of population
 to arable land is one of the world's highest. Nepal's per
 capita income is estimated to be approximately $140 per annum
 placing it among the world's poorest countries. Life
 expectancy is currently estimated at 44 years with the average
 for women being slightly lower. Infant mortality is estimated
 at a relatively high 150 deaths per 1,000 live births.
 The literacy rate for Nepal is approximately 20 percent. This
 figure has increased in conjunction with the increased
 enrollment in primary schools which is currently estimated at
 87 percent of school-aged children.
 Of the total population, only an estimated 10 percent has
 access to relatively safe drinking water. The ratio of calorie
 supply available for consumption relative to nutritional
 requirements is estimated at about 91 percent. Approximately
 60 percent of the population is believed to live below the
 absolute poverty level. Over 90 percent of Nepal's population
 lives in rural areas where many of the economic and social
 indicators referred to above are less favorable.
 
 
 1236
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LCANS ANO _ ANTS- 03LIGAT:ONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (US.rISZAL Y:ARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 L.JNTRY: NEPAL
 190.     1981     1982
 I.dCON. ASSIST.-TOTAL...       20.6      19.8     18.9
 LOANS ..............    .. ..0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ...............     20.6     19.8     18.9
 A.AlO  .... a ............      13.4     14.0     1"5.5
 LOANS ..............        0.0       0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............   ... 13.4      14.0     15.5
 (SE.SUPPASSST,)...         0.0      0.0       0.0
 B.FO03 FOR PEACE .......         5.7      4.3      1.7
 LOANS ..............        0.0       0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................     5.7      4.3      1.7
 TITLE I-TOTAL ..........         0.0      0.0      0.0
 REPAY. IN I-LOANS .....        0.0       0.0      0.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURP .....        0.0       0.0      0.0
 TITLE II-TOTAL....,,             5.7      4.3      1.7
 E.RELIEF.EC.OEV & WFP,         5.7       4.3      1.7
 VOL.RILIEF AGENCY.....         0.0       0.0      0.0
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST...          1.5      1.5      1.7
 LOANS .................    0.0       0.0      0.0
 !RANTS ....... .....        1.5      1.5      1.7
 PzAct  CORPS,..,..        1.5      1.5       1.7
 NARCOTICS .........  .   0.0      0.0       0.0
 OTHER .............       0.0      0.0       0.0
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL...          0.0      0.1      0.1
 LOANS... .............      0.0       0.0      0.0
 GRANTS..............        0.0       0.1      0.1
 A.MAP GRANTS ..........         0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.CREOIT SALES-MS ....        0.0       09      0.0
 C.INTL MIL.ED.TRNG ....        0.0       3.1      0.1
 O.TRAN- XCESS STOCK...         0.0       0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS ........        0.0       0.0      0.0
 -II.TOTAL ECON. & MIL,...        20.6     19.9     19.0
 L)ANS .............       .. 0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............   ... 20.6      19.9     19.0
 OTHER US LOAN5.........          0.0      0.0      0.0
 EX-IM BANK LOANS .......         0.0      0.0      0.0
 ALL  OTHER ..............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 ASSISTANCE fROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 .19s0     19ei     1982     1946-82
 TOTAL ........   115.1      61.5     55.8    637.2
 laku               0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 IFC                0.0      0.0       6.2      9.3
 IOA               60.0      0.0       0.0    261.4
 10"                -0,0     0.0       0.0      0.0
 A08               42.7     46.8      36.9    276.7
 AFOa               0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 UNDP               b.0     11.3       0.0     58.6
 OTHER-UN           4.4       3.5     12.7     31.2
 EEC                0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 
 
 1237
