Nepal
The Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA), hammered out to end the 10-year
fighting between the Maoists and government forces that claimed more than
13,000 lives, was thrown into jeopardy in May 2009 when the Maoists withdrew
from the government. The precipitating event was the president’s refusal to back
the Maoists’ demand to sack the army chief, Gen. Rookmangud Katawal. Maoist
Prime Minister Pushpa Kumar Dahal (alias Prachanda) and the Maoists went into
opposition, leading to the formation of a 22-party governing coalition led by the
United Marxist Leninist party (CPN-UML). The Maoists then boycotted the
Constituent Assembly, voted in to draft a new constitution.
The result was political instability, a weak government, and failure to make
progress on crucial issues of economic development and the framing of a new
constitution. The Maoists demanded a parliamentary debate to censure the president.
With the ruling parties reluctant, at this writing the Maoists are preventing
the Constituent Assembly from meeting.
Meanwhile, no member of the security forces or the Maoists has ever been held
criminally responsible for grave human rights abuses committed during the conflict.
Addressing impunity to ensure that abusive officers and soldiers are
removed from the ranks of the army and Maoists is crucial, particularly due to
fears that the peace process may break down. Laws to forbid enforced disappearances
and create a Truth and Reconciliation Commission were also delayed.
Accountability for Past Abuses
Accountability for human rights abuses continued to be promised by political parties
but was again not a priority in 2009. The army continued to make unsupported
claims that it dealt with abusers in its ranks, yet promoted officers identified
as alleged perpetrators of human rights violations, including enforced disappearances
and extrajudicial executions. Particularly controversial was the appointment
of Maj. Gen. Toran Bahadur Singh as acting army chief. As head of the 10th
Division, Singh was accused of involvement in cases of enforced disappearances
in Maharajgunj in 2003. At this writing the prime minister is blocking his promotion
to lieutenant general, but the army is insisting that it go ahead.
The police report that the army continues to refuse to cooperate in investigations
into army abuses: the army refuses to allow the police onto army bases, and the
police have come under pressure and threats not to open investigations or recommend
prosecutions against the army. The government claimed that it was too
weak to initiate prosecutions against the army.
The Maoists have also refused to hold their own personnel accountable for
human rights abuses. Among the members of the Maoists elected to the
Constituent Assembly were known perpetrators of human rights abuses. In
October 2008 the Maoist-led government decided to withdraw 349 cases against
Maoists pending in court, claiming that they were “political” in nature and had
been filed simply because the accused were Maoists.
After the Maoist-led government in August 2008 announced that it would compensate
“victims of conflict,” families of victims have in some cases suspended
their pursuit of criminal investigations, fearing they may negatively influence their
applications for compensation.
Ongoing Abuses and Impunity
The failure to hold people accountable for serious human rights abuses has provided
an impetus to ongoing abuses and impunity by political groups. Groups like
the Young Communist League (YCL, the Maoists’ youth wing), the Youth Force (the
youth wing of the CPN-UML), and the youth wing of the Nepali Congress, committed
serious abuses in 2009. The YCL was particularly abusive, though attacks by
all the youth groups decreased in the second half of the year.
The police remained largely above the law, with torture and mistreatment in custody
widespread. The perpetrators continue to escape justice. Instead, cases
against them are withdrawn, and the victims are offered token amounts of compensation.
Integration of Maoist Combatants
At the crux of the political stalemate is the question of the integration and rehabilitation
of 19,602 Maoist combatants verified by the United Nations Mission in Nepal (UNMIN), who have been held in cantonment sites around the country for
nearly three years. The army and many politicians from the older mainstream parties
maintain that former Maoist combatants should be integrated into society.
The Maoists insist on the integration of Maoist combatants into the security
forces. The 2006 Comprehensive Peace Agreement states that the interim cabinet
“shall form a special committee to carry out monitoring, integration and rehabilitation
of the Maoist combatants.”
On May 5, 2009, local media leaked a video recording of a speech that Prachanda
had made in January 2008 at a cantonment site in Chitwan, during which he said
that the Maoists had inflated the number of their combatants presented for registration
and verification. He also said that some money allocated for the cantonments
would be used to “prepare for a revolt.” Despite later attempts by
Prachanda to explain the context of the statement, it drew wide public condemnation
and raised serious doubts about the Maoists’ commitment to the peace
process and accountability for human rights abuses.
In mid-2009 there was some progress with the discharge and rehabilitation
process for 4,008 Maoist combatants, including 2,973 former child combatants. A
special committee was established as recommended under the CPA. However,
the political stalemate has stalled the committee’s work and the rehabilitation
and integration process.
Dalits
In a positive development, in September 2009 Nepal announced its support for
the draft United Nations principles and guidelines to eliminate caste discrimination,
which were contained in the final report on discrimination based on work
and descent (the UN terminology for caste discrimination) published by the
Human Rights Council in May 2009. This is an important step, particularly
because it sets a precedent for other countries, particularly India, that have resisted
UN intervention in addressing rampant caste-based discrimination.
Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity
Despite the 2007 Supreme Court directive to the government to repeal laws that
discriminate against lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender people, and to institute
protections, there has been at least one instance of arbitrary detention of gay
men. Police raided a private party in Kathmandu in early June 2009, and detained
the participants for 12 hours before releasing them without charge.
In September 2009 the government authorized and provided a budget for a
seven-member committee tasked with studying same-sex marriage laws in other
countries and making recommendations for passing the same in Nepal.
Terai
Ethnic tensions persist over the rights of Madheshi communities in the southern
Terai region (the southern plains bordering India), who want greater autonomy
and proportionate representation in government jobs. In February 2008 an eightpoint
agreement was signed conceding the demand for an autonomous Terai
region in a federal system, but was subject to approval by the then-proposed
Constituent Assembly; that approval is still lacking.
Some Madheshi groups contested elections and are now members of the
Assembly. After Prachanda’s resignation, some of these Madheshi representatives
entered the intense negotiations over the allocation of portfolios in the new
government, and the main Madheshi party, the Madheshi People’s Rights Forum,
split as a result. Other Madheshi groups have continued their armed resistance to
press their demands.
Tibetan Refugees
The Maoists demonstrated their friendship with China by increasing pressure and
engaging in a harsh crackdown on Tibetan refugees. In an effort to appease
China, since 2008 Nepali authorities have effectively sealed the border to prevent
the arrival of Tibetan refugees.
Key International Actors
While Nepal, as an aid-dependent country, was susceptible to external pressure
to ensure protection of rights during the conflict, international attention has now
shifted to other countries in the region, leaving the Nepali authorities and political
parties relatively free to ignore the urgent need for accountability and to
address current human rights problems.
Traditional donors such as Japan, the United States, the United Kingdom, and the
European Union have the ability, however, to have significant influence in Nepal,
including on human rights.
Nepal has to maintain a balance of relations between its two powerful neighbors
India and China. While traditionally Nepal has closer ties to India because of
social, cultural, and economic ties (including its dependence on India for access
to sea trade), the Maoist-led government attempted to strengthen ties with China,
which invested substantial sums in reconstruction after the conflict, and played
an increasingly important role in Nepal.
Another key international actor is the United Nations peacekeeping department,
as the Nepal army continues to be a key troop contributor and depends on funds
and prestige from participation in peacekeeping operations globally. Army assurances
that personnel responsible for human rights violations would be excluded
from United Nations peacekeeping duties appeared hollow given the absence of
investigations, and neither the UN nor foreign embassies committed the
resources to undertake proper vetting, relying on anecdotal reports instead.
The UN Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) in Nepal continued
to play a key role in promoting and protecting rights and, in particular,
working for accountability and establishing institutions that can provide better
protections in the future. The National Human Rights Commission still faced enormous
challenges, including limited resources and an unresponsive government
that failed to implement most of its recommendations. The OHCHR’s mandate to
provide assistance and training to create a stronger national human rights institution
with a strengthened capacity in monitoring, investigating, promoting, and
reporting on the human rights situation remained highly relevant in 2009.