 NEPAL
 Nepal is a constitutional monarchy with a democratic, parliamentary form of gov-
 ernment. Nepal was formerly an absolute monarchy, but the King in 1990 legalized
 political parties and invited formation of an interim government that promulgated
 a new Constitution. Under that Constitution the King retains important residual
 P owers, but he has effectively disassociated himself from the exercise of power. The
 arliament consists of the House of Representatives (lower house) and the National
 Council (upper house). In multiparty elections held in May 1991, the Nepali Con-
 gress Party won a majority in the House of Representatives, which chose G.P.
 Koirala as Prime Minister.
 Internal security is maintained by the Nepal police, under the Home Minister,
 and, as necessary, by the Royal Nepalese Army, of which the King is Commander-
 in-Chief. Because communication links in Nepal are limited, local officials have a
 ,9at deal of autonomy and exercise wide discretion in enforcing law and order. In
 992, as in previous years, the police on several occasions used excessive lethal
 force, and police mistreatment of criminal suspects continued. According to the U.S.
 Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, total military expenditures for 1989 were
 $33 million. There is no indication that efforts will be made to reduce these expendi-
 tures in absolute terms in the near future. However, the portion allocated to defense
 in the 1992-1993 budget fell slightly compared to the previous year.
 Nepal is one of the poorest countries in the world, with a per capita gross domes-
 tic product estimated at around $170. Over 80 percent of its 19 million people are
 engaged in subsistence agriculture. Carpet and ready-made garment sales and tour-
 ism revenues are the major sources of foreign exchange, and foreign aid covers 69
 per cent of Nepal's development budget. Under the new Government, efforts are
 under way to provide a greater role for the private sector.
 The 1990 Constitution guarantees a broad range of fundamental human rights,
 and the Parliament has passed most of the legislation necessary to bring the law
 into conformity with the Constitution. The human rights situation has improved
 considerably since 1990, and much progress has been achieved in the transition to
 a more open society. Substantial human rights problems remain, however. The prin-
 cipal problems concern the abuse of police powers, including arbitrary detention and
 beatings (which, in at least one instance, included torture) by a police force that is
 poorly trained, and the Government's unwillingness to investigate or enforce ac-
 countability for recent and past abuses. Police fired into crowds on several occasions,
 most notably during demonstrations against the Government on April 6 that re-
 sulted in the deaths of seven persons. Sme restrictions continue on freedom of ex-
 pression. Trafficking in women and child labor remained serious problems. A new
 awranting freedom of religion was passed; however, proselytizing remains prohib-
 ited.
 
 
 1153
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from
 a. Political and Other Extrqjudicial Killing.-There were a number of incidents
 involving political violence and killing pior to the February parliamentary by-
 electionsand, on a wider scale before the May local elections,. All of the major politi-
 cal parties traded charges of kiings, but the majority of allegations were believed
 to have been distortions made for political advantage.
 On April 6 at least 7 people were killed, almost 100 injured, and over 500 ar-
 rested in Kathmandu and its suburb of Patan after police fired on protesters dem-
 onstrating against the Government's economic policies. The demonstration was orga-
 nized by a coalition of parties, led by the Communist Party of Nepal/Unity Centre,
 and called for a general strike to protest recent price increases by the Government.
 This demonstration became violent in several places with incidents of arson and at-
 tacks on public and private property. The Government claimed that force was nec-
 essary to prevent further damage to public property. However, well-documented re-
 ports by human rights groups and eyewitness accounts indicate that the police were
 ill-trained in crwd control and overreacted. Most of the victims were innocent by-
 standers and, in one flagrant case, a woman who was a considerable distance away
 from the rioting was shot in the leg at point-blank range without provocation.
 Human rights organizations also condemned the use of bullets during the dem-
 onstrations.
 The Government failed to conduct an investigation of the incident or take discipli-
 nary action against the police for using excessive force. It acknowledged that the
 police are inadequately equipped and trained to cope with civil disturbances, but
 claimed that the level of force was justified in response to deliberate provocation.
 The families of the seven deceased were compensated approximately $500 each.
 In two incidents, on January 3 in Solukhumbu District and on August 28 in
 Okhaldhunga District, Nepalese police shot and killed Tibetan refugees who were
 members of groups transiting Nepal en route to India. The Government has not in-
 vestigated either incident or taken disciplinary action against the officers involved.
 The Government also did not publish the results of the Home Ministry's inquiry into
 incidents in 1991 at Argakhanchi and Khotang-in which police fired on crowds,
 killing two persons and wounding several others-or take disciplinary action against
 the police involved in those incidents.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of permanent disappearances. In May
 there were several cases in which rival political factions claimed their opponents
 had abducted and held prospective candidates briefly to prevent their registration
 in local elections. The report of the five-person commission to investigate the where-
 abouts of those missing or dead since December 1960 presented to the Parliament
 in 1991, still has not been published, nor has the overnment made any public
 statements regarding its contents, despite pressure from human rights groups to act
 on its findings.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 There was one particularly significant incident of torture in 1992. Following the
 January 15 murder of a policeman in Baglung District, over 500 people were de-
 tained for investigation. Most were released within 2 days; however, 10 persons
 were held for a period of nearly 2 months without being brought to court. According
 to a reliable team of investigators, all were tortured, including beatings on the soles
 of their feet, and at least three of the detainees received burns on their feet as well.
 All 10 denied any involvement with the murder and allege that they were arrested
 for political reasons. Local authorities did not deny the use of torture, and the local
 investigator commented that torture was necessary as a means to extract informa-
 tion. No disciplinary action was taken against these local authorities, although the
 Home Minister reported that he had instructed the police to stop such practices.
 Beating is still reported to be a routine means for police to extract confessions
 from common criminals. The Government has rarely conducted investigations into
 allegations of police brutalityor acknowledged public concern about its prevalence.
 Nepal's Constitution now provides for compensation to those subjected to physical
 or mental torture but the Supreme Court has ruled that legislation must be passed
 to determine levels of compensation before the courts can make awards.
 Three classes of prison facilities exist in Nepal. Class "C" cells-which generally
 hold common criminals--are the worst. They often have dirt floors, sparse or no fur-
 nishings, and poorer food than class "A" and "B" cells. Overcrowding is common, and
 the use of handcuffs and fetters is sometimes reported. Conditions in "A" and "B"
 cells are markedly better, with the former reserved for "prominent" persons. Women
 are incarcerated separately from men in equally poor conditions. Children are incar-
 cerated together with adults, either because they have committed crimes or their
 
 
 1154
 parents have done so and the children have nowhere else to live. There has been
 some slow inprovement in prison conditions; sick prisoners are now more likely to
 be referred to hospitals for treatment.
 Reflecting the low level of general medical facilities in the country, facilities for
 care and treatment of the mentally ill are inadequate. Such persons are often placed
 in jails under conditions that are degrading and sometimes inhuman by inter-
 national standards.
 The Mallik Commission's report on its investigation of the loss of life and property
 during the Movement to Restore Democracy's (MRD) agitation in 1990, in which it
 looked into charges of torture and other mistreatment, was submitted to the Attor-
 ney General on December 31, 1990 However the report remains unpublished, al-
 though it may be read in the parliamentary library. The report's principal author
 disputed the Attorney General's 1991 finding that the report supplies neither firm
 evidence nor a legal basis for prosecution. Human rights monitors urged the Gov-
 ernment to publish the report and take appropriate action based or. its contents.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-Accordin to the Constitution, a suspect
 must be brought before a court within 24 hours and informed of the general grounds
 for his arrest or be released. If the court upholds the detention the police are au-
 thorized up to 26 days, with a possible 7-day extension, to complete their investiga-
 tion. Although the Supreme Court ordered the release of a detainee on at least one
 occasion on the grounds that he had been held for over 24 hours before being pre-
 sented to a court, the police reportedly often violate this provision of the law in prac-
 tice. Under current law, persons are permitted access to a lawyer only after they
 are no lo   r in police custody. There is a functioning system of bail, but it is too
 ex nsive for most Nepalese.
 Cc law most often used to detain and arrest persons arbitrarily during the MRD
 agitation was the Public Security Act. The Act was amended, but not repealed by
 the new Government in 1991. It permits the Home Ministry to detain an individual
 for up to 6 months upon presentation of written notice that includes "grounds and
 reason." The district court must be notified of the detention within 24 hours. It may
 extend the period of detention once, for an additional 6 months, before charges must
 be filed. The grounds for detention under the Act are open to broad interpretation:
 to ensure the security of Nepal; order and tranquility inside Nepal; amicable rela-
 tions between Nepal and other friendly states; or amicable relations among people
 of different classes or religions within Nepal. Persons detained under this Act are
 considered to be held in preventive detention and are not brought to trial.
 There are other laws that allow for arbitrary detention, including the revised Pub-
 lic Offenses Act. It was under this Act that hundreds of civil servants were detained
 in 1991 during a 55-day protest strike against the Government. Despite the Act's
 revision in 1992, human rights monitors have expressed concern that it continues
 to vest too much power in the Chief District Officer, the highest ranking civil serv-
 ant in Nepal's 75 districts, and could give rise to abuses in the future.
 The 10 persons arrested in Baglung District following the murder of a policeman
 on January 15 were held for 30 to 55 days on charges of conspiracy and murder
 before being brought to court, a violation of the law. The detainees were also pre-
 vented from seeing any visitors or lawyers, also a procedural violation.
 Exile is prohibited by the Constitution and is not practiced.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Tria!.-Nepal's judicial system consists of three layers:
 The district courts, appellate courts, and the Supreme Court. The judges of all three
 layers are appointed by the King upon the recommendation of the Judicial Council,
 a constitutional body chaired by the Chief Justice, which makes recommendations
 and gives advice on matters of appointment, transfer, disciplinary action against
 judges, and other matters relating to judicial administration.
 Military and civilian courts are separate. Military courts generally deal only with
 military personnel who are immune from prosecution in civilian courts. In 1992 the
 Supreme Court ruled that civilians may no longer be tried in military courts for
 crimes involving the military. In the past, cases of terrorism or treason were often
 dealt with under the Treason Act in closed trials held before specially constituted
 tribunals. No such cases were tried in 1992, but the Treason Act remains in effect.
 Nepalese law provides for the right to a public trial except in some security and
 customs cases. The Constitution provides for protection from double jeopardy, pro-
 tection from retroactive application of the law, and the right to counsel; the Govern-
 ment provides free counsel to indigents. There were no reported instances of abuse
 in this area in 1992. The judiciary is legay independent and has the right of judi-
 cial review under the Constitution. Under the previous Panchayat system, the judi-
 ciary often collaborated with the police in upholding politically-motivated detentions;
 in 1992 the process of judicial strengthening continued, and the courts confronted
 the police in several cases of illegal detention.
 
 
 1155
 The Constitution also allows the Supreme Court to initiate contempt proceedings
 and to impose punishment for contempt of the Supreme Court or subordinate courts.
 All lower court decisions, including acquittals, are subject to appeal. The Supreme
 Court is the court of last appeal, but the King may grant pardons and may suspend,
 commute, or remit any sentence by any court.
 The Government has declared that it holds no political prisoners. There is no
 credible evidence that any political prisoners (as defined for the purpose of this re-
 port--see Appendix A) are being held in Nepal's jails, although some political par-
 ties occasionally claim that political prisoners are being held.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Priacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 new Government generally respects the privacy of the home and family, principles
 bolstered by Nepalese law and tradition. Search warrants are required before search
 and seizure, except in cases involving suspected security and narcotics violations.
 The Police Act of 1955 as amended empowers the police to issue warrants for search
 and seizure in criminal cases ueon receipt of information about criminal activities.
 The Chief District Officer in misdemeanor cases and court judges in felony cases
 must approve warrants within 24 hours after issuance.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution specifies that all citizens shall
 have freedom of thought and expression; it also provides that no news item, article,
 or any other reading material shall be censored. These rights are circumscribed,
 however, as the Constitution permits restriction of speech or press if the action
 would: threaten the sovereignty and integrity of the Kingdom; disturb the harmo-
 nious relations among eeople of different castes or communities; promote sedition,
 defamation, contempt of court, or instigation to commit crime; or contradict decent
 public behavior or morality. These restrictions were invoked in November when an
 editor served a 1-week jail sentence for contempt of court after printing a cartoon
 satirizing the Chief Justice.
 The Press and Publications Act provides for the licensing of publications and the
 granting of credentials to journalists. It includes penalties for violating these re-
 quirements. In August regulations issued to enforce this Act further circumscribed
 Nepal's ournalists by settin  specific requirements of education and experience in
 order tohold particular jobs in journalism. In addition, the Act prohibits publication
 of materials that, inter alia, foment disrespect toward the King or royal family-, un-
 dermine the integrity and sovereignty of the Kingdom; undermine the security,
 peace, and order of the Kingdom; create animosity among people of different castes,
 religions, ete.; or adversely affect the good conduct or morality of the public. A simi-
 lar list establishes the basis for banning the importation of foreign publications.
 Notwithstanding the law, a large number of Nepal's mere than 400 publications
 (some political party organs, some independent papers, and many small papers with
 circulation limited to a few hundred copies) remained vigorous in their criticism of
 the Government. A few published attacks on the monarchy without being prosecuted
 or closed down.
 The two Nepalese dailies with the largest circulation are government organs.
 While their editors may publish critical views and alternate  hc ies, editorial views
 in these dailies still tend to reflect government policy. The Ministry of Communica-
 tion has also provided occasional guidance to the editors. While the Government can
 exert pressure on the independent print media through its control of the price of
 newsprint and through the high proportion of advertising it purchases, there was
 no evidence that such pressure was applied in 1992.
 The sole radio and television stations in Nepal are government owned and con-
 trolled. While programming continued to reflect a broader range of interests and po-
 litical viewpoints than it did befor  e hpoitical transformation was begun in 1990,
 it still followed closely the views of the Government.
 There were no reported restrictions on academic freedom.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-Under the Constitution, free-
 dom of assembly is guaranteed. However, a caveat allows restrictions on such vaue
 grounds as undermining the "sovereignty and integrity" of Nepal or disturbing  aw
 and order." There were no reports of arrest or detention for exercising the freedoms
 of peaeable assembly or association.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The majority of Nepalese are Hindus, and Nepal is de-
 scribed in its Constitution as a Hindu Kingdom. There is a large minority of Bud-
 dhists, a smaller number of Muslims, and a small but growing number of Chris-
 tians. Non-Hindus are allowed to practice their religion and maintain places of wor-
 ship. A number of foreign Christian clergymen reside and work in Nepal in various
 fields. Religious education is offered by non-Hindus, including Muslims and Chris-
 tians. Religious publications are imported mainly from India and widely circulated.
 
 
 1156
 The Constitution and a law passed in 1992 allow self-conversion but outlaw pros-
 elytizing. The law provides a maximum penalty of 6 years for converting a person
 to another religion and a maximum sentence of 3 years for attempting to convert
 someone. No arrests were made under this provision in 1992. The law also protects
 the functioning of all religions but prohibits discrimination on the basis of caste;
 however, such discrimination is permitted at temples.
 In the past, Nepalese authorities, particularly in conservative rural areas, took
 the prohibition on conversion very seriously. The current Government's more toler-
 ant policies have allowed Christians and other non-Hindu groups to engage freely
 in a wide variety of religious activities which have, however, yet to include attempts
 at conversion. Religious groups may establish their own organizations and acquire
 their own places of worship, a though the Government has been slow in establishing
 procedures for registering religious organizations.
 There is continuing concern that the prohibition against religious conversion in
 the new Constitution raises the possibility that it may be used against people solely
 for the expression of their religious beliefs. For this reason various non-Hindu
 groups occasionally propose amending this provision of the Constitution.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.--Citizens of Nepal may move freely and reside where they wish, a right
 provided for in the Constitution. Foreigners (including Tibetans resident in Nepal)
 and journalists are restricted from traveling to some areas on the Chinese border
 unless they are part of a licensed trekking group escorted by a police liaison officer.
 Travel outside of Nepal is not restricted for Nepalese citizens. Tibetans resident in
 Nepal may travel freely only to India, although permission is routinely granted for
 their business travel to other countries. All Nepalese abroad are free to return
 home. Although it is not explicitly prohibited by the Constitution, there are no
 known cases of revocation of citizenship for political reasons.
 Nepal has no official refugee policy and is not party to the 1967 Protocol Relating
 to the Status of Refugees. The United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
 (UNHCR) has maintained an office in Kathmandu since 1989. The current Govern-
 ment is aiding the UNHCR's efforts by facilitating access to refugees from both
 China and Bhutan. In the past, Nepal accepted and assimilated approximately
 14,000 Tibetan refugees. Border restrictions, tightened in 1986 by a joint Nepalese/
 Chinese agreement, are observed haphazardly on the Nepalese side of the border.
 Tibetan refugees transiting through Nepal to India are usually permitted passage,
 although there are reports of police demanding payment from, and occasionally ad-
 ministering beatings to, these refugees. In January and again in August, Nepalese
 police shot and killed Tibetans who had entered Nepal illegally. Government claims
 that the victims had attacked the police were not borne out by UNHCR interviews
 of the surviving group members. Credible reports continue to be heard of some Ti-
 betan refugeesboing turned back by Nepaese authorities near the NepalChina bor-
 der; however, the incidence of this practice declined as the UNHCR established
 more regular procedures with the Government for handing undocumented Tibetan
 arrivals.
 There was another sharp increase in the number of ethnic-Nepalese hutanese
 fleeing into Nepal after reportedly suffering abuses or being expelled from Bihutan.
 At the end of 1991, the camps in southeastern Nepal housed 10,000 of these refu-
 gees, and at least 65,000 more arrived in 1992. They arrive to face unhealthful con-
 ditions, including overcrowding, shortages of clean water, poor sanitation and nutri-
 tion, and risk of epidemic disease. The UNHCR monitors these refugees' condition
 and ,provides assistane for their basic needs. The Government tolerates the refu-
 gees presence on a humanitarian basis, although it can offer them little except a
 place to stay. The Government raised the issue of the refugees with the Government
 of Bhutan in 1992, but the flow of new arrivals continued unchecked, and there was
 no agreement on refugee screening and repatriation.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Under the Constitution promulgated in 1990, Nepal is a constitutional monarchy
 with sovereignty vested in the people. The people, through their elected representa-
 tives, have the right to amend the Constitution to change all but the most basic as-
 pcts of the body pelitic-sovereignty vested in the people, the multiparty system,
 fund amental rights, and the constitutional monarchy.
 Parliamentary elections, based on universal suffrage for citizens over the age of
 18, are to be held every 5 years by secret ballot. On May 12, 1991, the people exer-
 cised their franchise for the first time in 32 years in a general election that Nepa-
 lese and more than 60 international observers described as basically free and fair.
 The Nepali Congress Party won 110 out of 205 seats in the House of Representa-
 
 
 1157
 
 tives and was able to form the Government without need of a coalition. The King
 appointed G.P. Koirala, leader of the Nepali Congress Party in the Parliament, as
 Prme Minister. The next parliamentary elections are scheduled to be held in 1996.
 Local elections were held On My 28 and 31, 1992, for municipal and village devel-
 opment councils, and the winners of these offices, some 46,000 in all, voted for dis-
 trict development committees in July. These elections were also generally free and
 fair, although scattered acts of violence and polling irregularities were reported. The
 governing Nepali Congress Party won over 50 percent of the offices contested. The
 main opposition party, the Nepal Communist Party/United Marxist and Leninist,
 won approximately 26 percent of the offices, and the conservative National Demo-
 cratic Party, led by former leaders of the Panchayat government, won 10 percent.
 The King continues to exercise certain powers "with the advice and consent of the
 Council of Ministers.* These powers include exclusive power in enacting, amending,
 and repealing laws relating to succession to the throne. The King's income and prop-
 erty are tax exempt and inviolable. No question may be raised in any court about
 any act performed by the King.
 The new Constitution also permits the King to exercise emergency powers in the
 event of war, external aggression, armed revolt, or extreme economic depression.
 The emergency powers allow him to suspend the freedoms of expression and assem-
 bly freedoms from censorship and preventive detention, and other basic freedoms
 witout judicial review. The rights to form associations and of habeas corpus may
 not be suspended. The lower, but not the upper, house of Parliament may be dis-
 solved. A state of emergency may be maintained for up to 3 months without legisla-
 tive approval and up to 6 months, renewable only once for an additional 6 months,
 if legislative approval is granted.
 The new Constitution bars the registration and participation in elections of any
 political party that is based on caste or community or that does not operate openly
 and democratically.
 There are no specific laws that restrict women or minorities from participating in
 the government orpolitical parties, but lingering conservative social traditions limit
 the influence of beth women and some castes and tribes in the political process. The
 Constitution requires that at least 5 percent of the candidates for the House of Rep.
 resentatives from each registered political party be women.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Nepal has over a dozen nongovernmental human rights organizations. The major
 organizations are the Human Rights Organization of Nepal (HURON) and the
 Forum for the Protection of Human Rights (FOPHUR), although their activities
 have dropped off somewhat following the advent of democracy. The Nepal Law Soci-
 ety also monitors human rights issues, and a number of nongovernmental organiza-
 tions focus on single issues such as child labor or women's rights. Both government-
 appointed commissions and nongovernmental human right groups continue to report
 that police authorities are do not cooperate with their efforts to gather information.
 In June Amnesty International (A) published a report criticizing the Govern-
 ment's inaction in addressing past human rights violations and its poor handling
 of the April 6 demonstrations. The Government stated that the report is politically
 biased and exaggerates the Government's human rights violations, and it has indi-
 cated a willingness for Al to send a team to assess the situation in Nepal. An inde-
 pendent Nepalese commission, named the Tuladhar Commission after the jurist who
 headed it, published a separate report on the April 6 incidents that criticized the
 Government's handling of the riots but also ascribed some blame to the leftist lead-
 ers of the general strike. The Tuladhar Commission complained that the Govern-
 ment and the official media obstructed its efforts to investigate the facts.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Language, or Social Status
 The Constitution specifies the right to equality, whereby the State shall not dis-
 criminate against citizens on grounds of religion, race, sex, caste, or ideology. How-
 ever, Nepal is still largely a traditional society wedded to the caste system, and
 caste discrimination is common, especially in the rural areas of western Nepal. Al-
 though the public shunning of "untouchables" has been outlawed, an exception was
 retained for traditional practices at religious sites. Economic, social, and educational
 differentiation tend to be a function of histrical patterns, geographical location, and
 caste. The spread of education and higher levels of prosperity, especially in the
 Kathmandu valley, are slowly reducing caste distinctions and increasing opportuni-
 ties for lower socioeconomic groups. Although politics and senior jobs in the govern-
 ment administration and army in Nepal continue to be dominated by higher and
 
 
 1158
 better educated urban-oriented castes (Brahmin, Chhetri, and certain elements of
 the Newar community), the representation of other castes is increasing slowly.
 Women in Nepal face gender discrimination, particularly in rural areas, where the
 weight of tradition, lack of education and ignorance of the law remain severe im-
 pediments to the exercise of basic rights, such as the right to vote or to hold prop-
 erty in their own names. According to preliminary figures from the 1991 census, the
 female literacy rate is 26 percent, compared to a male literacy rate of 57 percent.
 Over the years women have benefited from various changes in marriage and in-
 heritance laws. However, these laws continue to remain discriminatory, despite the
 constitutional prohibition against discrimination based on sex. The divorce law
 grants Nepalese women the right to divorce but on narrower grounds than those
 available to men. Likewise, the-law governing property rights favors men in a num-
 ber of ways, including division of family property, the disposition of property, inher-
 itance, and land tenancy. The new Constitution strengthened some provisions re-
 garding women, including equal pay for equal work.
 Wife beating is common, though its extent is difficult to measure owing to the
 value attached to family privacy in Nepal's traditional society. Several unconfirmed
 cases of dowry deaths were also reported over the year. In general, there is little
 public attention given to violence against women in the home.
 Trafficking in women is a deeply ingrained social problem in several of Nepal's
 poorest areas. Estimates of the total number of Nepalese girls and women working
 as prostitutes in the red-light districts of India's major cities vary widely but aver-
 age around 100,000. Coercion is often involved, although it is impossible to gauge
 its extent. Newspapers occasionally report the arrest of men attempting to abduct
 young women or trick them into going to India. Economic incentives also entice
 many other women. In certain parts of Nepal, families raise their daughters with
 the expectation that they will spend severa[ years in the brothels of India and then
 return with their earnings and settle in their native villages. In addition, the tradi-
 tion of religious prostitution among the Badini and Devaki of western Nepal is an
 ongoing concern of the Government. The Government prosecutes instances of coer-
 cive trafficking brought to its attention but takes few active measures to stop it. The
 spread of the acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) in India's red-light dis-
 tricts has discouraged the Government from aggressively promoting the return and
 rehabilitation of Nepalese prostitutes.
 Government efforts thus far focus more on preventing voluntary prostitution than
 on rehabilitation. The Women's Development Division of the Ministry of Labor and
 Social Welfare sponsors income-generating skill training programs in several dis-
 tricts known for producing prostitutes to be sent to India, and several nongovern-
 mental organizations have similar programs.
 In Nepal's more open political atmosphere, a growing number of women's advo-
 cacy groups are taking up women's issues. Nearly all political parties have their
 own women's groups to press for women's causes.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-Article 12 of the Constitution provides for the free-
 dom to form and to join unions and associations. The Constitution permits restric-
 tion of unions only through legal measures in cases of subversion, sedition, or simi-
 lar conditions. Since the political transformation begun in 1990, there has been an
 increase in trade union activity in every sector, with virtually all the unions closely
 linked to one or another of the political parties. Union participation in the formal
 sector is significant, but the formal sector comprises only a small portion of Nepal's
 overall labor market. Due to their recent formation and Nepal's lack of experience
 with trade unionism, the unions are still developing effective structures for organiz-
 ing, collective bargaining, and education. Moreover, while the Parliament passed
 new labor and trade union acts in 1992, the Government has yet to bring out regu-
 lations to implement them fully.
 Under current law, strikes are permitted except in "essential services" such as
 water supply, electricity, and telecommunications. The Government also is legally
 empowered to stop a strike or suspend the workings of a trade union if it disturbs
 peace and security or adversely affects the nation s economic interests. Under the
 new Labor Act, a secret ballot must be held to determine whether to strike and
 a 60-percent vote in favor is required for a strike to be legal. A number of illegal
 strikes took place in 1992, especially to protest retrenchment in the public enter-
 p rises under the Government's program of administrative reform, but most received
 little publicity and were ineffective.
 The Trade Union Act of 1992 establishes the procedures and requirements for
 forming and registering trade unions, associations, and federations, including the
 provisions required in all union constitutions. The Act also protects unions and offi-
 
 
 1159
 cials from lawsuits arising from any actions taken in the discharge of official duties,
 including collective brgaining.
 There are no restrictions on forming confederations or joining international labor
 bodies. Several federations exist, and-Nepalese trade union organizations maintain
 a variety of such affiliations.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The Labor Act of 1992 pro-
 vides for collective bargaining and stipulates that an organization must have the
 signatures of at least 51 percent of the eligible workers in order to negotiate collec-
 tively. Although the organizational structures (e.g., labor courts) to implement the
 Act's provisions have not been created, in practice, collective bargaining has been
 the primary mechanism for setting wages since April 1990.
 There are no current legal provisions prohibiting discrimination by employers
 against union members or organizers.
 There are no special economic zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-Article 20 of the 1990 Constitution
 prohibits traffic in human beings, slavery, serfdom, or forced labor in any form. The
 epartment of Labor enforces laws against forced labor in the organized sector of
 the economy. However, bonded labor is an aspect of traditional society, and over
 100,000 low-caste ethnic Tharus are estimated to be under the 'Kamaiya" system
 of bonded labor in the Terai region. (See also the discussion of trafficking in women
 in Section 5.)
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The Constitution stipulates that
 children shall not be employed in factories, mines, or similar hazardous work, and
 the law establishes a minimum age for employment of minors at 16 in industry and
 14 in agriculture. Despite the law, child workers are found in all sectors of the rural
 and urban economies where the families consider child labor essential to alleviate
 poverty. The Department of Labor's enforcement record is spotty, but in the urban
 ormal sector it has had some success in enforcing laws relating to permanency,
 minimum wage, and holidays. However, it has seldom enforced the minimum age
 law. Child Workers in Nepal (CWIN), the only national social action group dedicated
 to children's rights and welfare, estimates that 4.8 million Nepali children work at
 least part- time. As with the population at large, the overwhelming majority of these
 children are engaged in family subsistence agriculture, but children can be found,
 usually doing menial jobs, in almost every occupation. Child employment is particu-
 larly common in the smaller enterprises in construction, carpet weaving, res-
 taurants, garment manufacturing, transport, and domestic work. Human rights
 monitors estimate that children constitute between one-third and two-thirds of the
 work force in the carpet industries, where they generally work long hours in
 unhealthy conditions for low pay. Although a law specifically designed to protect
 children's rights was passed in May, stipulating that children may not be used as
 beggas or face discrimination on the basis of caste, religion, or sex, the Government
 haslittle ability to implement it comprehensively.
 e. Acceptable Condition. of Work.-The new Labor Act sets a minimum monthly
 wage in factories and in the organized labor sector. This wage is sufficient only for
 the most minimal standard of living. Rates in the unorganized service sector and
 in agriculture are often as much as 50 percent lower.
 The Labor Act calls for a 48-hour workweek, with 1 day off, and limits overtime
 to 20 hours per week. Health and safety standards, and other benefits such as a
 provident fund and maternity benefits, are also established in the Act. Implementa-
 tion of the new Labor Act has been slow, as the Government has not created the
 necessary regulatory or administrative structures to enforce its provisions.
