 NEPAL
 Nepal is a small, landlocked country strategically situated
 between India and China. Its current population is
 approximately 16.5 million and is growing at an estimated 2.5
 percent a year. Nepal, the world's only Hindu Kingdom,
 maintained a self-imposed isolation until 1951. Economic
 development and efforts to establish some form of democratic
 practice have been government objectives only since that time.
 Nepal ranks among the world's poorest countries, and it has a
 largely illiterate population dependent on subsistence
 agriculture.
 Nepal's Constitution specifies that the King (chief of state)
 is the sole source of authority for all government institutions
 in Nepal, possessing ultimate authority over all facets of the
 Government in fact as well as in name.
 The Constitution provides for direct election to the National
 Panchayat (national legislature) on the basis of universal
 adult suffrage. The National Panchayat is the Government's
 sole legislative body and representatives are elected from
 their districts for a five-year term. There are 112 elected
 representatives in the National Panchayat; the King appoints an
 additional 25 representatives. Legislation passed by the
 National Panchayat is sent to the King for his approval without
 which it cannot become law. Since 1980, the National Panchayat
 has been empowered to select a Prime Minister from among its
 members, provided a candidate is able to win the support of 60
 percent of the members. If no candidate receives that support,
 the National Panchayat provides the King with a list of three
 names from which to choose the Prime Minister.
 The Prime Minister has the constitutional authority to appoint
 the Council of Ministers (Cabinet) which functions as the
 executive arm of the Government. The ministers, who are also
 members of the National Panchayat, manage the Government's
 day-to-day operations and provide policy advice to the King.
 The Council of Ministers is answerable to the National
 Panchayat and the King.
 Internal security is maintained in the first instance by the
 national police force and as necessary by the army. Nepal's
 very limited communications facilities have resulted in local
 officials having a large degree of autonomy and wide discretion
 in how they deal with law and order issues. This has led to
 varied patterns of government reaction to opposition actions.
 Opposition views, including those of the banned political
 parties, are openly expressed and normally tolerated unless
 they touch upon the institution of the monarchy or the royal
 family personally. The press is increasingly active, and
 scores of independent papers began publishing in the past year,
 expressing a wide variety of views on political, social, and
 economic topics. For the first time, the nation saw its
 national assembly pass a vote of no confidence that led to the
 resignation of the Prime Minister and the speedy reelection of
 his successor. One of the new Government's first acts was the
 release of approximately 40 people it described as political
 prisoners.
 Despite such progress in democratic practice, significant
 restrictions on political activity still exist. Trade unions
 and trade associations remain illegal. Several attempts by
 political and student groups to organize public meetings were
 not permitted and organizers and participants were arrested,
 (1370)
 
 
 1371
 most of whom have been released. Other opposition groups,
 however, were permitted to stage public demonstrations, and
 university students were allowed to select their campus leaders
 in free, open, and lively elections.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Unlawful or Arbitrary Deprivation of Life
 There were no reported allegations of killing for political
 purposes during 1983.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no allegations of disappearances during 1983.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 The Prison Act governs the welfare and treatment of prisoners
 in Nepal. Law enforcement officials are empowered to engage
 only in those acts and duties specifically provided for in the
 law. Because torture is not provided for in the Prison Act, it
 is, by implication, prohibited. This concept of Nepalese law
 has been challenged in the courts and the Supreme Court has
 upheld that the Government may engage only in acts that have
 been authorized by legislation. However, close scrutiny of
 police practices continues to be lacking and occasional
 instances of police brutality are believed to occur. Nepal's
 inherent communications problems result in a considerable local
 autonomy and lack of accountability for local law enforcement
 officials. During 1983, there was one report of alleged police
 brutality involving a U.S. citizen arrested on a criminal
 charge. To date, police officials have not released the
 results of their investigation into the matter.
 Places of detention generally reflect the low standard of
 living in this extremely poor country. Jail conditions vary
 according to the crime committed and the person's status, but
 all prisoners have access to medical attention and to the
 traditional Nepalese diet. They are permitted visitors and
 goods from the outside. Generally, political prisoners have
 fared better than those convicted for criminal acts. Separate
 facilities are maintained for women and for the criminally
 insane.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Nepal does not have the right of habeas corpus, but according
 to the Constitution, a suspect must be brought before a court
 within 24 hours and must be informed of the general grounds
 for the arrest or be released. A seven day extension may be
 granted for the completion of the police investigation. Strict
 adherence to these principles is not the norm. The Public
 Security Act permits six months of preventive detention before
 charges must be filed. At this time approximately 200 people
 are believed to be held in preventive detention under this
 Act. In mid-1983, the new government of Prime Minister Chand
 released approximately 40 persons the Government described as
 political prisoners. This has sparked numerous appeals in the
 press for the release of other alleged political detainees.
 
 
 1372
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The law provides for the right to a fair public trial in most
 cases (some security and customs cases excepted), and this
 right is usually honored in practice. Except for those held in
 preventive detention, the Constitution guarantees the right to
 counsel and protection from double jeopardy and ex post facto
 laws. These rights are not always respected in practice, and
 their nationwide implementation remains an unrealized goal.
 There are separate military and civilian courts, but under a
 new law passed during the last session of the National
 Panchayat, civilians may be tried in military courts for crimes
 involving the military. Judges are appointed by the
 Government, and decisions in political and security cases
 sometimes reflect the view of the Government. All lower court
 decisions are subject to appeal, and the Supreme Court is the
 court of last appeal. The King may grant pardons and set aside
 judgments.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Nepalese law and tradition bolster privacy of the home and
 family, which the Government generally respects. People are
 free to meet with whom they please and express political or
 other views freely. Except for those suspected of narcotic or
 security violations, search warrants issued by central District
 officers are required before search and seizure. There have
 been no reports of monitoring of personal correspondence,
 although all merchandise imported through the mail undergoes a
 vigorous customs examination, and banned items like pornography
 or beef are seized.
 Section 2  Respect for Civil Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Under the Constitution, freedoms of speech and the press may
 not be exercised in support of a political party or to the
 detriment of the common good, the monarch, or members of the
 royal family. In practice, this rule is widely interpreted to
 permit criticism of the Government, but not the monarch or the.
 royal family. The number of independent newspapers and
 journals continued to grow significantly during the past year
 and there is wide tolerance of frank criticism of the
 Government in the press. Despite this, journals and newspapers
 which overstep the established guidelines may be suspended from
 publication. In 1983, two newspapers were suspended for the
 political content of their news or editorials and several
 others were warned. The two largest circulation dailies are
 government organs, but they carry reports of opposition
 activities and criticism of the Government. Following a
 liberalization of government policy governing the licensing of
 new newspapers in 1982, an estimated 150 papers began
 publishing. Although many of these papers have a very small
 circulation (less than 100 copies), this development
 demonstrates a growing government acceptance of a broader role
 for the press in Nepalese society.
 International news-magazines are generally available in Nepal,
 but they are occasionally banned for articles considered
 derogatory to the Government or to the monarchy. Two such
 bannings occurred in 1983. However, large numbers of travelers
 
 
 1373
 to and from India and the West make effective control of
 foreign reading material impossible.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Regulations permit local authorities to prohibit meetings,
 speeches and posters if they are found not to be "for the
 convenience or good of the general public." The law forbids
 activities which are detrimental to the monarchy, relations
 among the people, or national security. All political parties
 are officially banned under the National Panchayat system,
 although in practice political party members are generally
 permitted to assemble privately and express their views in the
 unofficial press. Regulations governing political activities
 are interpreted differently by local authorities in different
 areas of the country. The decision whether to permit a
 political meeting is made on an ad hoc basis. Opponents of
 former Prime Minister Thapa were permitted to hold several
 large rallies and demonstrations in different areas of Nepal
 this past year. The officially banned Congress Party was
 permitted to hold at least one large rally this year. However,
 the Government refused permission for other groups to hold
 public meetings and, in several instances, when the groups
 persisted, authorities stopped the activities and detained
 participants for a short period.
 Unions are prohibited by statute, although numerous
 associations approaching union status exist. Strikes were
 reported at the Balaju industrial estate in the Kathmandu
 Valley during 1983, but these were small in size and of limited
 duration. Kathmandu taxi drivers staged a sudden one-day
 strike in September to protest parking restrictions. Given the
 limited industrial development of Nepal and the very limited
 potential for organized labor among the small industrial labor
 force, trade unions are thus far not a significant factor in
 Nepal.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Nepal is officially a Hindu Kingdom and the vast majority of
 Nepalese are Hindus. Conversion from Hinduism or Buddhism (the
 second largest religious group) is against the law as is
 proselytization by members of any religion. While religious
 tolerance is a Nepalese tradition and any religion may be
 freely practiced, there were several unconfirmed reports in
 1983 of Nepali Christians being harassed by Government
 officials for practicing their faith as well as of sporadic
 violence against Christian Nepalese by villagers of other
 faiths. Numerous Christian voluntary organizations operate
 educational, medical, and social service facilities in Nepal,
 most of which are officially sanctioned by the Government. In
 addition, foreign clergy are permitted to live and work in
 Nepal to serve the expatriate community. Non indigenous
 religious literature is confiscated if distributed free of
 charge, but it may be purchased in book form.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel,
 Emigration, and Repatriation
 There are no restrictions on travel within the country for
 Nepalese citizens, although several border areas have been
 restricted for travel by foreigners. Voluntary repatriation of
 Nepalese citizens is not hampered by government interference.
 Passports are normally available to virtually all applicants.
 
 
 1374
 Issuance, however, is hindered by slow processing, short validity,
 and country limitations. Allegations were made in past years by
 opposition members that the Government limited their travel
 outside Nepal. During the past year an outspoken opposition
 member was given a passport for travel to the United States,
 despite having been previously refused, and a leader of the
 Congress Party traveled to Europe and the United States, despite
 his declared intention to seek foreign support for his banned
 party. There are no known cases of revocation of citizenship for
 political reasons.
 Nepal has no stated refugee policy. In the past it has accepted
 and assimilated approximately 12,000 Tibetan refugees and,
 according to immigration officials, no refugee has ever been
 forced to return to Tibet. Today, travelers from Tibet travel
 freely in both directions across the border.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to
 Change Their Government
 The central fact of the Nepalese political system is that Nepal is
 an absolute monarchy; political legitimacy flows from the King,
 not from the people. Most Nepalese accept and support thi.s
 central role of the monarchy. Some parts of the population do so
 for both religious reasons (the King is regarded as a
 reincarnation of the Hindu god Vishnu) and out of respect for
 tradition. Most.Westernized Nepalese do so because they see the
 monarchy as the symbol of Nepalese nationalism and a factor that
 unifies a nation of disparate ethnic and linguistfc communities.
 Accompanying this respect for the monarchy is substantial public
 support for the general concept that Nepal's future political
 development should follow democratic lines. The King's public
 statements stress the plight of the common man and the national
 duty to overcome the nation's backwardness. In the 1980
 constitutional reforms, he restructured the nation's formal
 political framework in ways that made government officials more
 answerable to the voting public. At present, he is backing a law
 and regulations that that will delegate substantial planning and
 spending powers from the center to the district and village
 levels. Certain elements of representative government exist and
 the trend is to even greater political participation. National
 Panchayat representatives pay far more attention to their
 constituents since the 1979 reforms, because they are elected
 directly.
 In July 1983, the National Panchayat passed a vote of no
 confidence against Prime Minister Thapa, which in turn led to his
 resignation. This action was the culmination of two months of
 political activity by Thapa's opposition in the National
 Panchayat. Although Thapa's resignation had to be approved by the
 King, it was the first removal of a Prime Minister from office by
 his colleagues in the National Panchayat. Thapa's ouster
 introduced the concept that the Prime Minister was answerable to
 the National Panchayat as well as to the King.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Non-governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 So international human rights organization is known to have
 requested permission to come to Nepal since the visit of
 
 
 1375
 Amnesty International representatives in 1977. Amnesty
 International has expressed concern in the past about the state
 of human rights in Nepal and has sponsored political prisoners,
 some of whom were subsequently released. One opposition member
 mentioned in the Amnesty International 1982 Country Report for
 Nepal was given a passport in 1983 for travel to the United
 States where she is now studying. Amnesty's 1983 report
 continued to express its concern "...about the imprisonment,
 often without trial, of political opponents of the Government,"
 as well as about severe restrictions on political activity in
 Nepal. Freedom House regards Nepal "partly free."
 There are two human rights organizations in Nepal which work
 with Amnesty International, regional human rights groups, and
 other groups. Activists disseminate their views in public
 meetings, newspapers, and pamphlets. There have been no
 reports of attempts to suppress them. The office concerned
 with international organizations at the Ministry of Foreign
 Affairs is responsible for dealing with international human
 rights organizations and issues. The Government has expressed
 its concern about human rights violations in Kampuchea,
 Afghanistan, and southern Africa.
 ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND CULTURAL SITUATION
 Nepal remains a very traditional rural Hindu society with over
 90 percent of the population engaged in subsistence
 agriculture. Communication facilities are still limited, and
 the radio remains most Nepalis' only contact with the outside
 world. Most of the population lives without electricity and
 have no access to adequate medical care. Additionally,
 although the large towns and cities have modernized, life in
 the remote villages has not changed in millennia.
 Nepal did not open its doors to the outside world and start
 modernizing until 1951. Until then, there were virtually no
 schools, roads, or public health services. Life for the
 average Nepali was as circumscribed and arduous as it had been
 a millennium earlier.
 The last 30 years have alleviated some of these problems, in
 some regions more than others. Progress has been painfully
 slow, however, and for most Nepalese the modernization process
 has been far more successful in arousing expectations than in
 satisfying wants. Nepal's economic development has been
 hampered by geographical and demographic problems compounded by
 its isolation until 1951. These problems are offset only
 partially by the country's major resources--cheap labor,
 tourism, and potential hydroelectric power. Eighty percent of
 Nepal's land is hilly or mountainous, creating a high
 population density on its arable land. Population pressure on
 the country's limited resources has resulted in recent years in
 rapid deforestation, serious erosion, and loss of soil
 fertility.
 Nepal's current population is approximately 16.5 million.
 Current population growth is estimated at 2.5 percent annually,
 increasing the pressure on food supplies and social services.
 Nepal's ratio of population to arable land is one of the
 world's highest. The per capita income is approximately
 $170 a year. Life expectancy is currently estimated at 44
 years with the average for women slightly lower. Infant
 mortality is estimated at a relatively high 110 deaths per
 1,000 live births.
 
 
 1376
 Of the total population, only an estimated 10 percent has
 access to relatively safe drinking water. The ratio of calorie
 supply available for consumption relative to nutritional
 requirements is estimated at about 88 percent. Approximately
 60 percent of the population is believed to live below the
 absolute poverty level. Over 90 percent of Nepal's population
 lives in rural areas where many of the economic and social
 indicators referred to above are less favorable.
 The literacy rate for Nepal is approximately 20 percent. This
 figure has increased in conjunction with the increased
 enrollment in primary schools, which is currently estimated at
 88 percent of school-aged children.
 Recently published 1980 Nepal census figures show a very low 12
 percent overall literacy rate for women in Nepal (compared to
 34 percent for men). This is primarily because, despite
 studies which reveal the very important roles women play in the
 rural labor force, female access to basic education has been
 extremely limited. Nationwide, less than 25 percent of all
 primary
 school students are female and the majority of these are girls
 living in urban or semi urban areas; this figure drops to about
 12 percent in secondary schools.
 What legal rights women have, as a result of national
 legislation, are irrelevant to the vast majority of Nepal's
 women. Lack of education, formidable communications obstacles,
 and communal and tribal customs which dictate a secondary role
 for women combine to make it virtually impossible for women to
 achieve the equal status with men which is granted them under
 Nepalese law. As a result, rights are conferred on women--or
 denied them--on the basis of community and ethnic tradition.
 An AID/Nepal-financed study of eight rural villages showed that
 women in these areas have no personal right to landed property
 or inheritance, but can gain access through marriage or male
 progeny. In the Kathmandu Valley, on the other hand, women can
 hold land in their own right.
 
 
 1377
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: NEPAL
 1981     1982     1983
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL...        19.8     18.9     18.5
 LOANS ................     0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .......... ....   19.8     18.9     18.5
 A.AID  ....  ............. .....  14.0  15.5     13.8
 LOANS ................     0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................   14.0     15.5     13.8
 (SEC.SUPP.ASSIST.)...         0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.FOOD  FOR  PEACE .......      4.3      1.7      2.8
 LOANS ................. .0.0        0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............        4.3      1.7      2.8
 TITLE I-TOTAL ....~. : :       000j
 REPAY. 0; t-LOANS ....          .b      0.0      0.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR .....        0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE  1I-TOTAL .........       4.3      1.7      2.8
 E.PELIEF.EC.DEV & WFP.         4.3      1.7      2.8
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY .....        0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST...         1.5      1.7      1.9
 LOANS ..................   0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............        1.5      1.7      1.9
 PEACE  CORPS ......       1.5      1.7      1.9
 NARCOTICS ........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 OTHER ............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL...         0.1      0.1      0.1
 LOANS .................    0.0     0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............        0.1      0.1      0.1
 A.VMAP  GRANTS ..........      0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.CREDIT FINANCING....         0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.INTL  MIL.ED.TRNG ....       0.1      0.1      0.1
 DTRAN-EXCESS STOCK...         0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER  GRANTS ........       0.0      0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. & MIL...        19.9     19.0     18.6
 LOANS ..............O.. .  0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................   19.9     19.0     18.6
 ..........................................................
 OTHEP  US  LOANS ..........      0.0      0.0      0.0
 EX-IM BANK LOANS .......        0.0      0.0      0.0
 ALL  OTHER ................    0.0      0.0      0.0
 ..........................................................
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1981     1982     1983     194-83
 TOTAL ..........  123.8  111.7     76.4    822.0
 IBRL              0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 IFC                0.0      6.2      0.0      9.3
 IDA               62.2     30.0     28.0    371.9
 IDB                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 ADS               46.8     36.9     48.4    325.1
 AFDB               0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 UNDP              11.3     25.9      0.0     84'5
 OTHER-UN           3.5     12.7      0.0     31.2
 EEC                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 
 
