 NAURU
 The Republic of Nauru, a small Pacific island with about 9,500 inhabitants,
 gained independence in 1968, at which time it adopted a modified form of par-
 liamentary democracy. Prior to independence it had been administered by Australia.
 Nauru has two levels of government, the unicameral Parliament and the Nauru
 Island Council (NIC). Parliamentary elections must be held at least triennally. The
 Parliament, consisting of 18 members from 14 constituencies, is responsible for na-
 tional and international matters. It elects the President, who is both head of state
 and head of government, from among its members. The N1C acts as the local gov-
 ernment and is responsible for public services. The judiciary is independent. Nauru
 has no armed forces, though it does maintain a 92-man police force under civilian
 control.
 The economy depends almost entirely on the country's rich phosphate deposits,
 mined by the government-owned Nauru Phosphate Corporation (NPC). The Govern-
 ment places a large percentage of the NPC's earnings in long-term investments
 meant to support the Nauruans after the phosphate reserves have been exhausted.
 Using current extraction techniques, Nauru's phosphate reserves will probably be
 exhausted by the year 2000. The Governments of Nauru and Australia reached a
 $70.4 million out-of-court settlement in July for rehabilitation of the Nauruan lands
 ruined by Australian phosphate mining.
 Fundamental human rights are provided for in the Constitution and generally re-
 spected in practice, although hard data and systematic records are lacking. Dis-
 crimination and violence against women remain the principal human rights prob-
 lems.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no political or other
 extrajudicial killings in 1993.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no political disappearances in 1993.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution prohibits these practices, and this prohibition is respected.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The constitutional prohibition against ar-
 bitrary arrest and detention is honored. The police may hold a person for no more
 than 24 hours without a hearing before a magistrate. Exile is not practiced.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-Nauru maintains an independent judiciary, and
 constitutiona provisions for both a fair hearing and a public trial are respected. De-
 fendants may have legal counsel, and a representative will be appointedwhen re-
 quired "in the interest of justice." Nauru has only two trained lawyers, and many
 people are represented in court by "pleaders," trained paralegals certified by the
 Government. There are no political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Constitution generally provides protection from these abuses. Searches not sanc-
 tioned by court order are prohibited, and there is no surveillance of individuals or
 of private communications. Nauruan citizenship and inheritance rights are traced
 through the female line. Until very recently, laws restricted intermarriage of Nauru
 men and women with non-Nauruans. Although the laws have changed and such
 intermarriage is practiced and permitted, intermarriage between Nauru women and
 foreign males still draws substantial social censure. The spouses-male or female-
 of Nauru citizens have no automatic right of abode in Nauru. They are, however,
 normally granted short-term "visits" sponsored by the Nauru spouse or they can
 apply for longer-term work permits. Foreign spouses are not eligible for Nauru citi-
 zenship.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of expres-
 sion. News and opinion circulate freely, rapidly, and widely by the press and word
 of mouth. The country has two regular publications: the private, fortnightly news-
 paper, the Central Star News, which operates and editorializes freely; and the Gov-
 ernment Gazette, which contains mainly official notices and announcements. The
 sole radio station, also owned and operated by the Government, broadcasts Radio
 Australia and British Broadcasting Corporation news reports but not local news.
 Satellite reception of pay television, broadcast from New Zealand, became available
 in 1991.
 Foreign publications are widely available. However, during the July South Pacific
 Forum meeting in Nauru, authorities banned the then-current issue of Pacific Is-
 
 
 lands Monthly, which strongly criticized the financial management and decisions of
 government investment trust managers regarding Nauru's phosphate resources and
 income. The issue was available, nonetheless, and no one was detained for posses-
 sion of it.
 There are no prohibitions or restrictions on academic freedom.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The constitutional right of
 peaceful assembly and association is honored. No limitations exist on private asso-
 ciations and no permits need be obtained for public meetings. There were several
 peacefui demonstrations during the July South Pacific Forum meeting against var-
 ious government policies and actions.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution protects freedom of religion and the
 Government recognizes no religion as official. Several different Christian denomina-
 tions are well established in Nauru. Missionaries, foreign clergy, and religious pub-
 lishing are all permitted. Adherence to a particular faith results in no advantage
 or disadvantage in any secular pursuit.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-Nauruans are free to move and travel both domestically and inter-
 nationally. Foreign workers must apply to their employers for permission to leave
 during the period of their contracts. They may break the contract and leave without
 permission but would lose their positions and, often, a sizable bond as a result. In
 most cases, foreign employees whose contracts are terminated by their employers
 must leave Nauru within 60 days. Nauru does not revoke citizenship for political
 reasons. Citizens who have left the country have the right to return, and repatriates
 receive the same treatment as other citizens. No restrictions on emigration exist.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens have, and exercise, the right to change their government. Though Nauru
 has no organized political parties, persons with diverse points of view run for and
 are elected to Parliament and to the NIC.
 Parliament elects the President. Nauru has had seven changes in presidential
 leadership since independence. Power has always been transferred peacefully and
 in accordance with the Constitution. Continuing this tradition, Bernard Dowiyogo
 was reelected to his parliamentary seat and the Presidency in November 1992. Vot-
 ing, by secret ballot, is compulsory for all citizens over age 20 for parliamentary
 elections. There have been multiple candidates for all parliamentary seats during
 recent elections. The approximately 3,000 guest workers in Nauru have no voice in
 political decisions. There are no lega impediments to participation in politics by
 women, and women have in the past served in Parliament, although none of the
 18 current parliamentarians are women.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 There are no restrictions on establishing local groups that concern themselves
 specifically with human rights, but to date none has been formed. There have been
 no allegations by outside organizations of human rights violations in Nauru, nor any
 requests for investigations.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 Women.-The Constitution contains provisions assuring women the same free-
 doms and protections as men. They are provided equal opportunities by the Govern-
 ment in education and employment and are free to own property and pursue private
 interests. Social values have, however, changed very slowly, and women still receive
 clear signals that their ultimate goal should be marriage and raising a family.
 Young women studying abroad on scholarship and contemplating marriage face re-
 view and possible termination of their educational grants as it is assumed that they
 will leave the work force and thus not require additional academic training.
 Nauru's population has been almost eliminated on several occasions, first by dis-
 ease and drought, then during World War II as a result of massive removals by the
 Japanese. The Government has gone to great lengths to encourage large families,
 and Nauruan women complain that emphasis on their reproductive role reduces
 their opportunities.
 Previous Nauruan governments have shown little interest in the problems of
 women. Nauruan authorities give high priority to improved health care and edu-
 cation, but the island has no gynecologists. The Government has not specifically ad-
 dressed the physical abuse of women, which anecdotal evidence indicates to be a se-
 rious problem, though there are no statistics showing its extent. Alcohol abuse is
 generally considered a major contributing factor.
 
 
 Children.-Child abuse statistics do not exist, but as with violence against
 women, it can be assumed that alcohol abuse sometimes leads to child neglect or
 abuse. The Government devotes considerable attention to the welfare of children,
 with particular stress on their health and educational needs.
 National/Racial/Ethnic Minorities.-Foreign laborers, mainly from  Vanuatu,
 Kiribati, and Tuvalu, experience some discrimination. While guest workers are pro-
 vided free housing, the shelters they are given are often poorly maintained and
 overcrowded. Some guest workers have alleged that Nauruan police rarely act on
 complaints they make against Nauruan citizens,
 People with Disabilities.-There is no reported discrimination against persons
 with disabilities in employment, education, and provision of state services. There is,
 however, no legislation or mandated provisions of accessibility for the disabled.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The Constitution provides for the right to assemble
 and associate peacefully and to form and belong to trade unions or other associa-
 tions. However, there are currently no trade unions in Nauru, and past efforts to
 form them were officially discouraged and ultimately failed. The transient nature
 of the mostly foreign work force and the relative prosperity of the Nauruans have
 also served to hamper efforts to organize the labor force. The right to strike is nei-
 ther protected, prohibited, nor limited by law. No strikes took place in 1993. Nauru
 is not a member of the International Labor Organization.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-Nauru has virtually no labor
 laws. The-private sector in Nauru employs only about 1 percent of Nauru a salaried
 workers. For government workers, public service regulations determine salaries,
 working hours, vacation periods, and other employment matters. There are no ex-
 port processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The Constitution forbids forced or
 compulsory labor, and there have been no instances of either.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-Education is compulsory until age
 16; Nauruan law sets 17 as the minimum age of employment. This is honored by
 the only two large employers, the Government and the NPC. Some children under
 age 17 work in the few small family owned businesses.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-Minimum wages paid on Nauru vary consider-
 ably between office workers and manual laborers, but they suffice to provide an ade-
 quate, if modest, standard of living. Thanks to yearly dividends paid to Nauruans
 by the phosphate trust, most families live in simple but adequate housing and al-
 most every Nauruan family owns at least one car or truck. The Government sets
 the minimum wage for Nauruans administratively for both public and private sec-
 tors. Since November 1992, that rate has been $5,958 ($A9,056) for those 21 years
 of age or older. The rate is progressively lower for those under 21 years of age, drop-
 ping to $2,957 ($A4,521) for those age 16. Employers determine wages for foreign
 contract workers based on market conditions and the consumer price index. Usually
 foreign workers and their families receive free housing, utilities, medical treatment,
 and often a food allowance. By regulation the workweek for office workers is 36
 hours and for manual laborers 40 hours in both the public and private sectors.
 The Government sets health and safety standards. The state-run mining enter-
 prise, NPC, has an active safety program that includes worker education and the
 use of safety helmets, safety shoes, respirators for dusty conditions, and other safety
 measures. The NPC has a safety officer, specifically responsible for improving safety
 standards and compliance throughout the company.
