 Nauru
 The Republic of Nauru, an 8.22-square mile Pacific island with
 about 9OOQ inhabitants, gained.independence in 1968, at which
 time it adopted a modified Westminster form of parliamentary
 democracy. Previouily, Australiazadministered the island,
 first asia-League 6 Nations mandate and later as a United
 ,Nations trust territory.
 Nauru has.tw6 levels of gqvbrnment, the unicameral Parliament
 and the Nauru Lcal Government Council (NLGC), both popularly
 elected bodies. Parliamentary elections must be held at least
 once every 3 years. The Parliament consists of 18 members
 from 8 constituencies dnd is responsible for national and
 international matters. The President, who is both head of
 state and head of government, is elected by Parliament from
 among its members.. The NLGC acts as the local government and
 -s responsible for public services. The judiciary is
 independent. Nauru has no armed forces, though it does
 maintain a police force, now numbering 72 officers, under
 civilian control.
 The economy depends almost entirely on thecountry's rich
 phosphate deposits which are mined by the government-owned
 Nauru Phosphate Corporation (NPC). Its profits are the
 primary source of revenue'for the Government; Nauru has no
 consumption or income taxes. A large percentage of the NPC's
 earnings are placed by the Government in long-term
 investments, meant to support the Nauruans after the phosphate
 reserves have been exhausted. Using current extraction
 techniques, Nauru has only 1 to 3 more years of phosphate
 production. Adapting to greatly reduced current demand for
 phosphate and the-eventual end to phosiihate income confronts
 the ation with its greatestchallenge since independence.
 Fundamental human rights are provided for in the Constitution
 and generally respected in practice, although hard data and
 systematic records are lacking. Discrimination and violence
 against women remain the principal human rights concerns.-
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS,
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extr-ajudicial Killing
 Ther were no- political or other extrajudicial killinqs.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no political disappearances.
 c.. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuian, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 The Constitution prohibits these practices, and this
 prohibition is respected.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 The constitutional prohibition of arbitrary arrest and
 detention is honored. The police may hold a person for no
 more than 24 hours without a hearing before a magistrate.
 Exile is not practiced.
 
 
 982
 NAURU
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Nauru maintains an independent judiciary, and constitutional
 provisions for both a fair hearing and a public trial are
 respected. Defendants may have legal counsel, and a
 representative will be appointed where required "in the
 interest of justice." Nauru has only two trained lawyers, and
 many people are represented in court by "pleaders," trained
 paralegals certified by the Government. There are no
 political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home,-or
 Correspondence
 The Constitution generally provides protection from these
 abuses. Searches notsanctioned by court order are
 prohibited, and there is no surveillance of individuals or of
 private communications.' However, Nauruan males must have
 permission from the Government to marry a non-Nauruan; such
 permission has not always been granted. Nauruan females are
 prohibited from marrying foreigners. Birth control measures
 are not readily available (see Section 5).
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Freedom of expression is provided for in the Constitution.
 News and opinion circulate freely, rapidly, and widely by word
 of mouth. Criticism of the Government, however, may not
 receive media attention. The country has only one regular
 publication, the Government Gazette, which contains only
 official notices and announcements. The one radio station,
 also owned and operated by the Government, broadcasts Radio
 Australia and British Broadcasting Corporation news reports
 and local news. The last private newsletter in Nauru stopped
 publication in 1990. Foreign publications are available.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 The constitutional right of peaceful assembly and association
 is honored. No limitations exist on private associations, and
 no permits need be obtained for public meetings.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Freedom of religion is protected by the Constitution, and no
 official religion is recognized by the Government. Several
 different Christian denominations are established in Nauru.
 Missionaries, foreign clergy, and religious publishing are all
 permitted. Adherence to a particular faith results in no
 advantage or disadvantage in any secular pursuit.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Nauruans are free to move and travel both domestically and
 internationally. Domestic trayel is particularly accessible,
 since any place on the island is within a 3-hour walk.
 Foreign workers must apply to their employers for permission
 to leave during the period of their contracts. They may break
 the contract and leave without permission but would lose their
 positions as a result. In most cases, foreign employees whose
 contracts are terminated by their employers must leave Nauru
 within 60 days.
 
 
 983
 NAURU
 Nauru does not revoke citizenship'for political reasons;
 citizens who have left the country have the right to return,
 and repatriates receive the same treatment as other citizens.
 No restrictions on emigration exist.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Citizens have, ,and exercise, this right. Though Nauru has no
 organized political parties, persons with diverse points of
 .view'run foe-and are elected to Parliament and to the NLGC.
 In-August 1989, Parliament elected a new president. This was
 followed 4 months later by the regularly scheduled election
 which resulted in two new members being chosen for Parliament
 and the naming of the third president to lead Nauru within the
 year. Nauru has had changes in presidential leadership on
 four occasions prior to 1989. Power has always been
 transferred peacefully-and in accordance with the Constitution.
 Voting by secret ballotis compulsory for all citizens over
 age 20 for parliamentary elections and for all over age 21 fvr
 NLGC elections.' All parliamentary seats have-been contested
 during recent elections. The only significant non-Nauruan
 group in the nation, the 3,000 guest workers, have no voice in
 political decisions.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 .of Human Rights
 There are no' local groups that concern themselves specifically
 with human rights.-. There have been no allegations by outside
 organizations of human rights violations in Nauru, nor any
 requests for investigations.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 The Constitution contains provisions assuring women the same-
 freedoms and protections as men. They are provided equal
 opportunities by the Government in education and employment
 and are free to own property and pursue private interests
 except, as noted above, they are prohibited from marrying
 foreigners.
 Nauru's population has been almost eliminated on several
 occasions, first by disease; and-then during World War II as a
 result of massive removals by the Japanese. The Government
 has gone to great lengths to encourage large families. Birth
 control has been available to women only after they have five
 children, and then it is often difficult to obtain. The
 island has no gynecological specialists.. Nauruan women
 complain that the emphasis on their reproductive role limits
 their opportunities.
 While no statistics exist to show its extent, physical abuse
 of women in Nauru is a serious problem, with alcohol abuse
 generally regarded as a major contributing factor. During the
 long tenure of former President DeRoburt, such abuse, like
 other issues involving women, received no attention from the
 Government. Improved health care and education are among the
 current Government's highest priorities. However, it has not
 specifically addressed the problem of physical abuse of women.
 
 
 984
 NAURU
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 The Constitution provides for the right to assemble and
 associate peaceably and to form and belong to trade unions or
 other associations. Trade unions do not exist in Nauru,
 however, and efforts to form them are officially discouraged.
 The transient nature of the mostly foreign work force and the
 relative prosperity of the Nauruans have tended to hamper
 efforts to organize the labor force. No strikes took place in
 1990. Nauru is not a member of the International Labor
 Organization.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 Nauru lacks labor laws and legislation. The private sector in
 Nauru employs only about 1 percent of Nauru's workers. For
 government workers, salaries, working hours, vacation periods
 and other employment matters are determined by public service
 regulations. There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 Forced or compulsory labor-is forbidden by the Constitution,
 and there were no instances of either.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 Nauruan law sets 17 as the minimum age of employment for
 children. This is honored by the only two large employers,
 the Government and the government-owned Nauru Phosphate
 Corporation (NPC). Children under age 17 work in the few
 small family-owned businesses.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 Nauruan wages provide a decent, if Spartan, living for all
 workers, but the actual compensation varies widely. In 1989
 Nauruans had a minimum wage of $3.88 per hour and a 35-hour
 workweek. Foreign contract workers had a similar workweek,
 but earned only $2.77 per day, except for skilled tradesmen,
 who earned $7.70. The Government's 1990 budget provided funds
 for a 12.5 percent wage increase during the fiscal year that
 began July 1. -Overtime rates of time and a half, with double
 time for Sundays and holidays, considerably supplement foreign
 workers' incomes. Also, free housing and food is provided for
 foreign workers and their families.
 The Government sets health and safety standards. NPC, the
 island's major employer, has an active safety program that
 includes worker education and the use of safety helmets,
 safety shoes, respirators for dusty conditions, and other
 safety measures. During 1990, despite many workers' lax
 attitudes toward the use of safety equipment, NPC had only two
 serious accidents in its large work force.
 
 
