 NAURU
 The Republic of Nauru, a small Pacific island with about 10,500 inhabitants,
 gained independence in 1968, at which time it adopted a modified form of par-
 liamentary democracy. Nauru has two levels of government, the unicameral Par-
 liament and the Nauru Island Council (NIC). Parliamentary elections must be held
 at least triennially. The Parliament, consisting of 18 me"ers from 14 constitu-
 encies, is responsible for national and international matters. It elects the President,
 who is both Head of State and Head of Government, from among its members. The
 NIC acts as the local government and is responsible for public services. The judici-
 ary is independent.
 Nauru has no armed forces although it does maintain a small police force (less
 than 100 members) under civilian control.
 The economy depends almost entirely on the country's declining phosphate depos-
 its-although recent government statements indicate that new drilling technology
 may extend the productivity of its mines. The mining industry is controlled by the
 rovemnment-owned Nauru Phosphate Corporation (NPC). The Government places a
 ge percentage of the NPC's earnings in long-term investments meant to support
 the citizenry after the phosphate reserves have been exhausted. The Governments
 of Nauru and Australia reached a $70.4 million out-of-court settlement in 1993 for
 rehabilitation of the Nauruan lands ruined by Australian phosphate mining.
 Fundamental human rights are provided for in the Constitution and are generally
 respected in practice. There were no reports of specific human rights abuses, but
 in the traditional culture women occupy a subordinate role, with limits on their job
 
 
 861
 opportunities. Complaints of discrimination against non-Nauruan Pacific island
 workers, particularly in treatment by police and in housing, continued.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no reports of political or
 other extrajudicial killings.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution prohibits these practices, and the Government respects these pro-
 hibitions in practice.
 The Government attempts to provide internationally accepted minimum prison
 conditions within its limited financial means and in accordance with local living
 standards. Prison conditions, however, are basic, and food and sanitation are lim-
 ited. There are no local human rights groups, and the question of visits to prisons
 by human rights monitors has not been raised. Visits by church groups and family
 members are permitted.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The constitutional prohibition against ar-
 bitrary arrest and detention is honored. The police may hold a person for no more
 than 24 hours without a hearing before a magistrate. The Government does not
 practice forced exile.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The judiciary is independent, and constitutional
 provisions for both a fair hearing and a public trial are respected. Defendants may
 have legal counsel, and a representative will be appointed when required "in the in-
 terest of justice." However, many cases never reach the formal legal process, as tra-
 ditional reconciliation is used-usually by choice but sometimes under communal
 (not government) pressure. Contract workers from Kiribati, Tuvalu, and Vanuatu
 are employed predominantly in the mining sector and do not have recourse to effec-
 tive communal assistance; they are particularly at a disadvantage in complaints
 against citizens. There are only two trained lawyers, and many people are rep-
 resented in court by "pleaders," trained paralegals certified by the Government.
 There were no reports of political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Constitution generally prohibits these abuses. Searches not sanctioned by court
 order are prohibite, and there is no surveillance of individuals or of private com-
 munications. Citizenship and inheritance rights are traced through the female line.
 Until very recently, laws restricted intermarriage with non-Nauruans. Although the
 laws have changed, intermarriage between women and foreign males still draws
 substantial social censure. The foreign spouses-male or female-of citizens have no
 automatic right of abode. They are, however, normally granted short-term "visits"
 sponsored by the citizen spouse, or they may apply for longer term work permits.
 Foreign spouses are not eligible for citizenship.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of expres-
 sion. News and opinion circulate freely, rapidly, and widely by the press and word
 of mouth. The country has one regular publication, the privately owned newspaper
 the Central Star News, which publishes monthly and which operates and editorial-
 izes freely. The sole radio station, owned and operated by the Government, broad-
 casts Radio Australia and British Broadcasting Corporation news reports but not
 local news. Pay television broadcasting from New Zealand is received by satellite.
 Foreign publications are widely available.
 There are no prohibitions or restrictions on academic freedom.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Government respects the
 constitutional right of peaceful assembly and association. There are no limitations
 on private associations, and no permits are required for public meetings.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for freedom of religion, and the
 Government respects this right in practice.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The law provides for these rights for citizens, and the Government re-
 spects them in practice.
 Foreign workers must apply to their employers for permission to leave during the
 period of their contracts. They may break the contract and leave without permission
 but would lose their positions and often a sizable bond as a result. In most cases,
 foreign employees whose contracts are terminated by their employers must leave
 Nauru within 60 days.
 
 
 862
 The Government cooperates with the office of the United Nations High Commis-
 sioner for Refugees and other humanitarian organizations in assisting refugees. No
 person in recent memory has applied for refugee status, and the Government has
 not formulated a formal policy regarding refugees, asylees, or first asylum.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens have, and exercise, the right to change their government. Although
 Nauru has no organized political parties, persons with diverse points of view run
 for and are elected to Parliament and to the NIC.
 Parliament elects the President. From late 1996 until February, there were five
 changes of government, all peaceful and in accordance with the Constitution. Since
 February more characteristic political stability has prevailed. Voting by secret ballot
 is compulsory for all citizens over the age of 20 for parliamentary elections. There
 have been multiple candidates for all parliamentary seats during recent elections.
 The approximately 3,000 guest workers have no voice in political decisions.
 There are no legal impediments to participation in politics by women. At present,
 there are no female Members of Parliament.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 There are no restrictions on establishing local groups that concern themselves
 specifically with human rights, but to date none has been formed. There have been
 no allegations by outside organizations of human rights violations in Nauru nor any
 requests for investigations.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution prohibits discrimination on the basis of race, sex, religion, dis-
 ability, language, or social status. The Government generally observes this in prac-
 tice; however, women do not receive the same degree of freedom and protection as
 men.
 Women.-The Government does not keep track of incidents of physical abuse
 against women. However, credible reports indicate that sporadic abuse, often aggra-
 vated by alcohol use, occurs. The Government has not addressed the problem of vio-
 lence against women. Families normally seek to reconcile such problems informally,
 and, if necessary, communally. Major incidents and unresolved family disputes are
 treated seriously by the judiciary and the Government.
 Constitutional provisions assure women the same freedoms and protections as
 men. The Government officially provides equal opportunities in education and em-
 ployment, and women are free to own property and pursue private interests. How-
 ever, in practice, traditional societal pressures deny women opportunities to fully ex-
 ercise these rights. The island's population has been nearly eliminated on more than
 one occasion, first by disease and drought, and later, during World War II, by mas-
 sive, forced removals from the island by the Japanese. The Government strongly
 supports efforts that encourage large families, and there have been reports of com-
 plaints by women that this emphasis on their reproductive role reduces their oppor-
 tunities for other roles in society. Married women, in particular, are sometimes dis-
 advantaged, as it is assumed that they will not want to study or work but instead
 will want to remain at home. For example, young women studying abroad on schol-
 arship and contemplating marriage face possible termination of their educational
 grants as it is assumed that they will leave the work force and thus not require
 additional academic training.
 Children.-The Government devotes considerable attention to the welfare of chil-
 dren, with particular stress on their health and educational needs. Child abuse sta-
 tistics do not exist, but alcohol abuse sometimes leads to child neglect or abuse. The
 NIC treats child abuse as a serious communal matter. There were no reported cases
 of child abuse during the year.
 People With Disabilities.-There is no reported discrimination in employment,
 education, and the provision of state services to persons with disabilities. There is,
 however, no legislation mandating accessibility to public buildings and services for
 the disabled.
 National/Racial/Ethnic Minorities.-Non-Nauruan Pacific island workers experi-
 ence some discrimination. While guest workers are provided free housing, the shel-
 ters they are given are often poorly maintained and overcrowded. Some guest work-
 ers have alleged that the police rarely act on complaints they make against citizens.
 
 
 863
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The Constitution provides for the right of citizens
 to form and belong to trade unions or other associations. However, Nauru has vir-
 tually no labor laws, and there are no trade unions. Past efforts to form unions were
 officially discouraged. The transient nature of the mostly foreign work force and the
 relative prosperity of the citizenry also have served to hamper efforts to organize
 the labor force. The right to strike is neither protected, prohibited, nor limited by
 law. No strikes took place in 1997. Nauru is not a member of the International
 Labor Organization. There are no provisions which would prohibit or limit the right
 of unions to affiliate with international bodies.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-While there are no legal im-
 pediments, collective bargaining does not take place, and, as noted above, has been
 unsuccessful. The private sector employs only about 1 percent of salaried workers.
 For government workers, public service regulations determine salaries, working
 hours, vacation periods, and other employment matters.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The Constitution forbids forced or
 compulsory labor, including forced and bonded labor by children, and effectively en-
 forces these prohibitions.
 d. Status of Child Labor Practices and Minimum Age for Employment.-Education
 is compulsory until the age of 16; the law sets 17 as the minimum age of employ-
 ment. This is honored by the only two large employers, the Government and the
 NPC. Some children under the age of 17 years work in the few, small, family-owned
 businesses. The Government prohibits forced and bonded labor by children and en-
 forces this prohibition effectively (see Section 6.c).
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-Minimum wages vary considerably between of-
 fice workers and manual laborers, but they suffice to provide an adequate, if mod-
 est, standard of living. Thanks to yearly dividends paid by the NPC, most families
 live in simple but adequate housing, and almost every family owns at least one car
 or truck. The Government sets the minimum yearly wage administratively for both
 public and private sectors. Since November 1992, that rate has been $6,562
 A9,056) for those 21 years of age or older. The rate is prgressively lower for those
 under 21 years of age. Employers determine wages for foreign contract workers
 based on market conditions and the consumer price index. Usually foreign workers
 and their families receive free housing, utilities, medical treatment, and often a food
 allowance. By regulation the workweek for office workers is 36 hours and for man-
 ual laborers 40 hours in both the public and private sectors. Neither law nor regula-
 tions stipulate a weekly rest period; however, most workers observe Saturdays and
 Sundays as holidays.
 The Government sets health and safety standards. The NPC has an active safety
 program that includes an emphasis on worker education and the use of safety equip-
 ment such as helmets, safety shoes, and dust respirators. The NPC has a safety of-
 cer who is specifically responsible for improving safety standards and compliance
 throughout the company.
