 NAURU
 The Republic of Nauru, a small Pacific island with about 10,500 inhabitants,
 gained independence in 1968, at which time it adopted a modified form of par-
 liamentary democracy. Nauru has two levels of government, the unicameral Par-
 liament and the Nauru Island Council (NIC). Parliamentary elections must be held
 at least triennially. The Parliament, consisting of 18 members from 14 constitu-
 encies, is responsible for national and international matters. It elects. the President,
 who is both Head of State and Head of Government, from among its members. The
 NIC acts as the local government and is responsible for public services. The judici-
 aryis independent.
 Nauru has no armed forces although it does maintain a small police force (less
 than 100 members) under civilian control.
 The economy depends almost entirely on the country's declining phosphate depos-
 its-although secondary reserves and residual mining may extend the productivity
 of its mines. The government-owned Nauru Phosphate Corporation (NPC) controls
 the mining industry. The Government places a large percentage of the NPC's earn-
 ings in long-term investments meant to support the citizenry after the phosphate
 reserves have been exhausted. The Governments of Nauru and Australia reached
 a $70.4 million out-of-court settlement in 1993 for rehabilitation of the Nauruan
 lands damaged by Australian phosphate mining.
 Fundamental human rights are provided for in the Constitution and are generally
 respected in practice. There were no reports of specific human rights abuses, but
 in the traditional culture women occupy a subordinate role, with limits on their job
 opportunities. Complaints of discrimination against non-Nauruan Pacific island
 workers, particularly nonresponsiveness by police and in housing, continued.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no reports of political or
 other extrajudicial killings.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution prohibits these practices, and the Government respects these pro-
 hibitions in practice.
 The Government attempts to provide internationally accepted minimum prison
 conditions within its limited financial means and in accordance -with local living
 
 
 1017
 standards. Prison conditions, however, are basic, and food and sanitation are lim-
 ited. There are no local human rights groups, and the question of visits to prisons
 by human rights monitors has not been raised. Visits by church groups and family
 members are permitted.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The constitutional prohibition against ar-
 bitrary arrest and detention is honored. The police may hold a person for no more
 than 24 hours without a hearing before a magistrate. The Government does not
 practice forced exile.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The judiciary is independent, and constitutional
 provisions for both a fair hearing and a public trial are respected. Defendants may
 have legal counsel, and a representative will be appointed when required "in the in-
 terest of justice." However, many cases never reach the formal legal process, as tra-
 ditional reconciliation is used-usually by choice but sometimes under communal
 (not government) pressure. Contract workers from Kiribati and Tuvalu are em-
 ployed predominantly in the mining sector and do not have recourse to effective
 communal assistance; they are particularly at a disadvantage in complaints against
 citizens. There are only two trained lawyers, and- many people are represented in
 court by "pleaders," trained paralegals certified by the Government.
 There were no reports of political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Constitution generally prohibits these abuses. Searches not sanctioned by court
 order are prohibited, and there is no surveillance of individuals or of private com-
 munications. Citizenship and inheritance rights are traced through the female line.
 Marriage between -women and foreign males may still draw social censure. The law
 extends the right of citizenship-subject to approval by the NIC-to both male and
 female spouses, provided that marital and residency requirements are met.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of expres-
 sion. News and opinion circulate freely, rapidly, and widely by the press and word
 of mouth. The country has no regular print media. Occasional publications include
 the government bulletin. The sole radio station, owned and operated by the Govern-
 ment, broadcasts Radio Australia and British Broadcasting Corporation news re-
 ports. Local television includes Nauru TV, which is government owned, as well as
 the privately owned SPN sports network.
 There are no prohibitions or restrictions on academic freedom.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Government respects the
 constitutional right of peaceful assembly and association. There are no limitations
 on private associations, and no permits are required for public meetings.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for freedom of religion, and the
 Government respects this right in practice.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The law provides for these rights for citizens, and the Government re-
 spects them in practice.
 Foreign workers must apply to their employers for permission to leave during the
 period of their contracts. They may break the contract and leave without permission
 but would lose their positions and often a sizable bond as a result. In most cases,
 foreign employees whose contracts are terminated by their employers must leave
 Nauru within 60 days.
 The Government cooperates with the office of the United Nations High Commis-
 sioner for Refugees and other humanitarian organizations in assisting refugees. No
 person in recent memory has applied for refugee status, and the Government has
 not formulated a formal policy regarding refugees, asylees, or first asylum.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens have, and exercise, the right to change their government. Although
 Nauru has no organized political parties, persons with diverse points of view run
 for and are elected to Parliament and to the NIC.
 Parliament elects the President. There was a change in government in June, the
 sixth new government in just over 2 years. All transitions were peaceful and in ac-
 cordance with the Constitution. Voting by secret ballot is compulsory for all citizens
 over the age of 20 for parliamentary elections. There have been multiple candidates
 for all parliamentary seats during recent elections. The approximately 3,000 guest
 workers have no voice in political decisions.
 There are no legal impediments to participation in politics by women. There are
 no female Members of Parliament.
 
 
 1018
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 There are no restrictions on establishing local groups that concern themselves
 specifically with human rights, but to date none has been formed. There have been
 no allegations by outside organizations of human rights violations in Nauru or any
 requests for investigations.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 Government policy prohibits discrimination on the basis of race, sex, religion, dis-
 ability, language, or social status.
 Women.-The Government does not keep track of incidents of physical abuse
 against women. However, credible reports indicate that sporadic abuse, often aggra-
 vated by alcohol use, occurs. Families normally seek to reconcile such problems in-
 formally, and, if necessary, communally. The judiciary and the Government treat
 major incidents and unresolved family disputes seriously.
 Nauru law assures women the same freedoms and protections as men. The Gov-
 ernment officially provides equal opportunities in education and employment, and
 women are free to own property and pursue private interests. However, in practice,
 societal pressures limit opportunities for women to fully exercise these rights. The
 Government has appointeda women's development officer to assist with the devel-
 opment of professional opportunities for women.
 Children.-The Government devotes considerable attention to the welfare of chil-
 dren, with particular stress on their health and educational needs. Child abuse sta-
 tistics do not exist, but alcohol abuse sometimes leads to child neglect or abuse. The
 NIC treats child abuse as a serious communal matter. There were no reported cases
 of child abuse during the year.
 People With Disabilities.-There is no reported discrimination in employment,
 education, and the provision of state services to persons with disabilities. There is,
 however, no legislation mandating accessibility to public buildings and services for
 the disabled. The Government has assisted persons with disabilities by building ac-
 cess ramps to homes and workplaces and by purchasing office equipment adapted
 for persons with disabilities.
 National/Racial/Ethnic Minorities.-Non-Nauruan Pacific island workers experi-
 ence some discrimination. While guest workers are provided free housing, the shel-
 ters they are given are often poorly maintained and overcrowded. Some guest work-
 ers have alleged that the police rarely act on complaints they make against citizens.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The Constitution provides for the right of citizens
 to form and belong to trade unions or other associations. However, Nauru has vir-
 tually no labor laws, and there are no trade unions. Past efforts to form unions were
 officially discouraged. The transient nature of the mostly foreign work force and the
 relative prosperity of the citizenry also have served to hamper efforts to organize
 the labor force. The right to strike is neither protected, prohibited, nor limited by
 law. No strikes took place during the year. Nauru is not a member of the Inter-
 national Labor Organization. There are no provisions, which would prohibit or limit
 the right of unions to affiliate with international bodies.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-While there are no legal im-
 pediments, collective bargaining does not take place, and, as noted above, has been
 unsuccessful. The private sector employs only about 1 percent of salaried workers.
 For government workers, public service regulations determine salaries, working
 hours, vacation periods, and other-employment matters.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The Constitution forbids forced or
 compulsory labor, including forced and bonded labor by children, and effectively en-
 forces these prohibitions.
 d. Status of Child Labor Practices and Minimum Age for Employment.-Education
 is compulsory until the age of 16; the law sets 17 as the minimum age of employ-
 ment. The only two large employers, the Government and the NPC, honor this.
 Some children under the age of 17 years work in the few, small, family-owned busi-
 nesses. The Government prohibits forced and bonded labor by children and enforces
 this prohibition effectively (see Section 6.c.).
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-Minimum wages exist for office workers and
 manual laborers, and suffice to provide an adequate, if modest, standard of living.
 Thanks to yearly dividends paid by the NPC, most families live in simple but ade-
 quate housing, and almost every family owns at least one car or truck. The Govern-
 ment sets the minimum yearly wage administratively for the public sector. Since
 
 
 1019
 November 1992, that rate has been $6,562 ($A9,056) for those 21 years of age or
 older. The rate is progressively lower for those under 21 years of age. Employers
 determine wages for foreign contract workers based on market conditions and the
 consumer price index. Usually foreign workers and their families receive free hous-
 ing, utilities, medical treatment, and often a food allowance. Some non-Nauruan
 contract workers have complained about conditions in company living compounds.
 By regulation the workweek for office workers is 36-hours and for manual laborers
 40 hours in both the public and private sectors. Neither law nor regulations stipu-
 late a weekly rest period; however, most workers observe Saturdays and Sundays
 as holidays.
 The Government sets health and safety standards. The NPC has an active safety
 program that includes an emphasis on worker education and the use of safety equip-
 ment such as helmets, safety shoes, and dust respirators. The NPC has a safety offi-
 cer who is specifically responsible for improving safety standards and compliance
 throughout the company.
