 NAURU
 Nauru, the world's smallest republic, consists of a single
 central Pacific island of 8.22 square miles with a population
 of approximately 8,000. As a League of Nations mandate and a
 United Nations trust territory, Nauru was administered by
 Australia on behalf of the Governments of Australia, New
 Zealand, and the United Kingdom. Upon independence on January
 31, 1968, Nauru adopted a modified Westminster form of
 parliamentary democracy.
 Nauru has two levels of government, the unicameral Parliament
 and the Nauru Local Government Council (NLGC), both popularly
 elected bodies. All Nauruans over the age of 20 are required
 to vote in parliamentary elections (21 is the minimum age in
 NLGC elections). The Parliament, consisting of 18 members
 from 8 constituencies, is elected at least every 3 years. It
 is responsible for national and international matters. The
 national government owns the Nauru Phosphate Corporation (NPC)
 and the national airline, Air Nauru. The NLGC acts as the
 local government and is responsible for the welfare of the
 Nauruan citizens. It also operates retail outlets, is the
 principal importer for the country, and owns a shipping line.
 The President, who is both head of state and head of
 government, is elected by Parliament from among its members.
 He presides over a Cabinet of four or five ministers. There
 are no formal political parties; thus, the President must win
 and retain the support of a majority of individual
 parliamentarians. The economy is based on the exploitation
 and marketing of Nauru's rich phosphate deposits. The NPC's
 profits are the primary source of revenue for the Government
 (there are no consumption or income taxes). About 60 percent
 of the NPC's earnings are placed by the Government in
 long-term investments, the income from which will be used to
 support the Nauruans after the phosphate reserves have been
 exhausted. In the meantime the NPC pays rent to the owners of
 the land which it mines. Although the other large economic
 enterprises on Nauru (e.g., Air Nauru, the Nauru Corporation)
 also are owned by the Government or by the NLGC, several
 small, private businesses operate successfully.
 Nauru has no armed forces, though it does maintain a police
 force of approximately 60 officers under civilian control.
 The courts are independent and effectively enforce the
 Constitution, which guarantees human rights.
 There were no reports of human rights abuses during 1986.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom From:
 a. Political Killing
 There were no reports of politically motivated killings.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no known instances of political disappearances.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 These practices are prohibited by the Constitution and this
 prohibition is respected.
 
 
 782
 NAURU
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 The Constitution prohibits arbitrary arrest and detention, and
 this prohibition is respected. The police cannot hold a
 person for more than 24 hours without a hearing before a
 magistrate. Exile is not practiced, though persons found to
 be "mentally disordered" by either two medical examiners or,
 in the case of a finding of not guilty due to mental
 incapacity, by a court, may be sent to appropriate medical
 facilities in Australia. However, upon discharge from such
 facilities, they may return to their places of original
 residence. Forced labor is forbidden by the Constitution,
 except as part of a sentence or court order.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The Constitution guarantees both a fair hearing and a public
 trial. Defendants may have legal representation, and a
 representative will be appointed where, "in the interest of
 justice," one is required. Due to the paucity of trained
 lawyers Nauru, a legal representative might not be an
 attorney, but instead a trained paralegal, certified by the
 Government to plead cases in the courts.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Protection from these abuses generally is provided by the
 Constitution. However, permission for a Nauruan to marry a
 non-Nauruan must be obtained from the Nauru Local Government
 Council. Such permission has not always been forthcoming,
 though there were no reports of any refusals in 1986. Also,
 while most foreign workers may bring their families to Nauru
 for the duration of their 2-year contracts, this privilege is
 denied to Filipino workers.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Freedom of expression is guaranteed by the Nauruan
 Constitution. Nevertheless, the Island's one radio station
 and one (weekly) newspaper are owned and operated by the
 Government. While the parliamentary opposition, private
 groups, and individual persons may voice opposition to the
 Government, they do not usually receive local media coverage.
 The lack of an independent press, however, appears to be more
 a function of economy than of government policy; the small
 audience makes economic survival difficult for private media
 ventures. Foreign publications are freely available.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Freedom of peaceful assembly and association is guaranteed in
 Nauru. However, there are no political parties nor trade
 unions on the Island. The transient nature of the foreign
 work force and the relative prosperity of the Nauruans
 minimize the motivation to organize the labor force.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Freedom of religion is protected by the Constitution, and no
 official religion is recognized by the Government. Several
 different Christian denominations-are established on the
 Island.
 
 
 783
 NAURU
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Nauruans are free to move and travel both domestically and
 internationally. Foreign workers must apply to their
 employers for permission to leave during the period of their
 contracts. They may break the contract and leave without
 permission but would lose their positions as a result.
 Foreign employees whose contracts are terminated by their
 employers must leave Nauru within 60 days in most cases.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Nauru is a democracy without organized political parties.
 Persons with diverse points of view run for and are elected to
 Parliament and to the NLGC. The current President, Hammer
 DeRoburt, has held office for most of the period since
 independence. Nevertheless, on three separate occasions
 Parliament has elected other persons as president (albeit they
 usually served only for short periods of time), and power has
 been transferred peacefully. In the next scheduled elections,
 in December 1986, no parliamentary seat is expected to be
 contested by fewer than two candidates.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 There have been no allegations by outside organizations of
 human rights violations in Nauru nor any requests for
 investigations.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 The Constitution guarantees women the same freedoms and
 protections as men. They are provided equal opportunities by
 the Government in education and employment, and are free to
 own property and pursue private interests. However, some
 discrimination based on sex exists, in part based on
 traditional culture. For example, all members of Parliament
 and most senior officials and managers are men, though there
 is no legal bar to women obtaining these positions. In
 regional forums, the Government is a leading advocate of the
 advancement of women.
 CONDITIONS OF LABOR
 No information is available on Nauruan domestic labor
 legislation. Since the demand for skilled and unskilled labor
 as well as managerial talent exceeds the supply in the
 country, workers are recruited overseas. Each worker enters
 into a 2-year contract which sets out the terms and conditions
 of employment.
 As virtually all foreign workers are under contract to the
 Government (and the government-owned NPC), the Government has
 total authority to terminate contracts and require workers to
 leave their jobs and the country. There have been rumors in
 the past that some workers' contracts were terminated
 capriciously. However, contract terms, including information
 about termination, are known to the workers before they agree
 to accept employment. There were no allegations of abuse of
 this power by the Government in 1986.
 
 
 784
