 NAURU
 The Republic of Nauru, an 8.22-square mile Pacific island with about 9,000 inhab-
 itants, gained independence in 1968, at which time it adopted a modified form of
 parliamentary democracy. Prior to independence it had been administered by Aus-
 tralia.
 Nauru has two levels of government the unicameral Parliament and the Nauru
 Island Council (NIC). Parliamentary elections must be held at least once every 3
 years. The Parliament, consisting of 18 members from 14 constituencies, is respon-
 sible for national and international matters. It elects the President, who is both
 head of state and head of government, from among its members. The NIC acts as
 the local government and is responsible for public services. The judiciary is inde-
 pendent. Nauru has no armed forces, though it does maintain -an 87-man police
 force under civilian control.
 The economy depends almost entirely on the country's rich phosphate deposits,
 mined by the government-owned Nauru Phosphate Corporation (NPC). The Govern-
 ment places a large percentage of the NPC's earnings in long-term investments
 meant to support the Nauans after the phosphate reserves have been exhausted.
 Using current extraction techniques, Nauru's phosphate reserves will soon be ex-
 hausted, probably by the year 2000.
 Fundamental human rights are provided for in the Constitution and generally re-
 spected in practice, although hard data and systematic records are lacking. Dis-
 crimination and violence against women remain the principal human rights prob-
 lems.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no political or other
 extrau dicial killings
 b. Dsappa    e.-There were no political disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment-
 The Constitution prohibits these practices, and this prohibition is respected.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The constitutional prohibition against ar-
 bitrary arrest and detention is honored. The police may hold a person for no more
 than 24 hours without a hearing before a magistrate. Exile is not practiced.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-Nauru maintains an independent judiciary and
 constitutional provisions for both a fair hearing and a public trial are respected. De-
 fendants may have legal counsel, and a representative will be appointed when re-
 quired "in the interest of justice." Nauru has only two trained lawyers, and many
 people are represented in court by "pleaders," trained paralegals certified by the
 Government. There are no political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Constitution generally provides protection from these abuses. Searches not sanc-
 tioned by court order are prohibited, and there is no surveillance of individuals or
 of private communications. Nauruan males must have permission from the Govern-
 ment to mar    a non-Nauruan; such permission has not always been granted.
 Nauruan females are prohibited from marrying foreigners in Nauru. However, laws
 relating to intermarriage are currently in flux due to a change in the structure and
 authority of the local government; these laws may be tested in the near future.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including
 a. Freedom of Speech and Pres.-The Constitution provides for freedom of expres-
 sion. News and opinions circulate freely, rapidly, and widely by the press and word
 of mouth. The country has two regular publications: the private fortnightly news-
 paper, The Central Star News, which operates and editorializes freely; and the Gov-
 ernment Gazette, which contains mainly official notices and announcements. The
 sole radio station, also owned and operated by the Government, broadcasts Radio
 Andtralia and British Broadcasting Corporation news reports but not local news.
 
 
 627
 Satellite reception of pay television, broadcast from New Zealand, became available
 in 1991. Foreign publications are available. There are no prohibitions or restrictions
 on academic freedom.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembl. and Association.-The constitutional right of
 peaceful assembly and association is honored. No limitations exist on private asso-
 ciations, and no permits need be obtained for public meetings.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution protects freedom of religion and the
 Government recognizes no religion as official Several different Christian denomina-
 tions are well established in Nauru. Missionaries, foreign clergy, and religious pub-
 lishing are all permitted. Adherence to a particular faith results in no advantage
 or disadvantage in any secular pursuit.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation-Nauruans are free to move and travel both domestically and inter-
 nationally. Foreign workers must apply to their employers for permission to leave
 durin.g the period of their contracts. They may break the contract and leave without
 permission but would lose their positions and, often, a sizable bond as a result. In
 most cases, foreign employees whose contracts are terminated by their employers
 must leave Nauru within 60 days. Nauru does not revoke citizenship for political
 reasons. Citizens who have left the country have the right to return, and repatriates
 receive the same treatment as other citizens. No restrictions on emigration exist.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens have, and exercise, this right. Though Nauru has no organized political
 parties, persons with diverse points of view run for and are elected to Parliament
 and to the NIC.
 Parliament elects the President. Nauru has had seven changes in presidential
 leadership since independence. Power has always been transferred peacefully and
 in accordance with the Constitution.
 Voting by secret ballot is compulsory for all citizens over age 20 for parliamentary
 elections. All parliamentary seats have been contested during recent elections. The
 3,000 guest workers in Nauru have no voice in political decisions.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 There are no restrictions on establishing local groups that concern themselves
 specifically with human rights, but to date none has been formed. There have been
 no allegations by outside organizations of human rights violations in Nauru, nor any
 requests for investigations.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Language, or Social Status
 The Constitution contains provisions assuring women the same freedoms and pro-
 tections as men. They are provided equal opportunities by the Government in edu-
 cation and employment and are free to own property and pursue private interests
 except that, as noted above, they face restrictions in marrying foreigners.
 Nauru's population has been almost eliminated on several occasions, first by dis-
 ease and drought, then during World War II as a result of massive removals by the
 Japanese. The Government has gone to    rat lengths to encourage large families,
 and Nauruan women complain that emphasis on their reproductive role reduces
 their opportunities. In the past, government restrictions limited the availability of
 contraceptives, but a senior Nauruan official stated in December 1991 that anyone
 can obtain them from the hospital dispensary upon request, without a prescription
 or official authorization. The same official noted, however, that the limited supply
 of different types of contraceptives sometimes makes them temporarily unavailable.
 Previous Nauruan governments have shown little interest in the problems of
 women. Nauruan authorities give high priority to improved health care and edu-
 cation but the island has no gynecological specialists. The Government has not spe-
 cifically addressed the physical abuse of women, which is a serious problem even
 though there are no statistics which show its extent. Alcohol abuse is generally con-
 sidered a major contributing factor.
 Foreign laborers, mainly from Vanuatu and Kiribati, experience some discrimina-
 tion. While guest workers are provided free housing, the shelters they are given are
 often poorly maintained and severely overcrowded. Some foreigners allege that
 Nauruan police rarely act on complaints they make against Nauruan citizens.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The Constitution provides for the right to assemble
 and associate peaceably and to form and belong to trade unions or other associa-
 tions. However, there are currently no trade unions in Nauru, and past efforts to
 
 
 form them were officially discouraged and untimately failed. The transient nature
 of the mostly foreign work force and the relative prosperity of the Nauruans have
 also served to hamper efforts to organize the labor force. No strikes took place in
 1992.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-Nauru lacks labor laws and
 legislation. The private sector in Nauru employs only about 1 percent of Nauru's
 workers. For government workers, public service regulations determine salaries,
 working hours, vacation periods, andother employment matters are determined by
 public service regulations. There are no exprt processing zones.
 c. Prohibilion of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The Constitution forbids forced or
 compulsoy labor, and there have been no instances of either.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-Education is compulsory until age
 16, and Nauruan law sets 17 as the minimum age of employment. This is honored
 by the only two large employers, the Government and the NPC. Some children
 under age 17 work in the few small family-owned businesses.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-Minimum wages aid on Nauru vary consider-
 ably between office workers and manual laborers, but tney suffice to provide an ade-
 qu ate, if Spsrtan, standard of living. The Government sets the minimum wage for
 Nauruans administratively; employers determine wages for foreign contract workers
 based on market conditions andthe consumer price index. Usually foreign workers
 and their families receive free housing, utilities, medical treatment, and, ofen, a
 food allowance. By regulation, the workweek for office workers is 36 hours and for
 manual laborers 40 in both the public and private sectors.
 The Government sets health and safety standards. The state-run mining enter-
 prise, NPC, has an active safety program that includes worker education and the
 use of safety helmets, safety shoes, respirators for dusty conditions, and other safety
 measures. In 1991 the   eatsbished the position of safety officer, responsible for
 improving safety standards throughout the company.
