 NAURU
 Nauru, the world's smallest republic, consists of a single
 Central Pacific island of 8.22 square miles with a population
 of approximately 9,000. As a League of Nations mandate and a
 United Nations trust territory, Nauru was administered by
 Australia on behalf of the Governments of Australia, New
 Zealand, and the United Kingdom. On independence in January
 1968, Nauru adopted a modified Westminster form of
 'parliamentary democracy. The courts are independent and
 effectively enforce the Constitution, which provides for basic
 human rights.
 Nauru has two levels of government, the unicameral Parliament
 and the Nauru Local Government Council (NLGC), both popularly
 elected bodies. All Nauruans over the age of 20 are required
 to vote in parliamentary elections (21 is the minimum age in
 NLGC elections).
 The President, who is both Head of State and Head of
 Government, is elected by Parliament from among its members.
 He presides over a cabinet of four or five ministers. There
 are no formal political parties; thus the President must win
 and retain the support of a majority of parliamentarians.
 Nauru has no armed forces but it maintains a police force of
 approximately 60 officers under civilian control.
 The economy is based on the exploitation and marketing of
 Nauru's rich phosphate deposits by the Nauru Phosphate
 Corporation (NPC). The NPC's profits are the primary source
 of revenue for the Government (there are no consumption or
 income taxes). A large percentage of the NPC's earnings are
 placed by the Government in long-term investments, the income
 from which is meant to support the Nauruans after the
 phosphate reserves have been exhausted. In the meantime, the
 NPC pays rent to the owners of the land which it mines.
 Although the other large economic enterprises on..Nauru (e.g.,
 Air Nauru and the Nauru Corporation) also are owned by the
 Government or by the NLGC, several small, private businesses,
 operate successfully.
 There were no reports of human rights abuses during 1988.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Persomv Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 There were no reports of politically motivatedkiJ1lings.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no known instances of disappearances-
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 These practices are prohibited by the Constitution, and this
 prohibition is respected.
 
 
 887
 NAURU
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 The Constitution prohibits arbitrary arrest and detention, and
 this prohibition is respected. The police cannot hold a
 person for more than 24 hours without a hearing before a
 magistrate. Exile is not practiced, though persons found to
 be "mentally disordered" either by two medical examiners or,
 in the case of a finding of not guilty due to mental
 incapacity, by a court, may be sent to appropriate medical
 facilities in Australia. However, upon discharge from such
 facilities they may return to their places of original
 residence.
 With regard to forced or compulsory labor, see Section 6.c.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Constitutional provisions for both a fair hearing and a public
 trial are respected. Defendants may have legal representation,
 and a representative will be appointed where, "in the interest
 of justice," one is required. Due to the paucity of trained
 lawyers in Nauru, a legal representative might not be an
 attorney, but instead a trained paralegal certified by the
 Government to plead cases in the courts. There are no
 political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Protection from these abuses generally is provided for in the
 Constitution. However, permission for a Nauruan to marry a
 non-Nauruan must be obtained from the NLGC. Such permission
 has not always been forthcoming, though there.were no reports
 of any refusals in 1988. While most foreign workers may bring
 their families to Nauru for the duration of their 2-year
 contracts, this privilege is denied to Philippine workers.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Freedom of expression is provided for in the Constitution.
 Nevertheless, the Island's one radio station and one newspaper
 (a weekly) are owned and operated by the Government. In 1988
 a small independent newsletter was founded, prcividing an
 alternative to the state-owned media. While the-parliamentary
 opposition, private groups, and individual persons may voice
 opposition to the Government, their statements-may not receive
 local media coverage. The small scale of the independent
 press, however, appears to be more a function of economy than
 of government policy; the small population makes economic
 survival difficult for private media-ventures. Further, in a
 society as small as Nauxu, news and opinions can travel widely
 by word of mouth. Foreign publications are-freely available.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Freedom of peaceful assembly and association is assured in
 Nauru. While there are no political parties in the usual
 sense of the term, in February 1987, 8 out of 18 members of
 Parliament joined an informal opposition grouping known as the
 "Democratic Party." No permit is needed to conduct public
 meetings.
 
 
 888
 NAURU
 For a discussion of freedom of association as it applies to
 labor unions, see Section 6.a.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Freedom of religion is protected by the Constitution, and no
 official religion is recognized by the Government. Several
 different Christian denominations are established in Nauru.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Nauruans are free to move and travel both domestically and
 internationally. Foreign workers must apply to their
 employers for permission to leave during the period of their
 contracts. They may break the contract and leave without
 permission but would lose their positions as a result.
 Foreign employees whose contracts are terminated by their
 employers must leave Nauru within 60 days in most cases.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Nauru is a democracy without organized political parties.
 Persons with diverse points of view run for and are elected to
 Parliament and to the NLGC. The NLGC acts as the local
 government and is responsible for public services. It also
 operates retail outlets, is the principal importer for the
 country, and owns a shipping line. The Parliament, consisting
 of 18 members from 8 constituencies, is elected at least every
 3 years and is responsible for national and international
 matters. The current President, Hammer DeRoburt, has held
 office for most of the period since independence.
 Nevertheless,'on four separate occasions Parliament has
 elected other persons, including opposition figures, as
 President (although they usually served only for short periods
 of time). Power has always been transferred peacefully and in
 accordance with the Constitution. All parliamentary seats
 were contested during the most recent elections in December
 1986 and January 1987.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 There have been no allegations by outside organizations of
 human rights violations in Nauru, nor any requests for
 investigations.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 The Constitution assures women the same freedoms and
 protections as men. They are provided equal opportunities by
 the Government in education and employment, and are free to
 own property and pursue private interests. However, some
 discrimination based on sex exists, in part the legacy of
 traditional culture. For example, all members of Parliament
 and most senior officials and managers are men, though there
 is no legal bar to women obtaining these positions. In
 regional forums, the Government is a leading advocate of the
 advancement of women.
 
 
 889
 NAURU
 Section 6   Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 Trade unions do not exist in Nauru, and attempts over the
 years to form unions have met with official discouragement.
 Pilots with Air Nauru went on strike during 1988, partly in
 order to gain recognition as a legal union. However, the
 strike was denounced by the Government as interrupting a
 service vital to maintaining the country's contact with the
 outside world. The Government continues to refuse to
 recognize the Air Nauru pilots' association as a legal union.
 Despite official distaste for unions, there are no laws
 discriminating against unions or their members.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 The transient nature of the mostly foreign work force and the
 relative prosperity of the Nauruans has tended to hamper
 efforts to organize the labor force. There are no economic
 incentive zones or special industries where labor standards
 differ from those elsewhere on Nauru.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 Forced or compulsory labor is forbidden by the Constitution,
 and it is not practiced on Nauru.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 No information is available on legislation relating to Nauruan
 domestic labor legislation or to the employment of children.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 There were no reports of any unfair practices relating to
 minimum wages, hours of work, and occupational safety and
 health. Since the demand for skilled and unskilled labor, as
 well as managerial talent, exceeds the supply in the country,
 most workers are recruited overseas. Each worker enters into
 a 2-year contract which sets out the terms and conditions of
 employment. Nauru provides many jobs for citizens of Tuvalu,
 Kiribati, and other island states that enjoy fewer employment
 opportunities. As virtually-all foreign workers are under
 contract to the Government (and the goveimment-owned NPC), the
 Government has total authority to terminate contracts and
 require workers to leave their jobs and the country. There
 have been allegations that some workers' contracts have been
 terminated capriciously. However, contract terms, including
 information about termination, are known to workers before
 they agree to accept employment.
 
 
 890