 NAURU
 Nauru, the world's smallest republic, consists of a single
 central Pacific island of 8.22 square miles with a population
 of approximately 8,000. As a League of Nations mandate and a
 United Nations trust territory, Nauru was administered by
 Australia on behalf of the Governments of Australia, New
 Zealand, and the United Kingdom. Upon independence on January
 31, 1968, Nauru adopted a modified Westminster form of
 parliamentary democracy.
 Nauru has two levels of government, the unicameral Parliament
 and the Nauru Local Government Council (NLGC), both popularly
 elected bodies. All Nauruans over the age of 20 are required
 to vote in parliamentary elections (21 is the minimum age in
 NLGC elections). The Parliament, consisting of 18 members
 from 8 constituencies, is elected at least every 3 years. It
 is responsible for national and international matters. The
 national Government owns the Nauru Phosphate Corporation (NPC)
 and the national airline, Air Nauru. The NLGC acts as the
 local government and is responsible for public services. It
 also operates retail outlets, is the principal importer for
 the country, and owns a shipping line.
 The President, who is both Head of State and Head of
 Government, is elected by Parliament from among its members.
 He presides over a cabinet of four or five ministers. There
 are no formal political parties; thus, the President must win
 and retain the support of a majority of individual
 parliamentarians. The economy is based on the exploitation
 and marketihg of Nauru's rich phosphate deposits. The NPC's
 profits are the primary source of revenue for the Government
 (there are no consumption or income taxes). A large percentage
 of the NPC'& earnings are placed by the'Government in long-term
 investments, the ihcome from which will be used to support the
 Nauruans after the phosphate reserves have been exhausted. In
 the meantime, the NPC pays rent to the owners of the land which
 it mines. Although the other large economic enterprises on
 Nauru (e.g., Air Nauru, the Nauru corporation) also are owned
 by the Government or by the NLGC, several small, private
 businesses operate successfully.
 Nauru has no armed forces, though it does maintain a police
 force of approximately 60 officers under civilian control.
 The courts are independent and effectively enforce the
 Constitution, which provides for basic human rights.
 There were no reports of human xights abuses during 1987.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom From:
 a. Political Killing
 There were no reports of politically motivated killings.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no known instances of political disappearances.
 
 
 771
 NAURU
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 These practices are prohibited by the Constitution, and this
 prohibition is respected.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, Exile, or Forced Labor
 The Constitution prohibits arbitrary arrest and detention, and
 this prohibition is respected. The police cannot hold a person
 for more than 24 hours without a hearing before a magistrate.
 Exile is not practiced, though persons found to be "mentally
 disordered" either by two medical examiners or, in the case of
 a finding of not guilty due to mental incapacity, by a court,
 may be sent to appropriate medical facilities in Australia.
 However, upon discharge from such facilities they may return
 to their places of original residence. Forced labor is
 forbidden by the Constitution, except as part of a sentence or
 court order.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Constitutional provisions for both a fair hearing and a public
 trial are respected. Defendants may have legal representation,
 and a representative will be appointed where, "in the interest
 of justice," one is required. Due to the paucity of trained
 lawyers in Nauru, a legal representative might not be an
 attorney, but instead a trained paralegal certified by the
 Government to plead cases in the courts. There are no
 political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Protection from these abuses generally is provided for in the
 Constitution. However, permission for a Nauruan to marry a
 non-Nauruan must be obtained from the NLGC. Such permission
 has not always been forthcoming, though there were no reports
 of any refusals in 1987. Also, while most foreign workers may
 bring their families to Nauru for the duration of their 2-year
 contracts, this privilege is denied to Filipino workers.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Freedom of expression is provided for in the Constitution.
 Nevertheless, the Island's one radio station and one newspaper
 (a weekly) are owned and operated by the Government. While
 the parliamentary opposition, private groups, and individual
 persons may voice opposition to the Government, their
 statements do not usually receive local media coverage. The
 lack of an independent press, however, appears to be more a
 function of economy than of government policy; the small
 population makes economic survival difficult for private media
 ventures. Further, in a society as small as Nauru, news and
 opinions can travel widely by word of mouth. Foreign
 publications are freely available.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Freedom of peaceful assembly and association is assured in
 Nauru. While there are no political parties on the island, in
 February 1987, 8 out of 18 members of the Nauruan parliament
 joined an opposition grouping known as the "Democratic Party."
 
 
 772
 NAURU
 Trade unions do not exist in Nauru, and attempts over the
 years to form unions have met with official discouragement.
 Pilots with Air Nauru, who are mostly Australian, have an
 association and have talked of forming a union, but cannot
 obtain any recognition from their employer, the Government.
 In general, however, the transient nature of the mostly
 foreign work force and the relative prosperity of the Nauruans
 minimize motivation to organize the labor force.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Freedom of religion is protected by the Constitution, and no
 official religion is recognized by the Government. Several
 different Christian denominations are established in Nauru.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Nauruans are free to move and travel both domestically and
 internationally. Foreign workers must apply to their
 employers for permission to leave during the period of their
 contracts.  They may break the contract and leave without
 permission but would lose their positions as a result.
 Foreign employees whose contracts are terminated by their
 employers must leave Nauru within 60 days in most cases.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of
 Citizens to Change Their Government
 Nauru is a democracy without organized political parties.
 Persons with diverse points of view run for and are elected to
 Parliament and to the NLGC. The current President, Hammer
 DeRoburt, has held office for most of the period since
 independence. Nevertheless, on four separate occasions
 Parliament has elected other persons, including opposition
 figures, as president (albeit they usually served only for
 short periods of time). Power has always been transferred
 peacefully and in accordance with the Constitution.
 Elections held in December 1986 resulted in a tie in the
 Parliament between Government and opposition forces, each side
 electing nine members. During several weeks of political
 maneuvering, opposition leader Kennan Adeang became President
 for 8 days before an impasse forced an early election in
 January 1987. Although Parliament was again deadlocked,
 DeRoburt put together a 10 to 8 majority and was reelected
 President. In September 1987, parliamentary maneuvering
 resulted in another nine to nine impasse, but DeRoburt was
 again able to reestablish a majority.
 In both the December 1986 and January 1987 elections, all
 parliamentary seats were contested.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 There have been no allegations by outside organizations of
 human rights violations in Nauru, nor any requests for
 investigations.
 
 
 773
 NAURU
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 The Constitution assures women the same freedoms and
 protections as men. They are provided equal opportunities by
 the Government in education and employment, and are free to
 own property and pursue private interests. However, some
 discrimination based on sex exists, in part the legacy of
 traditional culture. For example, all members of Parliament
 and most senior officials and managers are men, though there
 is no legal bar to women obtaining these positions. In
 regional forums, the Government is a leading advocate of the
 advancement of women.
 CONDITIONS OF LABOR
 No information is available on Nauruan domestic labor
 legislation. Nonetheless, it does not appear that there are
 any unfair practices in Nauru relating to the employment of
 children, nor to conditions of work with respect to minimum
 wages, hours of work, and occupational safety and health.
 Since the demand for skilled and unskilled labor, as well as
 managerial talent, exceeds the supply in the country, most
 workers are recruited overseas. Each worker enters into a
 2-year contract which sets out the terms and conditions of
 employment. Nauru provides many jobs for citizens of Tuvalu,
 Kiribati, and other island states that enjoy fewer employment
 opportunities.
 As virtually all foreign workers are under contract to the
 Government (and the government-owned NPC), the Government has
 total authority to terminate contracts and require workers to
 leave their jobs and the country. There have been allegations
 that some workers' contracts have been terminated capriciously.
 However, contract terms, including information about
 termination, are known to workers before they agree to accept
 employment.
 
 
 774
