 The Republic of Nauru, an 8.22 square mile Pacific island with
 about 9,000 inhabitants, gained independence in 1968, at which
 time it adopted a modified Westminster form of parliamentary
 democracy. Previously, Australia, acting on behalf of the
 United Kingdom and New Zealand, administered the island, first
 as a League of Nations mandate and later as a United Nations
 trust territory.
 Nauru has two levels of government, the unicameral Parliament
 and the Nauru Local Government Council (NLGC), both popularly
 elected bodies. Parliamentary elections must be held at least
 once every 3 years. The Parliament consists of 18 members
 from 8 constituencies and is responsible for national and
 international matters. The President, who is both head of
 state and head of government, is elected by Parliament from
 among its members. The NLGC acts as the local government and
 is responsible for public services. The judiciary is
 independent.
 Nauru has no armed forces, though it does maintain a police
 force, now numbering 72 officers, under civilian control.
 The economy depends almost entirely on the country's rich
 phosphate deposits which ate mined by the government-owned
 Nauru Phosphate Corporation (NPC). Its profits are the
 primary source of revenue for the Government; Nauru has no
 consumption or income taxes. A large percentage of the NPC's
 earnings are placed by the Government in long-term
 investments, meant to support the Nauruans after the phosphate
 reserves have been exhausted.
 Fundamental human rights are accorded by the Constitution and
 generally respected in practice, although hard data and
 systematic records are lacking. There were no formal reports
 of human rights abuses during 1989, but concerns have been
 expressed about discriminatory treatment of women.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing
 There were no political or other extrajudicial killings.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no political disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 The Constitution prohibits these practices, and this
 prohibition is respected.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 The constitutional prohibition of arbitrary arrest and
 detention is honored. The police may hold a person for no
 more than 24 hours without a hearing before a magistrate.
 Exile is not practiced, though persons found to be "mentally
 disordered" either by two medical. examiners or, in the case of
 a finding of not guilty due to mental incapacity, by a court
 
 
 935
 N~AURU
 may be sent to appropriate medical facilities in Australia.
 Once treatment is completed such persons may return to Nauru.
 With regard to forced or compulbory labor, see Section 6.c.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Nauru maintains an independent judiciary, and constitutional
 provisions for both a fair hearing and a public trial are
 respected. Defendants may have legal counsel, and a
 representative will be appointed where required "in the
 interest of justice." Nauru has only two trained lawyers, and
 many people are gepresented in court by "pleaders," trained
 paralegals certified by the Government. There are no
 political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The Constitution generally provides protection from these
 abuses. Searches not sanctioned by court order are
 prohibited, and there is no surveillance of individuals or of
 private communications. However, Nauruan males must have
 permission from the Government to marry a non-Nauruan; such
 permission has not always been granted, though there were no
 reports of any refusals in 1989. Nauruan females are
 prohibited from marrying foreigners. Birth control measures
 are not readily available (see Section 5).
 Section.2 Respect for Civil Liberties,*Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Freedom of expression is provided for in the Constitution, but
 the island's one radio station and one newspaper (a weekly)
 are owned and operated by the Government. While the
 parliamentary opposition, private groups, and individual
 persons may voice opposition to the Government, their
 statements may not receive local media coverage. However,
 Nauru's small population allows news and opinion to circulate
 freely, rapidly, and widely by word of mouth. A small
 independent newsletter appearing every 3 or 4 weeks provides
 an alternative to the state-owned media. Nauru has no
 prohibitions against other newspapers, but, with a market of
 only 528 households, the economic viability of independent
 media is precarious. Foreign publications are freely
 available.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 The constitutionally granted right of peaceful assembly and
 association is honored. No limitations exist on private
 associations, and no permits need be obtained for public
 meetings.
 For a discussion of freedom of association as it applies to
 labor unions, see Section 6.a.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Freedom of religion is protected by the Constitution# and no
 official religion is recognized by the Government. Several
 different Christian denominations are established in Nauru.
 Missionaries, foreign clergy, and religious publishing are all
 
 
 936
 N~AURU
 permitted. Adherence to a particular faith results in no
 advantage or disadvantage in any secular pursuit.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Nauruans are free to move and travel both domestically and
 internationally. Domestic travel is particularly accessible,
 since any place on the island is within a 3-hour walk.
 Foreign workers must apply to their employers for permission
 to leave during the period of their contracts. They may break
 the contract and leave without permission but would lose their
 positions as a result. In most cases foreign employees whose
 contracts are terminated by their employers must leave Nauru
 within 60 days.
 Nauru does not revoke citizenship for political reasons;
 citizens who have left the country have the right to return,
 and repatriates receive the same treatment as other citizens.
 No restrictions on emigration exist.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 To Change Their Government
 Citizens have, and exercise, this right. Though Nauru has no
 organized political parties, persons with diverse points of
 view run for and are elected to Parliament and to the NLGC.
 Though one man held power much of the time since independence,
 shifting parliamentary groupings, many reflecting family and
 clan loyalties, have often resulted in changes in leadership.
 In August 1989, Parliament elected a new president. This was
 followed 4 months later by the regularly scheduled election
 which resulted in two new members being chosen for Parliament
 and the naming of the third president to lead Nauru within the
 year. Nauru has also had changes in presidential leadership
 on four occasions prior to 1989. Power has always been
 transferred peacefully and in accordance with the
 Constitution. Voting by secret ballot is compulsory for all
 citizens over age 20 for parliamentary elections and for all
 over age 21 for NLGC elections. All parliamentary seats have
 been contested during recent elections. The only significant
 non-Nauruan group in the nation, the 3,000 guest workers, have
 no voice in political decisions.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 There have been no allegations by outside organizations of
 human rights violations in Nauru, nor any requests for
 investigations.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 The Constitution contains provisions assuring women the same
 freedoms and protections as men. They are provided equal
 opportunities by the Government in education and employment
 and are free to own property and pursue private interests
 except, as noted above, they are prohibited from marrying
 foreigners.
 Nauru's population has almost been eliminated on several
 occasions, first by disease, and-then during World War II as a
 result of massive removals by the Japanese. The Government
 
 
 937
 NiAURlU
 thereforewent to great lengths to encourage larg' families.
 Birlh c6otrol has been available to-women-eonly after they have
 five children, and then it.is often difficult to obtain. The
 island ha  no gynecological specialists and no women doctors.
 Nauruan women complain that the emphasis on their reproductive
 role l.Tmits their opportunities. Serious problems with
 alcoholism'are generally blamed for the physical abuse of -
 women in Nauru. During the tenure of former President
 DeRoburt, such abuse, like other issues involving women,
 received no attention from the Government, and no statistics
 about the prevalence of such abuse exist.
 Foreign contract laborers and their families live only in very
 crowded conditions and suffer disproportionately from the
 rationing imposed during times of water shortages.
 Additionally, while regulations allow those from Kiribati,
 Tuvalu, and other Pacific islands to bring spouses and two
 children under age 18 to Nauru, this privilege is denied to
 Filipino guest workers.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 Trade unions do not exist in Nauru, and efforts to form unions
 are officially discouraged. Pilots employed by Air Nauru went
 on strike during 1988 partly in order to gain recognition as a
 legal union. The DeRoburt Government refused to grant union
 status to the airline pilots, denounced the strike as
 interrupting a vital service, and dismissed the pilots.
 Replacement pilots have not attempted to form a union. The
 transient nature of the mostly foreign work force and the
 relative prosperity of the Nauruans have tended to hamper
 efforts to organize the labor force. No strikes took place in
 1989. Nauru is not a member of the International Labor
 Organization.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 There are no laws discriminating against unions or their
 members. There are no export processing zones on Nauru.
 c. Prohibition of Forced _r Compulsory Labor
 Forced or compulsory labor is forbidden by the Constitution,
 and there were no instances of either.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 Nauruan law sets 17 as the minimum age of employment for
 children. This is enforced, except where children under age
 17 work in the few small businesses owned by their families.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 Nauruan wages provide a decent, if Spartan, living for all
 workers, but the actual compensation varies widely. In 1989
 Nauruans had a minimum wage of $3.88 per hour and a 35-hour
 workweek. Foreign contract workers had a similar workweek,
 but earned only $2.77 per day, except for skilled tradesmen,
 who earned $7.70. Overtime rates of time and a half, with
 double time for Sundays and holidays, considerably supplement
 foreign workers' incomes. Also, free housing and food is
 provided for foreign workers and their families.
 
 
 938
 NiAURUI
 The Government sets health and safety standards. NPC, the
 island's major employer, has an excellent safety program that
 includes worker education and the use of safety helmets,
 safety shoes, respirators for dusty conditions, and other
 safety measures. During 1989 NPC had only 1 serious worker
 accident and about 10 minor accidents in its work force of
 1,200.
 
 
 939
