 NAURU
 The Republic of Nauru, a small Pacific island with about 10,500 inhabitants,
 gained independence in 1968, at which time it adopted a modified form of par-
 liamentary democracy. Nauru has two levels of government, the unicameral Par-
 liament and the Nauru Island Council (NIC). Parliamentary elections must be held
 at least triennially. The Parliament, consisting of 18 members from 14 constitu-
 encies, is responsible for national and international matters. It elects the President,
 who is both Head of State and Head of Government, from among its members. The
 NIC acts as the local government and is responsible for public services. The judici-
 aryis independent.
 Nauru has no armed forces although it does maintain a small police force (less
 than 100 members) under civilian control.
 The economy depends almost entirely on the country's rapidly depleting phos-
 phate deposits, mined by the government-owned Nauru Phosphate Corporation
 (NPC). The Government places a large percentage of the NPC's earnings in long-
 term investments meant to support the citizenry after the phosphate reserves have
 been exhausted, which, using current extraction techniques, will probably occur by
 the year 2000. The Governments of Nauru and Australia reached a $70.4 million
 out-of-court settlement in 1993 for rehabilitation of the Nauruan lands ruined by
 Australian phosphate mining.
 Fundamental human rights are provided for in the Constitution and generally re-
 spected in practice. There were no reports of specific human rights abuses, but in
 the traditional culture women occupy a subordinate role, with limits on their job op-
 portunities. Complaints of discrimination against workers from Kiribati, Tuvalu,
 and Vanuatu, particularly in treatment by police and in housing, continued.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no reports of political or
 other extrajudicial killings.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution prohibits these practices, and the Government respects these pro-
 hibitions in practice.
 The Government attempts to provide internationally accepted minimum prison
 conditions within its limited financial means and in accordance with local living
 standards. Prison conditions, however, are basic, and food and sanitation are lim-
 ited. There are no local human rights groups, and the question of visits to prisons
 by human rights monitors has not been raised. Visits by church groups and family
 members are permitted.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The constitutional prohibition against ar-
 bitrary arrest and detention is honored. The police may hold a person for no more
 than 24 hours without a hearing before a magistrate. The Government does not
 practice forced exile.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The judiciary is independent, and constitutional
 provisions for both a fair hearing and a public trial are respected. Defendants may
 have legal counsel, and a representative will be appointed when required "in the in-
 terest of justice." However, many cases never reach the formal legal process, as tra-
 ditional reconciliation is used-usually by choice but sometimes under communal
 (not government) pressure. Workers from Kiribati and Tuvalu are particularly at a
 disadvantage in complaints against citizens. There are only two trained lawyers,
 and many people are represented in court by "pleaders," trained paralegals certified
 by the Government.
 There were no reports of political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Constitution generally prohibits these abuses. Searches not sanctioned by court
 order are prohibited, and there is no surveillance of individuals or of private com-
 munications. Citizenship and inheritance rights are traced through the female line.
 Until very recently laws restricted intermarriage with non-Nauruans. Although the
 laws have change, intermarriage between women and foreign males still draws
 substantial socia censure. The foreign spouses-male or female-of citizens have no
 automatic right of abode. They are, however, normally granted short-term "visits"
 sponsored by the citizen spouse, or they may apply for longer term work permits.
 Foreign spouses are not eligible for citizenship.
 
 
 736
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of expres-
 sion. News and opinion circulate freely, rapidly, and widely by the press and word
 of mouth. The country has two regular publications: The private, fortnightly news-
 paper, the Central Star News, which operates and editorializes freely; and the Gov-
 ernment Gazette, which contains mainly official notices and announcements. The
 sole radio station, also owned and operated by the Government, broadcasts Radio
 Australia and British Broadcasting Corporation news reports but not local news.
 Pay television broadcast from New Zealand is received by satellite. Foreign publica-
 tions are widely available.
 There are no prohibitions or restrictions on academic freedom.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Government respects the
 constitutional right of peaceful assembly and association. There are no limitations
 on private associations, and no permits are required for public meetings.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for freedom of religion, and the
 Government respects this right in practice.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The law provides for these rights for citizens, and the Government re-
 spects them in practice.
 Foreign workers must apply to their employers for permission to leave during the
 period of their contracts. They may break the contract and leave without permission
 but would lose their positions and often a sizable bond as a result. In most cases,
 foreign employees whose contracts are terminated by their employers must leave
 Nauru within 60 days.
 The Government cooperates with the office of the United Nations High Commis-
 sioner for Refugees and other humanitarian organizations in assisting refugees. No
 person in recent memory has applied for refugee status, and the Government has
 not formulated a formal policy regarding refugees, asylees, or first asylum.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens have, and exercise, the right to change their government. Although
 Nauru has no organized political parties, persons with diverse points of view run
 for and are elected to Parliament and to the NIC.
 Parliament elects the President. Nauru has had eight changes in presidential
 leadership since independence in 1968. Power has always been transferred peace-
 fully and in accordance with the Constitution. Voting by secret ballot is compulsory
 for all citizens over the age of 20 for parliamentary elections. There have been mul-
 tiple candidates for all parliamentary seats during recent elections..The approxi-
 mately 3,000 guest workers have no voice in political decisions.
 There are no legal impediments to participation in politics by women, and cur-
 rently there is one female Member of Parliament.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 There are no restrictions on establishing local groups that concern themselves
 specifically with human rights, but to date none has been formed. There have been
 no allegations by outside organizations of human rights violations in Nauru nor any
 requests for investigations.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution prohibits discrimination on the basis of race, sex, religion, dis-
 ability, language, or social status. The Government generally observes this in prac-
 tice; however, women do not receive the same degree of freedom and protection as
 men.
 Women.-Previous governments have shown little interest in the problems of
 women. While the authorities give high priority to improved health care and edu-
 cation, the island has no gynecologists, and the Government has not addressed the
 physical abuse of women and does not collect statistics on it. Some credible reports
 ndicate that sporadic abuse, often aggravated by alcohol abuse, occurs. Families
 usually attempt to reconcile such problems informally as is standard islander prac-
 tice. Major and unresolved family disputes are treated seriously by the courts and
 the Government.
 Constitutional provisions assuring women the same freedoms and protections as
 men are not fully observed in practice. The Government provides equal opportuni-
 ties in education and employment, and women are free to own property and pursue
 private interests. However, both the Government and society still give women clear
 
 
 737
 signals that their ultimate goal should be marriage and raising a family. The popu-
 lation has been almost eliminated on several occasions, first by disease and drought,
 and then during World War H as a result of massive removals by the Japanese. The
 Government has gone to great lengths to encourage large families, and women com-
 plain that emphasis on their reproductive role reduces their opportunities. For ex-
 ample, young women studying abroad on scholarship and contemplating marriage
 face possible termination of their educational grants as it is assumed that they will
 leave the work force and thus not require additional academic training.
 Children.-The Government devotes considerable attention to the welfare of chil-
 dren, with particular stress on their health and educational needs. Child abuse sta-
 tistics do not exist, but alcohol abuse sometimes leads to child neglect or abuse. The
 NIC treats child abuse as a serious communal matter. There were no reported cases
 of child abuse during the year.
 People With Disabilities.-There is no reported discrimination in employment,
 education, and the provision of state services to persons with disabilities. There is,
 however, no legislation mandating accessibility to public buildings and services for
 the disabled-
 NationallRaciallEthnic Minorities.-Foreign laborers, mainly from Vanuatu,
 Kiribati, and Tuvalu, experience some discrimination. While guest workers are pro-
 vided free housing, the shelters they are given are often poorly maintained and
 overcrowded. Some guest workers have alleged that the police rarely act on com-
 plaints they make against citizens.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The Constitution provides for the right of citizens
 to form and belong to trade unions or other associations. However, Nauru has vir-
 tually no labor laws, and there are currently no trade unions. Past efforts to form
 unions were officially discouraged. The transient nature of the mostly foreign work
 force and the relative prosperity of the citizenry also have served to hamper efforts
 to organize the labor force. The right to strike is neither protected, prohibited, nor
 limited by law. No strikes took place in 1996. Nauru is not a member of the Inter-
 national Labor Organization. There are no provisions which would prohibit or limit
 the right of unions to affiliate with international bodies.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-While there are no legal im-
 pediments, collective bargaining does not take place, and, as noted above, has been
 unsuccessful. The private sector employs only about 1 percent of salaried workers.
 For government workers, public service regulations determine salaries, working
 hours, vacation periods, and other employment matters. There are no export proc-
 essing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The Constitution forbids forced or
 compulsory labor, and there have been no instances of either.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-Education is compulsory until the
 age of 16; the law sets 17 as the minimum age of employment. This is honored by
 the only two large employers, the Government and the NPC. Some children under
 the age of 17 years work in the few, small, family-owned businesses.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-Minimum wages vary considerably between of-
 fice workers and manual laborers, but they suffice to provide an adequate, if mod-
 est, standard of living. Thanks to yearly dividends paid by the NPC, most families
 live in simple but adequate housing, and almost every family owns at least one car
 or truck. The Government sets the minimum yearly wage administratively for both
 public and private sectors. Since November 1992, that rate has been $6,562
 ($A9,056) for those 21 years of age or older. The rate is progressively lower for those
 under 21 years of age. Employers determine wages for foreign contract workers
 based on market conditions and the consumer price index. Usually foreign workers
 and their families receive free housing, utilities, medical treatment, and often a food
 allowance. By regulation the workweek for office workers is 36 hours and for man-
 ual laborers 40 hours in both the public and private sectors. Neither law nor regula-
 tions stipulate a weekly rest period; however, most workers observe Saturdays and
 Sundays as holidays.
 The Government sets health and safety standards. The NPC has an active safety
 program that includes worker education and the use of safety helmets, safety shoes,
 respirators for dusty conditions, and other safety measures. The NPC has a safety
 officer who is specifically responsible for improving safety standards and compliance
 throughout the company.
 
 
