 NAURU
 The Republic of Nauru, a small Pacific island with about 9,900 inhabitants,
 gained independence in 1968, at which time it adopted a modified form of par-
 liamentary democracy.
 Nauru has two levels of government, the unicameral Parliament and the Nauru
 Island Council (NIC). Parliamentary elections must be held at least triennially. The
 Parliament, consisting of 18 members from 14 constituencies, is responsible or na-
 tional and international matters. It elects the President, who is both Head of State
 and Head of Government, from among its members. The NIC acts as the local gov-
 ernment and is responsible for public services. The judiciary is independent.
 Nauru has no armed forces, though it does maintain a small police force (less than
 100 members) under civilian control.
 The economy depends almost entirely on the country's rich phosphate deposits,
 mined by the government-owned Nauru Phosphate Corporation (NPC). The Govern-
 ment places a large percentage of the NPC's earnings in long-term investments
 meant to support the Nauruans after the phosphate reserves have been exhausted,
 which using current extraction techniues, will probably occur by the year 2000.
 The dovernments of Nauru and Australia reached a $70.4 million out-of-court set-
 
 
 656
 tlement in July 1993 for rehabilitation of the Nauruan lands ruined by Australian
 phosphate mining.
 Fundamental human rights are provided for in the Constitution and generally re-
 spected in practice. Discrimination and violence against women continue to be the
 principal human rights problems.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extra judicial Klling.-There were no reports of political or
 other extrajudicial killings.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of political disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution prohibits these practices, and this prohibition is respected.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The constitutional prohibition against ar-
 bitrary arrest and detention is honored. The police may hold a person for no more
 than 24 hours without a hearing before a magistrate. Exile is not practiced.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Tria.-Nauru maintains an independent judiciary, and
 constitutional provisions for both a fair hearing and a public trial are respected. De-
 fendants may have legal counsel, and a representative will be appointed when re-
 quired "in the interest of justice." However, many cases never reach the formal legal
 process, as traditional reconciliation is used-usually by choice, but sometimes
 under communal (not government) pressure. Guest workers from Kiribati and
 Tuvalu are particularly at a disadvantage in complaints against Nauruan citizens.
 Nauru has only two trained lawyers, and many people are represented in court by
 "pleaders," trained paralegals certified by the Government.
 There are no political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Constitution generally provides protection from these abuses. Searches not sanc-
 tioned by court order are prohibited, and there is no surveillance of individuals or
 of private communications. Nauruan citizenship and inheritance rights are traced
 through the female line. Until very recently, laws restricted intermarriage of Nauru
 men and women with non-Nauruans. Although the laws have changed and such
 intermarriage is practiced and permitted, intermarriage between Nauru women and
 foreign males still draws substantial social censure. The spouses--male or female-
 of Nauru citizens have no automatic right of abode in Nauru. They are, however,
 normally granted short-term "visits' sponsored by the Nauru spouse or they may
 apply for longer-term work permits. Foreign spouses are not eligible for Nauru citi-
 zenship.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of expres-
 sion. News and opinion circulate freely, rapidly, and widely by the press and word
 of mouth. The country has two regular publications: the private, fortnightly news-
 paper, the Central Star News, which operates and editorializes freely; and the Gov-
 ernment Gazette, which contains mainly official notices and announcements. The
 sole radio station, also owned and operated by the Government, broadcasts Radio
 Australia and British Broadcasting Corporation news reports but not local news.
 Pay television, broadcast from New Zealand, is received by satellite. Foreign publi-
 cations are widely available.
 There are no prohibitions or restrictions on academic freedom.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The constitutional right of
 peaceful assembly and association is honored. No limitations exist on private asso-
 ciations, and no permits need be obtained for public meetings.
 c. Freedom of Relgion.-The constitutional protection of freedom of religion is ob-
 served in practice.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-Naurans are free to move and travel both domestically and inter-
 nationally. Nauru does not revoke citizenship for political reasons. Citizens who
 have left the country have the right to return, and repatriates receive the same
 treatment as other citizens. No restrictions on emigration exist.
 Foreign workers must apply to their employers for permission to leave during the
 peiod of their contracts. They may break the contract and leave without permission
 but would lose their positions and, often, a sizable bond as a result. In most cases,
 foreign employees whose contracts are terminated by their employers must leave
 Nauru within 60 days.
 
 
 657
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens have, and exercise, the right to change their government. Though Nauru
 has no organized political parties, persons with diverse points of view run for and
 are elected to Parliament and to the NIC.
 Parliament elects the President. Nauru has had seven changes in presidential
 leadership since independence in 1968. Power has always been transferred peace-
 fully and in accordance with the Constitution. Continuing this tradition, Bernard
 Dowiyogo was reelected to his parliamentary seat and the Presidency in November
 1992. Voting, by secret ballot, is compulsory for all citizens over age 20 for par-
 liamentary elections. There have been multiple candidates for all parliamentary
 seats during recent elections. The approximately 3 000 guest workers in Nauru have
 no voice in political decisions. There are no legal impediments to participation in
 politics by women, and women have in the past served in Parliament. However,
 there are no women among the current 18 parliamentarians.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of .uman Rights
 There are no restrictions on establishing local groups that concern themselves
 specifically with human rights, but to date none has been formed. There have been
 no allegations by outside organizations of human rights violations in Nauru, nor any
 requests for investigations.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 Women.-The Constitutional provisions assuring women the same freedoms and
 protections as men are not fully observed in practice. The Government provides
 equal opportunities in education and employment and women are free to own prop-
 erty and pursue private interests. However, both the Government and society still
 give women clear signals that their ultimate goal should be marriage and raising
 a family. Nauru's population has been almost eliminated on several occasions, first
 by disease and drought, then during World War H as a result of massive removals
 by the Japanese. The Government has gone to great lengths to encourage large fam-
 ilies, and Nauruan women complain that emphasis on their reproductive role re-
 duces their opportunities. For example, young women studying abroad on scholar-
 ship and contemplating marriage face review and possible termination of their edu-
 cational grants as it is assumed that they will leave the work force and thus not
 require additional academic training.
 Previous Nauruan governments have shown little interest in the problems of
 women. Nauruan authorities give high priority to improved health care and edu-
 cation, but the island has no gnecologists. The Government has not addressed the
 physical abuse of women and des not collect statistics on it. Some credible reports
 indicate that the abuse that occurs, which is often aggravated by alcohol abuse,
 sometimes results in serious injury.
 Children.-Child abuse statistics do not exist, but alcohol abuse sometimes leads
 to child neglect or abuse. The NIC dealt with one child abuse case in 1994, treating
 it as a serious communal matter. The Government devotes considerable attention
 to the welfare of children, with particular stress on their health and educational
 needs.
 National/Racial/Ethnic Minorities.-Foreign laborers, mainly from  Vanuatu,
 Kiribati, and Tuvalu, experience some discrimination. While guest workers are pro-
 vided free housing, the shelters they are given are often poorly maintained and
 overcrowded. Some guest workers have alleged that Nauruan police rarely act on
 complaints they make against Nauruan citizens.
 People With Disabilities.-There is no reported discrimination in employment,
 education, and the provision of state services to persons with disabilities. There is,
 however, no legislation or mandated provisions of accessibility to public buildings
 and services for the disabled.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The Constitution provides for the right to assemble
 and associate peacefully and to form and belong to trade unions or other associa-
 tions. However, Nauru has virtually no labor laws and there are currently no trade
 unions. Past efforts to form them were officially discouraged. The transient nature
 of the mostly foreign work force and the relative prosperity of the Nauruans have
 also served to hamper efforts to organize the labor force. The right to strike is nei-
 ther protected, prohibited, nor limited by law. No strikes took  ace in 1994. Nauru
 is not a member of the International Labor Organization.
 
 
 658
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-While there are no legal im-
 pediments to collective bargaining and organizing the former does not take place,
 and, as noted above, the latter has been unsuccessful. The rivate sector in Na
 employs only about 1 percent of Nauru's salaried workers. For government workers,
 public service regulations determine salaries, working hours, vacation periods, and
 other employment matters. There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The Constitution forbids forced or
 compulsory labor, and there have been no instances of either.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-Education is compulsory until age
 16; Nauruan law sets 17 as the minimum age of employment. This is honored by
 the only two large employers, the Government and the NPC. Some children under
 age 17 work in the few small family-owned businesses.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-Minimum wages paid on Nauru vary consider-
 ably between office workers and manual laborers, but theg, suffice to provide an ade-
 quate, if modest, standard of living. Thanks to yearly dividends paid to Nauruans
 y he NRC, most families live in simple but adequate housing, and almost every
 Nauruan family owns at least one car or truck. The Government sets the minimum
 yearly wage for Nauruans administratively for both public and private sectors. Since
 November 1992, that rate has been $6 562 ($A9,056) for those 21 years of age or
 older. The rate is progressively lower or those under 21 years of age. Employers
 determine wages for foreign contract workers based on market conditions and the
 consumer price index. Usually foreign workers and their families receive free hous-
 ing, utilities, medical treatment, and often a food allowance. By regulation the work-
 week for office workers is 36 hours and for manual laborers 40 hours in both the
 public and private sectors. Neither law nor regulations stipulate a weekly rest pe-
 od; however, most workers observe Saturdays and Sundays as holidays.
 The Government sets health and safety standards. The NPC has an active safety
 program that includes worker education and the use of safety helmets safety shoes,
 respirators for dusty conditions, and other safety measures. The NPC has a safety
 officer, specifically responsible for improving safety standards and compliance
 throughout the company.
