 NAURU
 The Republic of Nauru, an 8.22-square mile Pacific island with
 about 9,000 inhabitants, gained independence in 1968, at which
 time it adopted a modified form of parliamentary democracy.
 Prior to independence'it had been administered by Australia.
 Nauru has two levels of Government, the unicameral Parliament
 and the Nauru Local Government Council (NLGC), both popularly
 elected bodies. Parliamentary elections must be held at least
 once every 3 years. The Parliament, consisting of 18 members
 from 14 constituencies, is responsible for national and
 international matters. The President, who is both head of
 State and Head of Government, is elected by Parliament from
 among its members. The NLGC acts as the local government and
 is responsible for public services. The judiciary it
 independent. Nauru has no armed forces, though it does
 maintain an 87-man police force under civilian control.
 The economy depends almost entirely on the country'srich
 phosphate deposits, which are mined by the government-owned
 Nauru Phosphate Corporation (NPC). A large percentage of the
 NPC's earnings are placed by the Government in long-term
 investments meant to support the Nauruans after the phosphate
 reserves have, been exhausted. Using current extraction
 techniques, Nauru's phosphate-reserves will be exhausted--
 probably by the year 2000.
 Fundamental human rights are provided for in'the Constitution
 and generally respected in practice, although hard data and
 systematic recordi are lacking. Discrimination and violence
 against women remain the principal human rights problems.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing
 There were no political or other extrajudicial killings.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no political disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment  ,r Punishment
 The Constitution prohibits these practices, and this
 prohibition is respected.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 The constitutional prohibition against arbitrary arrest and
 detention is honored. The police may hold a person for no more
 than 24 hours without a hearing before a magistrate. Exile is
 not practiced.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Nauru maintains an independent judiciary, and constitutional
 provisions for both a fair hearing and a public trial are
 respected. Defendants may have legal counsel, and a
 representative will be appointed where required "in the
 interest of justice." Nauru has only two trained lawyers, and
 
 
 944
 NAURU
 many people are represented in court by "pleaders," trained
 paralegals certified by the Government. There are no political
 prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The Constitution generally provides protection from these
 abuses. Searches not sanctioned by court order are prohibited,
 and there is no surveillance of individuals or of private
 communications. However, Nauruan males must have permission
 from the Government to marry a non-Nauruan; such permission has
 not always been granted. Nauruan females are prohibited from
 marrying foreigners. Birth control measures are not readily
 available (see Section 5).
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Freedom of expression is provided for in the Constitution.
 News and opinion circulate freely, rapidly, and widely by word
 of mouth. Criticism of the Government, however, may not
 receive media attention. The country has only one regular
 publication, the Government Gazette, which contains only
 official notices and announcements. The one radio station,
 also owned and operated by the Government, broadcasts Radio
 Australia and British Broadcasting Corporation news reports but
 not local news. Satellite reception of pay television,
 broadcast from New Zealand, became available in 1991. During
 1991 there were reports that foreign journalists experienced
 difficulty in obtaining access to information and interviews in
 Nauru and that reporters who criticized the country were
 discouraged from returning. It has not been possible to
 confirm such reports. Foreign publications are available.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 The constitutional right of peaceful assembly and association
 is honored. No limitations exist on private associations, and
 no permits need be obtained for public meetings.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Freedom of religion is protected by the Constitution, and no
 official religion is recognized by the Government. Several
 different Christian denominations are established in Nauru.
 Missionaries, foreign clergy, and religious publishing are all
 permitted. Adherence to a particular faith results in no
 advantage or disadvantage in any secular pursuit.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Nauruans are free to move and travel both domestically and
 internationally. Domestic travel is particularly accessible,
 since any place on the island is within a 3-hour walk. Foreign
 workers must apply to their employers for permission to leave
 during the period of their contracts. They may break the
 contract and leave without permission but would lose their
 positions and, often, a sizable bond as a result. In most
 cases, foreign employees whose contracts are terminated by
 their employers must leave Nauru within 60 days. Nauru does
 not revoke citizenship for political reasons. Citizens who
 have left the country have the right to return, and repatriates
 
 
 945
 NAURU
 receive the same treatment as other citizens. No restrictions
 on emigration exist.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Citizens have, and exercise, this right. Though Nauru has no
 organized political parties, persons with diverse points of
 view run for and are elected to Parliament and to the NLGC.
 The President is elected by Parliament. Nauru has had seven
 changes in presidential leadership since independence. Power
 has always been transferred peacefully and in accordance with
 the Constitution.
 Voting by secret ballot is compulsory for all citizens over age
 20 for parliamentary elections and for all over age 21 for NLGC
 elections. All parliamentary seats have been contested during
 recent elections. The 3,000 guest workers in Nauru have no
 voice in political decisions.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 There are no restrictions on the foundation of local groups
 that concern themselves specifically with human rights, but to
 date none has been formed. There have been no allegations by
 outside organizations of human rights violations in Nauru, nor
 any requests for investigations.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 The Constitution contains provisions assuring women the same
 freedoms and protections as men. They are provided equal
 opportunities by the Government in education and employment and
 are free to own property and pursue private interests except,
 as noted above, they are prohibited from marrying foreigners.
 Nauru's population has been almost eliminated on several
 occasions, first by disease and drought, then during World War
 II as a result of massive removals by the Japanese. The
 Government has gone to great lengths to encourage large
 families. Contraceptives are available to women only after
 they have five children, and then they are often difficult to
 obtain. The island has no gynecological specialists. Nauruan
 women complain that the emphasis on their reproductive role
 limits their opportunities.
 While no' statistics exist to show its extent, physical abuse of
 women in Nauru is a serious problem, with alcohol abuse
 generally regarded as a majoi contributing factor. Previous
 Nauruan governments have shown little interest in the problems
 of women. The current Government gives high priority to
 improved health care and education but it has not specifically
 addressed the problem of physical abuse of women. In 1991 a
 Nauruan was convicted of beating his wife to death.
 Foreign laborers, mainly from Vanuatu and Kiribati, experience
 some discrimination. While guest workers are provided free
 housing, the shelters they are given are often poorly
 maintained and severely overcrowded. Some foreigners allege
 that Nauruan police rarely act on complaints they make against
 Nauruan citizens.
 
 
 946
 NAURU
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 The Constitution provides for the right to assemble and
 associate peaceably and to form and belong to trade unions or
 other associations. Trade unions do not exist in Nauru,
 however, and efforts to form them are officially discouraged.
 The transient nature of the mostly foreign work force and the
 relative prosperity of the Nauruans have tended to hamper
 efforts to organize the labor force. No strikes took place in
 1991.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 Nauru lacks labor laws and legislation. The private sector in
 Nauru employs only about 1 percent of Nauru's workers. For
 government workers, salaries, working hours, vacation periods,
 and other employment matters are determined by public service
 regulations. There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 Forced or compulsory labor is forbidden by the Constitution,
 and there were no instances of either.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 Nauruan law sets 17 as the minimum age of employment for
 children. This is honored by the only two large employers, the
 Government and the NPC. Some children under age 17 work in the
 few small family-owned businesses.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 Minimum wages paid on Nauru vary considerably between office
 workers and manual laborers, but they suffice to provide an
 adequate, if Spartan, standard of living. The minimum wage for
 Nauruans is administratively set by the Government; wages for
 foreign contract workers are determined by the employer and are
 based on market conditions and the consumer price index.
 Foreign workers and their families receive free housing,
 utilities, medical treatment, and, often, a food allowance.
 The workweek for office workers is 36 hours and for manual
 laborers 40.
 The Government sets health and safety standards. The NPC has
 an active safety program that includes worker education and the
 use of safety helmets, safety shoes, respirators for dusty
 conditions, and other safety measures. In 1991 the NPC
 established the position of safety officer, responsible for
 improving safety standards throughout the company. During
 1991, despite many workers' lax attitudes toward the use of
 safety equipment, NPC had only two serious accidents.
 
 
 947
