 NEW ZEALAND
 New Zealand's system of government is patterned on that of
 Great Britain, with executive authority vested in a 20-member
 cabinet led by a prime minister. 'Of the 97 members of the
 unicameral legislature, 4 are elected from a separate roll to
 represent the minority population of native Maoris.
 Of New Zealand's population.of 3,263,000, native Maoris of
 Polynesian origin number 405,000, and 126,000 are Polynesians
 from other Pacific Islands. The rights of the increasingly
 urbanized, disadvantaged, and activist Maori minority have
 been receiving growing public attention. The Ministry of
 Maori Affairs is responsible for looking after their interests
 and needs.
 Real annual average economic growth has been low in recent
 years. However, the free enterprise economy affords the
 opportunity for a reasonable standard of living for most New
 Zealanders. Education is freely available to all.
 In 1987 New Zealand continued its excellent record in human
 rights. New Zealanders continue to enjoy personal freedom,
 freedom of religion, freedom of the press, universal suffrage,
 and the rule of law. Respect for minority rights, concern for
 the economically deprived, and the humane treatment of
 prisoners are established in principle and in practice.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 Killing for political motives by the Government or by New
 Zealand political organizations does not occur.
 b. Disappearance
 There have been no instances of political disappearance.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 The rights of those arrested in New Zealand are protected by
 law and observed in practice. Prisoners are provided access
 to legal assistance and allowed visits by family members.
 Food, facilities, and medical care are good. Prisoners are
 given the opportunity to work.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, Exile, or Forced Labor
 Freedom from arbitrary arrest, detention, and exile is assured
 in New Zealand law and respected in practice. New Zealand law
 provides for a writ of habeas corpus. Persons arrested in New
 Zealand are charged promptly. Legal aid is provided by the
 court to those who cannot afford to pay for a private attorney.
 New Zealand does not permit preventive detention or the use of
 forced or compulsory labor.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 New Zealand law assures a prompt, public trial. The rights of
 the accused are scrupulously maintained and subject to public
 
 
 NEW ZEALAND
 scrutiny. The judiciary operates independently of executive
 or legislative influence.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The right to privacy is assured under New Zealand law. The
 Government does not violate a person's privacy, the sanctity
 of the home, or the integrity of correspondence.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Freedom of speech and the press are assured by New Zealand law
 and respected in practice. There are 150 newspapers and 590
 magazines published. These cover the spectrum of political
 and social thought. The Government makes no attempt to censor
 the press, and opposition viewpoints are freely expressed.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 There are no restrictions on peaceful assembly or association.
 Independent labor unions, which in 1986 encompassed 64 percent
 of wage earners, actively engage in recruiting members and in
 collective bargaining, and they have the right to strike.
 Public sector unions are in some cases precluded from engaging
 in strike action but generally only for reasons of public
 safety. Mediation and arbitration procedures are independent
 of government control. Unions freely maintain relations with
 international bodies and participate in bilateral exchanges.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 New Zealand enjoys a long tradition of religious tolerance.
 All faiths are given equal treatment under the law.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 There are no controls upon citizens of New Zealand regarding
 internal movement or resettlement. Foreign travel is
 unrestricted, and the right to return is assured. Within the
 limits of the nation's resources, New Zealand accepts and
 resettles refugees and asylum seekers.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 The New Zealand Government is freely elected by its people.
 Two major parties, Labour and National, dominate the political
 scene and have alternately formed governments since the 1930's.
 There are other smaller parties and groups which are mostly
 devoted to limited and parochial issues, and are usually of
 little consequence in the national electoral process.
 Universal suffrage at 18 years of age and triennial elections
 provide the opportunity for citizens of New Zealand to change
 their government. There are no restrictions based upon race,
 sex, creed, or national origin which limit participation in
 the political process. Voting rates are high, and
 participation in political groups is common. Opposition
 groups have every opportunity to voice their views.
 
 
 776
 NEW ZEALAND
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 In the absence of allegations of abuse of human rights in New
 Zealand, no international or nongovernmental bodies have
 conducted investigations. New Zealand's endorsement of the
 principles of human rights is clearly demonstrated by its
 participation in local, national, and international bodies
 organized to protect human rights and prevent discrimination.
 Local human rights groups include governmental entities such
 as the New Zealand Human Rights Commission, the New Zealand
 Council for Civil Liberties, and private organizations such as
 the Citizens Association for Racial Equality, the New Zealand
 Chapter'of the International Commission of Jurists, the Race
 Relations Conciliator, Amnesty International, and the National
 Organization of Women.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 Despite the historical absence of overt discrimination, the
 Maori population, which is largely young and urbanized (90
 percent now living in cities) remains marginally educated and
 economically disadvantaged. Notwithstanding the noteworthy
 success of some Maori and extensive intermarriage with Pakeha
 (Caucasians), the stresses of transferring from a rural,
 traditional society to an urban Western environment are
 evident in various social indicators. A relatively high
 percentage of Maori are unemployed, and they figure
 disproportionately in crime statistics and the prison
 population. There has been a rise in Maori activism,
 evidenced most directly in a series of court cases demanding
 the return of government-held land to its original Maori
 tribal owners. Statements by Maori activists denouncing
 allegedly racist attitudes in New Zealand society and
 identifying with the claims of indigenous groups in Fiji and
 the South Pacific Islands are also more frequent. The
 Government has initiated a dialogue on proposed reforms
 designed to enhance Maori representation in the political
 process, thus better ensuring recognition of their basic
 rights and aspirations.
 There is growing sensitivity to the status of women. In 1985
 the Labour Government established a Ministry of Women's Affairs
 and also ratified the U.N. Convention for the Elimination of
 All Forms of Discrimination Against Women. In addition, the
 Human Rights Commission (established in 1977 by the Human
 Rights Commission Act) continues to hear complaints about most
 forms of discrimination. The largest category of complaints
 concerns discrimination against women in employment.
 CONDITIONS OF LABOR
 New Zealand enforces a 40-hour workweek and a minimum 3-week
 annual paid vacation for all employees, in addition to 11 paid
 public holidays. Children under age 16 may not be employed
 without special government approval and must not work at all
 between 10 p.m. and 6 a.m. The hourly minimum wage is $3.00.
 Acceptable conditions of work are assured both by national
 statute, such as the Machinery Act that requires secure
 fencing around most moving and dangerous parts of machines,
 and by safety, health, and welfare provisions included in
 collective agreements.
 
 

 
 
 