 NEW ZEALAND
 New Zealand has strong traditions of democracy, universal
 suffrage, individual freedoms and respect for minority
 rights. The law guarantees all citizens their basic
 rights, and these are respected in practice. As
 evidence of its commitment to human rights, the
 Government inaugurated a Human Rights Commission in
 September 1978 under the terms of the Human Rights
 Commission Act of 1977. The Commission is charged with
 promoting the advancement of human rights in New Zealand
 in accordance with the United Nations International
 Covenant of Human Rights.
 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Torture
 Torture is neither condoned nor practiced.
 b. Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 The law prohibits such punishment and is respected in
 practice.
 c. Arbitrary Arrest or Imprisonment
 The law prohibits such action and is respected in
 practice.
 d. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The law guarantees the right to a fair, public trial
 and is respected in practice.
 e. Invasion of the Home
 Effective legal safeguards prohibit arbitrary invasion
 of the home.
 
 (392)
 
 
 393
 2. Governmental Policies Relating to the Fulfillment
 of Such Vital Needs as Food, Shelter, Health Care
 and Education
 The New Zealand Government provides welfare benefits,
 universal health care, disability payments, aid for
 dependent children and old age benefits. Free public
 education is universal through the secondary level.
 The Government's commitment is indicated by the fact
 that 56 percent of the 1978 budget is devoted to
 education, social services, and health. New Zealand's
 Maori and islander minorities receive additional,
 special assistance through the programs of the
 Department of Maori Affairs as part of the Government's
 policy of promoting actively the welfare of those
 groups.
 3. Respect for Civil and Political Liberties,
 Including:
 a. Freedom of Thought, Speech, Press, Religion
 and Assembly
 These freedoms are deeply engrained in New Zealand law
 and practice. Press freedom is a basic tenet of the
 prevailing New Zealand political philosophy. Demon-
 strations are accepted by the Government and the
 public as a bona fide form of political activity.
 The Race Relations Act of 1972 forbids discrimination
 on the basis of race, color, or ethnic origin, and
 the Human Rights Act of 1977 forbids sexual discrimi-
 nation as well. The Government's Race Relations
 Conciliator (now attached to the Human Rights
 Commission) handles cases of racial discrimination.
 Freedom of association, including trade union
 activities, is guaranteed in the law and is respected
 in practice.
 b. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel and Emigration
 There are no political or legal barriers to domestic
 or international travel, including emigration.
 
 
 394
 c. Freedom to Participate in the Political
 Process
 The law protects this freedom and it is respected in
 practice.
 4. Government Attitude and Record Regarding Inter-
 national and Non-Governmental Investigation of
 Alleged Violations of Human Rights    -
 The Department of State knows of no requests for such
 investigations, and we believe the New Zealand
 Government would fully cooperate with any that were
 made.
 
 
