 NEW ZEALAND
 New Zealand is a parliamentary democracy, with executive authority vested in a
 20-member cabinet led by a prime minister. Five seats in the 120-member Par-
 liament are reserved for the native Maori minority population. The judiciary is inde-
 pendent.
 The Cook Islands and Niue are self-governing states in free association with New
 Zealand. Tokelau is a New Zealand territory. Their local laws are compatible with
 New Zealand and British common law.
 The police and defense forces are responsible to and firmly controlled by civilian
 officials.
 New Zealand is a highly efficient producer of agricultural products. The mainstay
 of its market-based economy is the export of wool, meat, and dairy products. An ex-
 panding manufacturing sector is engaged primarily in food processing, metal fab-
 rication, and the production of wood and paper products. Tourism is also a signifi-
 cant sector of the economy, and niche industries are developing in such high tech-
 nolog sectors as software production. Disparities in wealth are small but increas-
 in9. Most citizens enjoy a comfortable standard of living.
 e Government respects the human rights of its citizens, and the law and judici-
 ary provide effective means of dealing with instances of abuse. The Government has
 
 
 taken steps to address the problems of overcrowded prisons, violence against
 women, and societal discrimination against indigenous people.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no reports of political or
 other extrajudicial killings.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The law prohibits torture and other forms of mistreatment, and the Government re-
 spects these prohibitions in practice.
 Prison conditions generally meet minimum international standards. Many prisons
 are old and in need of extensive refurbishment. The burgeoning inmate population
 outpaced capacity, causing overcrowding again in 1997. Dunedin police cells de-
 signed for overnight use held inmates for extended periods without natural light or
 sufficient opportunities for exercise. The Department of Corrections acknowi edged
 this problem as an unavoidable "temporary measure" and planned to introduce 80
 new inmate bed units, but it had not done so by year's end. The Department began
 investigating new sites for additional prison construction to address long-term in-
 mate population totals, which are projected to reach almost 6,700 by the year 2007.
 Prison capacity was 5,354 inmates as of September, while the inmate population
 was 5,459.
 Due to a higher suicide rate among Maori inmates, the Department of Corrections
 began to institute a series of 39 recommendations from the 1996 government report
 entitled "Reducing Suicide by Maori Inmates."
 The Government permits prison visits by human rights monitors.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The law prohibits arbitrary arrest, deten-
 tion, or exile, and the Government observes these prohibitions.
 e. Denial of Fair Public TWal.-The law provides for an independent judiciary,
 and the Government respects this provision in practice. The judiciary provides citi-
 zens with a fair and efficient judicial process.
 There is a three-tiered impartial judiciary in place, with the right of appeal to the
 Privy Council in London, though this privilege is rarely invoked.
 The.law provides for the right to a fair trial, and the judiciary implements this
 provision.
 There were no reports of political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The law
 prohibits such practices, government authorities respect these prohibitions, and vio-
 lations are subject to effective legal sanction.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The law provides for freedom of speech and of
 the press, and the Government respects these rights in practice. An independent
 press, an effective judiciary, and a functioning democratic political system combine
 to ensure freedom of speech and of the press.
 Academic freedom is not limited.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The law provides for these
 rights, and the Government respects them in practice.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The law provides for freedom of religion, and the Govern-
 ment generally respects this right in practice.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The law provides for these rights, and the Government respects them
 mu practice. The Government ooperates with the United Nations High Commis-
 sioner for Refugees and other humanitarian organizations in assisting refugees.
 Under its own refugee quota, the Government accepts up to 750 UNHCR-approved
 e      e       to a dramatic increase in spontaneous" first asylum applica-
 tionsin the Gast 2 years, the Government began reviewing its laws and procedures
 with a view to curtailing the growth in this area. There were no reports of forced
 expulsion of persons with a valid claim to refugee status.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 The law provides citizens with the right to change their government peacefully,
 and citizens exercise this right in practice through periodic, free, and fair elections
 held on the basis of universal suffrage. A new electoral system, mixed-member pro-
 portional representation, was used in the October 12 general election with 27 politi-
 cal parties participating.
 
 
 865
 Women and minorities are accorded full opportunity to participate in political life.
 In the 120-member Parliament, 35 seats are held by women; 15 by Maori; 2 mem-
 bers are of Pacific Island origin; and 1 is of Asian heritage. The current Executive
 Council (cabinet) has 20 ministers including 3 Maori and 1 woman (the Prime Min-
 ister). There are also four ministers outside the Cabinet, two of whom are women.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 A number of human rights groups operate without government restriction, inves-
 tigating allegations and publishing their findings on human rights cases. Govern-
 ment officials are cooperative and responsive to their views.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The law prohibits discrimination on the basis of all the above listed factors, and
 the Government effectively enforces it.
 Women.-Violence against women is a major problem that cuts across all socio-
 economic groups. A government-sponsored academic survey released in August indi-
 cated that 1 woman in 16 was likely to be sexually assaulted each year. The report
 found that Maori and Pacific Islander women were particularly at risk and that
 multiple, violent victimization in these communities was common. The Government
 determined through a policy review of counseling services that gaps in service deliv-
 ery were more likely to impact on Maori women and girls than non-Maori.
 The law penalizes spousal rape. The Government convicted individuals on this
 charge in 1997. However, a national rape crisis group claims that the overwhelming
 majority of rape cases go unreported and that, of the cases that go to the police,
 only 12 percent end in convictions. The group indicated that husbands, partners,
 and boyfriends commit 23 percent of all sexual assaults reported to the organization.
 The Domestic Violence Act, which came into effect in 1996, broadened the defini-
 tion of violence to include psychological abuse, threats, intimidation, harassment,
 and allowing children to witness psychological abuse. It expanded intervention
 measures, such as the use of protection orders; education programs for men, women,
 and children; stronger police powers to arrest and detain offenders; improved access
 to legal services for women eligible for legal aid; and tougher penalties for breach
 of a protection order.
 The Government's strategy to prevent family violence included a range of objec-
 tives such as providing victim support, incorporating successful innovations and
 proven methods from family violence centers into the national family violence pro-
 grams (that is, the promotion of "best practice"), ensuring safety from violence, and
 inplementing Maori-designed and delivered programs. The police developed an in-
 ternal 5-year strategic plan focusing on family violence. The Government partially
 funded women's refuges, rape crisis centers, sexual abuse counseling, family vio-
 lence networks, and violence prevention services.
 While the law prohibits discrimination in employment and in rates of pay for
 equal or similar work, government documents acknowledge that in practice a gender
 earnings gap persists. Many statistics show that women earn 81 percent of men's
 average ordinary hourl wage, a rate that has been fairly static over the last dec-
 ade. he Ministry of Women's Affairs initiated a research program to review policy
 options and good practice models for addressing this gender pay gap. There are ef-
 fective legal remedies available for women who experience discrimination.
 Children.-The law provides specific safeguards for children's rights and protec-
 tion. The Government demonstrates its commitment to children's rights and welfare
 through its well-funded systems of public education and medical care.
 While female genital mutilation (FGM) is not known to be practiced in New Zea-
 land, the Government recognizes that the procedure is widely condemned by inter-
 national health experts as damaging to both physical and psychological health. It
 is expressly illegal to perform FGM or to make arrangements for a child to be re-
 moved from New Zealand in order to have the procedure. A May report of the Auck-
 land Healthcare FGM Pilot Education Program emphasized the rise in the number
 of African refugees settling in New Zealand (more than 800 Somalis received resi-
 dency in 1997) and the necessity for health care professionals to face the special
 needs of genitally mutilated women and the growing risk of the practice in the coun-
 try. The report recommended the establishment of guidelines for the obstetric care
 of genitally mutilated women- the development of national child protection guide-
 lines and strategies; the development of FGM education modules for New Zealand
 medical, midwifery, and nursing schools; and the appointment of a national coordi-
 nator to train regional coordinators and assist with the establishment of regional
 educational programs. However, these programs confront strongly held beliefs; the
 
 
 866
 report found that 77 percent of the genitally mutilated women living in the Auck-
 land area supported FGM.
 While no societal pattern of abuse of children exists, the Government recognizes
 the problem of violence within the family. Both government-sponsored and Vhari-
 table organizations work to prevent child abuse in the home.
 People With Disabilities.-The law prohibits discrimination against people with
 disabilities in employment, education, and the provision of other state services.
 Compliance with access laws, mandated by the Disabled Persons Community Wel-
 fare Act, varies as business owners and others strive to make necessary adaptations.
 Indigenous People.-Approximately 13 percent of the population claim at least one
 ancestor from the country's indigenous Maori or Morion minorities. The law pro-
 hibits discrimination against the indigenous population, yet a disproportionate num-
 ber of Maori continue to be included in the unemployment and welfare rolls, the
 prison population, school dropouts, infant mortality statistics, and single-parent
 households. Government policy recognizes a special role for indigenous people and
 their traditional values and customs, including cultural and environmental issues
 that have an effect on commercial development. The Ministry of Maori Develop-
 ment, in cooperation with several Maori nongovernmental organizations, seeks to
 improve the status of indigenous people. A special tribunal continues to hear Maori
 tribal claims to land and other natural resources stemming from the Treaty of
 Waitangi.
 - National/RaciallEthnic Minorities.-Pacific Islanders, who make up 5 percent of
 the opulation, are not an indigenous people, but they experience difficulties similar
 to Maori.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-Workers have unrestricted rights to establish and
 join organizations of their own choosing and to affiliate these organizations with
 other unions and international organizations. The principal labor organization, the
 New Zealand Council of Trade Unions, is affiliated with the International Confed-
 eration of Free Trade Unions. A second, smaller national labor federation, the New
 Zealand Trade Union Federation, was established in 1993. There are also a number
 of independent labor unions.
 Labor organization is rudimentary in the territory of Tokelau (population 1,800)
 and in the Freely Associated State of Niue (population 2,000). In the more developed
 Associated State of the Cook Islands (population 18,000), most workers in the public
 sector, the major employer, belong to independent local unions inspired by New Zea-
 land models. Industrial relations in the Cooks are governed by a simplified version
 of older national legislation.
 The law protects unions from governmental interference, suspension, and dissolu-
 tion. Unions, in fact, influence legislation and government policy. Some unions are
 affiliated with the Labour Party; others operate independently of political parties;
 all are free to support parties whose policies they favor. They freely exercise the
 right to strike.
 The law prohibits strikes designed to force an employer to become party to a
 multicompany contract. Under the Police Act of 1958 and amendments, sworn po-
 lice officers," i.e., all uniformed and plainclothes police but excluding clerical and
 support staff, are barred from striking or taking any form of industrial action. Po-
 lice, however, have freedom of association and the right to organize and to bargain
 collectively. Issues which cannot be settled by negotiation between the Police Asso-
 ciation and management are subject to compulsory, final-offer arbitration.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The law provides for the right
 of workers to organize and bargain collectively, and this is observed in practice in
 the country and its dependencies. The law prohibits uniformed members of the
 armed forces from organmzing unions and bargaining collectively.
 Unions now represent fewer than half of all wage earners. Under the Employment
 Contracts Act, employment relationships are based on contracts. Individual employ-
 ees and employers may choose to conduct negotiations for employment contracts on
 their own behalf, or they may authorize any other person or organization to do so
 on their behalf. Although choosing a union is entirely voluntary, unions have re-
 mained the most common agent used by workers to negotiate with employers. Em-
 ployers must recognize a representative authorized by an employee or employees.
 Neither employers or employees, however, are required to negotiate or to agree to
 a contract.
 The Government does not control mediation and arbitration procedures. The em-
 loyment court hears cases arising from disputes over the interpretation of labor
 laws. A less formal body, the employment tribunal, is available to handle wage dis-
 putes and assist in maintaining effective labor relations. Firing an employee for
 
 
 867
 union activities is grounds for a finding of unjustified dismissal and may result in
 reinstatement and financial compensation.
 There are no export processing zones in New Zealand, the Cook Islands, Nine, or
 Tokelan.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The law prohibits forced or com-
 pulsory labor, including forced and bonded labor by children. Inspection and legal
 penalties ensure respect for the provisions.
 d. Status of Child-Labor Practices and Minimum Age for Employment.-The Gov-
 ernment prohibits forced and bonded child labor and enforces this prohibition effec-
 tively (see Section 6.c.). Department of Labour inspectors effectivelyenforce a ban
 on the employment of children under the age of 15 years in manufacturing, mining,
 and forestry. Children under the age of 16 may not work between the hours of 10
 p.m. and 6 a.m. In addition to explicit restrictions on the employment of children,
 compulsory education ensures that children under the minimum age for leaving
 school (now 16 years) are not employed during school hours. By law children en-
 rolled in school ma not be employed, even outside school hours, if such employment
 would interfere with their education.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The law provides for a 40-hour workweek, with
 a minimum 3-week annual paid vacation, and 11 paid public holidays. Under the
 Employment Contracts Act, however, employers and employees may agree to longer
 hours than the 40 hours per week standard. While the law does not specifically pro-
 vide for a 24-hour rest period weekly, the practice is accepted by management and
 labor, and it is the norm. The government-mandated hourly minimum wage of ap-
 proximately $4.13 ($NZ 7.00) applies to workers 20 years of age and older. Com-
 bined with other regularly provided entitlements and welfare benefits for low-in-
 come earners, this wage is adequate to provide a decent standard of living for a
 worker and family. In 1994 a minimum wage for younger workers was introduced
 at 60 percent of the adult minimum. A majority of the work force earns more than
 the minimum wage.
 An extensive body of law and regulations govern health and safety issues, notably
 the Health and Safety in Employment Act of 1992. Under this legislation, employers
 are obliged to provide a safe and healthy work environment, and employees are re-
 sponsible for their own safety and health as well as ensuring that their actions do
 not harm others. The New Zealand Council of Trade Unions has criticized the act,
 however, for not providing sufficient employee involvement in workplace decisions
 affecting health and safety. Under the Employment Contracts Act, workers have the
 legal right to strike over health and safety issues. Unions and members of the gen-
 eral public may file safety complaints on behalf of workers. Department of Labour
 inspectors enforce safety and health rules, and they have the power to shut down
 equipment if necessary. The Department of Labour standard is to investigate re-
 ports of unsafe or unhealthy working conditions within 24 hours of notification.
 orkera have the right to withdraw from a dangerous work situation without jeop-
 ardy to continued employment.
