 NEW ZEALAND
 New Zealand is a parliamentary democracy, with executive authority vested in a
 20-member cabinet led by a prime minister. Five seats in the 120-member Par-
 liament are reserved for the native Maori minority population. The judiciary is inde-
 pendent.
 The Cook Islands, and Niue are self-governing states in free association with New
 Zealand. Tokelau is a New Zealand territory. Their local laws are compatible with
 New Zealand and British common law.
 The police and defense forces are responsible to and firmly controlled by civilian
 officials.
 New Zealand is a highly efficient producer of agricultural products. The mainstay
 of its market-based economy is the export of wool, meat, and dairy products. An ex-
 panding manufacturing sector is engaged primarily in food processing, metal fab-
 rication, and the production of wood and paper products. Tourism is also a signifi-
 cant sector of the economy, and niche industries are developing in such high tech-
 nology sectors as software production. Disparities in wealth are small but increas-
 ing. Most citizens en o a comfortable standard of living.
 The Government fully respects the human rights of its citizens, and the law and
 judiciary provide effective means of dealing with instances of individual abuse. The
 Government has taken steps to address the problems of overcrowded prisons, do-
 mestic violence, and societal discrimination against indigenous people.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no reports of political or
 other extrajudicial killings.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The law prohibits torture and other forms of mistreatment, and the Government re-
 spects these prohibitions in practice.
 Prison conditions generally meet minimum international standards, and the Gov-
 ernment permits visits by human rights monitors. Officials were increasingly con-
 cerned about overcrowding in some prisons. The Office of the Ombudsman was criti-
 cal of facilities in which prisoners were kept three to a cell and had to use buckets
 for toilets. The Department of Corrections acknowledged that there was a problem,
 which it described as "temporary," noting that new prisons scheduled to open later
 in the year were expected to ease the situation.
 A study released in August showed that Maori and Pacific Islander inmates had
 a suicide rate many times that of their counterparts ofEuropean heritage. However,
 it was also noted that the number of suicides in police custody has dropped consider-
 ably since 1991. This decline was attributed to increased training for police officers,
 who had been taught to recognize and monitor prisoners at risk.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detent" n, or Exile.-The law prohibits arbitrary arrest, deten-
 tion, or exile, and the Government observes these prohibitions.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The law provides for the right to a fair trial and
 an independent judiciary, and the Government respects this provision in practice.
 The judiciary provides citizens with a fair and efficient judicial process. A three-
 tiered impartial judiciary is in place, with the right to take an appeal to the Privy
 Council in London, though this privilege is rarely invoked.
 There were no reports of political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The law
 prohibits such practices, government authorities respect these prohibitions, and vio-
 lations are subject to effective legal sanction.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The law provides for freedom of speech and of
 the press, and the Government respects these rights in practice. An independent
 press, an effective judiciary, and a functioning democratic political system combine
 to ensure freedom of speech and of the press.
 Academic freedom is not limited.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The law provides for these
 rights, and the Government respects them in practice.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The law provides for freedom of religion, and the Govern-
 ment generally respects this right in practice. In April the court ruled on the 1995
 case of a family of Jehovah's Witnesses. The parents had appealed a court order
 that their son be given a blood transfusion in contravention of their religious beliefs;
 
 
 the family lost the appeal. Several other families also have sought the right to
 refuse medical treatment for their children on religious grounds. These cases were
 still being reviewed by the courts at year's end.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The law provides for these rights, and the Government respects them
 in practice. The Government cooperates with the United Nations High Commis-
 sioner for Refugees and other humanitarian organizations in assisting refugees.
 New Zealand provides first asylum and conferred this status on approximately 850
 persons in 1996. There were no reports of persons forced to return to a country
 where they feared persecution.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 The law provides citizens with the right to change their government peacefully,
 and citizens exercise this right in practice through periodic, free, and fair elections
 held on the basis of universal suffrage. A new electoral system, mixed-member pro-
 portional representation, was used in the October 12 general election with 27 politi-
 cal parties participating.
 Women and minorities are accorded full opportunity to participate in political life.
 In the 120-member Parliament, 35 seats are held by women; 15 by Maori; 2 mem-
 bers are of Pacific Island origin; and 1 is of Asian heritage. The current Executive
 Council (cabinet) has 20 mimsters including 3 Maori and 1 woman. There are also
 six ministers outside the Cabinet, three of whom are women.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitudes Regarding International and Nongovernmental
 Investigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 A number of human rights groups operate without government restriction, inves-
 tigating allegations and publishing their findings on human rights cases. Govern-
 ment officials are cooperative and responsive to their views.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The law prohibits discrimination on the basis of all the above listed factors, and
 the Government effectively enforces it.
 Women.-A 1995 government-commissioned survey found widespread physical
 and psychological abuse by men of their partners, and the Government is making
 a concerted effort to stop violence against women; initiatives include the issuance
 of nonmolestation and nonviolence orders against abusive partners, civil protection
 orders issued in family courts, and suits for compensation for some forms of neg-
 ligent harm. The law penalizes spousal rape.
 In addition, the Domestic Violence Act went into effect in July. This law broad-
 ened the definition of violence to include psychological abuse, threats, intimidation,
 harassment, and allowing children to witness psychological abuse. The law also pro-
 vided some relief from the costs of legal aid and mandated stricter penalties for of-
 fenders.
 Discrimination in employment and rates of pay for equal or similar work is pro-
 hibited by law. There are effective legal remedies available for women who experi-
 ence discrimination.
 Children.-The law provides specific safeguards for children's rights and protec-
 tion. The Government demonstrates its commitment to children's rights and welfare
 through its well-funded systems of public education and medical care. While female
 genital mutilation (FGM) is not known to be practiced in New Zealand, the Govern-
 ment recognizes that the procedure is widely condemned by international health ex-
 perts as damaging to both physical and psychological health. As New Zealand re-
 ceives increasing numbers of migrants and refugees from regions where FGM is
 practiced, the Government is conducting an education program to enable health care
 professionals to inform their patients about the consequences of FGM. As of January
 1, it is expressly illegal to perform FGM or to make arrangements for a child to be
 removed from New Zealand7 in order to have the procedure.
 While no societal pattern of abuse of children exists, the Government recognizes
 the problem of violence within the family. Both government-sponsored and chari-
 table organizations work to prevent child abuse in the home.
 People With Disabilities.-The law prohibits discrimination against people with
 disabilities in employment, education, and the provision of other state services.
 Compliance with access laws, mandated by the Disabled Persons Community Wel-
 fare Act, varies as business owners and others strive to make necessary adaptations.
 The 1996 census included questions regarding disabilities for the first time. In ad-
 dition a sample of the population was asked or more detailed information on dis-
 abilities and the barriers faced by the disabled.
 
 
 740
 Following a 1994 decision by the government Human Rights Commission that
 Stagecoach Wellington, the city bus company, had discriminated against the dis-
 abled, the bus company, in cooperation with the Commission and a coachbuilding
 company, reached agreement on a design for wheelchair-accessible buses, and began
 test driving the buses in August.
 Indigenous People.-Approximately 13 percent of the population claim at least one
 ancestor from the country's indigenous Maori or Moriori minorities. The law pro-
 hibits discrimination against the indigenous population, yet a disproportionate num-
 ber of Maori are included in the unemployment and wefae rolls, the prison popu-
 lation, school dropouts, infant mortality statistics, and single-parnt household.
 Government policy recognizes a special role for indigenous people and their tradi-
 tional values and customs, including cultural and environmental issues that have
 an effect on issues of commercial development. The Ministry of Maori Development,
 in cooperation with several Maori nongovernmental organizations, seeks to improve
 the status of indigenous people. A special tribunal continues to hear Maori tribal
 claims to land and other natural resources stemming from the Treaty of Waitangi.
 National/Racial/Ethnic Minorities.-Pacific Islanders, who make up 5 percent of
 the population, are not an indigenous people, but they experience difficulties similar
 to Inaori.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-Workers have unrestricted rights to establish and
 join organizations of their own choosing and to affiliate these organizations with
 other unions and international organizations. The principal labor organization, the
 New Zealand Council of Trade Unions, is affiliated with the International Confed-
 eration of Free Trade Unions. A second, smaller national labor federation, the New
 Zealand Trade Union Federation, was established in 1993. There are also a number
 of independent labor unions.
 Labor organization is rudimentary in the territory of Tokelau (population 1,800)
 and in the Freely Associated State of Niue (population 2,000). In the more developed
 Associated State of the Cook Islands (population 18,000), most workers in the public
 sector, the major employer, belong to independent local unions inspired by New Zea-
 land models. Industrial relations in the Cooks are governed by a simplified version
 of older national legislation.
 The law protects unions from governmental interference, suspension, and dissolu-
 tion. Unions, in fact, influence legislation and government policy. Some unions are
 affiliated with the Labour Party; others operate independently of political parties;
 all are free to support parties whose policies they favor. They freely exercise the
 right to strike.
 Whe law prohibits strikes designed to force an employer to become party to a
 multicompany contract. Under the Police Act of 1958 and amendments, "sworn po-
 lice officers," i.e., all uniformed and plainclothes police but excluding clerical and
 support staff, are barred from striking or taking any form of industrial action. Po-
 lice, however, have freedom of association and the right to organize and to bargain
 collectively. Issues which cannot be settled between the Police Association and man-
 agement through negotiation are subject to compulsory, final-offer arbitration.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectwely.-The law provides for the right
 of workers to organize and bargain collectively, and this is observed in practice in
 the country and its dependencies. The law prohibits uniformed members of the
 armed forces from organizing unions and bargaining collectively.
 Unions now represent fewer than half ofan wage earners. Under the Employment
 Contracts Act, employment relationships are based on contracts. Individual employ-
 ees and employers may choose to conduct negotiations for employment contracts on
 their own behalf, or they may authorize any other person or organization to do so
 on their behalf. Although choosing a union is entirely voluntary, unions have re-
 mained the most common agent used by workers to negotiate with employers. Em-
 ployers must recognize a representative authorized by an employee or employees.
 Neither employers or employees, however, are required to negotiate or to agree to
 a contract.
 The Government does not control mediation and arbitration procedures. The em-
 ployment court hears cases arising from disputes over the interpretation of labor
 laws. A less formal body, the employment tribunal, is available to handle wage dis-
 putes and assist in maintaining effective labor relations. Firing an employee for
 union activities is grounds for a finding of unjustified dismissal and may result in
 reinstatement and financial compensation.
 There are no export processing zones in New Zealand, the Cook Islands, Niue, or
 Tokelau.
 
 
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The law prohibits forced or com-
 pulsry labor. Inspection and legal penalties ensure respect for the provisions.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-Department of Labour inspectors
 effectively enforce a ban on the employment of children under the age of 15 years
 in manufacturing, mining, and forestry. Children under the age of 16 may not work
 between the hours of 10 p.m. and 6 am. In addition to explicit restrictions on the
 employment of children, compulsory education ensures that children under the mini-
 mum age for leaving school (now 16 years) are not employed during school hours.
 By law children enrolled in school may not be employed, even outside school hours,
 if such employment would interfere with their education.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The law provides for a 40-hour workweek, with
 a minimum of 3-weeks annual paid vacation, and 11 paid public holidays. Under
 the Employment Contracts Act, however, employers and employees may agree to
 longer hours than the 40 hours per week standard. While the law does not specifi-
 cally provide for a 2-hour rest period weekly, the practice i accepted by manage-
 ment and labor, and it is the norm. The government-mandated hourly minimum
 wage of approximately $4.40 ($NZ 6.375) applies to workers 20 years of age and
 older. Combined with other regularly provided entitlements and welfare benefits for
 low-income earners, this wage is adequate to provide a decent standard of living for
 a worker and family. In 1994 a minimum wage for younger workers was introduced
 at 60 percent of the adult minimum. A majority of the work force earns more than
 the minimum wage.
 An extensive body of law and regulations govern health and safety issues, notably
 the Health and Safety in Employment Act of 1992. Under this legislation, employers
 are obliged to provide a safe and healthy work environment, an emwloyees are re-
 sponsible for their own safety and health as well as ensuring that their actions do
 not harm others. The New Zealand Council of Trade Unions has criticized the act,
 however, for not providing sufficient employee involvement in workplace decisions
 affecting health and safety. Under the Employment Contracts Act, workers have the
 legal right to strike over health and safety issues. Unions and members of the gen-
 eral public may rile safety complaints on behalf of workers. Department of Labour
 inspectors enforce safety and health rules, and they have the power to shut down
 equipment if necessary. The Department of Labour standard is to investigate re-
 ports of unsafe or unhealthy working conditions within 24 hours of notification.
 orkers have the right to withdraw from a dangerous work situation without jeop-
 ardy to continued employment.
