 NEW ZFUAND
 New Zealand's system of government is patterned on that of
 Great Britain, with executive authority vested in a 20-member
 cabinet led by the prime minister. Of the 95 members of the
 unicameral legislature, 4 are elected from a separate roll to
 represent the minority population of native Maoris.
 Of New Zealand's population of 3,310,000, native Maoris of
 Polynesian origin number 295,000, and 96,000 are Polynesians
 from other Pacific Islands. The rights of the increasingly
 urbanized, disadvantaged, and activist Polynesian minority
 have been receiving increased public attention, and this
 concern has been institutionalized in the Ministry of Maori
 Affairs.
 Real annual average economic growth has been low in recent
 years. However, the free enterprise economy affords the
 opportunity for a reasonable standard of living for most New
 Zealanders. Education is freely available to all.
 In i986 New Zealand continued its excellent record in the
 human rights field. New Zealanders continue to enjoy personal
 freedom, freedom of religion, freedom of the press, universal
 suffrage, and the rule of law. Respect for minority rights,
 concern for the economically deprived, and the humane
 treatment of prisoners are accepted principles.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section I Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 Killing for political motives by the Government or by New
 Zealand political organizations does not occur.
 b. Disappearance
 There have been no instances of political disappearance.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 The rights of those arrested in New Zealand are protected by
 law and observed in practice. Prisoners are provided access
 to legal assistance and allowed visits by family members.
 Food, facilities, and medical care are good. Prisoners are
 given the opportunity to work.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Freedom from arbitrary arrest, detention, and exile is
 guaranteed under New Zealand law and respected in practice.
 New Zealand law provides for a writ of habeas corpus. Persons
 arrested in New Zealand are charged promptly. Access to
 counsel is prompt, and legal aid is provided by the court to
 those who cannot afford to pay for a private attorney. New
 Zealand does not permit preventive detention or the use of
 forced or compulsory labor.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 New Zealand law guarantees a prompt, public trial. The rights
 
 
 NEW ZEALAND
 of the accused are scrupulously maintained and subject to
 public scrutiny. The judiciary operates independently of
 executive or legislative influence.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The right to privacy is guaranteed under New Zealand law. The
 Government does not violate the privacy of the individual, the
 sanctity of the home, or the integrity of correspondence.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Freedom of speech and the press are guaranteed by New Zealand
 law and respected in practice. There are 150 newspapers and
 590 magazines published. These cover the spectrum of
 political and social thought. The Government makes no attempt
 to censor the press, and opposition viewpoints are freely
 discussed.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 There are no restrictions on peacefu] assembly or association.
 Independent labor unions, which in 1985 encompassed 41 percent
 of the work force, actively'engage-in recruiting members and
 in collective bargaining, and they have the right to strike.
 Public sector unions are in some cases precluded from engaging
 in strike action but generally only for reasons of public
 safety. Mediation and arbitration procedures are independent
 of government control. Unions freely maintain relations with
 international bodies and participate in bilateral exchanges.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 New Zealand enjoys a long tradition of religiour tolerance.
 All faiths are given equal treatment under tle law.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 There are no controls upon citizens of New Zealand regarding
 internal movement or resettlement. Foreign travel is
 unrestricted, and the right to return is guaranteed. Within
 the limits of the nation's resources, New Zealani accepts and
 resettles refugees. Asylum requests are handled in the same
 manner as refugee cases.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 The New Zealand Government is freely elected by its people.
 Two major parties, Labour and National, dominate the political
 scene and have alternately formed governments since the
 1930's. There are other smaller parties and groups which are
 mostly devoted to limited and parochial issues, and are
 usually of little consequence in the national electoral
 process. Universal suffrage at 18 years of age and triennial
 elections provide the opportunity for citizens of New Zealand
 to change their government. There are no restrictions based
 upon race, sex, creed, or national origin which limit
 participation in the political process. Voting rates remain
 
 
 786
 NEW ZEALAND
 high, and participation in political groups is common.
 Opposition groups have every opportunity to voice their views.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 In the absence of allegations of abuse of human rights in New
 Zealand, no international or nongovernmental bodies have
 conducted investigations. New Zealand's endorsement of the
 principles of human rights is clearly demonstrated by its
 participation in local, national, and international bodies
 organized to protect human rights and prevent discrimination.
 Local human rights groups include governmental entities such
 as the New Zealand Human Rights Commission, the New Zealand
 Council for Civil Liberties, and private organizations such as
 the Citizens Association for Racial Equality, the New Zealand
 Chapter of the International Commission of Jurists, the Race
 Relations Conciliator, Amnesty International, and the National
 Organization of Women.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 Despite the historical absence of ovett discrimination, the
 Maori population, which is largely young and urbanized (90
 percent now living in cities) remains marginally educated and
 economically disadvantaged. Notwithstanding the noteworthy
 success of some Maori and extensive intermarriage with Pakeha
 (Caucasians), the stresses of transferring from a rural,
 traditional society to an urban Western environment are
 evident in various social indicators. Concurrently, there has
 been a rise in Maori activism as well as development of some
 ethnic radicalism.
 There is growing sensitivity to the status of women. In 1985,
 the Labour Government established a Ministry of Women's
 Affairs and also ratified the U.N. Convention for the
 Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women. In
 addition, the Human Rights Commission (established in 1977 by
 the Human Rights Commission Act) continues to hear complaints
 about most forms of discrimination. The largest category of
 complaints concerns discrimination against women in employment.
 CONDITIONS OF LABOR
 New Zealand enforces a 40-hour work week and a minimum 3-week
 annual paid vacation for all employees, in addition to 11 paid
 public holidays. Children under age 16 cannot be employed
 without special government approval and must not work at all
 between 10 p.m. and 6 a.m. The hourly minimum wage is about
 US$2.10. Acceptable conditions of work are guaranteed both by
 national statute, such as the Machinery Act that requires
 secure fencing around most moving and dangerous parts of
 machines, and by safety, health, and welfare provisions
 included in collective agreements.
 
 
 787
