 NEW ZEALAND
 
 Respect for human rights in New Zdaland parallels that
 in the United States. Democratic traditions are
 firmly rooted. All citizens have basic rights guaranteed
 by Conon Law and observed in practice.
 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Torture
 Torture is unknown.
 b. Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 Freedom from cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or
 punishment is guaranteed by law and respected in practice.
 c. Arbitrary Arrest or Imprisonment
 Freedom from arbitrary arrest or imprisonment is guaranteed
 by law and respected in practice.
 d. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The right to a fair trial by jury is guaranteed by
 law and respected in practice.
 e. Invasion of the Home
 There are effective legal safeguards against arbitrary
 invasion of the home.
 2. Governmental Policies Relating to the Fulfillment
 of Such Vital Needs as Food, Shelter, Health Care
 and Education
 New Zealand was a pioneer in providing by law for
 general family welfare, health care, disability
 payments, dependent children benefits and old age
 stipends. There is universal public education.
 (258)
 
 
 259
 3. Respect for Civil and Political Liberties,
 Including:
 a. Freedom of Thought, Speech, Press, Religion
 and Assembly
 These freedoms are protected by law and respected in
 practice. There is a free and vigorous press, and
 demonstrations are a common and recognized form
 of political activity. Accusations have been made
 by sections-of the New Zealand populace that discrimi-
 nation against the small minority groups of Pacific
 Islanders exists. This discrimination, which is
 illegal, tends to be cultural and social rather
 than political. The government is taking steps
 to eliminate any instances of discrimination which
 can be found. There is a free labor movement.
 b. Freedom of Movement Within the Country,
 Foreign Travel and Emigration
 There are no political or legal barriers to domestic
 or foreign travel, including emigration. New Zealand
 residents when travelling overseas are allowed,
 exclusive of prepaid airline and hotel expenses, to
 take with them $1,000 for each month of their trip,.
 up to a maximum of $4,000. New Zealand residents
 who are emigrating are allowed to export all assets.
 c. Freedom to Participate-in the Political Process
 Freedom to participate in the political process is
 guaranteed by law and respected in practice.
 4. Government Attitude and Record Regarding International
 and Non-Governmental Investigation of Alleged
 Violations of Human Rights
 We are not aware of any requests for independent,
 outside investigations into human rights conditions
 in New Zealand.
 
 
