 NEW ZEALAND
 New Zealand is a parliamentary democracy, with executive
 authority vested in a 20-member cabinet led by a prime
 minister. The 97 members of the unicameral legislature
 include 4 elected by those members of the native Maori
 minority who wish to be included on a separate electoral roll.
 Maoris comprise over 12 percent of New Zealand's population of
 ,3,263,000, while other Pacific islanders total nearly 4
 percent. The rights of the increasingly urbanized,
 disadvantaged, and activist Maori minority are receiving
 increased public attention. The Ministry of Maori Affairs,
 which is responsible for looking-after Maori interests and
 needs, is being reorganized so that it can better carry out
 its responsibilities.
 Real annual average economic growth has been low in recent
 years. However, the free enterprise economy affords the
 opportunity for a reasonable standard of living for most New
 Zealanders. Education is freely available to all.
 New Zealand continued its excellent record in human rights
 during 1988. New Zealanders enjoy personal freedom, freedom
 of religion, freedom of the press, universal suffrage, and the
 rule of law. Respect for minority rights, concern for the
 economically deprived, and the humane treatment of prisoners
 are established in principle and in practice.
 RESPECT FOR HiMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 Killing for political motives does not occur.
 b. Disappearance
 There have been no instances of politically motivated
 disappearance.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 Torture and other forms of mistreatment are prohibited by law
 and these prohibitions are respected in practice.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 New Zealanders enjoy freedom from arbitrary arrest, detention,
 and exile. New Zealand law provides for the writ of habeas
 corpus, and persons arrested in New Zealand are charged
 promptly. Legal aid is provided by the court to those who
 cannot afford to pay for a private attorney. Preventive
 detention is prohibited.
 With regard to forced or compulsory labor, see Section 6.c.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 New Zealand law assures a prompt, public trial. The rights of
 the accused are.carefully observed and subject to public
 scrutiny. The judiciary operates independently of executive
 or legislative influence.
 
 
 891
 NEW ZEALAND
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The right to privacy is assured by law. The Government does
 not violate a person's privacy, the sanctity of the home, or
 the integrity of correspondence.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Freedom of speech and press are assured by law and respected
 in practice. There are 156 newspapers and 602 magazines
 published throughout the country, reflecting a wide spectrum
 of political and social thought. The Government makes no
 attempt to censor the press, and opposition viewpoints are
 freely expressed.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Rights to peaceful assembly and association are recognized and
 respected.
 For a discussion of freedom of association as it applies to
 labor unions, see Section 6.a.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 New Zealand enjoys a long tradition of religious tolerance.
 All faiths are given equal treatment under the law.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 New Zealanders are not subject to rimitations on internal
 movement or resettlement. Foreign travel is unrestricted, and
 the right to return is assured. To the extent of its
 resources, New Zealand accepts and resettles refugees and
 asylum seekers.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 The people freely elect their government. Two major parties,
 Labour and National, dominate the political scene and have
 formed governments chosen in triennial elections for more than
 50 years. Smaller parties and groups, mostly devoted to
 limited and parochial issues, are usually of little
 consequence in the national electoral process. New Zealand
 law provides for universal suffrage; citizens are eligible to
 vote at age 18. No restrictions based upon race, sex, creed,
 or national origin limit participation in the political
 process. Women and Maoris, as well as other minorities,
 regularly serve in Parliament and the Cabinet. Voting rates
 are high, and participation in political groups is common.
 Opposition groups freely voice their views.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 New Zealand's commitment to human rights is clearly
 demonstrated by the active efforts of local, national, and
 international bodies organized to protect human rights and
 prevent discrimination. The official New Zealand Human Rights
 
 
 892
 NEW ZEALAND
 Commission and New Zealand Council for Civil Liberties are
 joined by. such nongovernmental human rights organizations as
 the Citizens Association for Racial Equality, the New Zealand
 chapter of the International Commission of Jurists, the Race
 Relations Conciliator, Amnesty International, and the National
 Organization of Women.
 In January 1988, a member of the United Nations Working Group
 on Indigenous Populations visited New Zealand in a private
 capacity at the request of a Maori tribe which alleged it was
 the victim of institutionalized racial discrimination. After
 investigation and discussions with a wide range of sources,
 the U.N. official reported that she found no evidence to
 support the tribe's complaints, but she urged the Government
 to improve its already excellent human rights record by taking
 an even more active role in promoting the rights of its Maori
 citizens.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 Despite the historical absence of overt discrimination and the
 existence of some successful Maori, the indigenous population
 remains marginally educated and economically disadvantaged.
 Increasing urbanization--approximately 90 percent of young
 Maori live in cities--and continued assimilation with New
 Zealanders of European descent have created social stress
 which is reflected in social indicators. A relatively high
 percentage of Maori are unemployed and receive state
 assistance. They figure disproportionately in crime
 statistics and among the prison population.
 A trend toward increased Maori activism continued in 1988,
 evidenced most directly in a series of court cases demanding
 the return of government-held land to Maori tribes in
 accordance with the terms of the 1840 Treaty of Waitangi. In
 accordance with decisions of the Waitangi Tribunal, the body
 set up in 1975 to adjudicate such claims, the Government
 recently transferred several plots of land and granted rights
 to use resources, including fisheries, to specific tribes;
 where that was not possible, the Government provided
 substantial compensation to Maori claimants. Numerous other
 claims are currently under investigation. The Government has
 also engaged in dialogue on reforms designed to enhance Maori
 representation in the political process and thus better ensure
 recognition of their basic rights and aspirations.
 There was growing sensitivity to the status of women during
 1988. The Government established a Ministry of Women's
 Affairs in 1985 and has ratified the U.N. Convention for the
 Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women. A
 Human Rights Commission established in 1977 hears complaints
 about sex discrimination, most frequently concerning wage
 inequities. The Government is considering the introduction of
 legislation requiring employers to pay women and men comparable
 wages for work of comparable worth.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 New Zealand workers have unrestricted rights to establish and
 join organizations of their own choosing and to affiliate
 those organizations with other unions and international
 organizations. Their unions are protected from interference,
 
 
 893
 NEW ZEALAND
 suspension, and dissolution by the Government, and, in fact,
 have considerable influence on legislation and government
 policy. Unions have the right to strike. Public sector
 unions, however, are precluded from striking if work stoppages
 pose a threat to public safety. Unions freely maintain
 relations with international bodies and participate in
 bilateral exchanges.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 The right of labor unions to organize and bargain collectively
 is assumed by law. They actively recruit members and engage
 in collective bargaining. Sixty-one percent of wage earners
 are represented by unions. Mediation and arbitration
 procedures are independent of government control. A system of
 labor courts hears cases arising from disputes over
 interpretation of these laws. In addition, the Arbitration
 Commission and the Mediation Service are available to handle
 wage disputes and assist in maintaining effective labor
 relations. Labor laws are applied uniformly throughout the
 country.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 All New Zealand workers are protected from forced or
 compulsory labor by law and in practice.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children-
 Children under the age of 16 may not be employed without
 special government approval and must not work between the
 hours of 10 p.m. and 6 a.m. These laws are effectively
 enforced.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 New Zealand enforces a 40-hour workweek, a minimum of 3 weeks'
 annual paid vacation for all employees, and observance of 11
 paid public holidays. The hourly minimum wage of $3.00 is
 adequate to provide a decent standard of living. In most
 cases, minimum wage recipients also receive a variety of
 welfare payments. The vast majority of workers earn more than
 the minimum wage.
 
 
 894
