 NEW ZEALAND
 New Zealand is a parliamentary democracy, with executive authority vested in an
 18-member cabinet led by a prime minister. Five seats in the 120-member Par-
 liament are reserved for the native Maori minority population. The judiciary is inde-
 pendent.
 The Cook Islands and Niue are self-governing states in free association with New
 Zealand. Tokelau is a New Zealand territory. Their local laws are compatible with
 New Zealand and British common law.
 The police and defense forces are responsible to and firmly controlled by civilian
 officials.
 New Zealand is a highly efficient producer of agricultural products. The mainstay
 of its market-based economy is the export of wool, meat, and dairy products. An ex-
 panding manufacturing sector is engaged primarily in food processing, metal fab-
 rication, and the production of wood and paper products. Tourism is also a signifi-
 cant sector of the economy, and niche industries are developing in such high tech-
 nology sectors as software production. Disparities in wealth are small but increas-
 ing. Most citizens enjoy a comfortable standard of living.
 The Government generally respects the human rights of its citizens, and the law
 and judiciary provide effective means of dealing with instances of abuse. The Gov-
 ernment has taken steps to address the problems of overcrowded prisons, violence
 against women, and societal discrimination against indigenous people.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no reports of political or
 other extrajudicial killings.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The law prohibits torture and other forms of mistreatment, and the Government re-
 spects these prohibitions in practice.
 Prison conditions generally meet minimum international standards. The Govern-
 ment addressed persistent reports of overcrowding in recent years through the addi-
 tion of new cell capacity (428 new cells added in 1997 and 348 in 1998). As of Sep-
 tember, the average inmate population was 5,200 (with a maximum capacity of
 5,869 beds). Conditions at the older remand facilities at Mount Eden in Auckland
 and Christchurch (where slop buckets are still used in place of toilets) continue to
 cause concern. During the year, the Government accelerated construction to replace
 these older remand facilities and planned to complete the new 275-cell remand facil-
 ity next to Mount Eden Prison by year's end and the new 180-cell remand prison
 in Christchurch in 1999. With inmate numbers expected to continue to grow for the
 foreseeable future (current projections anticipate inmate populations of 5,820 by the
 year 2000 and 6,700 by the year 2005), the Government plans to invest $4 million
 (approximately $NZ 8 million) in the next 3 years for a new cognitive skills program
 entitled "straight thinking," which is designed to reduce recidivism rates by 10 per-
 cent.
 Prisons are also making greater use of intensive specialized programs, such as
 " ia marama," which has halved the rate of recidivism for participating sex offend-
 ers. Due to historically higher suicide rates among Maori inmates, the Department
 
 
 1020
 of Corrections continued to implement recommendations taken from a 1996 report
 entitled "Reducing Suicide by Maori Inmates." The most recent data from the end
 of 1997 indicated some progress with a suicide rate across the whole inmate popu-
 lation of 1.0 per 1,000 inmates (down from 1.43 suicides per 1,000 inmates in the
 period from 1993-96). Notably, Maori suicides also declined. The Department has
 trained more than 98 percent of its prison officers in suicide awareness.
 The Government permits prison visits by human rights monitors.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The law prohibits arbitrary arrest, deten-
 tion, or exile, and the Government observes these prohibitions.
 e. Denial of Fair Public TriaL-The law provides for an independent judiciary,
 and the Government respects this provision in practice. The judiciary provides citi-
 zens with a fair and efficient judicial process.
 There is a three-tiered impartial judiciary in place, with the right of appeal to the
 Privy Council in London, though this-privilege is rarely invoked.
 The law provides for the right to a fair trial, and the judiciary implements this
 provision.
 There were no reports of political prisoners.
 f, Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The law
 prohibits such practices, government authorities respect these prohibitions, and vio-
 lations are subject to effective legal sanction.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The law-provides for freedom of speech and of
 the press, and the Government respects these rights in practice. An independent
 press, an effective judiciary, and a functioning democratic political system combine
 to ensure freedom of speech and of the press.
 Academic freedom is not limited.
 b. Freedom of Peacefill Assembly and Association.-The law provides for these
 rights, and the Government respects them in practice.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The law provides for freedom of religion, and the Govern-
 ment generally respects this right in practice.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The law provides for these rights, and the Government respects them
 in practice. The Government cooperats with the United Nations High Commis-
 sioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and other humanitarian organizations in assisting ref-
 ugees. Under its own refugee quota, the Government accepts up to 750 U-NHCR-ap-
 proved refugees per year. Due to the continuing dramatic increases in "spontaneous"
 first asylum applications in the past 3 years, the Government hired 13 new deter-
 mination officers (bringing the total to 19). In 1997 the Government received 1,700
 first asylum applications, adjudicated 752 (approving 23 percent), and carried over
 a backlog of 1,000 cases. In 1998 the Government planned to adjudicate 1,300 appli-
 cations (almost double the previous year's total) while continuing to address its
 growing backlog (2,700 cases as of September) within 3 years. There were no reports
 of forced expulsion of persons with a valid claim to refugee status.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment-
 The law provides citizens with the right to change their government peacefully,
 and citizens exercise this right in practice through periodic, free, and fair elections
 held on the basis of universal suffrage. A new electoral system, mixed-member pro-
 portional representation, was used in the October 12 general election with 27 politi-
 cal parties participating.
 Women and minorities are accorded full opportunity to participate in political life.
 In the 120-member Parliament, 35 seats are held by women; 15 by Maori; 2 mem-
 bers are of Pacific Island origin; and 1 is of Asian heritage. The Executive Council
 has 23 ministers (18 within the Cabinet and 5 outside the Cabinet) including 3
 Maori and 3 woman (one of whom is the Prime Minister).
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights,
 A number of human rights groups operate without government restriction, inves-
 tigating allegations and publishing their findings on human rights cases. Govern-
 ment officials are cooperative and responsive to their views.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The law prohibits discrimination on the basis of all the above listed factors, and
 the Government effectively enforces it.
 
 
 1021
 
 Women.-Violence against women is a major problem that cuts across all socio-
 economic groups. A 1997 government-sponsored academic survey indicated that 1
 woman in 16 was likely to be sexually assaulted each year and that 35 percent of
 men have physically abused a female partner at some time in their lives. It found
 that Maori and Pacific Islander women were particularly at risk and that multiple,
 violent victimization in these communities was common. The 1997 government re-
 port entitled "Maori Family Violence in Aotearoa" recommended more direct Maori
 community involvement to combat all types of family violence, particularly battery
 against Maori women, and promised a 10-year dialog on addressing these pervasive
 problems.
 The law penalizes spousal rape. The Government convicted individuals on this
 charge in 1998. The National Collective of Rape Crisis groups, a private nonprofit
 organization, claimed that the majority of cases go unreported each year and that,
 of the cases that go to the police, only 10 to 15 percent end in convictions. The group
 reported that husbands and boyfriends commit about 25 percent of all sexual as-
 saults.
 The Domestic Violence Act, which came into effect in 1996, broadened the defini-
 tion of violence to include psychological abuse, threats, intimidation, harassment,
 and allowing children to witness psychological abuse. It expanded intervention
 measures, such as the use of protection orders; education programs for men, women,
 and children; stronger police powers to arrest and detain offenders; improved access
 to legal services for women eligible for legal aid; and tougher penalties for breach
 of a protection order.
 The Government's strategy to prevent family violence included a range of objec-
 tives such as providing victim support, incorporating successful innovations and
 proven methods from family violence centers into the national family violence pro-
 grams (that is, the promotion of "best practice"), ensuring safety from violence, and
 implementing Maori-designed and delivered programs. The Government partially
 funded women's refuges, rape crisis centers, sexual abuse counseling, family vio-
 lence networks, and violence prevention services.
 While the law prohibits discrimination in employment and in rates of pay for
 equal or similar work, government documents acknowledge that in practice a gender
 earnings gap persists. Many statistics show that women earn 81 percent of men's
 average ordinary hourly wage, a rate that has been fairly static over the last dec-
 ade. A 1997 report by the New Zealand Institute of Economic Research indicated
 that the gender pay gap was unlikely to narrow over the next 5 years based on cur-
 rent industry trends. To mark the 25th anniversary of the equal pay act of 1972,
 the New Zealand Council of Trade Unions is developing a 3-year campaign to
 achieve equal pay. There are effective legal remedies available for women who expe-
 rience discrimination.
 Children.-The law provides specific safeguards for children's rights and protec-
 tion. The Government demonstrates its commitment to children's rights and welfare
 through its well-funded systems of public education and medical care.
 Female genital mutilation (FGM), which is widely condemned by international
 health experts as damaging to both physical and psychological health, historically
 is not known to have been practiced in New Zealand. It is illegal to perform FGM
 or to make arrangements for a child to be taken outside the country in order to per-
 form it. The Government has been concerned due to a continuing increase in arriv-
 als in the immigrant communities most likely to practice FGM, that is, Somali, Su-
 danese, and Ethiopian immigrants. The Government funded an intensive 6-month
 national FGM awareness campaign from October 1997 through May, organizing
 workshops and the distribution of educational materials targeted at health care pro-
 fessionals, child care networks, police officers, and other public officials, and commu-
 nity-based organizations. This national program effectively was extended for an ad-
 ditional 14 months by one of New Zealand's regional health authorities to continue
 to work directly in the African refugee communities.
 While no societal pattern of abuse of children exists, the Government recognizes
 the problem of violence within the family. Both government-sponsored and chari-
 table organizations work to prevent child abuse in the home.
 People With Disabilities.-The law prohibits discrimination against people with
 disabilities in employment, education, and the provision of other state services.
 Compliance with access laws, mandated by the Disabled Persons Community Wel-
 fare Act, varies as business owners and others strive to make necessary adaptations.
 Indigenous People.-Approximately 13 percent of the population claim at least one
 ancestor from the country's indigenous Maori or Moriori minorities. While the law
 prohibits discrimination against the indigenous population, a 1998 government re-
 port entitled "Progress Towards Closing Social and Economic Gaps Between Maori
 and non-Maori" noted the continuing disproportionate number of Maori included in
 
 
 1022
 the unemployment- and welfare rolls, the prison population, school dropouts, infant
 mortality statistics, and single-parent households. Government policy recognizes a
 special role for indigenous people and their traditional values and customs, includ-
 ing cultural and environmental issues that have an effect on commercial develop-
 ment. The Ministry of Maori Development, in cooperation with several Maori non-
 governmental organizations, seeks to improve the status of indigenous people. A
 special tribunal continues to hear Maori tribal claims to land and other natural re-
 sources stemming from the Treaty of Waitangi.
 National/Racial/Ethnic Minorities.-Pacific Islanders, who make up 5 percent of
 the population, are not an indigenous people, but they experience difficulties similar
 to Maori.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-Workers have unrestricted rights to establish and
 join organizations of their own choosing and to affiliate these organizations with
 other unions and international organizations. The principal labor organization, the
 New Zealand Council of Trade Unions, is affiliated with the International Confed-
 eration of Free Trade Unions. A second, smaller national labor federation, the New
 Zealand-Trade Union Federation, was established in 1993. There are also a number
 of independent labor unions.
 Labor organization is rudimentary in the territory of Tokelau (population 1,800)
 and-in the Freely Associated State of Niue (population 2,000). In the more developed
 Associated State of the Cook Islands (population 18,000), most workers in the public
 sector, the major employer, belong to independent local unions inspired by New Zea-
 land- models. Industrial relations in the Cook Islands are governed by a simplified
 version of older national legislation.
 The law protects-unions from governmental interference, suspension, and dissolu-
 tion. Unions, in fact, influence legislation and government policy. Some unions are
 affiliated with the Labor Party; others operate independently of political parties; all
 are free to support parties whose policies they favor. They freely exercise the right
 to strike.
 The law prohibits strikes designed to force an -employer to become party to a
 multicompany contract. Under the Police Act of 1958 and amendments, 'sworn po-
 lice officers," that is, all uniformed and plainclothes police but excluding clerical and
 support staff, are barred from striking or taking any form of industrial action. Po-
 lice, however, have freedom of association and the right to organize and to bargain
 collectively. Issues that cannot be settled by negotiation between the Police Associa-
 tion and management are subject to compulsory, final-offer arbitration.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The law provides for the right
 of workers to organize and bargain collectively, and this is observed in practice in
 the country and its dependencies. The law prohibits uniformed members of the
 armed forces from organizing unions and bargaining collectively.
 Unions now represent fewer than half of all wage earners. Under the Employment
 Contracts Act, employment relationships are based on contracts. Individual employ-
 ees and employers may choose to conduct negotiations for employment contracts on
 their own behalf, or they may authorize any other person or organization to do so
 on their behalf. Although choosing a union is entirely voluntary, unions have re-
 mained the most common agent used by workers to' negotiate with employers. Em-
 ployers must recognize a representative authorized by an employee or employees.
 Neither employers or employees, however, are required to negotiate or to agree to
 a contract.
 The Government does not control mediation and arbitration procedures. The em-
 loyment court hears cases arising from disputes over the interpretation of labor
 laws; A less formal body, the employment tribunal, is available to handle wage dis-
 putes and assist in maintaining effective labor relations. Firing an -employee for
 union activities is grounds for a finding of unjustified dismissal and may result in
 reinstatement and financial compensation.
 There are no export processing zones in New Zealand, the Cook Islands, Niue, or
 Tokelau.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The law prohibits forced or com-
 pulsory labor, including forced and bonded labor by children. Inspection and legal
 penalties ensure respect for the provisions.
 d. Status of Child Labor Practices and Minimum Age for Employment.-The Gov-
 ernment prohibits forced and bonded child labor and enforces this prohibition effec-
 tively (see Section 6.c.). Department of Labor inspectors effectively enforce a ban on
 the employment of children under the age of 15 years in manufacturing, mining,
 and forestry. Children under the age of 16 may not work between the hours of 10
 p.m. and 6 a.m. In addition to explicit restrictions on the employment of children,
 
 
 1023
 compulsory education ensures that children under the minimum age for leaving
 school (now 16 years) are not employed during school hours. By law children en-
 rolled in school may not be employed, even outside school hours, if such employment
 would interfere with their education.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The law provides for a 40-hour workweek, with
 a minimum 3-week annual paid vacation, and 11 paid public holidays. Under the
 Employment Contracts Act, however, employers and employees may agree to longer
 hours than the 40 hours per week standard. While the law does not provide specifi-
 cally for a 24-hour rest period weekly, management and labor accept the practice,
 and it is the norm. The government-mandated hourly minimum wage of approxi-
 mately $3.50 ($NZ 7.00) applies to workers 20 years of age and older. Combined
 with other regularly provided entitlements and welfare benefits for low-income earn-
 ers, this wage is adequate to provide a decent standard of living for a worker and
 family. In 1994 a minimum wage for younger workers was introduced at 60 percent
 of the adult minimum. A majority of the work force earns more thani the minimum
 wage.
 An extensive body of law and regulations govern health and safety issues, notably
 the Health and Safety in Employment Act of 1992. Under this legislation, employers
 are obliged to provide a safe and healthy work environment, and employees are re-
 sponsible for their own safety and health as well as ensuring that their actions do
 not harm others. The New Zealand Council of Trade Unions has criticized the act,
 however, for not providing sufficient employee involvement in workplace decisions
 affecting health and safety. Under the Employment Contracts Act, workers have the
 legal right to strike over health and safety issues. Unions and members of the gen-
 eral public may file safety complaints on behalf of workers. Department of Labor
 inspectors enforce safety and health rules, and they have the power to shut down
 equipment if necessary. The Department of Labor standard is to investigate reports
 of unsafe or unhealthy working conditions within 24 hours of notification. Workers
 have the right to withdraw from a dangerous work situation without jeopardy to
 continued employment.
