 NEW ZEALAND
 New Zealand is a parliamentary democracy, with executive authority vested in a
 20-member cabinet led by a prime minister. Four seats in the 99-member legislature
 are reserved for those persons from the native Maori minority population who wish
 to be included on a separate electoral roll.
 Approximately 13 percent of New Zealand's population of 3,541,600 consider
 themselves Maori. Immigrants from the Pacific islands (5 percent) and Asia (2.5 per-
 cent) leaven a population of primarily European descent and play an important role
 in New Zealandas increasingly multicultural makeup. The rights of Maori and, to a
 lesser extent, Asians have received increasing public attention in recent years.
 Niue and the Cook Islands are self-governing countries in free association with
 New Zealand. In 1994 the New Zealand island dependency of Tokelau informed the
 United Nations that it is contemplating an act of self-determination on the basis of
 free association with New Zealand. Parliament is considering legislation which
 would expand the lawmaking authority of Tokelau's local assembly. Inhabitants of
 all three areas hold New Zealand citizenship and are entitled to New Zealand pass-
 ports. Local law in the Cook Islands, Niue, and Tokelau is compatible with New
 Zealand and British common law.
 New Zealand's police and defense forces are responsible to and firmly controlled
 by civilian officials.
 New Zealand is a highly efficient producer of agricultural products. The mainstay
 of its economy is the export of wool, meat, and dairy products. An expanding manu-
 factu ring setor is engaged primarily in food procssing, metal fabrication, and the
 production of wood and paper products. Niche industries are developing in such high
 technology sectors as software production. Recent structural reforms have trans-
 formed New Zealand from one of the world's most protected economies to one based
 on free trade and market rinciples. Disparities in wealth are very small (though
 increasing), and most New Zealanders have a omfortable standard of living.
 New Zealanders enjoy a wide range of freedoms, and basic human rights are guar-
 anteed by law and respected in practice. Minority rights are given special legislative
 protection, and prvision is made for the economically deprived. A new Human
 Rights Act, which took effect in February, incorporates existing prohibitions against
 discrimination, and adds new bans in several areas.
 
 
 659
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrujudicial Kiling-There were no reports of political or
 other extrajudicial killing.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearance.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 New Zealand law prohibits torture and other forms of mistreatment, and these pro-
 hibitions are generally respected in practice. In response to allegations that prison
 officials had mistreated inmates at two jails, a police investigation was initiated and
 is still under way. Some officials have already been disciplined, and several proce-
 dural reforms are being undertaken to prevent recurrence.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The law provides for freedom from arbi-
 trary arrest, detention, and exile, and this is respected. It also provides for judicial
 review of the legitimacy of arrests and requires that people arrested be charged
 promptly. The court provides legal aid to those who cannot afford to pay for a pri-
 vate attorney. The law prohibits preventive detention.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The independent and impartial judiciary assures
 a prompt and fair public trial. Final appeal in some instances may be made to the
 Priy Council in London, although this is rarely invoked. The authorities meticu-
 lously observe the rights of the accused.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The law
 protects the right to privacy. The Government does not violate personal privacy, the
 sanctity of the home, or the integrity of correspondence. The Office of the Privacy
 Commissioner hears complaints involving violation of personal privacy by individ-
 uals or the Government. The Privacy Commissioner is a statutory member of the
 Human Rights Commission.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The law provides for freedom of speech and
 press, and these are respected in practice. Several hundred newspapers and maga-
 zines reflect a wide spectrum of political and social thought. Numerous state and
 privately owned radio stations operate. One private and two state television chan-
 nels broadcast nationally, and international satellite broadcasts are available. The
 Government makes no attempt to censor the press, and opposition viewpoints are
 freely expressed.
 Academic freedom is not limited.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The law provides for the rights
 to peaceful assembly and association, and these are respected in practice.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-New Zealand enjoys a long tradition of religious freedom.
 The law treats all faiths equally.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The law places no limitations on internal movement or resettlement,
 nor does it restrict foreign travel or the right to return. Within the limits of its re-
 sources, New Zealand accepts and resettles refugees and asylum seekers.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 The people freely elect their government. The law provides for universal suffrage
 at age 18. No restrictions based upon sex, creed, or national origin limit participa-
 tion in the political process. Four seats have been reserved in Parliament Tor Maori
 who wish to be included on a separate electoral role. Currently, of the 99 members
 of Parliament, 21 are women, 6 are Maori (including the 4 reserved seats), and 1
 is of Pacific Island origin. Two major parties, National and Labour, dominate the
 political scene and have formed governments chosen in triennial elections for more
 than 50 years. Voting rates are high, and participation in political groups is com-
 mron. Opposition groups freely voice their views and can influence government poli-
 cies.
 Responding to complaints that the "first-past-the-post" electoral system, or simple
 majority system, unfairly disadvantaged small parties, the Government asked voters
 in a referendum held at the same time as the 1993 general election to determine
 whether to adopt proportional representation. A majority of voters chose to adopt
 a form of this known as mixed-member-proprtional representation (MMP). Under
 this system, each voter will cast two votes: one for the local constituency candidate
 and one for a political party. Candidates elected by constituencies and nominees se-
 lected from party lists will be combined to achieve proportionality in the Parliament,
 which will be expanded to 120 seats after the first M elections are held sometime
 
 
 660
 in 1995 or 1996. The change resulted in the formation of several new political par-
 ties in 1994.
 Under MMP, the number of seats reserved for indigenous people was determined
 during a 2-month registration period in which Maori were given the option to reg-
 ister on either the general or Maori electoral roll. Some Maori leaders accused the
 Government of providing inadequate support to the enrollment campaign when low
 registration led to Maori gaining only 5 seats in the new 120-seat Parliament (vice
 4 i the current 99-seat house.) I October the New Zealand High Court dismissed
 a legal challenge by three of New Zealand's main Maori organizations which sought
 to order the Government to conduct a new registration period with additional re-
 sources. The Maori groups are appealing the High Court's decision.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Local and international human rights organizations operate freely. New Zealand
 allows individuals to request an independent U.N. Human Rights Committee inves-
 tigation of alleged abuses of human rights.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The New Zealand Human Rights Commission hears complaints of discrimination
 based on sex, marital status, national or ethnic origin, and religious or ethical belief.
 The Race Relations Conciliator, a statutory member of the Human Rights Commis-
 sion but empowered under separate legislation, hears complaints based upon racial
 discrimination. New Zealand's new Human Rights Act, which was enacted in 1993
 and took effect in February 1994, replaced ana expanded the Human Rights Com-
 mission Act of 1977 and the Race Relations Act of 1971. The legislation incorporates
 existing bans against discrimination on the basis of sex (including pregnancy and
 sexual harassment), marital status, religious or ethical belief, race, color, or ethnic
 or national origin. It adds new bans against discrimination on the grounds of phys-
 ical or psychological disability (including disability or impairment due to the pres-
 ence in the body of organisms capable of causing illness), age, political opinion, em-
 ployment status, family status, or sexual orientation.
 The Act prohibits such discrimination in employment, education, access to public
 places, provision of goods and services, and housing and accommodation. The New
 Zealan  defense force ended its ban on homosexuals in the armed services shortly
 after the Act took effect in February. The military's new order prohibits unaccept-
 able sexual behavior, regardless of the sex involved.
 Women.-Nationwide police data for the 12-month period ending in June 1994
 show 8,471 assaults by males on females as compared to 5,562 in the previous re-
 porting year. Reported instances of male rape of females showed a less dramatic in-
 crease, 1,205 compared to 1,193. Informed observers state that these figures should
 be interpreted with caution. They attribute much of the increase to a heightened
 level of awareness by the public and a greater willingness to report such abuses.
 The Government actively combats violence against women in a number of ways,
 including the issuance of nonmolestation and nonviolence orders against abusive
 spouses, civil protection orders issued in family courts, or suit for compensation for
 some forms of negligent harm. A crime prevention unit under the Prime Minister
 coordinates national policy on domestic violence. The law penalizes spousal rape.
 Victims of domestic violence may stay in one of the 50 government-funded shel-
 ters operated by the National Collective of Independent Women's Refuges (NCIWR)
 or the half-dozen shelters run by church or private groups. One nongovernmental
 organization (NGO) reported that 80 percent of women in refuges refuse to take out
 nonviolence orders either because they are too frightened, don t believe they will be
 effective, or think the order will further anger the spouse.
 NGO's unanimously praise the police for their commitment to fight domestic vio-
 lence, including their policy of arresting offenders instead of attempting mediation
 at the scene, their coordination with victim support services, and their response to
 concerns raised by refuge workers. In March the police launched a nationwide cam-
 paign on spousal abuse by sponsoring a television documentary on domestic vio-
 1ence.
 Children.-A 1989 law increased specific safeguards for children's rights and
 made special provisions for the treatment of children by the legal system, including
 creation of the independent office of the Commissioner for Children with broad pow-
 ers of audit and inquiry into all aspects of children's rights.
 The number of reports of assaults on children under age 14 rose from 709 in the
 reporting period ending June 1993 to 990 in the year ending June 1994. (These fig-
 ures do not differentiate between those committed by children and those by adults.)
 
 
 Police statistics also contain a general category of abuse against children, and these
 showed an increase from 3,144 to 3,309. Again as with abuse of women, informed
 observers believe that the increase in reported abuses comes from greater public
 awareness of such abuses and a greater willingness to report them, and they at-
 tribute this largely to the effectiveness of the Government's intensified efforts to
 publicize the need to be aware of and report domestic violence.
 Indigenous People.-Approximately 13 percent of New Zealand's population claim
 at least one ancestor from the countrys indigenous Maori or Morioni minorities. De-
 spite a legal prohibition or. discrimination, s"ificant portions of the indigenous
 population remain marginally educated and economically disadvantaged. Maori ex-
 perience high rates of infant crib death and child abuse and are less likely to grad-
 uate from high school. A relatively high prcentage of Maori are unemployed and
 receive state assistance. Maori also figure disproportionately in crime statistics and
 among the prison population.
 In V 975aspecial tribunal was empowered to hear Maori tribal claims to land and
 other natural resources stemming from the Treaty of Waitani. While major agree-
 ments between the Government and Maori leaders resolving  aori claims to fishing
 rights have been reached, progress on resolving land disputes has been slow. In
 early December, the Government proposed a package of around $612 million to set-
 tle all outstanding Maori land claims.
 Government policy recognizes a special role for indigenous people and their tradi-
 tional values and customs, including cultural and environmental attitudes that have
 an impact on issues of commercial development.
 People With Disabilities.-The HumanRights Act prohibits discrimination on the
 grounds of physical and intellectual or psychological disability or impairment. The
 Disabled Persons Community Welfare Act of 1976 mandates community support,
 equipment, access to buildings, transportation to treatment centers and places of
 employment, and guidelines for modifications to workplaces and homes, and there
 are provisions in place for the delivery of these services. In December the Human
 Rights Commission ordered Stagecoach Wellington, the city bus com any, to cancel
 an order for 40 buses deemed insufficiently accessible to persons wit p ysical dis-
 abilities.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-New Zealand workers have unrestricted rights to es-
 tablish and join organizations of their own choosing and to affiliate these organiza-
 tions with other unions and international organizations. The principal labor organi-
 zation, the New Zealand Council of Trade Unions (NZCTU), is afiated with the
 International Confederation of Free Trade Unions (ICFTU). A second, smaller na-
 tional labor federation, the New Zealand Trade Union Federation (TUF), was estab-
 lished in 1993. There are also a number of independent labor unions.
 Labor organization is rudimentary in the New Zealand dependency of Tokelau
 (population 1,800) and in the Freely Associated State of Niue (population 2,000). In
 the more developed New Zealand Associated State of the Cook Ilands (population
 18,000), most workers in the public sector, the major employer, belong to independ-
 ent local unions inspired by New Zealand models. Industrial relations in the Cooks
 dre governed by a simplified version of older New Zealand legislation.
 The law protects unions from governmental interference, suspension, and dissolu-
 tion. Unions, in fact, influence legislation and government policy. They operate inde-
 pendently of political parties but can and do support parties whose policies they
 favor. Some unions are affliated with the opposition Laebour Party. They have and
 freely exercise the right to strike.
 The law prohibits strikes designed to force an employer to become party to a
 multicompany contract. Under the Police Act of 1958 and amendments, sworn po-
 lice officers," i.e., all uniformed and plainclothes police but excluding clerical and
 support staff, are barred from striking or taking any form of industrial action. Po-
 lice, however, do have freedom of association and the right to organize and to bar-
 gain collectively. Issues which cannot be settled between the Police Association and
 management through negotiation are subject to compulsory, final-offer arbitration.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The law provides for the right
 of workers to organize and bargain collectively, and this is observed in practice in
 New Zealand and its dependencies. The law prohibits uniformed members of the
 armed forces from organizing unions or bargaining collectively.
 The Employment Contracts Act (ECA) of 1991 initiated labor market deregula-
 tion, intended to make New Zealand more competitive internationally. This marked
 a sharp break with almost a century of prounion industrial legislation. Under the
 ECA, unions lost their special legal status and have no inherent right to represent
 any particular group of workers. The Act abolished compulsory unionism, the closed
 
 
 662
 shop, monopoly union coverage, and requirements forcing workers to join a particu-
 lar union. As a consequence, union membership plummeted.
 Unions now represent fewer than half of all wage earners. Under the ECA, em-
 ployment relationships are based on contracts. Individual employees and employers
 may choose to conduct negotiations for employment contracts on their own behalf
 or may authorize any other person or organization to do so as their representative.
 Although choosing a union as bargaining representative is entirely voluntary,
 unionshave remained the mast common agent used by workers to negotiate with
 employer. Employer. must recognize a representative authorized by an employee
 or employees. N either employers nor empoyees are required, however, to negotiate
 or toagreeto an employment ontract. In March, pursuant to a complaint by the
 NZCTU, the Freedom of Association Committee of the International Labor Organi-
 zation (ILO) criticized prvisions in the ECA as contrary to ILO Convention 87 on
 freedom of association and ILO Convention 98 on the right to organize and to bar-
 gain collectively. To obtain firsthand information on the working of the ECA, an ILO
 mission visitedNew Zealand in September for discussions with unions, employer
 representatives, and government officials.
 The Freedom of Association Committee's final report, issued in November, rec-
 ommended that the New Zealand Government keep it informed of judicial rulings
 on industrial relations issues, suggested the holding of tripartite consultations to
 promote collective bargaining, criticized only the ECA's prohibition on strikes to
 force a multiemployer contract, and offered the ILO's advisory services to the Gov-
 ernment of New Zealand. The Government has asked the NZCTU and the Employ-
 ers Federation for their comments on the report, but it has rejected the ILO's criti-
 cism of the ban on strikes to force multiemployer contracts.
 The Government does not control mediation and arbitration procedures. The em-
 ployment court hears cases arising from disputes over the interpretation of labor
 laws. A less formal body, the employment tribunal, is available to handle wage dis-
 putes and assist in maintaining effective labor relations. Firing an employee for
 union activities is grounds for a finding of unjustified dismissal and may result in
 reinstatement and financial compensation.
 There are no export processing zones in New Zealand, Tokelau, Niue, or the Cook
 Islands.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsoy Labor.-The law prohibits forced or com-
 pulsory labor in New Zealand and its dependencies. Inspection and legal penalties
 ensure respect for these provisions.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-Department of Labour inspectors
 effectively enforce a ban on the employment of children under age 15 in manufactur-
 ing, mining, and forestry. Children under the age of 16 may not work between the
 hours of 10 p.m. and 6 a.m. In addition to explicit restrictions on the employment
 of children, New Zealand's system of compulsory education ensures that children
 under the minimum age for leaving school (now 16) are not employed during school
 hours. By law children enrolled in school may not be employed even outside school
 hours if such employment would interfere with their education.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The law provides for a 40-hour workweek with
 a minimum of 3 weeks' annual paid vacation, and 11 paid public holidays. Under
 the Employment Contracts Act, however, employers and employees may agree to
 longer hours than the 40-hour per week standard. While New Zealand law does not
 specifically provide for a 24-hour rest period weekly, the practice is accepted by
 management and labor, and it is the norm. The government-mandated hourly mim-
 mum wage of approximately $3.75 ($NZ 6.125) applies to workers 20 years of age
 and older. Combined with other regularly provided entitlements and welfare bene-
 fits for low-income earners, this wage is adequate to provide a decent standard of
 living for a worker and his family. Effective Ap 1, 1994, a youth minimum wage
 for younger workers was introduced at 60 percent of the adult minimum. A majority
 of the work force earns more than the minimum wage.
 New Zealand has an extensive body of law and regulations governing health and
 safety issues, notably the Health and Safety in Employment Act of 1992. Under this
 legislation, employers are obliged to provide a safe and healthy work environment,
 and employees are responsible for their own safety and health as well as ensuring
 that their actions do not harm others. The New Zealand Council of Trade Unions
 has criticized the Act, however, for not providing sufficient employee involvement
 in workplace decisions affecting health and safety. Under the Employment Con-
 tracts Act, workers have the legal right to strike over health and safety issues.
 Unions and members of the general public may file safety complaints on behalf of
 workers. Department of Labour inspectors enforce safety and health rules, and they
 have the power to shut down equipment if necessary. The Department of Labour
 standard is to investigate reports of unsafe or unhealthy working conditions within
 
 
 24 hours of notification. Workers have the right to withdraw from a dangerous work
 situation without jeopardy to continued employment.
