 NEW ZEALAND
 New Zealand's system of government is patterned on that of
 Great Britain. Executive authority is vested in a 20-member
 cabinet led by the Prime Minister, the leader of the political
 party or coalition of parties holding a majority of seats in
 Parliament, Of the 95 members of the unicameral legislature,
 4 are elected from a separate roll to represent the minority
 population of native Maoris. Representatives to Parliament
 are elected for three-year terms. The judiciary consists of a
 Court of Appeals, Superior Court, and Magistrates' Court. New
 Zealand law is rooted in three primary sources: English
 common law; certain statutes of British parliamentary law
 enacted before 1947; and statutes of the New Zealand
 Parliament.
 Of New Zealand's population of 3,271,000, native Maoris of
 Polynesian origin number 280,000 and 88,000 are Polynesians
 from other Pacific islands. The rights of the increasingly
 urbanized, disadvantaged, and activist Polynesian minority
 have been receiving increased public attention, and this has
 been institutionalized in the Ministry of Maori Affairs.
 Real annual average economic growth has been low in recent
 years. However, the free-enterprise economy affords the
 opportunity for a reasonable standard of living for most New
 Zealanders.
 In 1985 New Zealand continued its good record in the human
 rights field. New Zealanders continue to enjoy personal
 freedom, freedom of religion, freedom of the press, universal
 suffrage, and the rule of law. Respect for minority rights,
 concern for the economically deprived, and the humane
 treatment of prisoners are accepted principles. Education is
 freely available to all. Subsidies are provided to the
 unemployed and the economically deprived. The sick and
 handicapped have access to a socialized system of medical
 care. State-sponsored pension plans guarantee a continuing
 income to the elderly.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section I Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 Killing for political motives by the Government or by New
 Zealand political organizations does not occur.
 b. Disappearance
 There have been no incidents involving disappearance.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 The rights of those arrested in New Zealand are protected by
 law and no such activities take place. Capital punishment is
 illegal. Prisoners are provided access to legal assistance
 and visits by family members. Food, facilities, and medical
 care are good. Prisoners are given the opportunity to work.
 
 
 838
 NEW ZEALAND
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Freedom from arbitrary arrest, detention, and exile is
 guaranteed under New Zealand law and is respected in
 practice. New Zealand law provides for a writ of habeas
 corpus. Persons arrested in New Zealand are charged
 promptly. Access to counsel is prompt, and legal aid is
 provided by the court to those who cannot afford to pay for a
 private attorney. New Zealand does not permit preventive
 detention or the use of forced or compulsory labor.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 New Zealand law guarantees a prompt, public trial. The rights
 of the accused are scrupulously maintained and subject to
 public scrutiny. The judiciary operates independently of
 governmental influence.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The right to privacy is guaranteed under New Zealand law. The
 Government does not violate the privacy of the individual, the
 sanctity of the home, or the integrity of correspondence.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Freedom of speech and the press are guaranteed by New Zealand
 law and are respected in practice. There are 156 newspapers
 and 602 magazines published which cover the spectrum of
 political and social thought. The Government makes no attempt
 to censor the press, and opposition viewpoints are freely
 discussed.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 There are no restrictions on peaceful assembly or association.
 Independent labor unions, which in 1984 organized 46 percent
 of the work force, actively engage in recruiting members and
 in collective bargaining, and they have the right to strike.
 Public sector unions are, in some cases, precluded from
 engaging in strike action but generally only for reasons of
 public safety. Mediation and arbitration procedures are
 independent of government control. Unions have the freedom to
 maintain relations with international bodies and participate
 in bilateral exchanges. Upon the reintroduction of compulsory
 unionism in 1985, the New Zealand Employers' Federation lodged
 a complaint with the International Labor Organization (ILO)
 that compulsory unionism denies workers the right to freedom
 of association. To date, the ILO has taken no action on this
 complaint.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 New Zealand enjoys a long tradition of religious tolerance.
 There is no state religion, and all faiths are given equal
 treatment under the law.
 
 
 839
 NEW ZEALAND
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 There are no controls upon citizens of New Zealand regarding
 internal movement or resettlement. Foreign travel is
 unrestricted and the right to return is guaranteed. Within
 the limits of the nation's resources, New Zealand accepts and
 resettles refugees. Asylum requests are handled in the same
 manner as refugee cases.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of
 Citizens to Change Their Government
 The New Zealand Government is genuinely elected by its
 people. The nation is a multiparty parliamentary state. Two
 major parties, Labour and Natioqal, dominate the political
 scene and have alternatively formed governments since the
 1930's. Universal suffrage at 18 years of age and triennial
 elections provide the opportunity for citizens of New Zealand
 to change their government. The New Zealand Labour Party won
 the general election of July 1984 with 42 percent of the vote,
 ending a 9-year period of government by the National Party.
 There are other, smaller parties and groups which are, for the
 most part, devoted to limited and parochial issues, and are
 usually of little consequence in the national electoral
 process. There are no restrictions based upon race, sex,
 creed, or national origin which limit participation in the New
 Zealand political process. Women parliamentarians number 12.
 Both major political parties now have women presidents.
 Voting rates remain high, and participation in political
 groups is common. Opposition groups have every opportunity to
 voice their views.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged
 Violations of Human Rights
 In the absence of allegations of abuse of human rights in New
 Zealand, no international or nongovernmental bodies have
 conducted investigations. New Zealand's endorsement of the
 principles of human rights is adequately demonstrated by
 participation in local, national, and international bodies
 organized to protect human rights and prevent discrimination.
 Representative among these groups are governmental entities
 such as the New Zealand Human Rights Commission, the New
 Zealand Council for Civil Liberties, and private organizations
 such as the Citizens Association for Racial Equality, the New
 Zealand Chapter of the International Commission of Jurists,
 the Race Relations Conciliator, Amnesty International, and the
 National Organization of Women.
 The Amnesty International 1985 Report does not include a
 section on New Zealand. Freedom House rates New Zealand
 "free."
 ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND CULTURAL SITUATION
 New Zealand's population of 3,271,000 is growing at the rate
 of only 1 percent yearly. Although manufacturing is
 increasing, agriculture remains the backbone of the economy.
 The major portion of export earnings comes from meat, wool,
 and dairy products. Real annual average growth has been low
 in recent years and there is little prospect of any dramatic
 acceleration.
 
 
 840
 NEW ZEALAND
 The free-enterprise economy affords a reasonable standard of
 living for most New Zealanders. Per capita income in 1984 was
 US$6,619. However, according to the 1981 census, the median
 income level of the Maori population is significantly lower
 than the level for non-Maoris. The 1983 unemployment rate
 among non-Maoris was 6.4 percent; among Maoris it was close to
 27 percent.
 Life expectancy (1983) for men was 71 and for women 77. The
 overall infant mortality rate continues to decline and in 1985
 was 10.40 per 1,000 live births. The adult literacy rate is
 99 percent.
 New Zealand enforces a 40-hour work week and a minimum 3 weeks
 of annual paid vacation for all employees, in addition to 11
 paid public holidays. Children under age 16 cannot be
 employed without special governuent approval and must not work
 at all between 10 p.m. and 6 a.m. The hourly minimum wage is
 NZ$4.25 (US$2.20). Acceptable conditions of work are
 guaranteed both by national statute, such as the Machinery Act
 that requires secure fencing around most moving and dangerous
 parts of machines, and by safety, health, and welfare
 provisions included in collective agreements.
 There is a growing sensitivity to the status of women and
 Maoris in New Zealand society. In 1985 the Labour Government
 established a Ministry of Women's Affairs and it also ratified
 the U.N. Convention for the Elimination of All Forms of
 Discrimination against Women. In addition, the Human Rights
 Commission (established in 1977 by the Human Rights Commission
 Act) continues to hear complaints about most forms of
 discrimination. The largest category of complaints concerns
 discrimination against women in employment.
 Maoris lag significantly behind non-Maoris in many important
 respects. The Maoris have become a largely urbanized
 population, 90 percent now living in cities. The urban Maori
 population is predominantly young, marginally educated, and
 economically disadvantaged. Unemployment statistics indicate
 that most Maori have not yet moved into the socioeconomic
 mainstream. Despite the historical absence of overt
 discrimination, the noteworthy success of some Maori, and
 extensive intermarriage with Pakeha (Caucasians), the stresses
 of transferring from a rural, traditional society to an urban
 Western environment are evident in various social indicators.
 Concurrently, there has been a rise in Maori activism as well
 as development of some ethnic radicalism. One focus of
 activism is the Waitangi Tribunal amendment bill, currently
 awaiting legislative action. If passed, it would allow the
 Tribunal to investigate Maori grievances dating back to 1840
 and would extend the jurisdiction and membership of the
 Tribunal. Maori activists believe that much of the land once
 owned by Maoris was taken from them unjustly and illegally by
 British immigrants, and that passage of the bill would help to
 resolve these grievances in their favor. While the Labour
 Government's long-term, structural economic reforms address
 the concerns of Maori only indirectly, their eventual success
 could significantly improve the socioeconomic status of Maoris.
 
 
 841
