 NEW ZEALAND
 New Zealand is a parliamentary democracy, with executive
 authority vested in a 20-member cabinet led by a prime
 minister. The 97 members of the'unicameral legislature
 include 4 elected by thdse members of the native Maori
 minority who wish to be included on a separate electoral roll.
 Maori comprise approximately 12 percent of New Zealand's
 population of 3,372,000, while other Pacific islanders total
 abdut'3 'ercent. The rights of the native Maori minority have
 been 'the subject of increasing public attention in recent
 years, particularly as the country commemorated 150 years of
 European settlement in 1990. The Department of Maori Affairs
 is being phased out in favor of the Iwi Transition Agency,
 charged with overseeing the devolution of responsibility for
 Maori interests to Iwi (tribal) authorities'.
 Niue and the Cook Islands are self-governing countries in free
 association with New Zealand. The island group of Tokelau is
 administered by New Zealand with limited but growing
 self-government. Inhabitants of all three hold local and New
 Zealand citizenship, and local.law is compatible with New
 Zealand and British common law.
 The police and defense-fbrces are-responsible to and firmly
 controlled by civilian officials.
 While real annual economic growth has been low or negative in
 recent years, the free enterprise economy affords most New
 Zealanders opportunity for a reasonable standard of living.
 Human rights are respected and protected in New Zealand. New
 Zealanders enjoy a'wide range of freedoms and live under the
 rule of law. There is yespect for minority rights and concern
 for the economically deprived.'-
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 S6ction'l Respect for the lntegrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing
 Such killings do-not occur.
 b. Disappearance
 There have been no instances of politically motivated
 disappearance.
 c. TortUre- and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 Torture and other forms of mistreatment are prohibited by law,
 and thdse prohibitions are respected in practice.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 New Zealanders enjoy freedom from arbitrary arrest, detention,
 and exile. New Zealand law provides for the writ of habeas
 corpus, and persons arrested in New Zealand are charged
 promptly. Legal aid is provided by the coirt to those who
 cannot afford to pay for a private attorney. Preventive
 detention is prohibited.
 
 
 986
 NEW ZEALAND
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 New Zealand law and an independent judiciary assure a prompt
 and fair public trial. The rights of the accused are
 carefully observed and subject to public scrutiny.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The right to privacy is protected by law. The Government does
 not violate a person's privacy, the sanctity of the home, or
 the integrity of correspondence.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom bf Speech and Press
 Freedom of speech and press are provided for in law and
 respected in practice. More than 150 newspapers and 600
 magazines are published throughout the country, reflecting a
 wide spectrum of political and social thought. The Government
 makes no attempt to censor the press, and opposition
 viewpoints are freely expressed.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Rights to peaceful assembly and association are recognized and
 respected.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 New Zealand enjoys a long tradition of religious tolerance.*
 All faiths are given equal treatment under the law.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 New Zealanders are not subject to limitations on internal
 movement or resettlement. Foreign travel is unrestricted, and
 the right to return is assured. To the extent of its
 resources, New Zealand accepts and resettles refugees and
 asylum seekers.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 The people freely elect their government. Two major parties,
 Labour and National, dominate the political scene and have
 formed governments chosen in triennial elections for more than
 50 years. Smaller parties and groups are usually of little
 consequence in the Hational electoral process. New Zealand
 law provides for universal suffrage at age 18. No
 restrictions based upon sex, creed, or national origin limit
 participation in the political process. Women and Maori, as
 well as other minorities, regularly serve in Parliament and
 the Cabinet albeit in numbers well below their proportion of
 the population. Voting rates are high, and participation in
 political groups is common. Opposition groups freely voice
 their views. However, a new law limiting free advertising in
 print and broadcast media to "major" political parties
 restricts the ability of smaller parties to present their
 views. Parties with fewer than 10 candidates are excluded
 from subsidized advertising and are not permitted to purchase
 it. A Maori party, which is contesting only the 4 Maori
 seats, is thus excluded and has attacked'the law as racist.
 
 
 987
 NEW ZEALAND
 Sectiot 4 'Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 .n.  -Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 bf Human Rights
 New Zealand's commitment to himan rights is demonstrated by
 the efforts of both nongovernmental and official organizations
 to protect-human rights and prevent discrimination.
 Nongovernmental organizations include: the New Zealand
 Council for Civil Liberties, the Citizens Association for
 Racial Equality, the New Zealand chapter of the International
 Commission of Jurists, Amnesty International, and the National
 Council of Women. The ratification of the optional protocol
 to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights in
 1989 allows individuals to request an independent U.N. Human
 Rights Committee-investigation of alleged abuses of rights.
 The official but highly independent New Zealand Human Rights
 Commission and the office of the Race Relations Conciliator
 'work -at:thenational and regional levels to adjudicate human
 rights .and'discrimination complaints.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 Discrimination based on the above factors is prohibited by
 law. Despite the historical absence of overt discrimination
 and the achievements and status of many successful Maori in
 government and public life, some of the indigenous population
 remain marginally educated and economically disadvantaged. A
 relatively high percentage of Maori are unemployed and receive
 state'assistance. They figure disproportionately in crime
 statistics and among the prison population.
 The la40 Treaty of Waitangi, by which Maori chiefs ceded
 sovereignty to the British crown, in recent years has become a
 focal point for many -Maori'seeking a greater economic and
 politikcal voice. The Waitangi Tribunal,.established to hear
 claims-to land and other rights-under the Treaty, was
 strengthened by a 1989 court ruling that Tribunal findings- in
 cases dealing with land held by state-owned enterprises are
 binding. The Government also settled the contentious issue of
 Maori fisheries, allocating in the 1990 Maori fisheries bill
 10 percent of the total quota to-the tribes. Although
 numerous cases have been resolved, much contentious litigation
 continues.
 The Human Rights Commission hears complaints of discrimination
 based on sex, marital status, national or ethnic origin, and
 religious or ethical belief. Arguing that such decisions
 should be left to market forces, the new-National Party
 Government immediately moved to abolish the Employment Equity
 Commission, which had-been created in 1990 by the prvious
 Labour government to adjudicate claims of sex-based
 inequalities. The Government funds shelters, provides
 assistance for victims of violence, and prosecutes offenders.
 Violence against women has received increased public and
 governmental attention in recent years. The Crimes Amendment
 Act of 1986 increased protection for the victim during trial
 by allowing suppression of the victim's name and other
 details, and eliminated the exemption for spouse rape. In
 1987 the police changed their policy on family violence,
 requiring that arrests be made instead of attempting mediation
 at the scene. Human rights organizations praise judges for
 supportively issuing "nonmolestation" and "nonviolence"
 restraining orders but complain that police continue to be
 
 
 988
 NEW ZEALAND
 reluctant to arrest offenders even when the offender has a
 history of violence. Women have become increasingly cognizant
 of their legal rights as evidenced by the number of claims by
 victims of sexual abuse to the Accident Compensation
 Corporation for "loss of the capacity for enjoyment of life."
 These claims multiplied from 3 in 1981 to 1,552 in fiscal
 1988. Service organizations for victims have dramatically
 increased in numbers in recent years.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 New Zealand workers have unrestricted rights to establish and
 join organizations of their own choosing and to affiliate
 those organizations with other unions and international
 organizations. Unions are protected from interference,
 suspension, and dissolution by the Government and, in fact,
 influence legislation and government policy. Unions have and
 freely exercise the right to strike. Public sector unions,
 however, are precluded from striking if work stoppages
 threaten public safety.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 The right of labor unions to organize and bargain collectively
 is provided by law. Unions actively recruit members and
 engage in collective bargaining. Sixty-four percent of wage
 earners are represented by unions. Upon taking office in
 October 1990, the new Government introduced legislation to
 reinstitute voluntary unionism and to end unions' exclusive
 bargaining rights even where they represent a majority of the
 workers. The changes are scheduled to become effective April
 1, 1991. During 1990 the national award system, whereby one
 contract covered workers across the country and across
 industrial lines, has been weakened. Wage settlements are
 increasingly on an industry basis as an indirect consequence
 of the weak economy.
 Mediation and arbitration procedures are independent of
 government control. A system of labor courts hears cases
 arising from disputes over interpretation of labor laws. In
 addition, the Arbitration Commission and the Mediation Service
 are available to handle wage disputes and assist in
 maintaining effective labor relations. There are no export
 processing zones. Labor laws are applied uniformly throughout
 the country.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 All workers are protected from forced or compulsory labor by
 law and in practice.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 Children under the age of 15 may not be employed without
 special government approval and must not work between the
 hours of 10 p.m. and 6 a.m. These laws are effectively
 enforced by the Department of Labour.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of. Work
 Ne. Zealand enforces a 40-hour workweek, a minimum of 3 weeks'
 annual paid vacation for all employees, and observance of 11
 paid public holidays. The hourly minimum wage of $3.70 is
 
 
 989
 NEW ZEALANl'D
 adequate for a decent standard of living. In most cases,
 minimum wage recipients also receive a variety of welfare
 payments. Most workers earn more than the minimum wage.
 New Zealand has an extensive body of law and regulations
 governing-health'and safety issues. Rules are enforced by
 Dephrtment'Df Labour inspectors who have the power to shut
 down equipment if hecessary, and unions may file safety
 complaints 6n behalf of workers.
 
 
 990
