 NEW ZEALAND
 New Zealand is a parliamentary democracy, with executive authority vested in a
 22-member cabinet led by a prime minister. The 97 members of the unicameral leg-
 islature include 4 whose seats are reserved for election by those members of the na-
 tive Maori minority who wish to be included on a separate electoral roll.
 Approximately 12 percent of New Zealand's population of 3,427,000 consider
 themselves Maori; other Pacific islanders make up about 3 percent of the popu-
 lation. The rights of Maori have received increasing public attention in recent years.
 Niue and the Cook Islands are self-governing countries in free association with
 New Zealand. The island group of Tokelau is administered by New Zealand with
 limited but growing self-government. Inhabitants of all three hold New Zealand citi-
 zenship and carry New Zealand passports. Local law is compatible with New Zea-
 land and British common law.
 New Zealand's police and defense forces are responsible to and firmly controlled
 by civilian officials.
 New Zealand is one of the world's most efficient producers of agricultural prod.
 ucts. The mainstay of its economy is the export of wool, meat, and dairy produ.
 A small but expanding manufacturing sector is engaged primarily in food process-
 ing, metal fabrication, and wood and paper products. Niche industries are develop-
 ing in such high technology sectors as software production. While recent structural
 reforms have reduced some social welfare benefits, the free enterprise economy af-
 fords most New Zealanders a comfortable standard of living.
 New Zealanders enjoy a wide range of freedoms, and human rights are respected
 and protected in law and in practice. Minority rights are given special legislative
 protection, and provision is made for the economically deprived.
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from
 a. Political and Other Extra judicial Killing.-Such killings do not occur.
 b. Disappearance.-There have been no instances of politically motivated dis-
 appearance.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 New Zealand law prohibits torture and other forms of mistreatment, and these pro-
 hibitions are respected in practice.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-Freedom from arbitrary arrest, detention,
 and exile is respected. The law provides for the writ of habeas corpus and requires
 
 
 629
 that persons arrested be promptly charged. The court provides legal aid to those
 who cannot afford to pay ror a private attorney. Preventive detention is prohibited.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.Z--The New Zealand judicial sytem is based on Brit-
 ish common law. A three-tiered, independent, and impartial judiciary assures a
 prompt and fair public trial. Final appeal in some instances may be made to the
 Privy Council in London, although this is rarely invoked. The rights of the accused
 are carefully observed and subject to public scrutiny.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 right to privacy is protected by law. The Government does not violate a person's pri.
 vacy, the sanctity of the home, or the integrity of correspondence. Recent legislation
 created the Office of Privacy Commissioner to hear complaints involving violation
 of personal privacy by individuals or the government. The Privacy Commissioner is
 a statutory member of the Human Rights Commission.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including
 a. Freedom of Speech and Pkess.-Freedom of speech and press are provided for
 in law and respected in practice. Several hundred newspapers and magazines are
 published throughout the countiy, reflecting a wide spectrum of polita and social
 thought. Numerous state and privately owned radio stations operate throughout the
 country. One private and two state television channels broadcast nationally, and
 international broadcasts are available for a fee. The Government makes no attempt
 to censor the press and opposition viewpoints are freely expressed. There are no
 limits on academic freedom.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-Rights to peaceful assembly
 and association are recognized in law and respected in practice.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-New Zealand enjoys a long tradition of religious toler-
 ance. All faiths receive equal treatment under the law.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The law places no limitations on internal movement or resettlement,
 nor does it restrict foreign travel or the right to return. To the extent of its re-
 sources, New Zealand accepts and resettles refugees and asylum seekers.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 The people freely elect their government. Two major parties, National and Labour,
 dominate the political scene and have formed governments chosen in triennial elec-
 tions for mere than 50 years. The law provides for universal suffrage at age 18. Ex-
 cept for the seats reserved for Maori, no restrictions based upon sex, creed, or na-
 tional origin limit participation in the political process. Women, Maori, and other
 minorities regularly serve in Parliament and the Cabinet. Voting rates are high, and
 participation. In political groups is common.
 Opposition groups freely voice their views and can influence government policies.
 Responding to complaints that the current "first-past-the-post" electoral system
 unfairly disadvantages small parties, the Government held a referendum on Sep-
 tember 19 to determine whether the electorate would favor some form of propor-
 tional representation for the 1996 election. A majorityv of those casting ballots voted
 for change and named the mixed member proportional" (MMP) system as their
 preference. A second referendum, to coincide with the 1993 general election, will
 allow voters to choose between the present system and MMP. Both the Government
 and the oppition Labour Party favor maintaining the status quo but have pledged
 to respect the results of the referendum.
 At the end of 1991, a coalition of five minor parties formed the Alliance to contest
 the 1993 general elections and advocate adoption of MMP. The Alliance includes the
 New Labur Party (one member of Parliament), the Green Party, the New Zealand
 Democratic Party, the Liberals (two members of Parliament) and Mana Motuhake
 (Maori party). It is not clear whether the Alliance parties intend to remain together
 should proportional representation be adopted.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 New Zealand has a long history of commitment to the protection of human rights
 both at home and abroad. Basic human rights are guaranteed by law and respected
 in practice. A wide variety of international and local human rights organizations op-
 erate freely.
 As a party to the optional protocl to the International Covenant on Civil and Po-
 litical Rights, New Zealand allows individuals to request an independent U.
 Human Rights Committee investigation of alleged abuses of rights. The official but
 highly independent New Zealand Human Rights Commission and the Race Rela-
 tions Conciliator work at all levels to adjudicate human rights and discrimination
 
 
 630
 complaints. New Zealand gives careful attention to the rights of children. It has
 signed the U.N. Convention on the Rights of the Child, and ratification is expected
 soon. New Zealand is preparing an inventory of children's rights as called for in the
 Declaration of the World Summit for Children.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex Religion, Language, or Social Status
 Discrimination based on the above factors is prohibited by law. Despite the histor-
 ical absence of overt discrimination and the achievements and status of many suc-
 cessful Maori in government and public life, significant portions of the indigenous
 population remain marginally educated and economically disadvantaged. A rel-
 atively high percentage of Maori are unemployed and receive state assistance. Maori
 figure disproportionately in crime statistica and among the prison population.
 A special tribunal was empowered in 1985 to hear Maori tribal claims to land and
 other natural resources stemming from the 1840 Treaty of Waitangi. The tribunal's
 decisions are binding on state-wned resources but not on private land. A major
 agreement between the Government and Maori leaders resolving Maori claims to
 fishing rights was reached in 1992. The Ministry of Macri Development oversees
 programs aimed at furthering the economic, social, and cultural development of the
 Maori people. In addition, every national, regional, and local government agency is
 required by law to consult with Maori representatives on any decision which might
 affect them.
 The 1989 Children, Young Persons, and their Families Act increased specific safe-
 guards for children's rights and made special provisions for the treatment of chil-
 dren by the legal system. The Act also created the independent office of a Commis-
 sioner for Chi dren to provide advocacy before the law for children without legal
 competence and to monitor compliance with and implementation of the Act. The
 Commissioner also has broad powers of audit and inquiry into all aspects of chil.
 dren's rights.
 The Yew Zealand Human Rights Commission hears complaints of discrimination
 based on sex, marital status, national or ethnic origin, and religious or ethical belief.
 The Race Relations Conciliator, a statutory member of the Human Rights Commis-
 sion but empowered under separate legislation, hears complaints based upon racial
 discrimination. Pending legislation would rationalize the various human rights laws
 and for the first time include specific protection from discrimination on the basis
 of sexual preference.
 The law in New Zealand addresses violence against women, including spousal
 rape, and provides for the suppression of victims' names. Victim support services are
 also widely available.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-New Zealand workers have unrestricted rights to es-
 tablish and join organizations of their own choosing and to affiliate those organiza-
 tions with other unions and international organizations. The principal labor organi-
 zation, the New Zealand Council of Trade Unions, is affiliated with the Inter-
 national Confederation of Free Trade Unions. Unions are protected from inter-
 ference, suspension, and dissolution by the Government and, in fact, influence legis-
 lation and government policy. Unions have and freely exercise the right to strike.
 Public sector unions, however, may not strike if work stoppages threaten public
 safety. Legislation enacted in 1991 prohibits strikes designedto force an employer
 to become a party to a multicompany contract.
 i. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The right of labor unions to
 organize and bargain collectively is provided by law. Unions actively recruit mem-
 bers and engage in ollective bargaining. The Employment Contracts Act of 1991
 ended compulsory membership in labor unions, which now represent less than half
 of all wage earners. As a consequence of the Act, unions no longer have an inherent
 right to represent any particular goup of workers. Employment relationships are
 to be based on contracts negotiate eitherb  the individual employees or their bar-
 gaining agent, which may be a union, another voluntary association of workers, or
 a private consultant.
 Mediation and arbitration procedures are carried out independently of govern-
 ment control. The Employment Court hears cases arising from disputes over the in-
 terpretation of labor laws. In addition, a less formal body, the Employment Tribu-
 na, is available to handle wage disputes and assist in maintaining effective labor
 relations. There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-New Zealand laws prohibit forced
 or compulsory labor. Inspection and legal penalties ensure respect for these provi-
 Q)nnQ
 
 
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-Children under the age of 15 may
 not be employed without special government approval and must not work between
 the hours of 10 p.m. and 6 a.m. The Department of Labour effectively enforces these
 laws.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-New Zealand law provides for a 40-hour work-
 week with a minimum of 3 weeks' annual paid vacation and 11 paid public holidays.
 The government-mandated minimum wage, for workers 20 years of age and older,
 is adequate for a decent standard of living, although most minimum wage earners
 also receive a variety of welfare benefits. A majority of the work force earns more
 than the minimum wage.
 New Zealand has an extensive body of law and regulations governing health and
 safety issues. Rules are enforced by Department of Labour inspectors who have the
 power to shut down equipment if necessary. Unions may file safety complaints on
 behalf of workers.
