 NEW ZEALAND
 New Zealand is a parliamentary democrag,, with executive authority vested in a
 20-member cabinet led by a prime minister. Four seats in the 99-member legislature
 are reserved for the native Maori minority population. New Zealand has an inde-
 pendent judiciary.
 The Cook Islands, Niue, and Tokelau are self-governing countries in free associa-
 tion with New Zealand. Their local laws are compatible with New Zealand and Brit-
 ish common law.
 New Zealand's police and defense forces are responsible to and firmly controlled
 by civilian officials.
 New Zealand is a highly efficient producer of agricultural products. The mainstay
 of its economy is the export of wool, meat and dairy products. An expanding manu-
 facturing sector is engaged primarily in food processing, metal fabrication, and the
 production of wood and paper products. Tourism is also a significant sector of the
 economy, and niche industries are developing in such high technology sectors as
 software production. Recent structural reforms have transformed a highly protected
 economy to one based on free trade and free market principles. Disparities in wealth
 are small but increasing, and most New Zealanders enjoy a comfortable standard
 of living.
 The Government fully respects the human rights of its citizens, and the law and
 judiciary provide effective means of dealing with instances of individual abuse. The
 Government has taken steps to address the problems of domestic violence against
 women and societal discrimination against indigenous people.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Kiling.-There were no-reports of political or
 other extrajudicial killings.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The law prohibits torture and other forms of mistreatment, and these prohibitions
 are generally respected in practice.
 Prison conditions meet minimum international standards, and the Government
 permits visits by human rights monitors.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The law prohibits arbitrary arrest, deten-
 tion, or exile, and the Government observes this prohibition.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The law provides for the right to a fair trial and
 an independent judiciary, and the Government respects this provision in practice.
 The judiciary provides citizens with a fair and efficient judicial process. A three-
 tiered impartial judiciary is in place, with the right to take an appeal to the Privy
 Council in London, though this privilege is rarely invoked.
 There were no reports of political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The law
 prohibits such practices, government authorities respect these prohibitions, and vio-
 lations are subject to effective legal sanction.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The law provides for freedom of speech and of
 the press, and the Government respects these rights in practice. An independent
 press, an effective judiciary, and a functioning democratic political system combine
 to ensure freedom of spech and of the press. Academic freedom is not limited.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The law provides for these
 rights, and the Government respects them in practice.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The law provides for freedom of religion, and the Govern-
 ment generally respects this right in practice. A family of Jehovah's Witnesses ap-
 pealed a court order that their son be given a blood transfusion in contravention
 of their religious beliefs. The boy was made a ward of the court in matters of medi-
 cal treatment, and the parents are considering a further appeal.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The law provides for these rights, and the Government respects them
 in practice. The Government cooperates with the U.N. High Commissioner for Refu-
 gees and other humanitarian organizations in assisting refugees. There were no re-
 ports of forced expulsion of those having a valid claim to refugee status. There were
 reports of refugees encountering bureaucratic difficulty in registering with employ-
 ment services and obtaining language and occupational training. The Government
 acknowledged the problem and took steps to remedy the situation.
 
 
 687
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 The law provides citizens with the right to change their government peacefully,
 and citizens exercise this right in practice through periodic, free, and fair elections
 held on the basis of universal suffrage.
 There are no restrictions on the role of women in politics and government. Of the
 99 Members of Parliament, 20 are women, 6 are Maori (including the 4 reserved
 seats), and I is of Pacific Island origin. Women and minorities are accorded full op-
 portunity to participate in political life. The Speaker of the House is a Maori, two
 women are members of the Executive Council (Cabinet), and the leader of the par-
 liamentary opposition is a woman.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitudes Regarding International and Nongovernmental
 Investigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 A number of human rights groups operate without government restriction, inves-
 tigating allegations and publishing their findings on human rights cases. Govern-
 ment officials are cooperative and responsive to their views.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The law prohibits discrimination on the basis of all the above listed factors, and
 the Government effectively enforces it.
 Women.-The Government makes a concerted effort to stop violence against
 women; initiatives include the issuance of nonmolestation and nonviolence orders
 against abusive partners, civil protection orders issued in family courts, and suits
 for compensation for some forms of negligent harm. The law penalizes spousal rape.
 A government-commissioned survey, published in 1995, found that 20 percent of
 New Zealand men had subjected their partners to physical or psychological abuse
 in the last year. Critics of the report believed that the definition of abuse was too
 broad, but the authors stood by their methodology and conclusions. The study rec-
 ommended that antiviolence programs for men encourage abusers to take respon-
 sibility for their actions and compel abusers to understand that their behavior is un-
 acceptable.
 In September nationwide television began showing a new series of public service
 announcements about domestic violence, focusing on the fact that violence occurs in
 all socioeconomic groups and is unacceptable in any circumstances. The advertise-
 ments also promote the message that a "cycle of violence* will be perpetuated into
 the next generation of the family unless the abuser is stopped. In December Par-
 liament passed a law that would require any person who is the subject of a restrain-
 ingorder to surrender his or her firearms and firearms license.
 Discrimination in employment and rates of pay for equal or similar work is pro-
 hibited by law. There are effective legal remedies available for women who experi-
 ence discrimination.
 Children.-The law provides for specific safeguards for children's rights and pro-
 tection. The Government demonstrates its commitment to children's rights and wel-
 fare through its well-funded systems of public education and medical care. Par-
 liament passed a law in 1995 which made it an offense for a New Zealander to have
 sex with a child under the age of 16 even outside of New Zealand's borders; the law
 was designed to ban New Zealanders' participation in "sex tourism."
 While no pattern of societal abuse of children exists, the Government recognizes
 the problem of violence within the family. Both government-sponsored and chari-
 table organizations work to prevent child abuse in the home.
 People With Disabilities.-The law prohibits discrimination against people with
 disabilities in employment, education, and the provision of other state services.
 Compliance with access laws, mandated by the Disabled Persons Community Wel-
 fare Act, varies as business owners and others strive to make necessary adaptations.
 Indigenous People.-Approximately 13 percent of the population claim at least one
 ancestor from the country's indigenous Maori or Moriori minorities. The law pro-
 hibits discrimination against the indigenous population, yet a disproportionate num-
 ber of Maori are included in the unemployment and welfare rolls, the prison popu-
 lation, school dropouts, infant mortality statistics, and single-parent households.
 Government policy recognizes a special role for indigenous people and their tradi-
 tional values and customs, including cultural and environmental issues that have
 an effect on issues of commercial development. The Ministry of Maori Development,
 in cooperation with several Maori nongovernmental organizations, seeks to improve
 the status of indigenous people. A special tribunal continues to hear Maori tribal
 claims to land and other natural resources stemming from the Treaty of Waitangi.
 
 
 688
 National /Racial/Ethnic Minorities.-Pacific Islanders, who comprise 5 percent of
 the population, are not an indigenous people, but they experience difficulties similar
 to Maori.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-Workers have unrestricted rights to establish and
 join organizations of their own choosing and to affiliate these organizations with
 other unions and international organizations. The principal labor organization, the
 New Zealand Council of Trade Unions, is affiliated with the International Confed-
 eration of Free Trade Unions. A second, smaller national labor federation, the New
 Zealand Trade Union Federation, was established in 1993. There are also a number
 of independent labor unions.
 Labor organization is rudimentary in the New Zealand dependency of Tokelau
 (population 1,800) and in the Freely Associated State of Niue (population 2,000). In
 the more developed New Zealand Associated State of the Cook Islands (population
 18,000), most workers in the public sector, the major employer, belong to independ-
 ent local unions inspired by New Zealand models. Industrial relations in the Cooks
 are governed by a simplified version of older New Zealand legislation.
 The law protects unions from governmental interference, suspension, and dissolu-
 tion. Unions, in fact, influence legislation and government policy. They operate inde-
 pendently of political parties but can and do support parties whose policies they
 favor. Some unions are affiliated with the opposition Labour Party. They freely exer-
 cise the right to strike.
 The law prohibits strikes designed to force an employer to become party to a
 multicompany contract. Under the Police Act of 1958 and amendments, sworn po-
 lice officers," i.e., all uniformed and plainclothes police but excluding clerical and
 support staff, are barred from striking or taking any form of industrial action. Po-
 lice, however, do have freedom of association and the right to organize and to bar-
 gain collectively. Issues which cannot be settled between the Police Association and
 management through negotiation are subject to compulsory, final-offer arbitration.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectiuely.-The law provides for the right
 of workers to organize and bargain collectively, and this is observed in practice in
 New Zealand and its dependencies. The law prohibits uniformed members of the
 armed forces from organizing unions and bargaining collectively.*
 Unions now represent fewer than half of all wage earners. Under the Employment
 Contracts Act, employment relationships are based on contracts. Individual employ-
 ees and employers may choose to conduct negotiations for employment contracts on
 their own behalf, or they may authorize any other person or organization to do so
 on their behalf. Although choosing a union is entirely voluntary, unions have re-
 mained the most common agent used by workers to negotiate with employers. Em-
 ployers must recognize a representative authorized by an employee or employees.
 Neither employers or employees, however, are required to negotiate or to agree to
 a contract.
 The Government does not control mediation and arbitration procedures. The em-
 ployment court hears cases arising from disputes over the interpretation of labor
 laws. A less formal body, the employment tribunal, is available to handle wage dis-
 putes and assist in maintaining effective labor relations. Firing an employee for
 union activities is grounds for a finding of unjustified dismissal and may result in
 reinstatement and financial compensation.
 There are no export processing zones in New Zealand, the Cook Islands, Niue, or
 Tokelau.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compunsory Labor.-The law prohibits forced or com-
 pulsory labor in New Zealand and its dependencies. Inspection and legal penalties
 ensure respect for the provisions.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-Department of Labour inspectors
 effectively enforce a ban on the employment of children under age 15 in manufactur-
 ing, mining, and forestry. Children under the age of 16 may not work between the
 hours of 10 p.m. and 6 a.m. In addition to explicit restrictions on the employment
 of children, compulsory education ensures that children under the minimum ae for
 leaving school (now 16 years) are not employed during school hours. By law chidren
 enrolled in school may not be employed even outside school hours if such employ-
 ment would interfere with their education.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The law provides for a 40-hour workweek with
 a minimum of 3 weeks annual paid vacation, and 11 paid public holidays. Under
 the Employment Contracts Act, however, employers and employees may agree to
 longer hours than the 40 hours per week standard. While the law does not specifi-
 cally provide for a 24-hour rest period weekly, the practice is acted by manage-
 ment and labor, and it is the norm. The government-mandated hourly minimum
 
 
 689
 wage of approximately $3.75 ($NZ 6.125) applies to workers 20 years of age and
 older. Conbined with other regularly provided entitlements and welfare benefits for
 low-income earners, this wage is adequate to provide a decent standard of living for
 a worker and family. In 1994 a minimum wage for younger workers was introduced
 at 60 .percent of the adult minimum. A majority of the work force earns mre than
 the minimum wage.
 An extensive body of law and regulations govern health and safety issues, notably
 the Health and Safety in Employment Act of 1992. Under this legislation, employers
 are obliged to provide a safe and healthy work environment, and employees are re-
 sponsibe for their own safety and health as well as ensuring that their actions do
 not harm others. The New Zealand Council of Trade Unionshas criticized the Act,
 however, for not providing sufficient employee involvement in workplace decisions
 affecting health and safety. Under the Employment Contracts Act, workers have the
 legal right to strike over health and safety issues. Unions and members of the gen-
 eral public may file safety complaints on behalf of workers. Department of Labour
 inspectors enforce safety and health rules, and they have the power to shut down
 equipment if necessary. The Department of Labour standard is to investigate re-
 ports of unsafe or unhealthy working conditions within 24 hours of notification.
 Workers have the right to withdraw from a dangerous work situation without jeop-
 ardy to continued employment.
