 NEW ZEALAND
 New Zealand is a parliamentary democracy, with executive authority vested in a
 23-member cabinet led by a prime minister. The 99 members of the unicameral leg-
 islature include 4 whose seats are reserved for election by persons from the native
 Maori minority population who wish to be included on a separate electoral roll.
 Approximately 12 percent of New Zealand's population of 3,427,000 consider
 themselves Maori. Immigrants from Europe, Asia, and Pacific islands leaven a popu-
 lation of primarily British descent. The rights of Maori have received increasing
 public attention in recent years.
 Niue and the Cook Islands are self-governing countries in free association with
 New Zealand. The island group of Tokelau is administered by New Zealand with
 limited but growing self-government. Inhabitants of all three hold New Zealand citi-
 zenship and are entitled to New Zealand passports. Local law in the Cook Islands,
 
 
 706
 Niue, and Tokelau is compatible with New Zealand and British common law. New
 Zealand's police and defense forces are responsible to and firmly controlled by civil-
 ian officials.
 New Zealand is one of the world's most efficient producers of agrclturl prod-
 ucts. The mainstay of its economy is the export of wool meat, and dairy products.
 A small but expanding manufacturing sector is engaged primarily in food process-
 ing, metal fabrication, and the production of wood and paper products. Niche indus-
 tries are developing in such high technology sectors as software production. Recent
 structural reforms have transformed New Zealand from one of the world's most pro-
 tected economies to one based on free enterprise. Disparities in wealth are very
 small (though increasing), and most New Zealanders have a comfortable standard
 of living.
 New Zealanders enjoy a wide range of freedoms, and human rights are respected
 and protected in law and in practice. Minority rights are given special legislative
 protection, and provision is made for the economically deprived.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for The Integrity of The Person, Including Freedom from
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-Such killings do not occur.
 b. Disappearance.-There have been no instances of politically motivated dis-
 appearance.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 New Zealand law prohibits torture and other forms of mistreatment, and these pro-
 hibitions are respected in practice.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-Freedom from arbitrary arrest, detention,
 and exile is respected. The law provides for the writ of habeas corpus and requires
 that persons arrested be charged promptly. The court provides legal aid to those
 who cannot afford to pay for a private attorney. Preventive detention is prohibited.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The New Zealand judicial system is based on Brit-
 ish common law. A three-tiered, independent, and impartial judiciary assures a
 rmpt and fair public trial. Final appeal in some instances may be made to the
 Privy Council in London, although this is rarely invoked. The rights of the accused
 are carefully observed and subject to public scrutiny.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 right to privacy is protected by law. The Government does not violate a person's ri-
 vacy, the sanctity of the home, or the integrity of correspondence. The office of Pri-
 vacy Commissioner hears complaints involving violation of personal privacy by indi-
 viduals or the Government. The Privacy Commissioner is a statutory member of the
 Human Rights Commission.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-Freedoms of speech and press are provided for
 in law and respected in practice. Several hundred newspapers and magazines are
 published reflecting a wide spectrum of political and social thought. Numerous state
 and privately owned radio stations operate. One private and two state television
 channels broadcast nationally, and international broadcasts are available for a fee.
 The Government makes no attempt to censor the press, and opposition viewpoints
 are freely expressed.
 There are no limits on academic freedom.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-Rights to peaceful assembly
 and association are recognized in law and respected in practice.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-New Zealand enjoys a long tradition of religious toler-
 ance. All faiths receive equal treatment under the law.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The law places no limitations on internal movement or resettlement,
 nor does it restrict foreign travel or the right to return. To the extent of its re-
 sources, New Zealand accepts and resettles refugees and asylum seekers.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 The people freely elect their government. Two major parties, National and Labour,
 dominate the political scene and have formed governments chosen in triennial elec-
 tions for more than 50 years. The law provides for universal suffrage at age 18. Ex-
 cept for the seats reserved for Maori, no restrictions based upon sex, creed, or na-
 tional origin limit participation in the political process. Women, Maori, and other
 minorities regularly serve in Parliament and the Cabinet. Currently, of the 99 Mem-
 bers of Parliament (M.P.'s), 21 are women. Voting rates are high, and participation
 
 
 707
 in political groups is common. Opposition groups freely voice their views and can
 influence government policies.
 Responding to complaints that the current "first-past-the-post" electoral system,
 or simple majority system, unfairly disadvantages small parties, the Government
 asked voters in the 1993 general election to determine whether to adopt ropor-
 tional representation. A majority of voters supported a change to Mixed-iember
 Proportional representation (MMP). Under this system, half of an expanded par-
 liament will be elected from constituencies and half selected from party lists in
 order to achieve proportionality. The change is likely to result in a larger number
 of parties, coalition governments, and a greater role for individual M.P.'s. Pro-
 ponents claim it will redress a situation under which a government could use an
 artificially inflated parliamentary majority to ush throuh legislation that was not
 sua majority of the population. Elections held alter mid-1995 will be
 held under MMP.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 New Zealand has a long history of commitment to the protection of human rights
 both at home and abroad. Basic human rights are guaranteed by law and respected
 in practice. A wide variety of international and local human rights organizations op-
 erate freely.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The New Zealand Human Rights Commission hears complaints of discrimination
 based on sex, marital status, national or ethnic origin, and religious or ethical belief.
 The Race Relations Conciliator, a statutory member of the Human Rights Commis-
 sion but empowered under separate legislation, hears complaints based upon racial
 discrimination. In July New Zealand enacted legislation that replaced and expanded
 the Human Rights Commission Act 1977 and the Race Relations Act 1971. The
 Human Rights Act 1993 incorporates existing bans against discrimination on the
 basis of sex (including pregnancy and sexual harassment), marital status, religious
 or ethical belief, race, color, or ethnic or national origin. It adds new bans against
 discrimination on the grounds of physical or psychological disability (including dis-
 ability or impairment due to the presence in the body of organisms capable of caus-
 ing illness), age, political opinion, employment status, family status, or sexual ori-
 entation. Such discrimination is prohibited in the areas of employment, education,
 access to public places, provision of goods and services, and housing and accommo-
 dation.
 Women.-The law in New Zealand addresses violence against women, including
 spousal rape, and provides for the suppression of victims' names. Police coordinate
 effectively with the numerous victim support service agencies available to women,
 including women's refuges, rape crisis centers, and sexual abuse centers. In August
 Parliament passed antipornography legislation banning material that promotes co-
 erced sexual activity or depicts acts of extreme violence and cruelty. The legislation
 is designed to reduce material that could lead to violence against women and chil-
 dren. As the first country to grant full suffrage to women, New Zealand celebrated
 the centennial year of that decision in 1993 with a series of conferences and activi-
 ties designed to promote a positive image of women.
 Children.-New Zealand pays careful attention to the rights of children. The Com-
 missioner for Children has submitted to the Government for review a broad plan
 of action on children's rights. The 1989 Children, Young Persons, and Their Fami-
 lies Act increased specific safeguards for children's rights and made special provi-
 sions for the treatment of children by the legal system. The act also created the
 independent office of a Commissioner for Children to provide advocacy before the
 law or children without legal competence and to monitor compliance with and im-
 plementation of the act. The Commissioner has broad powers of audit and inquiry
 into all aspects of children's rights.
 Indigenous People.-Approximately 12 percent of New Zealand's population claim
 at least one ancestor from the country's indigenous Maori or Morioni minorities. De-
 spite a legal prohibition on discrimination, significant portions of the indigenous
 population remain marginally educated and economically disadvantaged. Maori ex-
 perience high rates of infant crib death and child abuse and are less likely to grad-
 uate from high school. A relatively high percentage of Maori are unemployed and
 receive state assistance. Maori also figure disproportionately in crime statistics and
 among the prison population. Government policy recognizes a special role for indige-
 nous people and their traditional values and customs, including cultural and envi-
 ronmental attitudes that have an impact on issues of commercial development. The
 
 
 708
 Ministry of Maori Development oversees programs aimed at furthering the eco-
 nomic, social, and cultural development of the Maori people. In addition, every na-
 tional, regional, and local government agency is required by law to consult with
 Maori representatives on any decision that might affect them.
 A special tribunal was empowered in 1975 to hear Maori tribal claims to land and
 other natural resources stemming from the 1840 Treaty of Waitangi. Progress on
 resolving land disputes was slow until recently. The tribunal's decisions are binding
 on state-owned resources but not on private land. A major agreement between the
 Government and Maori leaders resolving Maori claims to fishing rights was reached
 in 1992. While not immune from racial tensions, New Zealand's Government and
 society put considerable effort into forging and maintaining mutual respect and
 partnership between the country's Anglo-Saxon majority and its indigenous Maori
 minority.
 National/Racial /Ethnic Minorities.-While New Zealand actively protects the
 rights of its indigenous Maori minority, it has not until recently given much thought
 to the small but growing number of other ethnic minorities. A recent increase in
 immigration from Asia has led to isolated incidents of discrimination and attempts
 by the Government to prevent them. Although its official policy is "Biculturalism,"
 the Government has encouraged immigration from Asia and portrayed in a positive
 light the contributions of immigrants from outside the European and Maori cul-
 tures. The Human Rights Act 1993 outlaws material that would incite hostility
 based on color, race, or ethnic origin.
 People with Disabilities.-Increasing popular attention to the problems faced b
 the disabled has led the Government to act to remove, to the fullest extent practica,
 impediments to their living normal lives. In 1991-92, the Government created the
 Office of Disability Support Services to coordinate disability programs. The Human
 Rights Act of 1993 prohibits discrimination in employment, education, access to pub-
 lic places, provision of goods and services, housing and accommodation on the
 grounds of physical, and intellectual or psychological disability or impairment.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-New Zealand workers have unrestricted rights to es-
 tablish and join organizations of their own choosing and to affiliate those organiza-
 tions with other unions and international organizations. The principal labor organi-
 zation, the New Zealand Council of Trade Unions (NZCTU), is affiliated with the
 International Confederation of Free Trade Unions (ICFTU) and with its subregional
 Mruping, the South Pacific and Oceanic Council of Trade Unions. A second national
 labor federation, the New Zealand Trade Union Federation (TUF), was established
 on May Day 1993. The TUF has not affiliated with any global international organi-
 zation, although some of its affiliates have retained longstanding ties with the
 ICFT~s international trade secretariats. There are also a number of labor unions
 independent of both groups.
 Labor organization is rudimentary in the New Zealand dependency of Tokelau
 (population 1,800) and in the freely associated state of Niue (population 2,000). In
 the more populous New Zealand associated state of the Cook Islands (population
 18,000), most workers in the public sector, the major employer, belong to independ-
 ent local unions inspired by New Zealand models. Industrial relations in the Cook
 Islands are governed by a simplified version of older New Zealand legislation.
 Unions inNew Zealand are protected by law from governmental interference, sus-
 pension, and dissolution, and, in fact, they influence legislation and government pol-
 icy. Unions operate independently of political parties but can and do support parties
 whose policies they favor. Unions have and freely exercise the right to strike. Public
 sector unions, however, may not strike if work stoppages would threaten public safe-
 ty. Legislation enacted in 1991 prohibits strikes designed to force an employer to
 become party to a multicompany contract. Workers are also barred from using sec-
 ondary boycotts and striking to force up the minimum wage.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectiuely.-The right of workers to orga-
 nize and bargain collectively is provided by law and observed in practice in New
 Zealand and its dependencies. Unions actively recruit members and engage in collec-
 tive bargaining. Labor market deregulation intended to make New Zealand more
 competitive internationally, which was initiated with the Employment Contracts Act
 (ECA) of 1991, marks a sharp break with almost a century of prounion industrial
 legislation. The ECA ended a previous system of national "awards" under which a
 wage agreement would apply to all employers and employees in an industry wheth-
 er or not they had been involved in the award negotiations. It also bannedcompul-
 sory membership in labor unions, abolished the official registration of unions, and
 ended requirements that unions be of a minimum size. As a consequence of the act,
 unions now represent less than half of all wage earners, and no longer have an in-
 
 
 herent right to represent any particular group of workers. Employers are free to
 choose with which and with how many bargaining agents they negotiate. The
 NZCTU has presented a complaint, alleging that theECA violates freedom of asso-
 ciation which is under review by the International Labor Organization.
 Employment relationships are based on contracts negotiated either by individual
 employees or their bargaining agent, which may be a union, another voluntary asso-
 ciation of workers, or a private consultant.
 Mediation and arbitration procedures are conducted independent of government
 control. The Employment Court hears cases arising from disputes over the interpre-
 tation of labor laws. A less formal body, the Employment Tribunal, is available to
 handle wage disputes and assist in maintaining effective labor relations. Firing an
 employee or union activities is grounds for a finding of unjustified dismissal and
 may result in reinstatement and financial compensation.
 There are no export processing zones in New Zealand, Tokelau, Niue, or the Cook
 Islands.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-Forced or compulsory labor is pro-
 hibited in New Zealand and its dependencies. Inspection and legal penalties ensure
 respect for these provisions.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-Children under the age of 15 may
 not be employed without special government approval and must not work between
 the hours of 10 p.m. and 6 a.m. The Department of Labour effectively enforces these
 laws.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-New Zealand provides for a 40-hour workweek,
 with a minimum of 3 weeks' annual paid vacation and 11 paid public holidays.
 Under the Employment Contracts Act, however, employers and employees may
 agree to longer hours than the 40-hour per week standard. In effect since December
 17, 1990, the government-mandated minimum wage of approximately $3.30
 ($NZ6.125) per hour for workers 20 years of age and older, is adequate for an ac-
 ceptable standard of living. Most minimum wage earners also receive a variety of
 welfare benefits. A majority of the work force earns more than the minimum wage.
 New Zealand has an extensive body of law and regulations governing health and
 safety issues, including a new Health and Safety in Employment Act which took ef-
 fect in April. Under this legislation, employers are obliged to provide a safe and
 healthy work environment, and employees are responsible for their own safety and
 health, including the right to remove themselves from dangerous or hazardous situ-
 ations, as well as for ensuring that their actions do not harm others. The NZCTU
 has criticized the act, however, for not providing sufficient employee involvement in
 workplace decisions ffecting health and safety. Under the Employment Contracts
 Ac, workers have the legal right to strike over health and safety issues. Unions and
 members of the general public may file safety complaints on behalf of workers. Safe-
 ty and health ru'es are enforced by Department of Labour inspectors who have the
 power to shut dwn equipment if necessary. The Department of Labour standard
 is to investigate reports of unsafe or unhealthy working conditions within 24 hours
 of notification.
 PAPUA NEW GUINEA
 Papua New Guinea (PNG), with some 1,000 tribes and over 800 distinct lan-
 guages for a population of about 4 million, is one of the world's most di'.,erse soci-
 eties. It has a federal parliamentary system based on universal adult suffrage.
 There have been five constitutional and peaceful transfers of power since it achieved
 independencc in 1975. The Constitution resembles those of other English-speaking
 parliamentary democracies and emphasizes respect for individual rights.
 The Government has constitutional authority over the armed forces (PNGDF), p-
 lice, and intelligence organizations. However, weak PNGDF discipline has led to
 human rights abuses involving civilian communities near military bases and on
 Bougainvile island. Similar problems continue to plague the Royal Papua New
 Guinea Constabulary, the country's only police force.
 The economy is characterized by a rlatively small but modern free enterprise sec-
 tor, heavily dependent on foreign investment, and a traditional subsistence sector
 that supports over 80 percent of the population. The modern sector produces most
 of the wealth and, normally, slightly less than 80 percent of government revenue,
 with the balance of the budget needs made up by assistance, including a cash grant
 from Australia.
 Prime Minister WinTi has given priority to resolving the crisis in Bougainville
 Island, the last redoubt of secessionist insurgents, and to reestablishing law and
 
 
 710
 order. Despite an increased commitment of financial and military resources and a
 general decrease in violence on the island during 1993, a political solution to the
 Bougainville crisis remained elusive at year's end. During the year, the Government
 continued to extend its control over Bougainville, partry because Bougainvilleans
 called for a restoration of public services and partly because of popular revulsion
 against human rights violations perpetrated by members of the Bougainville Revolu-
 tionary Army (BRA).
 In 1993 efforts to control an exceptionally high crime rate led Parliament to
 strengthen anticrime law and to pass the Internai Security Act which legal experts
 attacked because of its threat to internationally recognized rights, including those
 of freedom of expression, association, and movement. The Prime Minister has also
 taken the necessary first steps to amend the Constitution to shift the onus of proof
 to the defendant in cases of armed robbery, kidnaping, murder, and rape and to es-
 tablish a national identification system. At year's end, the proposed amendments
 were awaiting parliamentary action.
 In October the Ombudsman filed a suit against the Internal Security Act, charg-
 ing that it was unconstitutional. The Supreme Court heard the case in November.
 The ruling had not yet been issued at year's end. The major human rights abuses
 continued to be extrajudicial killings by security forces and insurgents on Bougain-
 ville, physical abuse of detainees and prisoners by police, extensive discrimination
 against women, and a culture of violence, including rape.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-In Bougainville there continue to be
 credible reports of instances where either the PNGDF or the resistance have exe-
 cuted alleged BRA members or their supporters. In February, as security forces
 moved into the former North Solomons provincial capital of Arawa, they confirmed
 the removal of three patients from the local hospital, including Ken Savia, a mem-
 ber of the province's suspended government and a minister in the "interim" govern-
 ment supportive of the BRA. Although little is known of what happened to the other
 two persons (see Section 1.b.), there are credible reports that either the security
 forces themselves or the resistance forces associated with them executed Savia, per-
 haps in retribution for the killing of eight PNGDF soldiers during the Arawa oper-
 ation. In August, in Buka, BRA insurgent Moses Tseraha was also killed. According
 to official sources, he was ambushed after slipping into Buka from Bougainville to
 conduct operations against the community's infrastructure and government rep-
 resentatives. Other reports indicate that he had entered Buka to arrange his sur-
 render but was instead hunted down and executed by the security forces.
 A BRA spokesman claimed that security forces were responsible for the August
 deaths of five men from Matukori village in the Siwai area, three of whom were
 allegedly thrown into the sea from a helicopter, and the deaths of five civilians in
 September at the Tabago Care Center in southern Bougainville. However, the three
 men allegedly thrown from the helicopter appeared alive on national television in
 December.
 The judiciary has so far taken few steps to investigate allegations of security force
 atrocities relating to the Bougainville conflict, although the magistrate system was
 reestablished in Buka during the year and government control extended throughout
 much of the island. No progress has been publicly reported in an inquest ordered
 in 1991 by former Attorney General Narokobi into the deaths of 11 persons in North
 Solomons Province in 1989 and 1990.
 Government sources hold the BRA responsible for 13 deaths of PNGDF personnel
 and the deaths of at least 2 policemen. There are also credible reports that the BRA
 killed civilians. In one case, the Government reported that in a 6-day period in Jan-
 uary, the BRA killed 17 civilians as they traveled to and from their garden plots.
 Outside of Bougainville, a national court in Rabaul sentenced four policemen to
 14 years each for the 1992 murder of a plantation worker. In October a PNGDF sol-
 dier was formally charged in the death of another soldier.
 b. Disappearance. -Security forces are believed responsible for the February dis-
 appearance of two patients removed from the Arawa hospital along with Ken Savia
 (see Section L.a.). There were also credible allegations of BRA-perpetrated dis-
 appearances in rebel-held areas.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution forbids torture and other cruel or degrading treatment or punish-
 ment. Reliable .eports nonetheless continue to suggest that PNG security forces
 (PNG soldiers, police, and correctional personnel), as well as BRA insurgents on
 Bougainville, engage in such practices. Reports of torture or other abuse by the
 
 
 711
 PNGDF on Bougainville originating with BRA rebels or sympathizers are frequently
 exaggerated. Such reports, however, cannot be dismissed out of hand, given the
 PNGD Fs difficulty in maintaining discipline. PNGDF soldiers were implicated in
 the burning down of a Port Moresy club, apparently in revenge following the death
 of one of their members.
 Instances of torture and abuse by PNG police were reported from regions through-
 out PNG in 1993, reflecting continued weakness in Royal Papua New Guinea Con-
 stabulary discipline and lack of respect for human rights. Villagers in the Yangora
 region of East Sepik Province, for example, complained of police brutality dunng a
 raid early in the year when police also allegedly burned their homes. In July police
 were also accused of staging revenge raids against squatter settlements and villag-
 ers near the Porgera gold mine, including burning of homes, following the death of
 one policeman. Such attacks are frequently used by the police as a form of collective
 punishment. In July police in Western Highlands Province allegedly fired into a
 crowd while trying to restore calm during aland dispute, killing a schoolboy. Credi-
 ble reports of police brutality were widespread and were frequently relatedto alco-
 hol. In October, in Port Moresby, police allegedly beat a government minister during
 an arrest for traffic violations.
 The courts do address cases of police abuse that are pressed through the court
 system, although many cases never reach the courts for lack of evidence or financial
 resources. In April, in Rabaul, a court sentenced two policemen to 3 months in jail
 for assault. A court also ordered the state to pay a pproximately $230 000 as com-
 pensation for damage caused in 1991 by a polie raid in Sepil in the Western High-
 lands. Police announced they would conduct an investigation of the incident near
 the Porgera mine. They conducted an investigation into the alleged mistreatment
 of the Government minister but did not make the results public, reportedly to pro-
 tect the minister.
 Prisons are severely overcrowded and understaffed. Jailbreaks are common. Fam-
 ily members are allowed to visit and supply food to supplement the prison diet, al-
 though at Goroka's Bihute prison visits and privileges were curtailed for 2 months
 following a breakout.
 Judicial redress is available to victims of official misconduct. Nevertheless, the
 case brought by a Member of Parliament from Bougainville seeking compensation
 for injuries suffered at the hands of security force members in 1989 was still pend-
 ing at year's end. The Supreme Court introduced a simple form in 1989 enabling
 citizens to file human rights complaints with the National Court, but this innova-
 tion seems to have had only a marginal impact on the enforcement of constitu-
 tionally guaranteed human rights.
 The Ombudsman Commission is empowered to investigate official abuse of au-
 thority and to refer cases to public prosecutors. Because of the expense involved in
 proceeding through the judicial system, however, few cases result in actual charges.
 PNG's free ress frequently publicizes allegations of human rights violations by the
 uniformed foes. At year's end, the Government had not established the human
 rights commission it had announced at the June World Conference on Human
 Rights.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The courts strongly enforce constitutional
 rotections against arbitrary arrest and detention. Those protections have, however,
 een weakened by the passage of the Internal Security Act and amendments to ex-
 isting anticrime legislation. Judicially issued warrants are no longer required when
 the authorities suspect that a person has committed any offense against that act
 or in the case of certain, largely white-collar offenses. The act further permits a per-
 son to be classified as a member of a proscribed organization solely on the basis of
 an affidavit filed by the police commissioner, without further proof. Those under ar-
 rest have the right to legal counsel; accused persons are informed of charges; and
 their arrest is subject to judicial review. Under legislation passed in 1993, only Na-
 tional or Supreme Court judges may grant bail in certain criminal cases involving
 a firearm. In all other cases, bail may be granted unless a judge rules otherwise.
 Exile is not practiced.
 e. Denial of Fair Public 7rial.-The law guarantees a public trial, and the Con-
 stitution provides for due process; an independent court system enforces beth.
 Defendants have the right to an attorney. Legal counsel is provided either by the
 public solicitor's office, or by the law society on recommendation of the solicitor's of-
 ice, for those accused of serious offenses and unable to afford counsel. "Serious of-
 fenses" are generally defined as felony charges or any case heard in either the na-
 tional or district court (as opposed to village or magistrate courts). Defendants and
 their attorneys may confront witnesses, present evidence, plead their cases, and ap-
 peal convictions. Given the relative shortage of police and udicial resources and an
 exceptionally high crime rate, periods between arrest an trial can be long. Such
 
 
 712
 periods of detention, however, are subject to strict judicial review. The courts are
 completely independent of executive, political, or militar authorities, and the Gov-
 ernment does not hold any prisoners on purely political grounds.
 A lack of access to Bougainville Island proper continues to hamper the judiciary's
 ability to investigate human rights violations there. Nevertheless, in September a
 former BRA rebel was charged with the 1990 kidnaping of five government officials
 and businessmen. BRA activity continues in some government-controlled areas, dis-
 couraging the restoration of judicial services in all areas except Buka. Because of
 the passage of time and lack of reliable evidence, it is not clear if and when the
 National Court in Rabaul will be able to adjudicate the 66 claims of human rights
 abuses filed by Bougainvilleans against the Government that have been pending
 since 1991.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-Privacy
 rights are not widely abused, but police are known to burn homes in the highlands
 to quell intertribal conflict and punish communities sus cted of harboring crimi-
 nals. There have also been reports of forcible entry into homes by police searching
 for criminals or stolen goods.
 g. Use of Excessive Force and Violations of Humanitarian Law in Internal Con-
 /Zicts.-Armed conflict on Bougainville Island decreased in the last half of the year.
 Nevertheless, both sides claim the other committed abuses against civilians. In Jan-
 uary the PNGDF reported killing nine BRA rebels at sea as they returned to Bou-
 gainville from the Solomon Islands. The BRA claimed the victims were unarmed ci-
 vilians. The Government also reported that in the last half of the year in central
 and southern Bougainville, increasing numbers of civilians left BRA- controlled
 areas seeking food, shelter, and health care. There were widespread reports of BRA
 attacks against civilians, both to hamper economic activity and to intimidate them
 to remain in BRA-controlled areas. The BRA allegedly has burned homes and vil-
 lages throughout Bougainville in retaliation for cooperation with security forces and
 to deny opponents their use. In August a Bougainville citizen who had lived for 4
 years under BRA control claimed that the BRA had beaten him on four separate
 occasions, ostensibly because they suspected him of being an informer. le also
 charged that the BRA had murdered his three brothers.
 In September the Government authorized the PNG Red Cross to reestablish a hu-
 manitarian assistance office in Wakunai on Bougainville Island after resisting ear-
 lier requests.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of speech,
 includingfreedom of the broadcast media and publications. A tradition of independ-
 ence in the news media, an effective judiciary, and a functioning democratic system
 of government have helped promote these freedoms in society.
 The Government has been actively debating an enhanced role for the Department
 of Communications in regulating the media. The Government also holds a majority
 share of the second daily newspaper, which started publishing in November. This
 increased government interest in the media, which are traditionally independent
 and privately owned, has provoked some concern, but there have been no overt ef-
 forts to censor the press. There have been subtle efforts on the part of government
 officials to pressure the host of a popular radio talk show, but these threats dis-
 sipated in the face of strong public support for the radio host. There were credible
 reports that the Government also used subtle pressure to keep reports of the pro-
 ceedings looking into the legality of the Prime Minister's September resignation and
 reelection off the front page, although the reporting was not censored. The restric-
 tions on access of journalists to Bougainville remain another controversial issue, but
 more reporters have been able to cover the court proceedings than in the past, and
 the Government does not attempt to censor their coverage.
 The nation's only television station has been engaged in a running battle with the
 censorship board over alleged pornography in some of its programs. While this dis-
 pute has provoked general debate over media freedoms, it is not political in nature
 but rather concerns the right of the censors to define and ban what the consider
 to be pornography. Two Australian television news show programs were banned in
 1993, one on the singer Madonna and one on child abuse by Australian priests.
 Citizens and foreigners are also occasionally convicted of possession of pornog-
 raphy under the Censorship Act. Freedom of expression, both in public and in aca-
 demia is not restricted. The courts and the Ombudsman Commission have sup-
 ported the right of free speech over government prerogative in most of the cases
 that they have been asked to address.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-Private associations and public
 assemblies are legal. Associations do not require formal registration. International
 
 
 713
 affiliation of church and civic groups is also freely permitted. Public demonstrations
 require police approval; this is frequently denied on the grounds that such activities
 encourage bystanders to engage in vandalism and violence. Police in the National
 Capital District did, however, grant permission in September for a protest march
 on Parliament organized by university students following parliamentary maneuver-
 ing in which the Prime Minister engineered his own reelection. They successfully
 discouraged another protest rally several days later organized by unknown persons.
 c. Freedom of Reli ion.-There are no restrictions on and no discrimination
 against the practice oa religion, which is protected by the Constitution. Many indige-
 nous and Christian denominations flourish side by side with small Buddhist and
 Muslim groups. Expatriate missionaries have traditionally moved freely throughout
 the country and provided most social services in many remote areas.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-PNG security forces continue to require travelers to Buka and Bougain-
 ville Islands to obtain permits. Even when their visits have been authorized by the
 Prime Minister, visitors have been turned back by the security forces. The Govern-
 ment prohibits unauthorized vessels or aircraft from calling at or landing on either
 island. Otherwise, freedom of movement within and outside the country has not
 been restricted in practice. However, the Internal Security Act, which came into
 force in midyear, authorizes the Government to exclude from any part of the country
 anyone convicted under the act or likely to commit an offense under the act. In addi-
 tion, the Government has announced its intention to introduce legislation establish-
 ing a national system of registration and identification cards. Provincial politicians
 continue to encourage squatters from other parts of the country to return to their
 home regions.
 The Government hosts between 9,000 and 10,000 Melanesian refugees from Irian
 Jaya, the neighboring province of Indonesia. Approximately 6,000, many of whom
 have land or kinship ties with Papua New Guineans, live along the border just in-
 side Papua New Guinea. They are not provided services by either the Government
 or by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR). While Papua
 New Guinea recognizes Irian Jaya as an integral part of Indonesia, the Government
 nonetheless grants asylum to qualified refugees, and regulations allow foreign citi-
 zens who meet the 10-year residency requirements to take up PNG citizenship. The
 Government administers UNHCR assistance to about 3,700 refugees at the sole re-
 maining camp at East Awin.
 There were no known forced repatriations of Irian Jayan insurgents to Indonesia
 during 1993. Over 200 were voluntarily repatriated.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens freely exercise the right to change their government through direct elec-
 tions with a secret ballot and universal adult suffrage. The voters elect a unicameral
 Parliament made up of 109 members from all 19 provinces and the Port Moresby
 National Capital District. Any citizen can stand for election, and several foreign-
 born citizens sit in Parliament. With a multiplicity of small parties, coalition govern-
 ments tend to be weak and shifting; none has yet survived its 5-year electoral man-
 date, although in September Prime Minister Wingti took steps to ensure that his
 coalition remained in office for the entire period, provoking a constitutional crisis.
 In Henganofi, new elections for Parliament ordered by the court following dis-
 "uted 1992 by-elections were contested by 10 candidates and conducted peacefully.
 ostelection violence caused by disgruntled supporters of losing candidates contin-
 ues to occur, however. In July, in Simbu Province, such disturbances reportedly
 caused at least 19 deaths following provincial elections.
 Although there are no legal barriers to their participation in political life, women
 are not found in significant numbers in senior positions in government or in politics
 (see Section 5). No women sit in Parliament or in the Cabinet.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 There are no official barriers to the formation of human rights groups. The PNG
 Association for Human Rights, formed in 1992, has been relatively inactive. A sec-
 ond nongovernmental organization focused on human rights and the environment,
 the Individual and Community Rights Advocacy Forum (ICRAF), was established
 early in the year. Numerous localized nongovernmental organizations-some dealing
 only tangentially with human rights issues, others focusing almost exclusively on
 women and children--exist throughout the country. Nongovernmental organizations
 have exercised their right to comment on human rights issues in PNG media with-
 out any known government interference or retribution.
 
 
 The U.N. Human Rights Commission adopted a resolution in March urging the
 Government to permit international factfinding missions and calling on the Govern-
 ment to negotiate with all factions of the Bougainville peoples. While the Govern-
 ment has invited potential donors, including the European Community and partici-
 pants in the Lome convention, to visit Bougainville, it has not extended invitations
 to human rights nongovernmental organizations that have expressed interest in con-
 ducting investigations into alleged human rights abuses.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 Extreme ethnic and geographic diversity prevents domination by any one tribe or
 clan. The democratically elected government, based on loose coalitions, cannot afford
 to favor one group over another consistently.
 Women.-Despite extensive rights for women provided by the Constitution and
 law, traditional patterns of discrimination against women result in a significant de-
 nial of human rights. Some women in the modern sector have achieved senior posi-
 tions, serving as doctors, lawyers, business executives, civil servants, and in high
 government positions. Despite constitutional and legal guarantees regarding family
 law, marriage, and property rights, most women, even those in urban areas, still
 live in a system that relegates them to second-class status. Village courts tend to
 enforce traditional attitudes and values that oppress both women and youth. Vio-
 lence against women, including domestic violence and gang rape, is prevalent. Some
 tribal and clan cultures emphasize antagonism between the sexes. While women are
 ostensibly protected by their family and clan, they are nonetheless often victims of
 violence and force. Traditional village deterrents, such as requirements for com-
 pensation, are breaking down. Attacks on women remain common in intertribal war-
 are as well.
 Fear of rape, especially gang rape, is justifiably common among women and con-
 strains not only their movements and social activities but also their ability to exer-
 cise authority and discipline in business and professional activities. Rape is punish-
 able by prison sentences, but assailants are seldom apprehended. Most areas with-
 out access to law enforcement services rely on .payback," a traditional form of re-
 venge, directed at the offender's tribe or clan, to deter or punish rape. Domestic vio-
 lence such as wife-beating, also common is usually viewed by police and citizen
 alike as a private, family matter. Such violence is often related to alcohol.
 Village court justices tend to be overly severe on women, for instance, by imposing
 4ail terms on women found guilty of adultery, while letting men off lightly. There
 is no pattern of similar discrimination against women by circuit-riding National
 Court justices. Indeed, the latter frequently annul village court sentences and free
 unjustly imprisoned women. Both the Government and public organizations are
 working to upgrade the status of women, so far with limited results. The Govern-
 ment provides a grant to the National Council of Women and has instituted an Of-
 fice of Women's Affairs in the Department of Home Affairs and Youth.
 Children.-Approximately 44 percent of PNG's population is under the age of 16.
 In PNG's traditional clan system, children are generally cared for within the ex-
 tended family, in accordance with financial resources and the tribe's access to serv-
 ices. Because of the geographic isolation and remoteness of many villages, an esti-
 mated 38 percent of children under 5 are malnourished. Though infant mortality
 rates for children under 5 have declined, they remain extremely high at 114 per
 1,000 live births. Maternal mortality is the fourth highest in the world, at 900 per
 100,000 births. Pneumonia and other acute respiratory infections, together with
 childbirth, diarrhea, and malaria, are the main causes of serious illness and death.
 Although statistics are not available, child abuse does occur but does not appear to
 be as prevalent as wife-beating.
 Education, a government priority, takes approximately 15 percent of the Govern-
 ment's budget. While the percentage of eligible students enrolled in primary schools
 has increased substantially, only 38 percent complete primary studies. Only 15 per-
 cent of secondary age children are enrolled in school, due in part to high costs and
 limited availability. Vocational schools are limited and underfunded. In 1991 the
 Government adopted the National Youth Service Act, aimed at increasing youth in-
 volvement in agriculture, tourism, and civic action, but it has not been imple-
 mented. Most programs to protect and develop youth are operated by nongovern-
 mental organizations and religious organizations. Many government programs are
 severely underfunded. Within its limited resources, the Government is committed to
 the welfare and protection of the rights of children.
 People with Disabilities.-Through the National Board for the Disabled, the Gov-
 ernment provides limited funding for the disabled to approximately 14 nongovern-
 mental organizations which provide services. The Government does not provide pro-
 
 
 715
 grams or services directly. Services and health care for the disabled, except for that
 provided by the traditional family and clan system, do not exist in several of the
 country's provinces. No legislation mandates accessibility for the disabled.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The right to form and join labor unions is protected
 by law, subject to registration by the Department of Labor. While the Government
 does not use registration as a form of control over unions, an unregistered union
 has no legal standing with the Department of Labor or before the courts and, ac-
 cordingly, cannot operate effectively. Unionized workers account for one-half of the
 250,000 wage earners in the formal economy and are organized into some 50 trade
 unions, most of which are associated with the Trade Unions Congress. Unions are
 independent of the Government and of political parties. They may freely affiliate
 with international organizations.
 Both public and private-sector unions exercised their right to strike in 1993. Con-
 cerned over perceived politicization of the appointments of departmental heads, ap-
 proximately 100 attorneys and staff in the Office of the Attorney-General, with sup-
 port from the Public Employees Association, struck to revoke a controversial ap-
 pointment as Secretary of Justice. After a week, the strike was abandoned in favor
 of a legal challenge, which was ultimately accepted by the courts. Mining workers
 have been responsible for the most visible union activity in the private sector. La-
 borers at the Ok Tedi Mine struck three times in 1993-first over wages, then man-
 agement activities, and finally work-related conditions.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The Constitution provides for
 the right to engage in collective bargaining, to join industrial organizations, and to
 seek employment. These rights are exercised freely. In past years, the International
 Labor Organization (ILO) has admonished the Government to amend the law that
 gives it discretionary power to cancel arbitration awards or declare wage agree-
 ments void when they are contrary to government policy. This has not been accom-
 plished because of a lack of resources. The ILO has now offered its technical assist-
 ance.
 The law prohibits antiunion discrimination by employers against union members
 and organizers. The Department of Labor and Employment, as well as the courts,
 resolve complaints. There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The Constitution forbids slavery
 and all forms of forced or compulsory labor, and there were no reports of their prac-
 tice in 1993.
 d. Minimum age for employment of children.-The minimum working age, as es-
 tablished in Chapter 373 of the Employment Act, is 18. However, children between
 the ages of 11 and 18 may be employed in family related work provided they have
 parental permission, a medical clearance, and a work permit from a labor office.
 Such employment is rare, except in subsistence agriculture. The Department of
 Labor and Employment and the courts take steps to enforce the minimum age law,
 but they are hampered by a lack of resources.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-Minimum wages for the private sector are set
 by the Minimum Wage Board, a quasi-governmental body with worker and employer
 representation. The most recent determination, which became effective in October
 1992, dramatically reduced the minimum wage to $22.50 (kina 22.96) per week. Ap-
 proximately 10 percent of private-sector wage earners are subject to the minimum
 wage, and the determination represents a setback, particularly for new and un-
 skilled workers. The minimum wage would not support a decent standard of living
 for a worker and family who exist solely on the cash economy. There is no means
 to judge statistically the effect of the new minimum wage, though employment in
 the formal sector continued to decline slightly. The Department of Labor has re-
 ceived no formal complaints that higher wage workers have been fired in order that
 a lower cost replacement might be hired, although union leaders claim that this has
 occurred. Minimum wage levels, allowances, rest periods, holidays, leave, and over-
 time are regulated by law. The workweek is limited by law to 42 hours (44 in rural
 areas).
 Enforcement of the Industrial Health and Safety Law and related regulations is
 the responsibility of the Department of Labor. The law requires that inspections
 take place on a regular basis, but, due to a shortage of inspectors, they occur only
 when requested by workers or unions. In 1992 businesses have been closed on sev-
 eral different occasions due to violation of safety laws. Health and safety regulations
 are still under revision.
 
 
 716
