 NEW ZEALAND
 New Zealand is'a parliamentary democracy, with executive
 authority vested in a 22-member cabinet led by a prime
 minister. The 97 members of the unicameral legislature include
 4 elected by those members of the native Maori minority who
 wish to be included on a separate electoral roll.
 Maori comprise approximately 12 percent of New Zealand's
 population of 3,427,000, while other Pacific islanders total
 about 3 percent. The rights of the native Maori minority have
 been the subject of increasing public attention in recent
 years. The Department of Maori Affairs is being phased out in
 favor of the Iwi Transition Agency, charged with overseeing the
 devolution of resp6nsibility'for Maori interests to Iwi
 (tribal) authorities.
 Niue and the Cook Islands are self-governing countries in free
 association with New Zealand. The island group of Tokelau is
 administered by New Zealand with limited but growing
 self-government. Inhabitants of all three hold local and New
 Zealand citizenship, and local law is compatible with New
 Zealand and British common law.
 The police and defense forces are responsible to and firmly
 controlled by civilian officials.
 New Zealand is one of the world's most efficient producers of
 agricultural products. The mainstay of its economy is the
 export of wool, meat, and dairy products. A small
 manufacturing sector is engaged'primarily in food processing,
 metal fabrication, and wood and paper products. While real
 annual economic growth has been low or negative in recent
 years, the free enterprise economy affords most New Zealanders
 a comfortable standard of living.
 Human rights are respected and protected in New Zealand. New
 Zealanders enjoy a wide range of freedoms and live under the
 rule of law. There is respect for minority rights and a6ncern
 for the economically deprived.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing
 Such killings do not occur.
 b. 'Disappearance
 There have been no instances of politically motivated
 disappearance.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 Torture and other forms of mistreatment are prohibited by law,
 and these prohibitions are respected in practice.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 New Zealanders enjoy freedom from arbitrary arrest, detention,
 and exile. The law provides for the writ of habeas corpus, and
 persons arrested in New Zealand are promptly charged. Legal
 
 
 948
 NEW ZEALAND
 aid is provided by the court to those who cannot afford to pay
 for a private attorney. Preventive detention is prohibited.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 New Zealand law and an independent judiciary assure a prompt
 and fair public trial. The rights of the accused are carefully
 observed and subject to public scrutiny.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The right to privacy is protected by law. The Government does
 not violate a person's privacy, the sanctity of the home, or
 the integrity of correspondence.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Freedom of speech and press are provided for in law and
 respected in practice. Several hundred newspapers and
 magazines are published throughout the country, reflecting a
 wide spectrum of political and social thought. The Government
 makes no attempt to censor the press, and opposition viewpoints
 are freely expressed.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Rights to peaceful assembly and association are recognized and
 respected.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 New Zealand enjoys a long tradition of religious tolerance.
 All faiths are given equal treatment under the law.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 New Zealanders are not subject to limitations on internal
 movement or resettlement. Foreign travel is unrestricted and
 the right to return is assured. To the extent of its
 resources, New Zealand accepts and resettles refugees and
 asylum seekers.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 The people freely elect their government. Two-major parties,
 National and Labour, dominate the political scene and have
 formed governments chosen in triennial elections for more than
 50 years. There are no restrictions on the formation of
 political parties, though smaller parties have historically
 been of little consequence in the national electoral process.
 New Zealand law provides for universal suffrage at age 18. No
 restrictions based upon sex, creed, or national origin limit
 participation in the political process. Maori, other
 minorities, and women regularly serve in Parliament and the
 Cabinet. Voting rates are high, and participation in political
 groups is common. Opposition groups freely voice their views
 and can influence government policies.
 In response to complaints that the current "first-past-the-post"
 electoral system unfairly disadvantages third parties, the
 
 
 949
 NEW ZEALAND
 Government has announced plans to hold a two-tiered referendum
 in 1992-93 on whether to adopt some form of proportional
 representation for the 1996 election. Both major political
 parties have expressed support for holding the referendum,
 although there is no clear consensus between them concerning
 whether proportional representation or which form of it should
 be adopted.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 New Zealand's-commitment to human rights is demonstrated by the
 efforts of both nongovernmental and official organizations to
 protect human rights and prevent discrimination.
 Nongovernmental organizations include: the New Zealand Council
 for Civil Liberties, the Citizens Association for Racial
 Equality, the New Zealand Chapter of the International
 Commission of Jurists, Amnesty International, and the National
 Council of Women. The ratification of the optional protocol to
 the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights in
 1989 allows individuals to request an independent U.N. Human
 Rights Committee investigation of alleged abuses of rights.
 The official but highly independent New Zealand Human Rights
 Commission and the Office of the Race Relations Conciliator
 work at the national and regional levels to adjudicate human
 rights and discrimination complaints.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 Discrimination based on the above factors is prohibited by
 law. Despite the historical absence of overt discrimination
 and the achievements and status of many, successful Maori in
 government and public life, some of the indigenous population
 remain marginally educated and economically disadvantaged. A
 relatively high percentage of Maori are unemployed and receive
 state assistance. They figure disproportionately in crime
 statistics and among the prison population.
 The 1840 Treaty of Waitangi, by which Maori chiefs ceded
 sovereignty to the British,crown, in recent years has become a
 focal point for many Maori seeking a greater economic and
 political voice. A special tribunal was established in 1975 to
 hear claims to land and other rights under the Treaty. The
 tribunal's role was strengthened by a 1989 court ruling that
 its decisions would be regarded as binding in the case of land
 held by state-owned enterprises.
 The New Zealand Human Right  Coriamission hears complaints of
 discrimination based on sex, marital statu, national or ethnic
 origin, and religious or ethical belief. The Government funds
 shelters, provides assistance for victims of violence, and
 prosecutes offenders.
 Violence against women has received increased public and
 governmental attention in recent years. The Crimes Amendment
 Act of 1986 increased protection for the victim during trial by
 allowing suppression of the victim's name and other details,
 and eliminated the exemption for spousal rape. In 1987 the
 police changed their policy on family violence, requiring that
 arrests be made instead of attempting mediation at the scene.
 Human rights organizations praise judges for supportively
 issuing "nonmolestation" and "nonviolence" restraining orders
 
 
 950
 NEW ZEALAND
 but complain that police continue to be reluctant to arrest
 offenders even when the offender has a history of violence.
 Women have become increasingly cognizant of their legal rights
 as evidenced by the number of claims by sexual abuse victims to
 the accident compensation corporation for "loss of the capacity
 for enjoyment of life." Assistance organizations for such
 victims have dramatically increased in numbers in recent years.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 New Zealand workers have unrestricted rights to establish and
 join organizations of their own choosing and to affiliate those
 organizations with other unions and international
 organizations. Unions-are protected from interference,
 suspension, and dissolution by the Government and, in fact,
 influence legislation and government policy. Unions have and
 freely exercise the right to strike. Public sector unions,
 however, are precluded from striking if work stoppages threaten
 public safety, and new legislation prohibits (in both the
 public and private sectors) strikes designed to enforce
 national wage awards.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 The right of labor unions to organize and bargain collectively
 is provided by law. Unions actively recruit members and engage
 in collective bargaining.
 Approximately half oZ all wage earners are represented by
 unions, and the level is dropping. The Employment Contracts
 Act, which became law May 15, ended compulsory membership in
 labor unions. This legislation also scrapped the past system
 of national awards, whereby one contract covered workers across
 the country and across industrial lines. Under the new law,
 employers may negotiate contracts with unions, with other
 voluntary associations of workers, or with individuals.
 Mediation and arbitration procedures are carried out
 independently of government control. A system of labor courts
 hears cases arising from disputes over interpretation of labor
 laws. In addition, the Arbitration Commission and the
 Mediation Service are available to handle wage disputes and
 assist in maintaining effective labor relations. There are no
 export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 All workers are protected from forced or compulsory labor by
 law and.in practice.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 Children under the age of 15 may not be employed without
 special government approval and must not work between the hours
 of 10 p.m. and 6 a.m. These laws are effectively enforced by
 the Department of Labour.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 New Zealand enforces a 40-hour workweek, a minimum of 3 weeks'
 annual paid vacation for all employees, and observance of 11
 paid public holidays. The government-mandated minimum wage is
 adequate for a decent standard of living. In most cases,
 
 
 951
 NEW ZEALAN
 minimum wage recipients also receive a variety of welfare
 benefits. Most workers earn more than the minimum wage.
 New Zealand has an extensive body of law and regulations
 governing health and safety issues. Rules are enforced by
 Department of Labour inspectors who have the power to shut down
 equipment if necessary, and unions may file safety complaints
 on behalf of workers.
 
 
 952
