 OMAN
 Until the present Sultan seized power from his father
 in 1970, Oman was generally considered to have the most
 authoritarian and reactionary government in the Arabian
 Peninsula. Since that date, despite the serious
 threat to Oman's survival posed until 1976 by the
 Dhofar insurgency, the Sultanate has made substantial
 progress in providing its citizens a freer and more
 prosperous life. The Dhofar conflict, mounted by in-
 digenous leftists supported by irregular forces from the
 neighboring People's Democratic Republic of Yemen, has
 virtually ended after several years of fighting.
 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Torture-
 The Omani criminal code prohibits the use of torture
 and this prohibition seems to have been observed in
 practice. Inquiries initiated by Amnesty International
 in 1975 failed to confirm allegations that government
 forces employed torture during their suppression of the
 Dhofar insurgency.
 b. Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punish-
 ment
 In the early 1970s, there probably were isolated in-
 stances of cruel, inhuman or degrading punishment in
 connection with the Dhofar insurgency. There are no
 recent reports of such practices.
 c. Arbitrary Arrest or Imprisonment
 The Omani criminal code prohibits arbitrary arrest.
 Citizens can petition the courts and the Sultan for
 remedy of violations of their rights. The power of
 the state to arrest and detain is defined by law. Vio-
 lations of the law have not come to our attention,
 although they may occasionally take place.
 d. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Fair and public trials are provided for in both
 
 (394)
 
 
 395
 traditional Islamic law and the new criminal code. U.S.
 Government officials-attending sessions of both Islamic
 and police courts found the procedures to be in accord-
 ance with law.
 e. Invasion of the Home
 Warrants are not required for police searches of private
 premises. Such searches are probably infrequent.
 2. Governmental Policies Relating to the Fulfillment of
 Such Vital Needs as Food, Shelter, Health Care and
 Education
 Since 1970 the Omani Government has followed liberal
 policies in providing for basic needs for the poor and
 in supporting education. Modest oil reserves and heavy
 defense expenditures during the Dhofar insurgency
 limited the financial resources available for social
 welfare.
 Oman is emerging from backwardness and poverty as a
 result of its recent oil wealth. Substantial dis-
 parities of wealth between the merchant'class and the
 rest of the population exist. It is impossible to
 dismiss the persistent allegations of bribery in the
 awarding of government contracts; it is equally
 impossible to determine the extent to which resources
 are thereby signiflicantly diverted from the poor. In
 the last year, the government has moved against one case
 of financial malfeasance by government officials.
 3. Respect for Civil and Political Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Thought, Speech, Press, Religion, and
 Assembly
 Oman remains a traditional society. There is no
 national assembly. Freedom of the press, of assembly,
 and of speech is circumscribed. There are no restric-
 tions on religious practices. Although labor organiza-
 tions are not expressly forbidden, Oman has no organized
 labor movement.
 
 
 396
 Omani women have only recently begun to emerge from
 traditional isolation and are not yet active in public
 life. They rarely appear in public unveiled.
 b. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel and Emigration
 Omanis may travel freely throughout the country except
 in the area of the Dhofar insurgency. Omanis may also
 emigrate and travel abroad freely.
 c. Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 There are neither political parties nor elections in
 Oman. Citizens have access to government leaders
 through personal appeal, which is sanctioned by Islamic
 and tribal practice. Oman remains essentially conser-
 vative in its recognition of political rights.
 4. Government Attitude and Record Regarding-Inter-
 national and Non-Governmental Investigation of
 Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Given Oman's cultural traditions and history, the pre-
 sent government represents a dramatic step towards
 enlightened rule. The government supports economic
 development and modernization of Omani society. The
 general condition of social and political freedom is
 much improved.
 International concern has not generally focused on human
 rights in Oman. The government did refuse to receive a
 proposed Amnesty International mission in 1972 when the
 Dhofar insurgency was at. its peak.
 
 
