 OMAN
 The Sultanate of Oman is an absolute monarchy without
 popularly elected representative institutions or political
 parties at any level. Sultan Qaboos Bin Said al Said
 celebrated the 20th anniversary of his accession in 1990 and
 is the 14th ruler of the current dynasty. The Cabinet of
 Ministers is appointed by and responsible to the Sultan. An
 appointed 55-member State Consultative Council, formed in
 1981, functions as a purely advisory body on economic and
 social questions. Sultan Qaboos has continued the al Said's
 long tradition of firm control over all important matters
 affecting the State, but also.has brought notables from the
 tribal system of the interior into the national administration..
 Oman's -strategic location on the south shore of the Strait of
 Hormuz exposed the country to the increased tension in the
 Persian Gulf area during the 1980's, and the Government has
 continued to devote considerable rovenue to defense. National
 security is an area of ongoing major concern. Oman-has
 continued to devote considerable revenue to defense because of
 external threats in a dangerous region. There has been no
 credible internal security threat since the defeat of the
 insurrection in the southern province of Dhofar in 1975. The
 security services are large and efficient but are not
 generally regarded as intrusive.
 Almost totally undeveloped when Sultan Qaboos came to power in
 1970, Oman has used its modest oil revenues to achieve a
 significant improvement in living standards for most of its
 citizens. Oman's free market economy remains heavily
 dependent on petroleum exports, and public expenditures, the
 driving force of the economy, are determined by the price of
 oil.
 In 1990 a number of human rights in Oman remained tightly
 restricted, particularly the freedoms of expression and
 association, the right of citizens to change the government,
 and worker rights. There continued to be various forms of
 discrimination against women as well as occasional reports of
 abuse of foreign workers. Civil and political rights are not
 formally codified; however, in the absence of any attempt to
 exercise these rights, the integrity of the individual is
 usually respected.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing
 There were no known political or other extrajudicial killings
 in Oman.
 b. Disappearance
 No cases of disappearance were reported.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 Torture or other forms of cruel punishment are not
 countenanced or systematically practiced by Omani
 authorities. Amputations, stonings, and relhted penalties
 
 
 1579
 OMAN
 under Islamic law have not been practiced for many years.
 There have been occasional reports in previous years of
 physical abuse of prisoners while in official custody; none
 were known to have been made in 1990.     -
 However, there was a report in 1990 of convict labor gangs
 being made to perform punitive, physically grueling make-work
 tasks in the hot desert. Prison conditions are harsh, with
 temperatures sometimes exceeding 120 degrees in cells without
 climate control or proper ventilation.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Although Omani law does not provide for habeas corpus or its
 equivalent, the period of detention before trial in criminal
 cases is usually short. Police notification to. the family,
 however, is often slow. Under current Omani procedures, the
 police have 24 hours to submit papers to a magistrate showing
 the grounds for holding an arrestee. The magistrate may then
 allow the police up to 14 days to- gather further information.
 If additional time is needed, the magistrate may grant the
 police an extension not to exceed 70 days. Incommunicado
 detention is not usually practiced, but attorneys are not
 always permitted unfettered: access to- their clients. In the
 past there have been infrequent abuses of the power of
 arrest. The criminal code imposes penalties for unjustified
 arrest or detention, and citizens have several channels
 through which they can seek redress of a grievance against law
 enforcement authorities. These-channels appear to offer
 effective redress in most cases, particularly in the rural
 areas. Over the last few years, suits have been filed by
 citizens- against police officers for arbitrary arrest. These-
 suits were settled out of court-and it is unknown if any
 disciplinary action was taken.
 All Omanis who were in exile before 1970 under the previous
 Sultan were granted amnesty, and presumably all whQ wanted to
 return to the Sultanate have done so. Oman does- not practice
 exile as a form of punishment.
 e. Denial of Fair PubLlic Trial
 Oman's current criminal code, enacted in 1974, does not
 explicitly state the rights of the accused-during the criminal
 process, nor does it have rules for admission.of evidence
 during trfals or codified procedures for entering cases into
 the criminal system. A draft criminal code modeled on the
 Zrench system has been completed and awaits:the-Sultan's
 signature.
 Judicial practice in Oman conforms in most part to Islamic
 prescriptions for a fair trial before experienced and
 impartial judges. Oman's criminal judges are professionals,
 trained by legal institutions in several Arab countries. In a
 criminal trial the accused is presumed innocent. He may be
 represented by an attorney, but this is not a legal
 requirement, and the Government will not pay for counsel.
 Trial is before a single judge. There are no jury trials, and
 there is no right to a public trial. The judge, at his
 discretion, may release the accused if he determines the
 detention is illegal or may set bail without any restrictions
 on the amount required. The accusd, or his lawyer, may read
 the police "charge sheet" which summarizes the case against
 him, but there is no procedure for seeking the exclusion of
 any of its elements. Questions as to the reliability of
 
 
 1580
 OMAN
 statements and the authenticity of documents may be raised in
 a closing argument to the judge. During the trial, only the
 judge questions witnesses, who may be called by the judge,
 prosecution, or defense. There is no questioning or
 cross-examination by counsel. A verdict and sentencing are
 frequently pronounced within 1 day after the trial's end.
 Felony verdicts are final, except for appeal to the state
 advisor for penal affairs. A capital sentence requires the
 Sultan's ratification.
 Beyond the civilian courts, which deal with misdemeanor and
 felony criminal cases, there are Shari'a courts, which handle
 family law, and provincial governors who adjudicate minor
 matters in rural areas. There are also military tribunals,
 before which civilians do not appear, and a committee for the
 resolution of commercial disputes, which does not handle
 criminal matters. A rarely used security court system handles
 internal security cases. There have been no reports of
 political prisoners in Oman.
 The various judicial systems are subordinate to the Sultan,
 and in most cases they operate independently, but they are
 susceptible to his influence in cases of particular interest,
 especially those concerning national security.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 There is a widespread fear of government eavesdropping, and
 Omanis are guarded in their speech and written communication.
 Warrants are not required to search private residences,
 offices, or vehicles; such searches, as well as the monitoring
 of telephones and private correspondence, are confined to
 cases where the Government perceives a security threat or
 criminal activity.
 Although there is no government policy to discourage the use
 of other languages in speeech or print or in religious
 instruction in the home, the Government has increasingly
 insisted that correspondence with it, and public and legal
 documents, be in Arabic. A 1986 law banned, with a few
 exceptions, marriage between Omanis and foreigners. The law,
 promulgated as an effort to stem the erosion of Omani culture,
 is widely resented.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 There are no provisions in law to protect freedom of speech or
 freedom of the press; Criticism of the Sultan in any form or
 medium is prohibited by law. Criticism of individual
 officials, agencies, and their programs is tolerated, but is
 given scant media coverage. The Government controls all radio
 and television broadcasting and provides no coverage of
 dissenting viewpoints. The 1984 press and publication law
 mandates government control over all printed matter, including
 newspapers and magazines. The law provides for strict prior
 censorship of all information in printed form in both domestic
 and imported publications. Imported printed material is
 carefully screened by government censors, and Omani
 publications operate under government guidelines on tone and
 content.
 
 
 1581
 
 OMAN
 The Government owns two of the three daily newspapers, and
 subsidies to the remaining daily and several privately owned
 periodicals provide an effective incentive for toeing the
 line. Editorials and news coverage largely reflect the
 Government's views, though some leeway on foreign policy
 issues is tolerated.
 Publications and video and audio cassettes arriving in Oman
 from foreign countries are censored for politically,
 culturally, or sexually offensive material and are
 occasionally banned. While there are no formal lists of
 objectionable material available to the public, the censor's
 attention focuses on articles that directly attack or embarass
 the Government.
 Sultan Qaboos University, Oman's only institution of higher
 learning, graduated its first class in 1990. Courses in
 politics and lectures on controversial subjects are
 prohibited, and access to the campus by the nonuniversity
 community is linited.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Freedom of assembly is not guaranteed by law, and public
 gatherings do not take place without government sponsorship.
 Associations of any kind must register with the Government,
 and those that oppose the predominant social or political
 views of the Sultanate are prohibited.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Oman is an Islamic state. Non-Muslims in the Sultanate are
 prohibited from proselytizing, and conversion to Islam is
 encouraged and publicized. Virtually all Omani citizens
 adhere to one of the Islamic sects, with the exception of the
 small Hindu community made up of Omani citizens of Indian
 origin. Ibadhi Muslims form the dominant group of Muslims in
 Oman and include the royal family. However. there- may be as
 many or more Sunni Muslims- in the country, and members of both
 the Sunni and small Shi'a communities are found in all walks
 of life in both the public and private sectors. There are-
 ample facilities for training of Muslim clergy and for
 religious instruction. Non-Muslim foreigners, both Christian
 and Hindu, are allowed to worship at designated locations on
 land donated by the Sultan. Although there is no indigenous
 Jewish community, Jews are not barred from living and working
 in Oman. Religion is not a factor in gaining entry into Oman.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreigr
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 With the exception of a few military areas, there are no
 restrictions on travel by Omanis within their country. The
 development of a modern transportation system over the last 20
 years has facilitated travel to heretofore inaccessible areas
 throughout the country. Omanis living abroad before 1970 have
 returned to Oman in large numbers with official encouragement
 and without legal obstacles. Thousands of ethnic Omani
 refugees from east Africa, particularly Tanzania, have been
 resettled and integrated successfully. Many Omanis who sought
 refuge in Yemen during the 1965-75 Dhofar rebellion have
 returned to Oman with official encouragement. Male Omanis may
 travel abroad freely; a woman must have authorization from her
 husband or father to obtain a passport.
 
 
 1582
 OMAN
 Oman doesinot have a standard policy on refugees, who are
 dealt with by the Government-on an ad hoe basis. The
 Sultanate traditionally has.not harbored refugees, but as a
 special-case has accepted for temporary settlement several
 thousand Kuwaiti refugees-and over the last 10-years has
 assisted some non-Arab, Muslim refugees to-find accommodations
 in third countries. Oman's tight control over the entry of
 foreigners into-the country has effectively screened out
 would-be refugees.
 Section 3 -Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Oman has no formal democratic-institutions, and its citizens
 do not, therefore- have the ability peacefully-to change their
 leaders or the political. system. Oman is an absolute monarchy
 in which the Sultan has the final word on all government
 decisions, in-theory and in practice. The next successor to
 the ionarchy will probably be determined through a consensus
 of the royalifamily and leading public figures. There are no
 political parties, .legal opposition groups, or elections, and
 -there is no constitution. Citizens-have indirect access to
 senior officials through the traditional practice of
 petitioning local leaders foriredress of grievances.
 Successful redress depends on the effectiveness of personal
 contactnand the status and-influence of the intermediary. The
 people-have free access to their Government at the level of
 provincial governor; the provincial and tribal leaders in turn
 have access to the Sultan, his advisers, and ministry
 officials to present the views of their constituents. The
 Sultan makes an annual 3-week tour around the country to
 listen directly to his subjects" problems.
 In rural areas, government reflects the tribal nature of Omani
 society, as traditional elites dominate the tribal and
 appointive town councils. Final authority outside Muscat,
 however, is with the provincial governors, who are named by
 the Sultan. In an effort to broaden participation in
 government, the Sultan formed the State Consultative Council
 in 1981, with 55 members drawn from the Government, business
 community, and outlying districts. While this appointive
 council includes members of every significant ethnic,
 geographic, and religious group, there are no women
 representatives. The Council's role remains advisory and is
 confined to the social and economic-spheres.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The Government declined to receive a proposed Amnesty
 International mission in 1972 during the insurgency in
 Dhofar. Since then, there have been no known requests by
 international human rights organizations to visit Oman. There
 are no independent organizations to monitor human rights
 violations, and public criticism of the Government's human
 rights practices would face major obstacles under the existing
 restrictions on freedoms-of speech and association.
 .Section 5 -,Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 Omani society's interpretation of Islamic precepts on the
 status of women results in de jure and de facto discrimination
 
 
 1583
 OMAN
 in a number of areas. Women have shared in the benefits of
 the social and economic growth of recent years, and schooling
 for girls is available to the same extent as for boys in urban
 areas but not in rural areas. The level of education that
 girls attain remains well below that of boys. A few women
 have reached high positions in the private and public sectors,
 but by and large the occupational areas most available to
 women are limited to the fields of teaching, secretarial work,
 and medicine.
 By law, women receive equal pay and benefits for equal work.
 The Government, by far the largest employer of women in the
 country, enforces this regulation within its ministries.
 Islamic inheritance laws are strictly interpreted in Oman. By
 law, a woman in Oman can receive only one-eighth of her
 husband's property when he dies. Daughters receive less than
 sons. In urban, educated families, many women have property
 in their own names; less-educated women do not usually have
 that protection. Because of the relative lack of education
 among older women, many are unaware of their rights and are
 reluctant to use the court system.
 Violence against women is not publicly discussed in Oman, and
 no statistics are available on its extent. In a few towns in
 the interior and in the southern Dhofari region, female
 circumcision is practiced. The total number of cases
 nationwide is thought to be relatively small. However, in
 some regions, such as the Dhofar, the practice is a
 significant health hazard. According to the local press, in
 Salalah alone there-were 114 cases of infant female
 circumcision requiring hospitalization in the first 5 months
 of 1990. The type of circumcision practiced is "sunna," the
 least radical form, which involves removal of the foreskin of
 the clitoris. In a statement to the local press in June, the
 Grand Mufti of Oman said that female circumcision is,
 according to Islamic teachings, desirable but not compulsory.
 He recommended-that if parents choose to have their daughter
 circumcised, the operation be performed with proper medical
 care.
 The gains achieved by a small minority of women are largely
 irrelevant to the great majority, both in the towns and in the
 rural areas, who live their lives within the confines of the
 house and the local marketplace. All but the youngest females
 in the rural areas are illiterate. This general lack of
 female education, combined with communal and tribal customs
 that dictate a subsidiary role for women, makes it difficult
 for most adult women to participate adequately in the modern
 sector. Educational facilities for girls (including
 university training) have been expanded, but communal and
 tribal customs continue for now to work against equal
 opportunity for women.
 While there are no formal government restrictions against
 Omanis of east African origin, many of them believe they face
 de facto discrimination in employment opportunities. In many
 cases they write inadequate Arabic, fluency in which is
 increasingly required.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 - a. The Right of Association
 Labor unions are illegal in Oman. Oman's labor law specifies
 that "it is absolutely forbidden to provoke a strike for any
 
 
 1584
 OMAN
 reason." Oman is not a member of the International Labor
 Organization (ILO).
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 There are no provisions for collective bargaining for wages
 and working conditions in Oman. Wages are set by employers
 within the guidelines delineated by the Ministry of Labor.
 The labor law, promulgated'in 1973 and amended a number of
 times since, provides procedures for pursuing a "collective
 grievance" through the Ministry of Labor and, ultimately, to a
 three-member arbitration board which is empowered to make
 binding decisions. The arbitration board is used extensively.
 by employees, particularly lower paid workers such as clerks,
 mechanics, and salesmen. The draft of a new labor law still
 awaits action by the Sultan. The 1973 labor law (as amended)
 is a comprehensive document defining conditions of employment
 for both Omanis and foreign workers, who constitute 50 percent
 of the work force. Work rules must be approved by the
 Ministry of Labor and posted conspicuously in the workplace.
 Any employee (Omani or expatriate) may file a grievance with
 the labor court, which is presided over by one of six tribunal
 judges. The court has a busy docket and sessions convene
 daily. Court procedures are informal and summary in nature.
 The labor courts reportedly operate impartially and generally
 give workers the benefit of the doubt in grievance hearings.
 There are no export processing zones in Oman. The labor law
 applies equally throughout the sultanate.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 Forced or compulsory labor is prohibited by law, but some
 former slaves still live out their lives in traditional
 servitude to their former masters.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 Under the labor law, children, defined as those under the age
 of 13, are prohibited from working. Juveniles, defined as
 those over 13 years and under 16 years, are prohibited from
 performing evening or night work or strenuous labor.
 Juveniles are also forbiddea to work overtime or on weekends
 or holidays without ministry permission. Education is not
 compulsory, but the Government encourages school attendance.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 The labor law states that the Government can determine the
 minimum wage and make adjustments according to economic
 circumstances. Minimum wage guidelines do not cover domestic
 servants, farmers, government employees, or workers in small
 businesses. The minimum monthly salary for Omani graduates of
 secondary and vocational schools employed in the private
 sector is fixed at $390 per month, with an additional housing
 and transportation allowance of $130. Nongraduate Omanis
 receive a minimum of $208 per month, with a housing and
 transportation allowance of $52. The minimum wage is not an
 issue for most Omanis and mid- to upper-level expatriates,
 since their wages greatly exceed that level. The statutory
 minimum wage for foreign workers is $150 per month (plus
 benefits), but it is not generally enforced for menial
 workers, and employers usually pay less. Expatriate manual
 laborers and clerks (mainly South Asians) generally earn
 between $100 and $125 per month, plus lodging. Their
 compensation is sufficient to maintain an adequate standard of
 living-in Oman and to send a portion of'their income home.
 
 
 1585
 
 OMAN
 Many expatriates, including maids, are provided annual or
 biannual round-trip tickets to their country of origin by
 their employers. Omanis working in the private sector are
 issued labor cards bearing the name of the employee, his
 company, and his job. The-private sector workweek is 40 to 45
 hours (less for Muslims during Ramadan). The workweek is 5
 days in the public sector and generally 5 1/2 days in the
 private sector.
 Supplemental income through compensated overtime work is
 common for lower level employees. Every worker has the right
 to 15 days of annual leave during the first 3 years of
 employment and 30 days per year thereafter. Some expatriate
 maids and menial laborers not protected by the labor law are
 required to work long hours uuder substandard working
 conditions by a few employers. Expatriate workers' passports
 are commonly held by the employer, who-is legally responsible
 for their actions while In Omar.
 Oman's labor law and a subsequent 1976 proclamation "governing
 compensation for occupational injuries and illnesses" cover in
 detail issues of occupational safety and access to medical
 treatment. Employees covered by the labor law can recover
 compensation for industrial injury or illness through medical
 insurance provided by the employer. The health and safety
 standard codes are scrupulously enforced by inspectors who
 make frequent on-site inspections, as required by law. The
 laws on child and female labor and conditions of work are
 effectively and uniformly enforced by inspectors throughout
 the country.
 
 
 1586
