 OMAN
 The Sultanate of Oman is a monarchy which has been ruled by the Al Bu Sa'id
 family since the middle of the 18th century. It has no political parties or elected
 representative institutions. The current sultan is Qaboos Bin Sa'id Al Sa'id who ac-
 ceded in 1970. Although the Sultan retains firm control over all important policy
 issues, he has brought tribal leaders and other notables into the Government. Much
 decisionmaking is by consensus among these leaders according to longstanding tra-
 dition. In 1991 the Sultan established a 59-seat Consultative Council, or Majlis Ash-
 Shura, which replaced an older advisory body. Council members are selected from
 lists of nominees proposed by each of the 59 wilayats (regions). After the country's
 first national census in 1993, the Sultan expanded the membership of the new
 Council to 80 seats. The Council has no formal legislative powers, but may question
 government ministers and recommend changes to new laws on economic and social
 policy.
 The entire security apparatus falls under the authority of the Ministry of Palace
 Office Affairs which coordinates all intelligence and security policies. The internal
 security service investigates all matters related to internal security. The Royal
 Oman Police performs regular police duties, provides security at airports, acts as
 immigration officials, and maintains a small coast guard. There were no confirmed
 reports indicating that these agencies were involved in human rights abuses in
 1994.
 Since 1970, Oman has used its modest oil revenue to make impressive economic
 progress and improve public access to health care, education and social services. The
 Government seeks to diversify the economy and stimulate private investment.
 
 
 1156
 
 The Government continues to restrict or deny important human rights. In 1994
 the Government detained 200 people in connection with an alleged plot to desta-
 bilize the country. The Government charged 131 of these suspects with sedition and
 tried them in secret before the State Security Court. The detentions and secret
 trials raised serious questions about freedom from arbitrary arrest and the right to
 due process. Other human rights restrictions included infringements on the free-
 doms of expression and association. The Government does not guarantee full rights
 for workers and women. As a practical matter, the people do not have the right to
 change their government.
 Nonetheless, the Government took several steps in 1994 to address human rights
 concerns. It increased the number of seats on the Consultative Council and allowed
 women to take part in nominations for Council members. In November the Govern-
 ment selected two women to serve on the Council. The Government also joined the
 International Labor Organization (ILO) and began to draft a new labor law that ad-
 dresses worker rights.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no reports of political or
 extrajudicial killing.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 There were no confirmed reports of torture. However, there were unconfirmed re-
 ports that security forces physically mistreated an undetermined number of persons
 arrested for subversion. These reports were not confirmed.
 The Government severely restricts access to prisons. However, prison conditions
 reportedly meet internationally recognized minimum standards.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-In general the police obtain warrants
 prior to making arrests but are not required by law to do so. The authorities must
 obtain court orders to hold suspects in pretrial detention. Within 24 hours of arrest,
 the police are required to file charges or ask a magistrate judge to order continued
 detention. The police do not always follow these procedures, and in one confirmed
 case in 1994 an individual was detained for more than 72 hours without charge.
 Judges may order detentions for 14 days to allow investigation and may grant ex-
 tensions if necessary. There is a system of bail.
 The police do not routinely notify a detainee's family or in the case of a foreign
 worker the worker's sponsor of the detention. The authorities post a list of persons
 scheduled for trial near the magistrate court building in Muscat. While there were
 no reports of incommunicado detention in 1994, the police do not always permit at-
 torneys and family members to visit detainees. Judges occasionally intercede to en-
 sure that security officials allow such visits.
 In May, June, and September, security forces detained at least 200 persons, and
 questioned at least a hundred more, for their alleged membership in a subversive
 group. The Government later tried 131 of the detainees for conspiracy to subvert
 national unity and security and the misuse of Islam (see Section i.e.). The authori-
 ties stated that the police obtained the necessary court orders for the detentions and
 that formal charges were brought as quickly as possible. However, the lack of public
 information about the cases has raised questions about the possible arbitrary nature
 of the arrests and detentions-and the fairness of the trials. In December the au-
 thorities announced that family members and friends may visit the prisoners, but
 had earlier denied such visits.
 The Government does not practice exile as a form of punishment.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The udicial system does not always ensure fair
 trials based on internationally accepted norms. The judiciary comprises the mag-
 istrate courts, which adjudicate misdemeanors and criminal matters; the Islamic, or
 Shari'a, courts, which adjudicate personal status cases such as divorce and inherit-
 ance; the Authority for the Settlement of Commercial Disputes (ASCD); the Labor
 Welfare Board; and the Real Estate Committee, which hears tenant-landlord dis-
 putes. A State Security Court tries cases involving national security. Although it is
 administratively distinct from the other courts, magistrate court judges have pre-
 sided over trials in the State Security Court.
 The various courts are subordinate to the Sultan and subject to his influence. The
 Sultan appoints all judges, acts as a court of final appeal, and intercedes in cases
 of particular interest, especially in national security cases. However, there have
 been no reported instances in which the Sultan has overturned a decision of the
 ASCD or the magistrate courts.
 
 
 1157
 The Criminal Code does not specify the rights of the accused. There are no writ-
 ten rules of evidence, or codified procedures for entring cases into the criminal sys-
 tem, or any legal provision for a public trial. Criminal procedures have developed
 by tradition and precedents in the magistrate courts. In criminal cases, the police
 provide defendants with the written charges against them, defendants are presumed
 innocent, and have the right to present evidence and confront witnesses. The pros-
 ecution and the defense question witnesses through the judge, who is usually the
 ony person to question witnesses in court.
 There are no jury trials: a single judge tries misdemeanors; a panel of three
 judges tries felonies and secuity offenses. Magistrate court judges must be citizens.
 Public prosecutors are senior police officers. They may bring additional charges after
 defense attorneys have inspected the charge sheet or during trial
 A detainee may hire an attorney but has no explicit right to be represented by
 counsel. The Government does not pay for the legal representation of indigents.
 Judges often pronounce the verdict and sentenc within 1 day after the completion
 of a trial. Defendants may appeal jail sentences longer than 3 months and fines over
 the equivalent of $1,300 to a three-judge panel. Defendants accused of national secu-
 rity offenses and serious felonies do nothave the right ofappeal. Death sentences,
 which are rare, require the Sultan's approval.
 The Government tried 131 persons for subversion in secret before the State Secu-
 rity Court, which issued verdicts on November 12 (see Section 1.d.). The Court sen-
 tenced two defendants to death and the others from 3 to 15 years in prison. The
 Sultan later commuted the death sentences to prison terms. The defendants did not
 receive a fair trial by international norms.
 There are no known political prisoners. However, the secrecy of the subversion
 trials prevents any independent assessment of the Government's assertion that the
 defendants were actual subversives found guilty of plotting to destabilize the coun-
 try.
 f, Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The po-
 lice are not required by law to obtain search warrants. There is a widespread belief
 that the Government eavesdrops on both oral and written communications, and
 Omanis are guarded in both areas. Citizens must obtain permission from the Min-
 istry of Interior to marry foreigners.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-There is no legal protection for free speech or
 press. The law prohibits any criticism of the Sultan in any form or medium. The
 authorities tolerate criticism of government officials and agencies, but such criticism
 rarely receives media coverage.
 The 1984 Press and Publication Law authorizes the Government to censor all do-
 mestic and imported publications. Ministry of Information censors may act against
 any material regarded as politically, culturally, or sexually offensive. However, jour-
 nalists and writers generally censor themselves to avoid government harassment.
 Editorials reflect the Government's views, although the authorities tolerate some
 criiicism on foreign issues. The Government discourages in-depth reporting on con-
 troversial domestic issues, and seeks to influence privately owned dailies and peri-
 odicals by subsidizing their operating costs. In late August, all four daily news-
 papers reported the arrest of the 200 alleged subversives only once-by publishing
 the dispatch of the government-owned Oman News Agency without further com-
 ment.
 On several occasions in 1994, the Government prohibited the entry onto the mar-
 ket of several foreign newspapers. The authorities prevented distribution of the Au-
 gust 6 edition of the London-based Arabic daily A1-Hayat, reportedly because it con-
 tained some statements regarded as critical of the Majlis Ash-Shura, an& of the No-
 vember 7 edition of the Financial Times, reportedly because it contained an article
 critical of the Government's economic policy. Customs officials sometimes confiscate
 video cassette tapes and erase offensive material. The tapes may or may not be re-
 turned to their owners.
 The Government controls the local radio and television companies. They do not
 air any politically controversial material. The Government does not allow the estab-
 lishment of privately owned radio and television companies. However, the availabil-
 ity of satellite dishes has made foreign broadcast information accessible to the pub-
 lic.
 The appropriate government authority, such as the Sultan Qaboos University, the
 police, or the relevant ministry must approve cultural events, including plays, con-
 certs, lectures, and seminars. Most organizations avoid controversial issues for fear
 the authorities may cancel their events. Academic freedom is restricted, particularly
 
 
 1158
 regarding controversial matters, including politics. Professors may be dismissed for
 going beyond acceptable boundaries.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The law does not guarantee
 freedom of assembly. The Government regards all private associations as illegal un-
 less lawfully registered. The Ministry of Social Affairs and Labor must approve the
 establishment of all associations and their by-laws. The Government uses the power
 to license associations as the power to control the political environment. It does not
 license groups regarded as a threat to the predominant social or political views of
 the Sultanate.
 All public gatherings require government sponsorship. The authorities do not al-
 ways enforce this requirement, and unauthorized gatherings take place without gov-
 ernment approval. In 1994 the Government increased restrictions on most types of
 public gatherings (see Section 2.c.).
 c. Freedom of Religion.-Islam is the state religion. Most Omanis are badhi or
 Sunni Muslims, but there is also a minority of Shi'a Muslims. Non-Muslims are free
 to worship at churches and temples built on land donated by the Sultan. There are
 many Christian denominations which utilize two plots of donated land on which two
 Catholic and two Protestant churches have been built. The Government prohibits
 non-Muslims from proselytizing Muslims. It also prohibits non-Muslim groups from
 publishing religious material, although imported printed material may be brought
 into the country. Members of all religions and sects are free to maintain links with
 coreligionists abroad and undertake foreign travel for religious purposes.
 The 1994 restrictions on most types of public gatherings resulted in a substantial
 curtailment of non-Muslim religious celebrations. For example, the authorities did
 not grant permission to the Hindu and Zoroastrian communities to celebrate some
 of their religious festivals in public.
 The police monitor mosque sermons to ensure that the preachers do not discuss
 political topics and stay within the state-approved orthodoxy of Islam. Security
 forces reportedly arrested a mosque preacher in the city of Salalah for his alleged
 association with an unauthorized Islamic group.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Government does not restrict travel within the country except to
 military areas. While a man may travel abroad freely, a woman must have author-
 ization from her husband, father, or nearest male relative to obtain a passport.
 The Government does not have a policy on refugees or a tradition of harboring
 stateless or undocumented aliens. Tight control over the entry of foreigners into the
 country has effectively screened out would-be refugees. However, in 1994 the Gov-
 ernment offered temporary refuge to several thousand Yemenis displaced by the
 civil war in Yemen.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Oman is an autocracy in which the Sultan retains the ultimate authority on all
 important foreign and domestic issues. The country has no formal democratic politi-
 cal institutions, and its citizens do not have the ability peacefully to change their
 leaders or the political system.
 There is no constitution, political parties, or elections. Citizens have indirect ac-
 cess to senior officials through the traditional practice of petitioning their patrons,
 usually the local governor, or wali, for redress of grievances. Successful redress de-
 pends on the effectiveness of the patron's access to appropriate decisionmakers. The
 Sultan appoints the governors. The Sultan makes an annual 3-week tour of the
 country, accompanied by his ministers, to listen directly to his subjects' problems.
 In 1991 Sultan Qaboos established a Consultative Council, or Majlis Ash-Shura.
 In 1994 he expanded the number of Council seats to 80 from the original 59, a move
 which allocated two members for districts with a higher population. The Govern-
 ment selected the Council members from several nominees elected in caucuses of
 prominent persons in each district. In 1994 four women were nominated for Council
 seats; two of them were selected to serve.
 The Council has no formal legislative powers. The Council is not an effective
 check on the Sultan who issues all laws by decree. However, it serves as a conduit
 of information between the people and the government ministries. No serving gov-
 ernment official is eligible to be a Council member. The Council may question gov-
 ernment ministers, review all draft laws on social and economic policy, and rec-
 ommend legislative changes to the Sultan, who makes the final decision.
 
 
 1159
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 The Government prohibits the establishment of human rights groups. The exist-
 ing restrictions on the freedom of speech and association do not permit any activity
 or speech critical of the Government. There were no known requests by inter-
 national human rights organizations to visit Oman in 1994.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 Women.-Women face many forms of discrimination. Most women live their lives
 within the confines of the home. Widespread illiteracy hampers women's ability to
 own property, participate in the modern sector of the economy, or even inform them-
 selves o their own rights. Government officials frequ, ently deny women land grants
 or housing loans, and prefer to conduct business with a woman's husband or other
 male relative. Many educated women face job discrimination because prospective
 employers fear they might quit to marry or raise families. Government grants for
 study abroad are limited almost exclusively to males.
 Many aspects of Islamic tradition also discriminate against women. Islamic law
 favors male heirs in adjudicating inheritance claims. Many women are reluctant to
 take an inheritance dispute to court for fear of alienating the family.
 Some educated women have attained positions of authority in government, busi-
 ness, and the media. An estimated 14 percent of all civil servants are women. Two
 women also serve in the Consultative Council. In both the public and private sec-
 tors, women are entitled to liberal maternity leave and equal pay for equal work.
 The bureaucracy, the country's largest employer of women, observes such regula-
 tions, as do many private sector employers. Women constitute roughly half of the
 3,000 students at the Sultan Qaboos University and are a majority in the colleges
 of arts, education, science, business, and Islamic studies.
 There is no evidence of a pattern of spousal abuse but information is scant and
 difficult to collect. Doctors do not have a legal responsibility to report either spouse
 or child abuse cases to the courts. Battered women may ile a complaint with the
 police, but more often seek family intervention to protect them from violent domestic
 situations. There have been reports that employers or male coworkers have sexually
 harassed foreign females employed in such positions as domestic servants and hos-
 pital nurses. Foreign women employed as domestic servants and garment workers
 have complained that their employers have withheld their salaries and that govern-
 ment officials have been unresponsive to their grievances.
 Children.-The Government has made the health, education, and general welfare
 of children a budgetary priority. There is no pattern of familial or other child abuse.
 Communities in the interior and in the Dhofar region still practice female genital
 mutilation. Experts believe that the number of such cases is small and declining an-
 nually.
 National/Racial/Ethnic Minorities.-Citizens of East African origin complain that
 they frequently face job discrimination in both the public and private sectors. Some
 public istitutions reportedly favor hiring members of one or another regional, trib-
 al, or religious group. However, no group is banned from employment.
 Religous Minorities.-Some members of the Shi'a Musim minority claim they
 face discrimination in employment and educational opportunities.
 People With Disabilities.-The Government has mandated parking spaces and
 some ramps for wheelchair access in private and government office buildings and
 shopping centers. Compliance is voluntary. Students in wheelchairs have easy ac-
 cess to Sultan Qaboos University. The Government has established several rehabili-
 tation centers for handicapped children. Handicapped people, including the blind,
 work in government offices. Free government medical assistance to all citizens in-
 cludes physical therapy for the handicapped.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-In 1994 the Ministry of Social Affairs and Labor
 drafted a new labor law, and the Consultative Council recommended some changes.
 Although consensus on the final draft has not yet been reached, government officials
 said that the new labor code will be consistent with international labor standards.
 It will reportedly contain a provision for the establishment of worker committees in
 the workplace and remove the prohibition against strikes. The current law stipu-
 lates that "it is absolutely forbidden to provoke a strike for any reason."
 Labor unrest is rare. Although strikes are technically illegal, workers sometimes
 stage job actions. In general, these disputes are settled without police intervention.
 In 1994 the Government joined the International Labor Organization. The Govern-
 ment received an ILO representative who provided advice on the draft labor law.
 
 
 1160
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The current law does not pro-
 vide for the right to collective bargaining. It requires that employers of more than
 50 workers form a joint labor-management committee as a communication forum be-
 tween the two groups. The implementation of this provision is uneven, and the effec-
 tiveness of these committees is questionable. In general the committees discuss such
 questions as living conditions at company-provided housing. They are not authorized
 to discuss wages, hours, or conditions of employment. Such issues are specified in
 the work contracts signed individually by workers and employers and must be con-
 sistent with the guidelines of the Ministry of Social Affairs and Labor.
 The current law defines conditions of employment for some Omanis and foreign
 workers. It covers domestic servants and construction workers, but not temporary
 workers or those with work contracts that expire within 3 months. Foreign workers
 constitute at least 50 percent of the work force and as much as 80 percent of the
 modern-sector w    ork ce.
 Work rules must be approved by the Ministry of Social Affairs and Labor and
 posted conspicuously in the workplac by employers of 10 or mre workers. Sim-
 larly, any employer with 50 or more workers must establish a grievance procedure.
 Regardless of the size of the com any any employee, including foreign workers, may
 file a grievance with the Labor Welfare Board. Sometimes worker representatives
 file collective grievances, but most grievances are filed by individual workers. Lower
 paid workers use the procedure regularly. Plaintiffs and defendants in such cases
 maybe represented bysegal counsel      c
 There are no export processingzones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compzdsory Labor.-The law prohibits compulsory
 labor but foreign workers sometimes find themselves in situations amounting to
 forced labor. In such cases, employers withhold letters of release, a document releas-
 ing the worker from his emploent contract, thus allowing him to switch jobs.
 Without the letter, a foreign worker must continue to work for his current employer
 or become technically unemployed--which is sufficient grounds for deportation.
 Many foreign workers are not aware of their right to take such disputes before the
 Labor Weliare Board. Others are reluctant to file complaints for fear of retribution
 by unscrupulous employers. In most cases, the Board releases the grievant from
 service and awards compensation for time worked under compulsion. Employers face
 no other penalty than to reimburse the worker's back wages.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The law prohibits children under
 the age of 13 from working. The Ministry of Social Affairs and Labor effectively en-
 forces this prohibition. Children between 13 and 16 years of age may be employed
 but must obtain the Ministiys permission to work overtime, at night, on weekends
 or holidays, or perform strenuous labor.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The Ministry of Social Affairs and Labor issues
 minimum wage guidelines for various categories of workers. The minimum wage for
 nonprofessional workers was about $156 a month (60 rials). Minimum wage guide-
 lines do not cover domestic servants, farmers, government employees, or workers in
 small businesses. Many foreigners work in fields exempt from the minimum wage
 statute. The Government is lax in enforcing minimum wage guidelines for foreign
 workers employed in menial jobs. However, foreign workers with high skills are fre-
 quently paid more than their Omani counterparts.
 The minimum wage is suffiient toprovide a decent standard of living for a work-
 er and family. The compensation for  oreign manual laborers and clerkis  sufficient
 to cover living expenses and to permit some savings to be sent home.
 Theprivate sector workweek is 40 to 45 hours and includes a rest period from
 Thursday afternoon through Friday. Government officials have a 35-hour workweek.
 While the law does not designate the number of days in a workweek, it requires
 athot t one 24-hour rest period per week and mandates overtime pay for hours in
 excess of 48 per week. Government regulations on hours of employment are not al-
 ways enforced. Employees who have worked extra hours without compensation may
 file a complaint before the Labor Welfare Board, but the Board's rulings are not
 binding.
 Every worker has the right to 15 days of annual leave during the first 3 years
 of employment and 30 days per year thereafter. Employers provide many foreign na-
 tionas mcluding maids, with annual or biannual reund-trip tickets to their coun-
 tries of origin.
 All employers are required by law to provide first aid facilities. Work sites with
 over 100 employees must have a nurse. Employees covered under the Labor Law
 may recover compensation for injury or illness sustained on the job through em-
 ployer-provided medical insurane.The health and safety standard codes are en-
 fo  ceby inspectors from the Department of Health and Safety of the Directorate
 of Labor. As required by law, they make frequent on-site inspections.
 
 
 1161
 
 The law states that employers must not to place their employees in situations in-
 volving dangerous work. However, the law does not specifically grant a worker the
 right to remove himself from dangerous work without jeopardy to his continued em-
 ployment.
