 OMAN
 The Sultanate of Oman is an absolute monarchy without popularly
 elected representative institutions or political parties at any
 level. Sultan Qaboos bin Sa'id Al Sa'id, the 14th ruler of the
 current dynasty, celebrated the 21st anniversary of his
 accession in 1991. Sultan Qaboos has maintained the Al Sa'id
 extended family's long tradition of firm control over all
 important matters affecting the State, while bringing notables
 from the tribal system into the national administration. The
 Cabinet of Ministers is appointed by and responsible to the
 Sultan. The State Consultative Council, an advisory body formed
 in 1981, gave way in 1991 to the Majlis ash-Shura (council of
 "consultation" or "deliberation"), 59 of whose 60 membeis are
 appointed from among nominees selected in district caucuses of
 leading citizens. The Sultan announced that the Majlis would
 receive all new laws in the economic and social fields for
 comment prior to their promulgation.
 Oman's strategic location on the south shore of the Strait of
 Hormuz exposed the country to the increased tension in the
 Persian Gulf area during the 1980's, culminating in the Gulf war
 against Iraq, in which Omani ground troops participated.
 Because of its concerns about national security, the Government
 continues to devote a considerable share of its revenue to
 defense. There has been no credible internal security threat
 since the defeat of the insurrection.in the southern province of
 Dhofar in 1975. The security services are large and efficient
 but do not have a record of or reputation for abuse of human
 rights.
 Almost totally undeveloped when Sultan Qaboos came to power,
 Oman has used its modest oil revenues to achieve an improvement
 in living standards for most of its citizens, Oman's free
 market economy remains heavily dependent upon petroleum
 exports. Public expenditure, the driving force in the economy,
 is determined largely by the price of oil;
 A number of human rights continued to be tightly restricted in
 1991, particularly the freedoms of expression, peaceful assembly
 and association, the right of citizens to change the government,
 and worker rights. Various formsof discrimination against
 women continued to occur, and there were occasional reports of
 abuse of foreign workers. Civil and political rights are not
 formally codified. In the absence of any challenge to the
 current order, the authorities usually respect the integrity of
 the individual.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing
 There were no known political or extrajudicial killings in 1991.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no reports of disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 Torture or other forms of cruel punishment are not
 ,systematically practiced or countenanced by Omani authorities.
 
 
 1540
 OMAN
 In 1991 several defendants in criminal trials exhibited to
 judges the evidence of physical beating, which the victims
 attributed to the police. In such cases, judges ordered that
 the victims be examined and treated in a hospital prior to
 standing trial. These few instances appear to have been rogue
 actions, which elicited no announced disciplinary action.
 Amputations, stonings, and similar penalties under Islamic Law
 have not been practiced for many years.
 Prison conditions are harsh, with temperatures sometimes
 exceeding 120 degrees Fahrenheit in cells that are often without
 climate control or proper ventilation. In 1991 the police
 discontinued the practice reported in 1990 in which prison
 inmates were used as laborers outside a penal institution.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Although Omani law does not provide for habeas corpus or its
 equivalent, the period of detention prior to trial is usually
 short. Police notification to detainees' families is often slow
 and is made in response to inquiries rather than on police
 initiative. In the capital area, the authorities post outside
 the criminal court building a list of names of persons being
 held pending trial.
 The police do not require a warrant to make an arrest but must
 obtain judicial concurrence to hold a suspect. After an arrest,
 under current procedures, the police have 24 hours to submit
 papers to a magistrate showing the grounds for holding the
 arrestee. The occasional failure of the police to seek judicial
 approval promptly has caused tension between the civil judges
 and the police. When the police provide the courts with
 documentary justification for the arrest, the magistrate may
 exercise his option to order bail or release a detainee into the
 custody of another or on his own recognizance. Alternatively,
 the judge may order that the suspect be held up to 14 days. If
 the police require more time to gather evidence, the judge may
 grant extensions of the detention period.
 Incommunicado detention is rare, but-the police do not always
 permit attorneys and visitors to see detainees. Judges
 occasionally intercede to ensure access to detainees. A
 detainee or persons interested in his case may appoint an
 attorney upon arrest.
 Arbitrary detention and other abuses of the power of arrest have
 been infrequent. The criminal code imposes penalties for
 unjustified arrest or detention, and citizens have several
 channels through which to seek redress of grievances against law
 enforcement authorities. These channels include traditional and
 tribal leaders, local sheikhs, and district administrators who
 mediate regularly in a broad variety of matters. However, there
 have been no public disclosures of disciplinary actions against
 police officials in recent years, making it difficult to
 evaluate, the effectiveness of the mechanisms.
 After his accession in 1970, Sultan Qaboos granted amnesty to
 all Omanis who were in exile. Oman does not practice exile as a
 form of punishment.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Oman's criminal code, enacted in 1974, does not explicitly state
 the rights of the accused during the criminal process but
 ,instead relies heavily on tradition. It has no rules for
 
 
 1541
 
 OMAN
 admission of evidence during trials or codified procedures for
 entering cases into the criminal system.
 The various judicial systems are subordinate to the Sultan. In
 most cases they operate independently, but they are susceptible
 to his influence in cases of particular interest, especially
 those concerning national security. However, judicial practice
 in Oman conforms in most part to Islamic prescriptions for a,
 fair trial before experienced' and impartial judges. Oman's
 criminal and civil judges, both Omani and expatriate Arab, are
 professionals who have trained at legal institutions in various
 Arab countries. In the Islamic, or Shari'a, court system,
 Oman's Ministry of Justice for several years has offered formal
 training to candidates for judgeships. Omani graduates of
 preparatory schools study at the Ministry's institute for 9
 months before serving a 3- to 5-year assistantship under a
 serving Shari'a judge.
 In a criminal trial, the accused is presumed to be innocent. He
 may be represented by an attorney, but this is not a legal
 requirement, and the Government will not pay for counsel.
 Defendants have the right and are expected to be present at
 trial, they may present evidence, and they may confront
 witnesses by questions put through the judge, who is the only
 one to question witnesses. Trial is before a single judge for
 misdemeanors and minor felonies and before a panel of three
 judges for serious felonies. There are no jury trials and no
 right to a public trial. The accused, or his lawyer, may read
 the police "charge sheet,"-which summarizes the case against
 him.- There is-no procedure by which the defense may seek the
 deletion of elements of the charge sheet prior to trial, but the
 magistrate may find cause to do so during the trial. The police
 or public prosecutor (a senior police officer) may add charges
 after file inspection by the defense and during the trial.
 During the trial, witnesses may he called by the judge,
 prosecution, or defense. There is no cross-examination by
 counsel. The prosecution and defense may challenge the
 reliability of statements or authenticity of documents in their
 closing statements to the judge. Judges frequently pronounce a
 verdict and sentence within 1 day after a trial's end.
 Sentences of over 2 months in jail and-fines of over $1,300 are
 subject to appeal. The President or Deputy President of the
 Magistrate'court chairs the Court of Appeal, which can opt not
 to consider an appeal it finds ill-grounded, A capital sentence
 requires the Sultan's ratification; execution of a convicted
 criminal last occurred in 1975.
 Apart from the civilian courts, which treat misdemeanor and
 felony criminal cases, there are Shari'a courts that handle
 family law and provincial governors who adjudicate 'minor matters
 in rural areas. A senior police official often arbitrates
 claims arising from traffic accidents. There are also military
 tribunals, before which civilians do not appear, and a committee
 for the resolution of commercial disputes, which does not treat
 criminal matters. A rarely used security court system handles
 internal security cases.
 There have been no reports of political prisoners in Oman.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 There is a widespread belief that the Government eavesdrops on
 both oral and written communications, and Omanis are guarded in
 
 
 1542
 014AN
 both areas. The police do not require a warrant to search a
 private residence, office, or vehicle. However, such searches,
 as well as the monitoring of telephones and private
 correspondence, are confined to cases where the Government
 perceives a security threat or criminal activity.
 A 1986 law banned, with few exceptions, marriage between Omanis
 and foreigners. The law, promulgated in an effort to stem the
 erosion of Omani culture, is widely resented. The Government
 revoked the Omani nationality and passports of two women who
 violated the ban, and there is a report that two or three male
 government employees have lost their jobs in punishment for
 wedding foreigners.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 There are no provisions in law to protect freedom of speech or
 freedom of the press. Criticism of the Sultan in any form or
 medium is prohibited by law. Criticism of individual officials,
 agencies, and their programs is tolerated but rarely receives
 media coverage. In 1991, 34 Omanis were detained on allegations
 that, inter alia, in public cbmments they had alleged and
 criticized corruption in high places. The courts tried them
 according to the penal code and acquitted those 29 charged with
 criticizing the Government, while 5 wereconvicted on other
 charges.
 The Government controls all radio and television broadcasting
 and does not provide for airing political debate or
 nongovernment viewpoints. The 1984 Press and Publication Law
 mandates government control over all printed matter, including
 newspapers and magazines. The law provides for strict prior
 censorship of all information in printed form in both domestic
 and imported publications. Imported printed material is
 screened by government censors, and Omani publications operate
 under general, unwritten government guidelines on tone and
 content. In practice, publications in Oman censor themselves,
 avoiding anything that might be construed as an attack on the
 Government. Editors and reporters usually give government
 ministries an opportunity to respond before critical stories are
 printed. Friendly nations are also protected from direct
 attack. While the law provides for censorship prior to
 publication, in practice publications often receive pro forma
 clearance and are distributed and reviewed concurrently. In a
 few cases, publications have been forced to recall offending
 editions.
 The Government owns two of the four daily newspapers, and
 subsidies to the remaining dailies and several privately owned
 periodicals provide an effective incentive for self-censorship.
 Editorials and news coverage largely reflect the Government's
 views, though some leeway on foreign policy issues is
 tolerated. Publications and video and audio cassettes arriving
 in Oman from foreign countries are censored for politically,
 culturally, or sexually offensive material and are occasionally
 banned. While there are no formal lists of objectionable
 material available to the public, the censors' attention focuses
 primarily on articles that directly attack or embarrass the
 Government.
 Sultan Qaboos University, Oman's only institution of higher
 'learning, graduated its second class in 1991. Courses in
 politics and lectures on controversial subjects are prohibited,
 
 
 1543
 OMAN
 and acces to the campus by those outside the university
 community is limited.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Freedom of assembly is not guaranteed by law, and public
 gatherings do not take place without government sponsorship.
 Associations of any kind must register with the Government and
 submit their bylaws to the concerned ministry for approval.
 Those that oppose the predominant social or political views of
 the Sultanate are prohibited.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Oman is an Islamic state. Non-Muslims in the Sultanate are
 prohibited from proselytizing, and conversion to Islam is
 encouraged and publicized. Virtually all Omani citizens adhere
 to one of the Islamic sects, with the exception of the small
 Hindu community made up of Omani citizens of Indian origin.
 Ibadhi Islam, the historically dominant sect in Oman's interior
 and that to which the royal family adheres, provides the basis
 of the conservative but tolerant religious ethos of the
 society. However, through immigration and uneven population
 growth rates, there now may be as many or more Sunni Muslims
 than Ibadhis in the country, Members of both the Sunni and
 small Shi'a communities are found in all walks of life in both
 the public and private sectors. There are ample facilities for
 the training of Muslim clergy and for religious instruction.
 Non-Muslim foreigners, both Christian and Hindu, are allowed to
 worship at designated locations on land donated by the Sultan.
 Although there is no indigenous Jewish community, Jews are not
 barred from living and working in Oman. Religion is not a
 factor in gaining entry into Oman.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel,
 Emigration, and Repatriation
 With the exception of a few military areas, there are no
 restrictions on travel by Omanis within their country, The
 development of a modern transportation system over the last 20
 years has facilitated travel to heretofore inaccessible areas
 throughout the country. Omanis living abroad before 1970 have
 returned to Oman in large numbers with official encouragement
 and without legal obstacles, including the many Om'anis who
 sought refuge in Yemen during the 1965-75 Dhofar rebellion.
 Thousands of ethnic Omani refugees from east Africa,
 particularly Tanzania, have been resettled and integrated
 successfully. Male Omanis may- travel abroad freely; a woman
 must have authorization from her husband, father, or nearest
 male relative to obtain a passport.
 Oman does not have a standard policy on refugees. Tight control
 over the entry of foreigners into the country has effectively
 screened out would-be refugees. The rare stateless or
 undocumented person who arrives in Oman may be detained pending
 a determination that he or she has not violated immigration or
 other laws. The Sultanate traditionally has not harbored
 refugees; however, it did accept for temporary settlement
 several thousand Kuwaiti refugees during the 1990-91 Iraqi
 occupation of that country. Persons seeking resettlement are
 dealt with by the Government on an ad hoc basis. Over the last
 10 years Oman has assisted some non-Arab, Muslim refugees to
 find accommodations in third countries.
 
 
 1544
 OMAN
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Oman has no formal democratic institutions, and its citizens do
 not, therefore, have the ability peacefully to change their
 leaders or the political system. Oman is an absolute monarchy
 in which the Sultan has the final word on all government
 decisions, in theory and in practice. The next successor to the
 monarchy will probably be determined through a consensus of the
 royal family and leading public figures. There are no political
 parties, legal opposition groups, or elections, and there is no
 constitution. Citizens have indirect access to senior officials
 through the traditional practice of petitioning local leaders
 for redress of grievances. Successful redress depends on the
 effectiveness of personal contact and the status and influence
 of the intermediary. The people have free access to their
 Government at the level of provincial governor; the provincial
 and tribal leaders in turn have access to the Sultan, his
 advisers, and ministry officials to present the views of their
 constituents.
 The Sultan makes an annual 3-week tour of the country to listen
 directly to his subjects' problems. In rural areas, government
 reflects the tribal nature of Omani society as traditional
 elites dominate the tribal and appointive town councils. Final
 authority outside Muscat, however, is with the provincial
 governors, who are named by the Sultan. In an effort to broaden
 participation in government, the Sultan formed the State
 Consultative Council in 1981. While this appointive council
 included members of every significant ethnic, geographic, and
 religious group, there were no female representatives. The
 successor to that council, the Majlis ash-Shura, established in
 1991, represents a modest expansion of popular participation.
 The Sultan chose 59 of its 60 members from among the nominees
 selected in the spring 1991 caucuses, in which hundreds of
 leading citizens in each district participated. In contrast to
 the practice under the State Consultative Council, no serving
 government officials are eligible to sit as members of the new
 .Majlis. It held its opening session on December 21.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 There are no independent organizations to monitor human rights
 violations. Public criticism of the Government's human rights
 practices would face major obstacles under the existing
 restrictions on freedoms of speech and association. The
 Government declined to receive a proposed Amnesty International
 mission in 1972 during the insurgency in Dhofar, citing the
 state of emergency in force at that time. Since then, there
 have been no known requests by international human rights
 organizations to visit Oman.
 Section-5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 Omani society's interpretation of Islamic precepts on the status
 of women results in de jure and 4e facto discrimination in a
 number of areas. However, women have shared in the benefits of
 the social and economic growth of recent years. A few women
 have reached high positions in the private and public sectors,
 and gradually the occupational areas available to women are
 expanding beyond the traditional fields of teaching, secretarial
 work, and medicine.
 
 
 1545
 OMAN
 Schooling for girls is available to the same extent as for boys
 in urban areas but not in rural areas. In general the level of
 education that girls attain remains below that of boys.
 However, women constitute over 40 percent of the 2,600 students
 at Sultan Qaboos University, and they made up a similar
 proportion in each of the first two graduating classes. By law,
 women receive equal pay and benefits for equal work. The
 Government, by far the largest employer of women in the country,
 enforces this regulation within its ministries. Islamic
 inheritance laws are strictly interpreted in Oman. By law, a
 woman in Oman may receive only one-eighth of her husband's
 property when he dies. Daughters receive less than sons. In
 urban, educated families, many women have property in their own
 names; less-educated women do not usually have that protection.
 Because of the relative lack of education among older women,
 many are unaware of their rights and are reluctant to use the
 court system.
 Violence against women is not discussed publicly in Oman, and no
 statistics are available on its extent. Communities in a few
 towns in the interior and in the Dhofar region practice female
 circumcision. The total number of cases nationwide is
 relatively small and declining annually. However, in some
 regions the practice poses a significant health hazard, and the
 central Government seeks to educate the people against this
 practice. In a statement to the local press in 1990, the Grand
 Mufti of Oman recommended that if parents chose to have a
 daughter circumcised the operation be performed with proper
 medical care. The gains achieved by a small minority of women
 are largely irrelevant to the great majority, who live their
 lives within the confines of the house and the local
 marketplace. All but the youngest females in the rural areas
 are illiterate. This general lack of female education, combined
 with communal and tribal customs that dictate a subsidiary role
 for women, makes it difficult for most adult women to
 participate adequately in the modern sector. Educational
 facilities for girls (including university training) have
 expanded in recent years, but communal and tribal customs
 .continue to work against equal opportunity for women.
 While there are no government restrictions against Omanis of
 East African origin, some of them believe they face de facto
 discrimination in employment opportunities. Occasionally, the
 perception of discrimination results from the fact that the
 victims write or speak inadequate Arabic, fluency in which is
 increasingly necessary in official and business circles.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 Labor unions are illegal in Oman. Oman's labor law specifies
 that "it is absolutely forbidden to provoke a strike for any
 reason."
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 There are no provisions for collective bargaining for wages and
 working conditions in Oman. Wages are set by employers within
 the guidelines delineated by the Ministry of Labor. The 1973
 Labor Law (as amended) is a comprehensive document defining
 conditions of employment for both Omanis and foreign workers,
 who constitute 50 percent of the work force. Work rules must be
 approved by the Ministry of Labor and posted conspicuously in
 the workplace.
 
 
 1546
 OMAN
 Any employee, Omani or expatriate, may file a grievance with the
 Labor Welfare Board, which comprises six inspectors who
 arbitrate disputes. Lower paid workers such as clerks,
 mechanics, and salesmen use the'board extensively.
 Representative workers may present collective grievances, but
 most'cases are filed on behalf of individual workers. The board
 has a docket of about 150 cases per month, about 80 percent of
 which involve expatriates. Sessions are convened daily;
 procedures are informal and summary in nature. The Labor
 Welfare Board reportedly operates impartially and generally
 gives workers the benefit of the doubt in grievance hearings.
 Disputes that the board cannot resolve go to the Minister of
 Labor for decision.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Ptohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 Forced or compulsory labor is prohibited by law, but a handful
 of former slaves still live out their lives in traditional
 servitude to their former masters. Another form of compulsory
 labor occurs occasionally. Some employers withhold the letters
 of release that expatriate workers require in order to transfer
 employment and residency sponsorship from one employer to
 another. Failing to secure a letter of release and legal
 transfer to another firm in Oman, an expatriate must either
 continue working or become technically unemployed. To avoid
 that status and the consequent possibility of mandatory
 departure from the country, some expatriates submit to their
 employers'-coercion. The employers demand that expatriate
 workers perform overtime or remain at a firm for several months
 against their wish, in some cases without compensation, in
 exchange for the promise of a release letter. This practice is
 proscribed by law. However, labor inspections in the workplace
 are rare, and it falls to the worker to approach the Labor
 Welfare Board. Workers may engage attorneys to argue such cases
 before the Board, and in most cases the Board releases the
 employee immediately from service with back compensation for the
 time worked under compulsion. The employer faces no penal
 sanction. The only penalty against -an employer is the loss of
 the worker and the compensation payment made to him.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 Under the law, children, defined as those under the age of 13,
 are prohibited from working. Juveniles, defined as those over
 13 years and under 16 years of age, are prohibited from
 performing evening or night work or strenuous labor. Juveniles
 are also forbidden to work overtime or on weekends or holidays
 without ministry permission. Education is not compulsory, but
 the Government encourages school attendance.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work -
 Using its authority under the law to determine the minimum wage
 and make adjustments according to economic circumstances, the
 Government issues minimum wage guidelines for various categories
 of workers. Minimum wage guidelines do not cover domestic
 servants, farmers, government employees, or workers in small
 businesses. There is also a statutory minimum wage for foreign
 workers. However, many foreign workers are in the categories
 exempt from the minimum wage statute, For menial work that is
 subject to the minimum wage, lax enforcement usually permits
 employers to pay less than the legal standard. The minimum wage
 is sufficent to provide an Omani worker in the capital area with
 
 
 1547
 OMAN
 a decent subsistence, with something left over to send to family
 members living in rural areas, as is the custom. The
 compensation for expatriate manual laborers and clerks (mainly
 South Asians) is sufficient to maintain a standard of living in
 Oman superior to that which they left behind and to send a
 portion of their income home.
 Workers in the private sector are issued labor cards bearing the
 name of the employee, his company, and his job. The private
 sector workweek is 40 to 45 hours (less for Muslims during
 Ramadan), and includes-9 rest period from Thursday afternoon to
 Saturday morning, which many shopkeepers and their employees opt
 not to observe. While the law does not designate the number of
 days in a workweek, it requires at least one 24-hour rest period
 per week and mandates overtime pay for hours in excess of 48 per
 week. In practice, the workweek is 5 days in the public sector
 and generally 5 1/2 days in the private sector. Some expatriate
 maids and menial laborers not protected by the labor law are
 required by a few employers to work longer hours under
 substandard working conditions.
 Supplemental income through compensated overtime work is common
 for lower level employees. Every worker has the right to 15
 days of annual leave during the first 3 years of employment and
 30 days per year thereafter. Employerd'provide many
 expatriates, including maids, with annual or biannual round-trip
 tickets to their countries of origin. Employers commonly hold
 expatriate workers' passports, as the former are legally
 responsible for the actions of the latter while they are in
 Oman.
 Labor laws and regulations cover in detail issues of
 occupational safety and access to medical treatment. Employees
 covered under the law can recover compensation for industrial
 injury or illness through medical insurance, which the employer
 must provide. The health and safety standard codes are
 scrupulously enforced by inspectors who make frequent on-site
 inspections, as required by law. The laws on child and female
 labor and conditions of work are effectively and uniformly
 enforced by inspectors throughout the country.
 
 
 1548
