 The Sultanate of Oman is an absolute monarchy without
 popularly elected representative institutions or political
 parties. The reigning Sultan, Qaboos bin Said al Said, is the
 14th ruler of the current dynasty. The 55-member State
 Consultative Council, formed in 1981, functions as an advisory
 body on economic and social questions. Members are appointed
 by the Sultan who has continued the house of al Said's long
 tradition of firm control over all important matters affecting
 the Omani State. At the same time, the Sultan has built on an
 earlier trend to bring notables of the tribal system of the
 interior into the national administration.,
 National security continues to be an area of major concern.
 Although an insurrection in the southern province of Dhofar,
 supported by the People's Democratic Republic of Yemen, was
 defeated in 1975, Oman has continued to devote considerable
 revenue to defense. Oman's strategic location on the south
 shore of the Strait of Hormuz exposed the country to the
 increased tension in the Persian Gulf area during the 1980's.
 The internal security services are large, efficient, and
 pervasive, but are not generally regarded as intrusive. Many
 key jobs in the Government, especially in the military and
 internal security services, are occupied by foreigners,
 including many British, although a policy of "Omanization" is
 causing the number of expatriates to decline.
 Almost totally undeveloped when Sultan Qaboos came to power in
 1970, Oman has used its modest oil revenues to foster
 impressive progress in the social, economic, and administrative
 spheres, achieving a significant improvement in living
 standards. Oman's economy remains heavily dependent on
 petroleum exports.
 There were no important changes in the human rights situation
 in 1989. Human rights in Oman--particularly the freedoms of
 speech and association and the right to change the government
 --remained tightly restricted. Civil and political rights are
 not formally codified, but the integrity of the individual is
 usually respected, although there have been some reports of
 abuse of foreign workers (see Section l.a.). The people have
 access to their Government at the local wali (governor) level;
 the walis and tribal leaders in turn have access to the
 Sultan, his advisers, and ministry officials to present the
 views of the people they represent-
 RESPECT FOR HU4AN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing
 There were no known political or other extrajudicial killings
 in Oman.
 b. Dis-appearance
 No cases of disappearance were reported.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 Torture or other forms of cruel punishment are not
 systematically practiced by Omani authorities. However, there
 
 
 1520
 were unconfirmed reports in 1989 that one youth was
 hospitalized for several weeks after being interrogated by the
 police (his mistreatment was said to have stopped when senior
 police officials learned of it).and that one foreign worker
 died from injuries suffered while in custody shortly after his
 arrest. Capital punishment, amputations, and related
 penalties under Islamic law are no-longer carried out. Prison
 conditions are harsh, with temperatures sometimes exceeding
 120 degrees in cells without airconditioning, fans, or proper
 ventilation. In 1989 the Government began publishing in the
 daily press the names, photos, and jail sentences of those
 convicted. This practice is apparently intended to humiliate
 the criminals' families and thereby serve as a deterrent to
 prospective wrongdoers. There are reports that juveniles are-
 sometimes held with hardened criminals, and the result is the
 brutalizing of the juveniles.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Although Omani law does not provide for habeas corpus or its
 equivalent, the period of detention before trial in criminal
 cases is usually short. Police notification to family is
 often slow. Incommunicado detention is not normally
 practiced, although some youths were reportedly held
 incommunicado for
 3 months for interrogation during a state security trial.
 Under current Omani procedures, a person suspected of a crime
 may be held up to 15 days while a case is under investigation,
 although this may be extended to a maximum of 70 days if
 approve- by the magistrate. Attorneys are not always
 permitted access to their clients. While in the past there
 have been abuses of the police power of arrest, the criminal
 code imposes penalties for unjustified arrest or detention.
 Citizens have several channels through which they can seek
 redress of any grievance against law enforcement authorities,
 and these channels appear to serve their purpose well,
 particularly in rural areas. There are several cases
 currently pending before the courts involving citizens suing
 police-officers for unjustified arrest.
 All Omanis who were in exile under the previous Sultan were
 given the opportunity to return, as many thousands did after
 1970. The grace period for those in self-imposed exile who
 wished to return to Oman formally ended on December 31, 1986,
 although amnesty has subsequently been granted to at least one
 additional returnee.
 With regard to forced or compulsory labor, see Section 6.c.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Oman's first criminal code was enacted in 1974. This code
 does not explicitly state the rights of the accused during the
 criminal process, nor does it have rules for admission of
 evidence-during trials or codified procedures for entering
 cases into the criminal system. A draft revised criminal code
 modeled on the French system has been circulating for comment
 within the Government since 1988.
 Judicial practice in Oman conforms, for the most part, to the
 prescriptions under Islamic law for a fair trial before
 experienced and impartial judges. However, there is no right
 under law to a jury, counsel, or public trial, and attorneys
 are not provided for those who cannot afford them. If a case
 proceeds to trial, it is heard before a judge alone.
 
 
 1521
 Generally, all questioning is conducted by the judge, and
 there is no examination or cross-examination by the
 prosecution, defense, or the accused. Either side may request
 the judge to ask particular questions of a witness, however,
 and some judges do permit direct questioning of witnesses. At
 the discretion of the judge, the accused may call witnesses.
 Decisions in serious criminal cases heard by the magistrate
 court are generally pronounced promptly, and sentencing is
 immediate. Verdicts are final, although there may be informal
 appeals to the state advisor for penal affairs and ultimately
 to the Sultan in cases involving serious offenses. The Sultan
 must approve death penalty verdicts. The various judicial
 systems are subordinate to the Sultan, but they operate
 independently in the majority of cases. The judicial system
 suffers from a lack of trained personnel.
 Although Islamic law is administered throughout the country by
 Islamic judges (qadis) in Shari'a courts, the jurisdiction of
 the Shari'a court is limited to civil cases, including
 commercial, as well as minor criminal cases. Similarly,
 recently reconstituted "barzah" or people's courts--presided
 over by walis, judges, and staff--handle personal and minor
 commercial disputes but not criminal cases. In these cases,
 there is a right of appeal to the Minister of Justice and
 ultimately to the Sultan. There is also a security court
 system that handles internal national security cases. This
 rarely used court consists of a three-judge panel whose
 verdict is final. The accused has a right to counsel, but
 there is no appeal of the verdict except to the Sultan. The
 last known trial before the security court was the case in
 late 1988 involving 16 Shi'a charged with plotting to
 overthrow the Government. Of these, two were released, two
 were sentenced to life imprisonment, and the remainder
 received sentences ranging from 5 to 15 years in prison.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 There is a widespread fear of government eavesdropping, and
 Omanis are guarded in their speech and written communication.
 Warrants are not required to search private residences,
 offices, or vehicles, and such searches, as well as the
 monitoring of telephones and private correspondence, are
 confined to cases where the Government perceives a security
 threat or criminal activity.
 Although there is no government policy to discourage the use
 of other languages in speech or print or in religious
 instruction in the home, the Government has increasingly
 insisted that correspondence with it, and public and legal
 documents, be in Arabic. A 1986 law banned, with a few
 exceptions, marriage between Omanis and foreigners. The move
 was explained as an effort to stem the erosion of Omani
 culture. Those already married to foreigners had to register
 within a specified period or risk forfeiting their citizenship
 and that of their offspring.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 There are no provisions in law which protect freedom of speech
 or freedom of the press. Criticism of the Sultan in any form
 or medium is prohibited by law. Criticism of individual
 officials, agencies, and their programs is tolerated but is
 
 
 1522
 OMAN
 not given media coverage. The Government controls all radio
 and-television broadcasting. Government control of all
 printed matter, including newspapers and magazines, is
 sPecified in the press and publication law, issued in May
 1984. The law imposes strict'controls on, and a mechanism
 for, prior ce1sprship of all information in printed form in
 both domestic and jmported publications. The Government owns
 two of the three-daily newspapers, one in Arabic and one in
 English, Subsidies to the remaining daily and several
 privately owned weekly and biweekly publications provide an
 effective incentive to self-censorship, although there have
 been arrests and closure for offensive articles. Thus,
 editorials and news coverage invariably reflect the
 Government's views.
 Publications and video and audio cassettes arriving in Oman
 from foreign countries are cpnsored for politically or
 sejually offensive material and are occasionally banned. The
 censor's attention generally focuses on articles that directly
 attack or embarrass the Government. In the last 3 years,
 three expatriate reporters have been deported for articles
 written about Oman.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Freedom of assembly is not guaranteed by law. Associations of
 any kind must register with the Government, and those which
 oppose the political system of the Sultanate are prohibited.
 For a discussion of freedom of association as it applies to
 labor unions, see section 6.a.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Oman is an Islamic state. Non-Muslims in Oman are prohibited
 from proselytizing, and conversion to Islam is encouraged and
 publicized. Virtually all Omani citizens adhere to one or
 another sect of Islam, the exception being the small Hindu
 community made up of Omani citizens of Indian origin. Ibadhi
 Muslims form the dominant group of Muslims in Oman and include
 the ruling family. However, there may be as many or more
 Sunni Muslims in the country, and members of both the Sunni
 and small Shi'a communities are found in all walks of life in
 both the public and private sectors. Non-Muslim foreigners,
 both Christian and Hindu, are allowed to worship at designated
 locations on land donated by the Government. Although there
 is no indigenous Jewish community, Jews are not barred from
 living and working in Oman. Religion is not a factor in
 gaining entry into Oman.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 With the exception of a few military areas, there are no
 restrictions on travel by Omanis within their country. The
 Governmeht's development of transportation has greatly
 increased the ability to move within the country to heretofore
 inaccessible areas. Omanis living abroad before 1970 have
 returned to Oman in large numbers with official encouragement
 and without legal obstacles. Several thousand ethnic Omani
 refugees from East Africa, particularly from Zanzibar, have
 been resettled successfully. Many Omanis who had sought
 refuge in the People's Democratic Republic of Yemen during the
 insurgency in Dhofar (1965-1975) have returned to Oman with
 official encouragement. Non-Omani refugees are not permitted
 
 
 1523
 to remain in Oman. Those few that reach Oman are generally
 returned to their homelands unless they can be quickly
 resettled in a third country. Omanis may travel abroad
 freely, although a woman must have authorization from her
 husband or father to obtain a passport. Many Omanis work
 abroad, particularly in the United Arab Emirates, where an
 estimated 35,000 Omanis are currently employed. Many of these
 people travel home to Oman on weekends.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Oman has no formal democratic institutions, and its citizens
 do not, therefore, have the ability to change peacefully their
 leaders or the political system. Oman is a monarchy in which
 the Sultan retains the final word on all government
 decisions. Succession to the monarchy is determined through a
 consensus of the ruling family and leading public figures.
 There are no political parties, legal opposition groups,
 elections, nor a constitution. Citizens have indirect access
 to senior officials through the traditional practice of
 submitting to local leaders petitions for the redress of
 grievances. Successful redress depends on the effectiveness
 of personal contact and the quality of the persons chosen as
 intermediaries. Outside of Muscat, the Government still
 reflects the tribal nature of Omani society. Traditional
 elites dominate the tribal and town councils, which settle
 intratribal disputes. Final authority, however, is with the
 walis, who are appointed by the Sultan. In an effort to
 broaden participation in the Government, the Sultan formed the
 State Consultative Council in 1981. It consists of 55 members
 drawn from the Government, the business community, and the
 outlying districts. It includes members of every significant
 ethnic, geographic, and religious group. The Council's role
 remains advisory, however, and is confined to the social and
 economic spheres.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The Government of Oman declined to receive a proposed Amnesty
 International mission in 1972 during the insurgency in
 Dhofar. Since then, there have been no known requests by
 international human rights organizations to visit Oman. There
 are no independent organizations to monitor human rights
 violations.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or SocialStatus
 Although Oman's government and society are conservative, it
 has been relatively moderate in its attitude toward Islamic
 precepts on the status of women. Women have shared in the
 benefits of the social and ecooomic growth of recent years.
 Schooling for girls is available to the same extent as for
 boys in urban areas, but less so in rural areas. For cultural
 reasons, the level of education that girls attain is still
 below that of boys. By and large, however, the occupational
 areas most available to women are limited to the fields of
 teaching, secretarial work; and nursing.
 Violence against women is not believed to be widespread.
 Little is known about the extent to which abuse occurs within
 the family owing to the respect attached to personal privacy
 
 
 1524
 in this traditional society. There is no public discussion of
 the subject.
 The gains achieved by a small minority of women are largely
 irrelevant to -the great majority, both in the towns and in the
 rural areas; who live their lives within the confines of the
 house and the local marketplace. The previous lack of adult
 education facilities means that all but the youngest females
 in rural areas are illiterate. This general lack of
 education, combined with communal and tribal customs which
 dictate a subsidiary role for women, makes it difficult for
 most adult women to participate fully in the modern sector.
 The recent expansion of educational-facilities for girls
 (including university training) will allow for some
 equalization of the position.of women in the future, but
 communal and tribal customs will continue to work against full
 participation by women for the foreseeable future.
 While there are no formal government restrictions against
 Omanis of east African origin, many of them believe they face
 de facto discrimination in employment opportunities.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. .The Right of Association
 Labor unions are illegal in Oman, and, as specified in Oman's
 labor.law, "it is absolutely forbidden to provoke a strike for
 any reasons." Oman is not a member of the International Labor
 Organization (ILO).
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 There are no provisions for collective bargaining for wages
 and working conditions in Oman. Wages are set by employers
 within the guidelines set down by the Government. The labor
 law provides procedures for pursuing a "collective grievance"
 and-encourages conciliationof disputes through the formation
 of joint consultative bodies of labor and management under
 Department of Labor auspices. Employers are forbidden by law
 from making a distinction between workers who are parties to
 labor dispute hearings and those who are not. Labor
 reconciliation hearings are not open to the press or public.
 Oman's labor law, promulgated in 1973, is a comprehensive
 document defining conditions of employment for both Omanis and
 foreign workers, who constitute 50 percent of the work force.
 Work rules must be approved by the Department of Labor and
 posted conspicuously. Under Oman's labor court system, any
 employee (Omani or expatriate) may file a grievance. The
 employer pays all costs incurred in the filing of the
 grievance, regardless of the verdict. The employee cannot be
 reprimanded or punished for filing a grievance. The labor law
 is reported to be fairly enforced, and the labor courts
 generally give workers the benefit of the doubt in
 grievance hearings. A 1989 draft of a revised labor code
 awaits action by the Sultan. There are no export processing
 zones in Oman.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 Forced or compulsory labor is prohibited by law, and not
 practiced.
 
 
 1525
 
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 Employment of children under the age of 18 is prohibited,
 except with the permission of a guardian and the wali. Oman
 law regulates the employment of juveniles, defined as those
 between the ages of 13 and 18, prohibiting evening and
 nighttime work, work in a strenuous occupation, and overtime
 and holiday work. Education is not compulsory, but the
 Government encourages school attendance.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 The labor law states that the Government can determine the
 minimum wage and make adjustments accordinq to economic
 circumstances. Minimum wage guidelines do not cover domestic
 servants, farmers, government employees, or workers in small
 businesses. In November 1989, minimum monthly salary for Omani
 graduates of secondary and vocational schools employed in the
 private sector was fixed at $390 per month, with an additional
 $130 housing and transportation allowance. Nongraduate Omanis
 receive a minimum of $208 per month, with $52 housing/transport
 allowance. However, the minimum wage is not an issue for most
 Omanis and mid- to upper-level expatriates, since most are paid
 wages well above that level. The statutory minimum wage for
 foreign workers is $150 per month (plus benefits), but it is
 not enforced and employers frequently pay less. Expatriate
 manual laborers and clerks generally earn between $100 and $125
 per month, plus lodging, which is enough both to maintain an
 adequate standard of living and to send a portion of their
 income back home. Omanis working in the private sector are
 issued labor cards bearing the name of the employee, his
 company, and his work. The workweek is 40 to 45 hours in the
 private sector (less for Muslims during Ramadan). Every worker
 has the right to 15 days of annual leave during the first 3
 years of employment and 30 days per year thereafter.
 Expatriate maids and menial laborers are not protected by the
 labor law, and some are required to work long hours under
 substandard working conditions by some employers. Expatriate
 workers' passports are commonly held by the employer, who is
 legally responsible for their actions, until they leave Oman.
 Oman's labor law and a subsequent 1976 proclamation "governing
 compensation for occupational injuries and illnesses" cover in
 detail issues of occupational safety and access to medical
 treatment. Employees covered by the labor law can recover
 compensation for industrial injury or illness through medical
 insurance provided by the employer. Oman has occupational
 health and safety standard codes which are scrupulously
 enforced by inspectors who make frequent on-site inspections.
 Such codes and inspections are required under Chapter Seven of
 the labor law. The laws on child labor and conditions of work
 are, for the most part, effectively and uniformly enforced by
 inspectors throughout the country.
 
 
 1526
