 OMAN
 Until the present Sultan seized power from his father
 in 1970, Oman was generally considered to have a very
 authoritarian and conservative government. Since
 that date, the Sultanate has made substantial progress
 in providing its citizens with a freer and more
 prosperous life. This progress took place despite a
 serious insurgency in the Dhofar Province in south-
 western Oman during the period 1965-1976. The Dhofar
 conflict was mounted by indigenous leftists supported
 by irregular forces from the neighboring People's
 Democratic Republic of Yemen, and by the People's
 Republic of China and the Soviet Union. The Dhofar
 insurgency was declared over in 1976.
 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 FreedoM from:
 a. Torture
 The Omani criminal code prohibits the use of torture,
 and this prohibition seems to be observed in
 practice.
 b. Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 In the early 1970s, there probably were instances of
 cruel, inhuman or degrading punishment in connection
 with the Dhofar insurgency. Most oases of such
 behavior involved rebel forces rather than those of
 the Government. There are no recent reports of such
 practices.
 c. Arbitrary Arrest or Imprisonment
 The ne6 Omani criminal code imposes penaltiOSL for
 unjustified arrest- and detention by the authorities,
 and is regulated by statute. Citizens can petition
 the courts, the Minister of Justice, or the Sultan
 
 (604)
 
 
 himself for remedies in cases of violations of their
 rights. A few abuses of the police power of arrest
 have come to the attention of the Department of State.
 There are instances of petty arbitrariness, usually by
 law enforcement officials in the outlying districts,
 who exceed their legal mandate.
 d. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Both traditional Islamic law and the criminal code
 call for a hearing and a fair trial by experienced
 judges. Eyewitness accounts by United States
 Government officials attending sessions of Islamic
 and police courts revealed an impressive degree of
 fairness in those proceedings. There have been some
 reports of other cases in which procedures favored
 the prosecution. Omani regional variations probably
 exist in this respect.
 e. Invasion of the Home
 Warrants are not required for police searches of
 private premises. Such searches are infrequent and
 are resorted to in cases when national security is
 felt to be threatened (as in the Dhofar insurgency) or
 when smuggling (as with arms and narcotics) is
 suspected.
 2. Governmental Policies Relating to the Fulfillment
 of Such Vital Needs as Food, Shelter, Health Care
 and Education
 Since 1970, the Omani Government has followed liberal
 policies in providing for basic needs of the poor and
 in supporting education. Over half of the 1978 budget
 of $2.0 billion reflects major expenditures on social
 services (including housing, sanitation, education,
 development projects and civilian salaries). Oman's
 modest oil reserves and its heavy defense expenditures
 during the Dhofar insurgency have limited the financial
 resources available for social welfare.
 
 
 606
 Oman is emerging under the current Sultan from an
 unusual degree of backwardness and poverty. Limited
 oil wealth has enabled the Sultan's Government to
 launch several social services and social welfare pro-
 grams since 1970. However, substantial disparities
 of wealth still exist between the ruling family and
 the merchant class, and the rest of the population.
 There are persistent allegations of bribery in the
 awarding of government contracts. It is difficult to
 determine the extent to which resources are thereby
 significantly diverted from the poor. In the last few
 years, the Government has moved against at least one
 case of financial malfeasance by a government official.
 3. Respect for Civil and Political Liberties, Includ-
 ing:
 a. Freedom of Thought, Speech, Press, Religion
 and Assembly
 Oman remains a traditional society. There is no
 national assembly. Freedom of the press, assembly and
 speech is circumscribed. There are no restrictions on
 religious practices. Independent labor organizations
 do not exist and are officially discouraged.
 There does not appear to be any officially-sanctioned
 discrimination between Omani citizens of Arab origin
 and those of African origin.
 Omani women have only recently begun to emerge from
 traditional seclusion. However, educated Omani women
 do hold jobs, a few at very responsible levels. Women
 are becoming more active in public life, and govern-
 ment policy encourages progress in this area.
 b. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel and Emigration
 Omanis may travel freely throughout the country except
 in the war-torn Dhofar area. Omanis may also emigrate
 
 
 607
 and travel abroad freely.
 c. Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 There are neither political parties nor elections in
 Oman. Citizens have access to government leaders
 through personal appeal, which is sanctioned by Islamic
 and tribal practice. Oman remains essentially con-
 servative in its recognition of political rights.
 4. Government Attitude and Record Regarding Inter-
 national and Non-governmental Investigation of
 Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Little international attention has focused on the
 situation in Oman. The Government declined to receive
 a proposed Amnesty International mission in 1972 when
 the Dhofar insurgency was at its peak.
 
 
