 OMAN
 The Sultanate of Oman is a monarchy without popularly elected representative
 institutions or political parties. Oman has been ruled by a sultan of the Al Bu Sa'id
 family since the middle of the 18th century. While maintaining the ruling family's
 long tradition of firm contrl over all important matters affecting the State, Sultan
 ao   Bin Sa'id Al Sa'id has brought leaders from the tribal system into his Gov-
 ernment, and much decisionmaking is consensual in accordance with longstanding
 tradition. Since his accession in 1970, he has balaned tribal, regional, and ethnic
 interests in composing the national administration. The Cabinet of Ministers is ap-
 pointed by and responsible to the Sultan. The State Consultative Council, an advi-
 sory body formed in 1980, was replaced in 1991 by the Majlis Ash-Shura or Consult-
 ative Council. This body represents the Sultan's measured effort to broaden partici-
 pation in government. The Consultative Council's mandate is to review new laws
 pertaining to economic development and social services prior to their promulgation.
 tmay summon Ministers to appear before the Majlis to discuss the Ministries' poli-
 des and plans.
 Oman is strategically located at the entrance to the Persian Gulf opposite Iran.
 Oman is concerned with internal stability and security, given the tensions in the
 region, the proximity of Iran and Iraq, and the potential threat of political Islam.
 The security apparatus is pervasive but professional and well trained; it is under
 the direct responsibility of the Ministry of Palace Office Affairs. The police are
 under the full control of the highest levels of government. Reports of human rights
 abuses by security personnel are rare.
 Almost totally undeveloped when Sultan Qaboos came to power in 1970, Oman
 has used its modest oil revenues to make impressive economic progress and improve
 public access to health care, education, and social services. Almost 80 percent of the
 Government's revenue comes from its oil production, but it is seeking to diversify
 Oman's free market economy and stimulate private sector activity. Individuals are
 free to associate with others in pursuing commercial interests, but only Omani citi-
 zens may own real property. In 1993 the Government lifted restrictions on foreign
 ownership of Omani stocks and bonds.
 There was no essential change in the human rights situation in 1993. A number
 of basic rights continued to be restricted or denied, particularly the freedoms of ex-
 pression, peaceful assembly and association, the right of citizens to change their
 government, and worker rights. Additionally, various forms of discrimination
 against women remain although women have made tangible progress in some areas
 of public life. Civil and political rights are not formally codified,but in the absence
 of any challenge to stability and order, the authorities generally respect the integ-
 rity of the person. Freedom of religion is generally respected.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no reports of political or
 extra Eudicial killing.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 There were no reports of torture in 1993. There were a few unconfirmed reports that
 some prisoners had been beaten during pretrial detention. In particular, there were
 a few instances of police beating suspects accused of crimes against women and chil-
 dren. One defendant on trial in the Magistrate Court alleged he had been abused
 but retracted his accusation in court.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-There were no reports of arbitrary arrest
 in 1993. The police do not require a judicial warrant to make an arrest but must
 obtain judicial concurrence to hold a suspect. In practice, the police generally obtain
 warrants prior to making an arrest unless there is some urgency to apprehending
 a suspect. Under current procedures, the police have 24 hours after an arrest to file
 charges or submit papers to a magistrate showing the grounds for holding the ar-
 restee. When the police provide the courts with documentary justification for an ar-
 
 
 1263
 rest, the magistrate may exercise his option to order bail or release the detainee
 into the custody of another or on his own recognizance. Alternatively, the judge may
 order that the suspect be held up to 14 days. If he police require more time to gath-
 er evidence, the judge may grant extensions of the detention period. The police
 sometimes detain suspects for questioning or for protective custody. Such detentions
 are usually for less than 24 hours. However, there are indications that illegal deten-
 tions have occurred when the police did not seek judicial concurrence for detention
 for longer periods.
 The police do not routinely notify a detainee's family or sponsor (in the case of
 foreign nationals) of his or her detention; they will often allow a detainee to make
 a telephone call. In the capital area, the authorities post outside the criminal court
 building a list of names of persons being held pending trial. While there were no
 reports of incommunicado detention in 1993, the police did not always permit attor-
 neys and visitors to see detainees. Judges occasionally intercede to ensure access to
 detainees. A detainee or persons interested in the detainee's case may hire an attor-
 ney but there is no explicit right to an attorney, and the Government will not pay
 for iegal representation for an indigent person.
 Although Omani law does not require a prompt judicial determination of the le-
 gality of a detention, the period of detention prior to trial is usually short.
 The Civil Court publishes a semimonthly schedule assigning a "judge in charge"
 each day during off-duty hours and weekends. These magistrates are available to
 review charges or grounds for holding a detainee. The occasional failure of the police
 to promptly seek judicial approval for detentions has caused tension between the
 civil judges and the police. There are no known political detainees in Oman.
 After his accession in 1970, Sultan Qaboos granted amnesty to all Omanis who
 were in exile. Oman does not practice exile as a form of punishment.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Tria.-In addition to civilian courts, which treat mis-
 demeanor and felony criminal cases, the court system includes Shari'a courts, which
 handle family law, an authority for the settlement of commercial disputes under the
 Ministry of Commerce and Industry, and a board to hear labor disputes under the
 Ministry of Social Affairs and Labor. The Magistrate Court is a criminal court and
 adjudicates violations of the Criminal Code. A rarely used security court system
 handles internal security cases. Provincial governors arbitrate minor matters in
 rural areas but do not have the authority to detain persons.
 The various judicial systems are subordinate to the Sultan. In most cases they
 operate independently, but the Sultan may intercede in cases of particular interest,
 especially those concerning national security.
 Judicial practice in Oman conforms in most part to Islamic prescriptions for a fair
 trial before experienced and impartial judges. Oman's criminal judges, all Omani,
 are professionals who have trained at legal institutions in various Arab countries
 after completing their bachelor's degrees. A college graduate may become a judge
 in the civilian courts at age 28 after 3 years of postgraduate study and 1 to 2 years'
 apprenticeship as a judge trainee. In the Islamic, or Shari'a, court system, a high
 school graduate may join the ranks of Shari's court judges at age 23 after complet-
 ing a 5-year course at one of Oman's four higher institutes for Islamic studies and
 an apprenticeship. There were no reports in 1993 that judges were transferred or
 dismissed for political reasons.
 Oman's Criminal Code, enacted in 1974, does not explicitly state the rights of the
 accused during the criminal process but instead relies heavily on tradition and pro-
 cedures instituted by the Magistrate Court. There are no written rules for admission
 of evidence during trials or codified procedures for entering cases into the criminal
 system.
 In a criminal trial, the accused is presumed to be innocent. He may be rep-
 resented by an attorney, but this is not a legal requirement, and the Government
 will not pay for counsel. Defendants have the right and are expected to be present
 at trial; they may present evidence; and they may confront witnesses by asking
 questions put through the judge, who generally is the only one who may question
 witnesses. The police have the responsibility to prosecute cases before the Mag-
 istrate Court. Trial is before a single judge for misdemeanors and minor felonies
 and before a panel of three judges for serious felonies. There are no jury trials, and,
 while there is no explicit right to a public trial, court proceedings are generally open
 to the public. The accused person, or his lawyer, may read the police Jcharge sheet,"
 which summarizes the case against him. There is no procedure by which the defense
 may seek the deletion of elements of the charge sheet prior to trial, but the mag-
 istrate may delete charges during the trial. The police or Public Prosecutor (a senior
 police officer) may add charges aer inspection of the file by the defense and during
 the trial.
 
 
 1264
 During the trial, witnesses may be called by the judge, prosecution, or defense.
 The prosecution or the defense may cross-examine witnesses through (and with the
 approval of) the judge, but there is no procedural right to cross-examination. The
 prosecution and defense may challenge the reliability of statements or authenticity
 of documents in their closing statements to the judge. Judges frequently pronounce
 a verdict and sentence within 1 day after a trial s end. Jail sentences of over 3
 months and fines of over $1,300 are subject to appeal before a three-judge panel.
 However, judgments in serious felony cases may not be appealed because they are
 heard in the first instance before the highest judicial panel; there is no other court
 of appeal.
 The Public Prosecutor's office may also appeal a sentence that it believes to be
 too light although it may not appeal an innocent verdict. The President of the Mag-
 istrate dourt chairs the Court of Appeals, which may opt not to consider an appeal
 it finds ill-grounded. The Shari's Court generally allows attorneys representing both
 parties to appear before the judge. Judgments may be appealed within 30 days to
 an appeal court within the Shari's court system, and the appeals are heard by a
 senior judge.
 Commercial matters brought before the authority for the settlement of commercial
 disputes are heard before a panel consisting of two judges and a member of the
 Chamber of Commerce. Once a case is filed, the authority may summon the parties
 to appear and often seeks opinions from auditors and other experts. Cases involving
 fines of over $26,000 (10,000 Omani rials) may be appealed to a five-member panel
 and receive a fresh hearing.
 There was no evidence that the legal system discriminated against minorities.
 However, in the case of discrimination against women, the Shari's courts adhere to
 Islamic law equating the testimony of one man with that of two women.
 A capital sentence requires the Sultan's ratification. There were no reports of po-
 litical prisoners in 1993.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The po-
 lice are not required to have a warrant in order to search a private residence, ofpice,
 or vehicle. There is a widespread belief that the Government eavesdrops on both
 oral and written communications, and Omanis are guarded in both areas.
 A 1986 law banned marriage between Omanis and foreigners (defined as not in-
 cluding citizens from the Gulf Cooperation Council states). However, many promi-
 nent Omanis are married to foreigners, and some were married after 1986. Re-
 cently, a new marriage law was promulgated which set forth the conditions allowing
 marriages between Omanis and foreigners. Omanis may now obtain permission from
 the Ministry of Interior if they can justify their desire to marry a foreigner and can
 show the financial ability to support the foreign spouse.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-There is no legal protection of free speech or
 of a free press. Criticism of the Sultan in any form or medium is prohibited by law.
 Criticism of individual officials, agencies, and their rograms is tolerated but rarely
 receives media coverage. Sessions of the Majlis Ash-Shura, including those featuring
 questioning of ministers by council members, receive television and print media cov-
 erage.
 The 1984 Press and Publication Law mandates government control over all print-
 ed matter, including newspapers and magazines. The law provides for strict prior
 censorship of all information in printed form in both domestic and imported publica-
 tions. Imported printed material is screened by government censors, and Omani
 publications operate under general unwritten government guidelines on tone and
 content. In practice, publishers in 6man censor themselves, avoiding anything that
 might be construed as an attack on the Government. Editors and reporters usually
 give government ministries an opportunity to respond before critical stories are
 printed. Friendly nations are also protected from direct attack. While the law pro-
 vides for censorship prior to publication in practice, publications often receive pro
 forma clearance and are distributed and reviewed concurrently. There were no re-
 ports of publishers having been forced to recall any editions in 1993. However, the
 Information Ministry issued a decree in July delaying for 1 day the distribution of
 newspapers published outside of Oman.
 The Government owns two of the four daily newspapers, and government sub-
 sidies to the remaining dailies and several privately owned periodicals provide an
 effective incentive for self-censorship. Editorials and news coverage largely reflect
 the Government's views, although some latitude is tolerated on foreign policy issues.
 One Omani newspaper resumed publishing letters to the editor in 1993.
 Publications and video and audio cassettes arriving from foreign countries are
 censored for politically, culturally, or sexually offensive material and are occasion-
 
 
 1265
 ally banned. There are no formal lists of objectionable material available to the pub-
 lic, but the censors' attention focuses primarily on articles that directly attack or
 embarrass the Government.
 The Government controls all radio and television broadcasting and does not pro-
 vide for the airing of political debate or nongovernment viewpoints. However, the
 free market in dish antennae has made a wide range of broadcast information acces-
 sible to the public.
 Oman has one institution of higher learning, Sultan Qaboos University, estab-
 lished in 1986. Courses in politics and lectures on controversial subjects are prohib-
 ited. Access to the campus by persons outside the university community is limited
 but may be obtained for visitors.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-Freedom of assembly is not
 guaranteed by law, and public gatherings may not take place without government
 sponsorship. However, this requirement is not always enforced in practice, and such
 gatherings have occurred without official sanction. If the authorities learn of an un-
 authorized gathering in time, they may order its cancellation. Associations of any
 kind must register with the Government and submit their by-laws to the concerned
 ministry for approval. Those that oppose the predominant social or political views
 of the Sultanate are prohibited. However, informal groupings, such as women's and
 expatriate clubs, are allowed to operate.
 c. Freedom of Religion.--Oman is an Islamic State. Most Omanis are badhi or
 Sunni Muslims; there is also a Shi'a minority. Non-Muslims in the Sultanate are
 prohibited from proselytizing, and conversion to Islam is encouraged and publicized.
 Over 100 Saudi school-teachers departed Oman at the end of the school year when
 the Government declined to renew their contracts. Their departure was attributed,
 in part, to concern that some of the teachers were attempting to proselytize for their
 Wahabi beliefs.
 Non-Muslim foreigners are free to worship at churches and temples built on land
 donated by the Sultan. There are about 20 Christian denominations. A new Catholic
 church was completed in 1993 on a compound in the city of Sohar (the fourth such
 compound of church buildings in the country), and plans are under way for a new
 Protestant church at the same location. Clergymen a so conduct services for smaller
 groups of their congregants throughout Oman. There is no indigenous Jewish com-
 munity, but Jews are not barred from living and working in Oman. Non-Muslim re-
 ligious publishing is not allowed, but non-Muslim texts and literature may be
 brought in to the country for use by non-Muslims.
 Members of all religions and sects in Oman are free to maintain links with coreli-
 gionists in other countries and with the supranational hierarchies that exist for
 some denominations. They are also free to undertake religious travel, whether for
 the Muslim haji, conferences, or consultations with religious leaders. Religion is not
 a factor in gaining entry into Oman, nor is it commonly a basis for job discrimina-
 tion (see also Section 5).
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-There are no restrictions on travel by Omanis within their country,
 with the exception of a ban on travel to a few military areas and a requirement that
 passes be obtained from the police to travel to certain areas. While male Omanis
 may travel abroad freely, a woman must have authorization from her husband, fa-
 ther, or nearest male relative to obtain a passport.
 Omanis living abroad before 1970 have returned to Oman in large numbers with
 official encouragement and without legal obstacles. The returnees include the many
 Omanis who sought refuge in Yemen during the 1965-75 Dhofar rebellion. Thou-
 sands of ethnic Omanis from east Africa, particularly Tanzania, have been resettled
 and integrated successfully.
 Oman does not have a standard policy on refugees and traditionally has not
 harbored stateless or undocumented aliens. Tight control over the entry of foreign-
 ers into the country has effectively screened out would-be refugees. The rare state-
 less or undocumented person who arrives in Oman may be detained pending a de-
 termination that he or she has not violated immigration or other laws. The Govern-
 ment deals with persons seeking resettlement on an ad hoc basis. Oman has as-
 sisted some non-Arab, Muslim refugees to be resettled in third countries.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Oman has no formal democratic political institutions, and its citizens de not have
 the ability peacefully to change their leaders or the political system. Oman has an
 autocratic system in which the Sultan has the final word on all government deci-
 sions in theory and in practice. His successor, should a change occur in the near
 
 
 1266
 
 future, will probably be determined through a consensus of the royal family and
 leading public figures.
 There are no politicalparties, legal oppsition groups, or elections, and there is
 no written constitution. Citizens have indirect access to senior officials through the
 traditional practice of petitioning local leaders for redress of grievances. Successful
 redress depends on the effectiveness of personal contact and the status and influ-
 ence of the intermediary. People have access to the Government at the level of pro-
 vincial governor (wali) and to their district representatives in the Majlis Ash-Shura.
 Provincial and tribal leaders and Majlis members in turn have access to the Sultan,
 his advisers, and ministry officials to present the views of their constituents and to
 accept their petitions. Citizens may als call on ministers and lower level officials.
 The Sultan makes an annual 3-week tour of the country to listen directly to his sub-
 jects' problems. Ministers accompany the Sultan and can be asked to respond di-
 rectly to citizens' complaints. In rural areas, local government reflects the tribal na-
 ture of Omani society, as traditional elites dominate the tribal and appointive town
 councils. Final authority outside Muscat is with the provincial governors, who are
 appointed by the Sultan.
 The Majlis Ash-Shura, established in 1991, is seen as a modest step toward broad-
 ening popular participation in the Government. The Sultan chose 59 of its 60 mem-
 bers from among three nominees from each district, selected in caucuses held in the
 spring of 1991 in which hundreds of leading citizens in each district participated.
 In contrast to the practice under the predecessor Council no serving government
 officials are eligible to sit as members of the new Majlis. In its second full year of
 existence, the Majlis met four times in full session, as decreed by the Sultan. Its
 five committees met on virtually a weekly basis, preparing reports on agenda items
 for the full Council. The Council's stated purposes are to serve as a conduit of infor-
 mation between the people and the government ministries and to provide the citi-
 zens' perspective, sometimes local in scope and sometimes national, on issues that
 previously were the sole preserve of government officials.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 There are no independent organizations to monitor human rights violations.
 Under the existing restrictions on freedoms of speech and association, public criti-
 cism of the Government's human rights practices would not be permitted. There
 were no known requests by international human rights organizations to visit Oman
 in 1993.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 Women.-There are many forms of discrimination against women in this tradi-
 tional society, even though some women, primarily in the capital, have attained po-
 sitions of authority in government, business, and the media. An estimated 14 per-
 cent of all civil servants are women. The occupational areas available to women are
 gradually expanding beyond the traditional field of teaching, as secretarial work,
 medicine and communications have become acceptable professional areas for women
 over the iast several years. However, some observers have noted a contraction of op-
 portunities for women as the Government becomes more concerned about employ-
 ment opportunities for men. In addition, some employers are concerned that female
 candidates for jobs might leave the work force to marry or have children, further
 diminishing women's opportunities for employment or for professional training.
 Schooling for girls is available to the same extent as for boys in urban areas and
 increasingly so in rural areas. In general, the level of education that girls attain re-
 mains below that of boys; however, the gap appears to be narrowing. Over 90 per-
 cent of Oman's children reach grade five of primary education. Women constitute
 roughly half of the 3,000 students at Sultan Qaboos University. Women students
 constitute the majority in the colleges of arts, education, and Islamic sciences, and
 science and business. Over half of the first graduating class of the college of medi-
 cine in 1993 were women. Admission of women to faculties in some technical fields,
 however, has become severely restricted in a reflection of a reluctance both among
 employers to hire trained females for work in these fields outside the capital area
 andamong trained females to accept work in them.
 The gains achieved by a small minority of women are largely irrelevant to the
 great majority, who live their lives within the confines of the home. Many females
 in the rural areas are illiterate. The lack of female education in some outlying areas
 of the country, where poverty is higher, combined with communal and tribal cus-
 toms that dictate a subsidiary role for women, makes it difficult for most adult
 women to participate fully in the modern sector.
 
 
 1267
 By law, women are to receive equal pay and benefits for equal work. The Govern-
 ment, by far the largest employer of women in the country, enforces this regulation
 within its ministries, where women serve in professional and senior managerial po-
 sitions. Women in the private sector earn salaries equal to those of their male coun-
 terparts. Women can sometimes have difficulty in obtaining land grants or sub-
 sidized government housing loans because the Government presumes that they will
 reside with a male relative, be it husband or brother. Legal provisions for female
 employees, including a provision for liberal maternity leave, are observed in both
 the public and private sectors. The Labor Law, in some ways very progressive, al-
 lows women with infants time off during the day to nurse.
 Omani society's interpretation of Islamic precepts on the status of women also re-
 sults in de jure and de facto discrimination in a number of areas. Islamic inherit-
 ance laws are strictly interpreted. A woman may receive only one-eighth of her hus-
 band's property when he dies. Daughters receive less than sons. In urban, educated
 families, many women have property in their own names; less educated women do
 not usually have that protection. Because of the relative lack of education among
 older women, many are unaware of their rights. Others are reluctant to use the
 court system out of fear that they might forfeit family support by bringing a matter
 before the court.
 There is no evidence that there is a pattern of spouse abuse. Because of the close-
 ness of Oman's extended families, battered women often seek family intervention to
 remove and protect them from violent domestic situations.
 Children.-The Government has made the health, education, and general welfare
 of children a priority in its budget. Medical care for Omani children is free, and a
 highly effective child immunization program has helped bring about dramatic im-
 provements in child health. Communities in a few towns in the interior and in the
 Dhofar region still practice female genital mutilation (circumcision). The total num-
 ber of cases nationwide is small and declinng aIually.
 National/Racial /Ethnic Minorities.-While there are no government restrictions
 directed against Omanis of east African origin, some of these Omanis appear to face
 de facto discrimination in employment opportunities. Some public institutions osten-
 sibly favor members of one or another regional, tribal, or religious group in their
 hiring. Each ethnic or national grup has its patrons in certain sectors. No group
 is banned from employment in the public sector. A regionally based group that is
 favored in positions in its native region would not have the same advantages in a
 different area of the country.
 Religious Minorities.--Oman's Muslim population includes a small Shi'a minority.
 Some Shi'as claim they face obstacles in employment and educational opportunities.
 Although there may be some grounds for these concerns, the main obstacle that the
 Shi'as face is that their limited number makes it difficult for them to develop an
 effective patronage group. Non-Muslim religious publishing is not permitted (see
 Section 2.c.).
 People with Disabilities.-The Government has taken some steps to address the
 public access needs of the handicapped, although compliance has been voluntary
 and not mandatory. There are handicapped parking spaces and some ramps for
 wheelchair acess in front of private and government o ice buildings and shopping
 centers. In October the Government sponsored a handicapped awareness week to in-
 crease public knowledge of the problems facing the handicapped. The Government
 has established a few handicapped centers mii r children in  band outlying re-
 gions. There are a few voluntary associations in Muscat which help people with dis-
 abilities, particularly handicapped children. Handicapped people, including the
 blind, work in govrnment offices. Disabled students in wheelchairs successfully at-
 tend Sultan Qabos University. The free medical assistance offered to all Omanis
 includes physical therapy for the handicapped.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The Omani Labor Law does not anticipate or ad-
 dress the formation of labor unions. In practice, organizations representing only
 workers do not exist, and there have been no known efforts to form unions. The
 Labor Law specifies that "it is absolutely forbidden to provoke a strike for any rea-
 son." Labor unrest has been rare during the two decades Oman has been developing
 a modern economy. Nevertheless, there were at least three reported strikes in 1993.
 Workers reportedly struck at two garment factories due to labTrmanagement dis-
 agreements about terminating workers' contracts The strikes lasted a few days and
 were .ttled without resort to police enforcement of the law prohibiting strikes. The
 factoS owners reqUnested the assistance of the Ministry of Social Affairs and Labor
 in mediati g two o the disputes. There were no reports that workers were forced
 
 
 1268
 to return to work. Oman is a member of the Arab Labor Organization and in 1993
 decided to join the International Labor Organization.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-Collective bargaining is not
 provided for in Omani law and is not practiced. However, according to the Labor
 Law, employers of more than 50 workers are required to form a joint body of labor
 and management representatives as a forum for communication between the two
 groups. However, implementation of this provision of the Labor Law appears to be
 uneven, and it is unclear how often the committees that do exist meet. Generally,
 these committees discuss such questions, for example, as living conditions in a com-
 pany housing compound. Wages and hours are not under the purview of these com-
 mittees; they are agreed upon by workers and employers in individual contracts,
 within the guidelines delineated by the Ministry of Social Affairs and Labor under
 the law. The committees are not formed across company lines; membership is con-
 fined to management and labor representatives from each individual company.
 The 1973 Labor Law (as amended) defines conditions of employment or both
 Omanis and foreign workers. The Labor Law covers domestic workers and construc-
 tion workers but does not cover temporary workers (those in Oman for less than
 three months). Foreign workers constitute at least 50 percent of the work force-
 if one includes the traditional Omani occupations of fishing, subsistence farming,
 and herding-and 80 to 90 percent of the work force in the modern sector. In Au-
 gust the Government promulgated a new regulation effective in March 1994, aimed
 at reducing the number of expatriate shopkeepers. The regulation prohibits the hir-
 ing of additional workers after that date. The initial concerns of the Omani business
 sponsors and the foreign shopkeepers have eased because the Government is allow-
 ing unlimited hiring of expatriates before the deadline and may consider amend-
 ments to the final regulation.
 Citizens of India, Pakistan, the Philippines, Bangladesh, and Sri Lanka continue
 to seek employment in Oman in large numbers, generally entering into employment
 contracts prior to their arrival. Work rules must be approved by the Ministry of So-
 cial Affairs and Labor and posted conspicuously in the workplace by employers of
 10 or more workers. Similarly, any employer with 50 or more workers must estab-
 lish a grievance procedure. Regardless o the size of the company, any employee,
 Omani or foreign, may file a grievance with the Labor Welfare Board, which com-
 prises 6 inspectors who arbitrate disputes. Lower paid workers, such as clerks, me-
 chanics, and salesmen, use the Board regularly. Both plaintiff and defendant may
 retain and be represented by counsel. Worker representatives may present collective
 grievances, but most cases are filed on behalf of individual workers.
 The Board has a docket of about 150 cases per month, about 80 percent of which
 involve foreign nationals. Sessions convene daily;, procedures are informal and sum-
 mary in nature. The Board operates impartially and generally gives workers the
 benefit of the doubt in grievance hearings. Disputes that the Board cannot resolve
 are referred to the Minister of Social Affairs and Labor for decision. Complaints in-
 volving employer-employee relations should be brought before the magistrate court
 if there is an allegation of criminal wrongdoing.
 There are no export processing zones in Oman.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-Although prohibited by law, a
 form of compulsory labor occurs occasionally. Some employers withhold the letters
 of release that foreign workers require in order to transfer employment and resi-
 dency sponsorship from one employer to another. Failing to secure a letter of release
 and legal transfer to another firm in Oman, a foreign national must either continue
 working at his current workplace or become technically unemployed. To avoid that
 status and the possibility of being forced to leave the country, some employees sub-
 mit to their employers' coercion.
 Some employers demand that foreign workers perform overtime or remain at a
 firm for several months against their wishes, in some cases without compensation,
 in exchange for the promise of a release letter. This practice is proscribed by law.
 However, labor inspections in the workplace are rare, and it generally falls to the
 worker to approach the Labor Welfare Board to report a violation. Many foreign
 workers are not aware of their right to a hearing on a labor dispute before the Labor
 Welfare Board. Workers may engage attorneys to argue cases before the Board, and
 in most cases the Board releases the employee immediately from service with back
 compensation for the time worked under compulsion. The employer faces no penal
 sanction if the Board decides in the worker's favor. The only penalty against an em-
 ployer is the loss of the worker and the compensation payment made to him.
 d.Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-Under the law, children, defined
 as those under the age of 13, are prohibited from working. This prohibition is effec-
 tively enforced by the Directorate of Labor under the Ministry of Social Affairs and
 Labor. Juveniles, defined as those over 13 years and under 16 years of age, are pro-
 
 
 1269
 hibited from performing evening or night work or strenuous labor. Juveniles are
 also forbidden to work overtime or on weekends or holidays without the permission
 of the Ministry of Social Affairs and Labor. There are no export industries in which
 child labor is used. Omani children are sometimes employed as riders in camel
 races, but they generally ride under the auspices of their families. Their involve-
 ment in the races does not preclude them from access to education and medical care.
 There were no instances in which child camel jockeys suffered serious injury.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-Using its legal authority to determine the min-
 imum wape and make adjustments according to economic circumstances, the Gov-
 ernment issues minimum wage guidelines for various categories of workers. The
 current minimum wage for nonprofessional workers, set in 1979, is approximately
 $156 per month (60 Omani rials). Minimum wage guidelines do not cover domestic
 servants, farmers, government employees, or workers in small businesses--a consid-
 erable segment of the total work force. In some public sector jobs requiring a high
 degree of specialization, foreign workers earn a higher wage than Omani counter-
 parts. However many foreign workers are in categories exempt from the minimum
 wage statute. For menial work that is subject to the minimum wage lax enforce-
 ment by the Directorate of Labor usually permits employers to pay less than the
 legal standard. The minimum wage is sufficient to provide an Omani worker in the
 capital area with a decent subsistence, with something left over to send to family
 members living in rural areas, as is the custom. The compensation for foreign man-
 ual laborers and clerks (mainly south Asians) is sufficient to cover living expenses
 and to permit a portion of the income to be sent home.
 The private sector workweek is 40 to 45 hours (less for Muslims during Ramadan)
 and includes a rest period from Thursday afternoon through Friday, which many
 shopkeepers and their employees opt not to observe. While the law does not des-
 inate the number of days in a workweek, it requires at least one 24-hour rest pe-
 nod per week and mandates overtime pay for hours in excess of 48 per week. In
 practice, the workweek is 5 days in the public sector and generally 5  days in the
 private sector. Some menial laborers not protected by the Labor Law are re uired
 by a few employers to work longer hours under substandard working conditions.
 Supplementa income through compensated overtime work is common for lower level
 employees.
 Every worker has the right to 15 days of annual leave during the first 3 years
 of emp loyment and 30 days per year thereafter. Employers provide many foreign na-
 tionals, including maids, with annual or biennual round-trip tickets to their coun-
 tries of origin. Employers commonly hold foreign workers' passports, as they are le-
 gally responsible for the workers' actions while they are in Oman.
 The Labor Law and regulations cover in detail issues of occupational safety and
 access to medical treatment. For example, all employers must provide first aid facili-
 ties and those with over 100 employees in one location must also employ a nurse
 at that location. Employees covered under the Labor Law may recover compensation
 for industrial injury or illness through medical insurance, which the employer must
 provide. The health and safety standard codes are enforced by inspectors from the
 Department of Health and Safety of the Directorate of Labor. They make frequent
 on-site inspections, as required by law.
\