 OMAN
 Although the Sultanate of Oman is an absolute monarchy with no
 machinery for the election of any institutions to share in the
 country's rule, the integrity of the individual is generally
 respected. The reigning Sultan, Qaboos bin Said AI-Bu Said,
 is the 14th ruler of the current dynasty. He came to power in
 1970 in a palace coup which ousted his father who had reigned
 for nearly 40 years prior to that date. The 13 years since
 Sultan Qaboos' accession to power have witnessed a remarkable
 degree of progress within the social, economic, and
 administrative spheres. Almost totally undeveloped in 1970,
 Oman has used its modest oil revenues to foster such
 progress. During this period the Government has achieved a
 significant improvement in the living standards of its
 people. Development requirements have necessitated the influx
 of large numbers of migrant workers, largely from India and
 Pakistan, but alto from some countries in East Asia. The
 standard of living of some of these workers, while better than
 in their home countries, has not always kept pace with the
 standards enjoyed by Omani citizens.
 Political development, however, is still embryonic. The State
 Consultative Council, formed in 1981 by the Sultan, functions
 as an advisory body on economic and social questions. Its
 members, while broadly representative of the population, are
 appointed by the Sultan. In practice the reigning Sultan has
 continued the long tradition of the House of Al-Bu Said; i.e.,
 absolute control over all questions affecting the Omani state.
 Despite its autocratic character, the Sultan's Government
 enjoys a high level of acceptance among the population. The
 obvious economic and social benefits that have accrued from
 the current Government's efforts to modernize the country have
 won the allegiance of the urban population of the capital area
 and the provincial administrative centers. More importantly,
 Sultan Qaboos has been able to build on a trend already
 visible during the-reign of his father to bring notables of
 the tribal system of the interior into the existing national
 administrative system. Historically, threats to a Sultan's
 rule came from the ability of tribal leaders to organize
 opposition around the politico-religious institution and
 person of an imam (religious leader), located in the
 interior. The institution of the imamate was effectively
 ended in the 1950's, however, and many of the individuals who
 would otherwise have given primary allegiance to the system of
 tribal authority have been offered positions in the
 administrative structure that has been steadily widening since
 1970.
 National security remains a matter of continuing close
 attention. In the early years of the rule of Sultan Qaboos,
 the Government's concern was focused on quelling an
 insurrection in the southern Province of Dhofar. This
 insurrection was supported directly by the People's Democratic
 Republic of Yemen, with some Soviet and Chinese support. The
 insurrection was finally defeated in 1975, but continued
 hostility from South Yemen forced Oman to continue to devote
 much of its revenue to defense. This practice was continued
 with the growth of a new threat to its security and that of
 the entire Persian Gulf from the Islamic Republic of Iran. As
 the nation on the south shore of the Strait of Hormuz, Oman
 has become the focus of attention for efforts to protect the
 flow of oil from the area, with concomitant increased
 expenditure on military modernization.
 
 (1378)
 
 
 1379
 There have been no major incidents in 1983 which have had a
 significant impact on the human rights environment in Oman.
 Although lacking formal codification of civil and political
 rights, the Government is reasonably accessible to the people
 through their tribal leaders and walis (governors) who have
 the role of ombudsmen. The internal services are large,
 efficient, and pervasive, but are not generally regarded as
 repressive. In the short term, modernization and political
 development associated with it are likely to have a positive
 impact on human rights as Omanis--the Sultan, his
 administration, and the population at large--see the
 advantages of working together to administer their growing
 economy and to consolidate the creation of the modern state
 that began only 13 years ago.
 In the longer term, the effects on human rights of rapid
 modernization are difficult to predict. At present, the Omani
 Government sends large numbers of students abroad for
 university training. In addition, many Omanis work and travel
 abroad, particularly in neighboring countries, where they come
 into contact with currents of thought and opinion not readily
 available in Oman. To date many key jobs in the Government,
 especially in the military and internal security services, are
 occupied by outsiders, including many British. Already, some
 demands for an increased pace in "Omanization" in the public
 sector have surfaced.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Unlawful or Arbitrary Deprivation of Life
 There have been no known illegal or arbitrary killings by the
 Government or by politically motivated factions in Oman in
 recent years.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no allegations of disappearances in 1983.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 Though Islamic law is administered throughout the country by
 Islamic judges, the physical mutilations prescribed by such
 law are generally commuted by the Government to prison terms.
 Exceptions may occur in very remote areas, or among Bedouin
 tribes, but there is no confirmation of such practices nor do
 they have the Central Government's sanction. There are no
 reports of torture or other forms of cruel punishment by state
 police or administrative authorities.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Though Omani law does not provide for habeas corpus or its
 equivalent, the period of detention before trial in criminal
 cases is usually short. Abuses of the police power of arrest
 have occurred, but the criminal code imposes penalties for
 unjustified arrest or detention, and in at least one case in
 1983 such penalties were invoked. Citizens have several
 channels through which they can seek redress of any grievance
 against law enforcement authorities, and these appear to
 
 
 1380
 function well, particularly in rural areas. There are no
 reports of Omanis being detained merely for organizational
 affiliation though membership in certain unauthorized
 organizations is a criminal offense. Fewer than 50 insurgents
 from the Dhofar insurgency (1965-75) are reportedly still
 under detention, but approximately 500 Dhofaris returned to
 Oman in 1983 under an amnesty following the rapprochment
 between Oman and South Yemen. All Omanis who were in exile
 under the previous Sultan were given the opportunity to return
 to Oman, and many thousands have done so since 1970.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Islamic law prescribes a fair and speedy trial before
 experienced and impartial judges, and judicial practice in
 Oman conforms largely to these prescriptions. In fact,
 however, the majority of cases are settled by out-of-court
 negotiations. There is no right under law to a jury, counsel,
 or a public trial, but members of the public do attend trials
 and hearings. The defendant is formally charged either before
 a magistrate of the police court in the capital area, or a
 local magistrate (qadi) in outlying areas. The defendant may
 call and question witnesses. If convicted, he may appeal his
 case to the chief magistrate of the police court system, and
 ultimately to the Sultan in cases involving serious offenses.
 The various judicial systems are technically subordinate to
 the Sultan, but they operate independently in the vast
 majority of cases.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 There are no reported incidents of Government interfering
 arbitrarily or unreasonably with the private lives of its
 citizens. However, warrants are not required to search
 private residences or offices. Such searches, as well as
 monitoring of telephones and private correspondence, appear to
 be infrequent and confined to cases where the Government
 perceives a security threat or criminal activity. There is no
 forced membership in political organizations, and
 no effort at state control over the use of indigenous
 languages in speech or print, or religious instruction in the
 home. Omani men have the right to marry as they choose, but
 marriages between Omani women and non-Muslim men are not
 permitted in accordance with Islamic law.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 There are no guarantees in law which protect freedom of speech
 or freedom of the press. Criticism of the Sultan in any form
 or in any medium is prohibited by law. Criticism of
 individual officials, agencies, and their programs is
 tolerated, but is not given media coverage. The Government
 controls all radio and television broadcasting originating in
 Oman. It also owns the only two daily newspapers, one in
 Arabic, and one in English. Subsidies to the several
 privately owned weekly and biweekly publications provide
 effective incentive to self-censorship, although arrests and
 closure for offensive articles have occurred. Thus,
 editorials and news coverage by the media invariably reflect
 government views. Publications arriving in Oman from foreign
 countries are censored for politically or sexually offensive
 
 
 1381
 material and are occasionally banned. The censor's attention
 generally focuses on articles that directly attack or
 embarrass the Omani Government. Academic freedom is not an
 issue in Oman as there are as yet no institutions of higher
 education. Conversations with or between Omania are candid on
 the subjects of social, economic, and administrative
 development.
 b. Freedom of PeaCeful Assembly and Association
 Freedom of assembly is not guaranteed by law. Associations of
 any kind must register with the Government, and those which
 oppose the political system of the Sultanate are prohibited.
 Labor unions and strikes are illegal, and the organization of
 professional groups is embryonic.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Oman is an Islamic state and virtually all Omani citizens
 adhere to one or another sect of Islam, the exception being a
 small Hindu community made up of Omani citizens of Indian
 origin. Ibadhi Muslims are in an overall majority and include
 the royal family. However, members of the Sunni and Shi'a
 Muslim minorities are found in all walks of life in both the
 public and private sector. Non-Muslim foreigners, both
 Christian and Hindu, are allowed to worship freely. In fact,
 the Government of Oman has donated land for the purpose of
 building a Christian church and a new Hindu temple. The only
 restriction imposed by the Government on non-Muslims in Oman
 is a prohibition against proselytizing. Conversely,
 conversion to Islam is encouraged and publicized.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel,
 Emigration, and Repatriation
 Omanis living abroad before 1970 have returned to Oman in
 large numbers with official encouragement and without legal
 obstacles. Included in this group are several thousand ethnic
 Omani refugees from East Africa, particularly Zanzibar, who
 have been successfully resettled. Many Omanis who had sought
 refuge in the Peoples Democratic Republic of'Yemen during the
 insurgency in Dhofar Province (1965-75) have returned to Oman
 with official encouragement. Non-Omani refugees are not
 permitted to remain in Oman. Those few that reach Oman are
 generally returned to their homelands unless they can be
 quickly resettled in a third country.
 Omanis may travel to foreign countries freely, although a
 woman must have authorization from her husband or father to
 obtain a passport. Many Omanis work abroad, particularly in
 the United Arab Emirates where an estimated 30,000 Omanis are
 currently employed. Many of these people travel home to Oman
 on weekends. With the exception of a few military areas,
 there are no restrictions on travel by Omanis, including
 women, within their country. The Government has undertaken an
 extensive program of road construction and instituted a
 comprehensive transport system which has greatly increased the
 ability to move within the country to areas that had
 heretofore been physically inaccessible.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to
 Change Their Government
 Oman is an absolute monarchy where the Sultan has ultimate
 
 
 1382
 authority over all government functions. Political parties,
 legal opposition groups, elections, and constitutions are
 unknown.  Thus, citizens have no right to change their
 Government or to choose the laws that govern them. As
 individuals, citizens do have access to senior officials
 through the traditional practices of submitting petitions for
 the redress of grievances. Successful redress depends on the
 effectiveness of personal contact and the quality of the
 persons chosen as intermediaries. Outside of Muscat, the
 Government still reflects the tribal nature of Omani society.
 Traditional elites dominate the tribal and town councils, which
 settle intratribal disputes. Final authority, however, is with
 the walis (governors) who are appointed by the Sultan. In
 reality, therefore, citizens do not have the right to
 participate in the political process. In an effort to broaden
 participation in the Government, the Sultan formed the
 Consultative Council for the State in 1981. It consists of 55
 members drawn from the Government, the business community and
 the outlying districts.  It includes members of every
 significant ethnic, geographic, and religious sector of the
 population. The Council membership is directly appointed by
 the Sultan. At present, the Council's role is an advisory one,
 limited to the social and economic spheres.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Non-governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The Government of Oman declined to receive a proposed Amnesty
 International mission in 1972 during the insurgency in Dhofar.
 Since then, there have been no known requests by international
 human rights organizations to visit Oman. There are no
 independent organizations based within the country that
 observe, report, or contest human rights violations. Freedom
 House rates Oman "not free," while Amnesty International does
 not include Oman in its 1983 report. Oman has played a passive
 role in the United Nations and regional bodies on issues
 dealing with human rights.
 ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND CULTURAL SITUATION
 Before 1970, the Government of Oman actively discouraged all
 forms of modernization. Oman was among the poorest countries
 in the world with a rudimentary economy and virtually no modern
 infrastructure. With the start of oil exports in 1967, the
 accession of the present Sultan to power in 1970, and the
 increase in oil prices in the 1970's, Oman has made remarkable
 advances in almost every index of development. The Government
 has devoted a large proportion of its oil revenues to building
 infrastructure, industrialization, improvement in agriculture
 and fishing, expansion in communications, and the provision of
 a full range of social services to the population. From 1970
 to the present, the number of hospital beds has jumped from 12
 to several thousand, the number of students in schools from a
 few hundred to 145,000, and the length of paved roads from
 approximately 10 kilometers to almost 3,000. Life expectancy
 has increased by some five years to 48, and programs for the
 eradication of endemic diseases are widespread. The infant
 mortality rate is 119/1000. Boosted by the inflow of Omanis
 from overseas and by migrant workers from the Indian
 Subcontinent and East Asia, population growth now stands at 3.1
 percent a year.
 Many towns and most rural areas still lack reliable supplies of
 
 
 1383
 safe water and electricity. The adult literacy rate is still
 below 50 percent, and many primary age children are not in
 school. Though per capita gross national product is now over
 $5,924 a year, for a population estimated at 978,000, the
 benefits of the new prosperity have been by and large centered
 in the capital area and a few key provincial centers like
 Salalah. The Government is aware of this imbalance, and has
 made some effort to redress it. Corruption in some areas has
 also siphoned off some of the gains from the commonweal, but
 the Government is taking steps to curtail incidents of
 corruption.
 Though conservative, Oman has not been extreme in its attempts
 to impose strict adherence to Islamic precepts on women. For
 example, women have shared in the benefits of social and
 economic growth of recent years, and schooling for girls is
 available to the same extent as to boys in urban areas, less so
 in rural areas. However, for cultural reasons the educational
 level of girls still lags behind that of boys. Many Omani
 women drive. A few women have reached high levels in the
 public sector. By and large, however, occupational advances
 available to women are limited to the traditional spheres of
 teaching, secretarial work, and nursing.
 
 30-231 0 - 84 - 88
 
 
 1384
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: OMAN
 1981     1982     1983
 ..........................................................
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL...        0.7     15.5     15.1
 LOANS................      0.0      7.5     12.5
 GRANTS ...............     0.7    8.0      2.6
 A.AIO  .... ..................  0.0    15.0    15.0
 LOANS ....... .........   0.0      7.5     12.5
 GRANTS ................    0.0     7.5      2.5
 (SEC.SUPP.ASSIST.)...        0.0     15.0     15.0
 B.FOOD FOR PEACE .......       0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS ...............      0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................    0.0     0.0      0.0
 TITLE  I-TOTAL ..........      0.0      0.0      0.0
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS .....       0.0      0.0      0.0
 PAY. IN  FOR. CURR .....      0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE  I1-TOTAL .........      0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.RELIEF.EC.DEV & WFP.        0.0      0.0      0.0
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY .....       0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST...        0.7      0.5      0.1
 LOANS ...............      0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............        0.7    0.5      0.1
 PEACE CORPS ......        0.7     0.5      0.1
 NARCOTICS ........        0.0     0.0      0.0
 OTHER ............        0.0     0.0      0.0
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL...       25.0     30.1     30.1
 LOANS ................   25.0     30.0     30.0
 GRANTS ................    0.0     0.1      0.1
 A.trAP  GRANTS ..........     0.0     0.0      0.0
 B.CREDIT FINANCING....       25.0     30.0     30.0
 C.INTL  MIL.EO.TRNG ....      0.0      0.1      0.1
 D.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK...        0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER  GRANTS ........      0.0      0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. & MIL...       25.7     45.6     45.2
 LOANS ................   25.0     37.5     42.5
 GRANTS ...............     0.7    8.1      2.7
 ---..----.--.----.---------.--.----.--------------.-.-.---
 OTHER  US  LOANS ..........     0.0      0.0      0.0
 EX-IM BANK LOANS .......       0.0      0.0      0.0
 ALL  OTHER ...............      0.0     0.0      0.0
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1981     1982     1983    1946-83
 TOTAL ........     0.0     16.8     0.0     70.0
 IBRD               0.0     15.0     0.0     62.0
 IFC                0.0      0.0     0.0      2.0
 IDA                0.0      0.0     0.0      0.0
 IDB                0.0     0.0      0.0      0.0
 ADB                0.0      0.0     0.0      0.0
 AFDB               0.0      0.0     0.0      0.0
 UNDP               0.0      1.8     0.0      5.5
 OTHER-UN           0.0      0.0     0.0      0.5
 EEC                0.0      0.0     0.0      0.0
 
 
