 OMAN
 The Sultanate of Oman is a monarchy which has been ruled by the A1 Bu Sa'id
 family since the middle of the 18th century. It has no political parties or direclyo
 elected representative institutions. The current Sultan is Qaboos Bin Sa'id Al Said
 
 
 1239
 who acceded in 1970. Although the Sultan retains firm control over all important
 olicy issues, he has brought tribal leaders and other notables into the Government.
 accordance with tradition and cultural norms, much decisionmaking is by consen-
 sus among these leaders. In 1991 the Sultan established a 59-seat Consultative
 Council, or Majlis Ash-Shura, which replaced an older advisory body. The Govern-
 ment selects council members from lists of nominees proposed by each of the 59
 wilayats (regions). After the country's first national census in 1993, the Sultan ex-
 pandd the membership of the new Council to 80 seats. The Council has no formal
 legislative powers, but may question government ministers and recommend changes
 to new laws on economic and social policy.
 The entire internal security apparatus falls under the authority of the Ministry
 of Palace Office Affairs which coordinates all intelligence and security policies. The
 Internal Security Service investigates all matters related to internal security. The
 Royal Oman Police performs regular police duties, provides security at airports,
 serves as the country's immigration agency, and maintains a smaml coast guard.
 There are credible reports that security forces occasionally mistreated detainees.
 Since 1970 Oman has used its modest oil revenue to make impressive economic
 progress and improve public access to health care, education, and social services.
 man has a mixed economy with significant government participation in industry,
 transportation and communications. The Government seeks to diversify the economy
 and stimulate private investment.
 The Government continues to restrict or deny important human rights. Human
 rights abuses include arbitrary arrest, mistreatment of detainees, prolonged deten-
 tion without charge, and the denial of due process. The Government restricts free-
 dom of expression and association, and does not guarantee full rights for workers
 and women. On November 5, Sultan Qaboos granted a general amnesty to an unde-
 termined number of persons who were tried and sentenced in 1994 during a round-
 up of alleged subversives. An undetermined number of prisoners held since the
 1980's on similar charges were also released. As a practical matter, the people do
 not have the right to change their government.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no reports of political or
 other extrajudicial killings.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punshment.-
 Security forces mistreat some detainees, particularly during interrogation. However,
 the abuse does not appear to be systematic, and often varies depending upon the
 social status of the victim and the official involved. Techniques range from sleep
 deprivation to harsher measures such as hanging a bound victim from a steel bar
 in such a way that the wrists must support the full weight of the body. Security
 officials sometimes beat detainees but are often careful to conceal evidence of abuse
 b employing such tactics as restricting blows to less visible areas of the body. Al-
 though judges have the right to order investigations of allegations of mistreatment,
 there is no recent evidence that any officer has been punished for abusing detainees.
 The Government does not permit independent monitoring of prisons. Neverthe-
 less, prison conditions appear to meet minimum international standards. Access to
 some prisoners is severely restricted. Prison officials refused some requests for visits
 by relatives of the alleged subversives jailed in 1994. These prisoners were held in
 a special section at Rumais maximum security prison. Apreviously unknown group
 calling itself the "Oman Civil Rights Committee,* believed to be based in the United
 Kingdom, alleged in early May that prison officials at Rumais denied medical care
 to "50 of the 146" alleged subversives who were suffering from possible food poison-
 ing. The group described conditions at Rumais as "atrocious." These allegations were
 unconfirmed.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The police may obtain warrants prior to
 making arrests but are not required by law to do so. The authorities must obtain
 court orders to hold suspects in pretrial detention. Within 24 hours of arrest, the
 police are required to file charges or ask a magistrate judge to order continued de-
 tention. In practice, however, the police do not always follow these procedures.
 Judges may order detentions for 14 days to allow investigation and may grant ex-
 tensions, if necessary. There is a system of bail.
 Police handling of arrests and detentions constitutes incommunicado detention in
 some instances. The police do not routinely notify a detainee's family or, in the case
 of a foreign worker, the worker's sponsor of the detention. Sometimes notification
 is made only just prior to the detainee's release. The authorities post a list of per-
 
 
 1240
 sons scheduled for trial near the magistrate court building in Muscat. The police
 do not always permit attorneys and family members to visit detainees. Judges occa-
 sionally intercede to ensure that security officials allow such visits.
 The Government does not practice exile as a form of punishment.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The judiciary comprises the magistrate courts,
 which adjudicate misdemeanors and criminal matters; the Islamic, or Shari'a,
 courts, which ajudicate personal status cases such as divorce and inheritance; the
 Authority for the Settlement of Commercial Disputes (ASCD); the Labor Welfare
 Board; and the Rent Dispute Committee, which hears tenant-landlord disputes. A
 State Security Court tries cases involving national security. Although it is adminis-
 tratively distinct from the other courts, magistrate court judges have presided over
 trials in the State Security Court.
 The various courts are subordinate to the Sultan and subject to his influence. The
 Sultan appoints all judges, acts as a court of final appeal, and intercedes in cases
 of particular interest, especially in national security cases. However, there have
 been no reported instances in which the Sultan has overturned a decision of the
 ASCD or the magistrate courts.
 The Criminal Code does not specify the rights of the accused. There are no writ-
 ten rules of evidence, or codified procedures for entering cases into the criminal sys-
 tem, or any legal provision for a public trial. Criminal procedures have developed
 by tradition and precedents in the magistrate courts. In criminal cases, the police
 provide defendants with the written charges against them, defendants are p resumed
 innocent, and have the right to present evidence and confront witnesses. The pros-
 ecution and the defense question witnesses through the judge, who is usually the
 only person to question witnesses in court.
 There are no jury trials. A single judge tries misdemeanors; a panel of three
 judges tries felonies and security offenses. Magistrate court judges must be citizens.
 Public prosecutors are senior police officers. They may bring additional charges after
 defense attorneys have inspected the charge sheet or during trial.
 A detainee may hire an attorney but has no explicit right to be represented by
 counsel. The Government does not pay for the legal representation of indigents.
 Judges often pronounce the verdict and sentence within 1 day after the completion
 of a trial. Defendants may appeal jail sentences longer than 3 months and fines over
 the equivalent of $1,300 to a three-judge panel. Defendants accused of national secu-
 rity offenses and serious felonies do not have the right of appeal. Death sentences,
 which are rare, cannot be carried out without the Sultan's approval.
 There are no known political prisoners. An undetermined number of individuals
 who were tried and sentenced for engaging_ in alleged subversive activities in 1994
 remained incarcerated for most of 1995. However, the secrecy of their trials pre-
 vented any independent assessment of the Government's assertion that all those
 convicted were actually guilty of plotting to destabilize the country. In November
 the Sultan granted a general amnesty to -all prisoners involved in activities and or-
 ganizations that are forbidden by law." This had the effect of freeing those jailed
 in 1994. Some of these individuals occupied important positions in the Government.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The po-
 lice are not required by law to obtain search warrants. There is a widespread belief
 that the Government eavesdrops on both oral and written communications, and
 Omanis are guarded in both areas. Citizens must obtain permission from the Min-
 istry of Interior to marry foreigners, which is not automatially granted. In one re-
 cent case, officials at an Omani embassy abroad confiscated the passport of an
 Omani woman who had married a European national without permission from her
 father or the Government. When her husband traveled alone to Oman to discuss the
 marriage with his wife's family, he was placed under arrest. The man was allowed
 to depart the country after his wife surrendered her passport and his government
 intervened on his behalf.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-There is no legal protection for free speech or
 press. The law prohibits any criticism of the Sultan in any form or medium. The
 authorities tolerate criticism of government officials and agencies, but such criticism
 rarely receives media coverage.
 The 1984 press and publication law authorizes the Government to censor all do-
 mestic and imported publications. Ministry of Information censors may act against
 any material regarded as politically, culturally, or sexually offensive. However, jour-
 nalists and writers generally censor themselves to avoid government harassment.
 Editorials reflect the Government's views, although the authorities tolerate some
 criticism on foreign affairs issues. The Government discourages in-depth reporting
 
 
 1241
 on controversial domestic issues, and seeks to influence privately owned dailies and
 periodicals by subsidizing their operating costs.
 The Government prohibits the entry onto the market of foreign newspapers and
 magazines containing reports or statements deemed critical of Oman. Customs offi-
 cials sometimes confiscate video cassette tapes and erase offensive material. The
 tapes may or may not be returned to their owners.
 The Government controls the local radio and television companies. They do not
 air any politically controversial material. The Government does not allow the estab-
 lishment of privately owned radio and television companies. However, the availabil-
 ity of satellite dishes has made foreign broadcast information accessible to the pub-
 lic.
 The appropriate government authority, such as Sultan Qaboos University, the po-
 lice, or the relevant ministry must approve cultural events, including plays con-
 certs, lectures, and seminars. Most organizations avoid controversial issues cue to
 fear that the authorities may cancel their events. Academic freedom is restricted,
 particularly regarding controversial matters, including politics. Professors may be
 dismissed for going beyond acceptable boundaries.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Assoiation.-The law does not guarantee
 freedom of assembly. The law states that the Ministry of Social Affairs and Labor
 must approve the establishment of all associations and their by-laws. Despite this,
 some groups are allowed to function without such formal registration. The Govern-
 ment uses the power to license associations as a means to control the political envi-
 rnment. It does not license groups regarded as a threat to the predominant social
 or political views of the Sultanate.
 All public gatherings require government sponsorship. The authorities do not al-
 ways enforce this requirement, and gatherings sometimes take place without formal
 government approval. Regulations implemented in 1994 restricting most types of
 public gatherings remain in effect.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-Islam is the state religion. Most Omanis are Tbadhi or
 Sunni Muslims, but there is also a minority of Shi a Muslims. Non-Muslims are free
 to worship at churches and temples built on land donated by the Sultan. There are
 many Christian denominations which utilize two plots of donated land on which two
 Catholic and two Protestant churches have been built. Other land has been made
 available to Catholic and Protestant missions in Sohar and Salalah.
 The Government prohibits non-Muslims from proselytizing Muslims. It also pro-
 hibits non-Muslim groups from publishing religious material, although material
 printed abroad may be brought into the country. Members of all religions and sects
 are free to maintain links with coreligionists abroad and undertake foreign travel
 for religious purposes. Due to government restrictions on public gatherings, there
 has been a substantial curtailment of non-Muslim religious celebrations in recent
 years.
 The police monitor mosque sermons to ensure that the preachers do not discuss
 political topics and stay within the state-approved orthodoxy of Islam. In major
 mosques in a number of cities, imams preach standardized sermons distributed by
 the Ministry of Justice, Awqaf, and Islamic Affairs.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Government does not restrict travel by citizens within the country
 except to military areas. Foreigners, other than diplomats, must obtain a govern-
 ment pass to cross border points. While a man may travel abroad freely, a woman
 must have authorization from her husband, father, or nearest male relative to ob-
 tain a passport.
 The Government does not have a policy on refugees or a tradition of harboring
 stateless or undocumented aliens. Tight control over the entry of foreigners into the
 country has effectively screened out would-be refugees. Yemeni refugees who were
 allowed to enter southern Oman in mid-1994 have since returned to their country.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Oman is an autocracy in which the Sultan retains the ultimate authority on all
 important foreign and domestic issues. The country has no formal democratic politi-
 cal institutions, and its citizens do not have the ability peacefully to change their
 leaders or the political system.
 There is no written constitution, political parties, or direct elections. Citizens have
 indirect access to senior officials through the traditional practice of petitioning their
 patrons, usually the local governor, or wali, for redress of grievances. Successful re-
 trss depends on the effectiveness of the patron's access to appropriate
 decisionmakers. The Sultan appoints the governors. The Sultan makes an annual
 
 
 1242
 3-week tour of the country, accompanied by his ministers. The tour allows the Sul-
 tan to listen directly to his subjects' problems.
 In 1991 Sultan Qaboos established a Consultative Council, or Majlis Ash-Shura.
 In 1994 he expanded the number of council seats to 80 from the original 59, a move
 which allocated two members for districts with a higher population. The Govern-
 ment selected the council members from several nominees elected in caucuses of
 prominent persons in each district. Caucus participants are also subject to govern-
 ment approval. In some cases, nominees with the most votes did not win appoint-
 ment to the Council. The Council has no formal legislative powers, which remain
 concentrated in the Sultan's hands. However, it serves as a conduit of information
 between the people and the government ministries. No serving government official
 is eligible to be a Council member. The Council may question government ministers,
 review all draft laws on social and economic policy, and recommend legislative
 changes to the Sultan who makes the final decision.
 The Sultan has publicly advocated a greater role for women in both the public
 and private sectors. In 1994, the Government selected two women to serve on the
 Consultative Council.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 The Government prohibits the establishment of human rights groups. The exist-
 ing restrictions on the freedom of speech and association do not permit any activity
 or speech critical of the Government. There were no known requests by inter-
 national human rights organizations to visit Oman.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 Oman does not have a written Constitution. It does not have laws to prohibit dis-
 crimination. Institutional and cultural discrimination based on gender, race, reli-
 gion, social status, and disability exists.
 Women.-There is no evidence of a pattern of spousal abuse but information is
 scant and difficult to collect. Doctors do not have a legal responsibility to report ei-
 ther spouse or child abuse cases to the courts. Battered women may file a complaint
 with the police, but more often seek family intervention to protect them from violent
 domestic situations. There have been reports that employers or male coworkers have
 sexually harassed foreign females employed in such positions as domestic servants
 and hospital nurses. Foreign women employed as domestic servants and garment
 workers have complained that their employers have withheld their salaries and that
 government officials have been unresponsive to their grievances.
 Most women live within the confines of their homes. They continue to face many
 forms of discrimination. Illiteracy among older women hampers their ability to own
 property, participate in the modern sector of the economy, or even inform them-
 selves of their own rights. Government officials frequently deny women land grants
 or housing loans, andprefer to conduct business with a woman's husband or other
 male relative.
 However, since 1970 conditions for women have improved dramatically in several
 areas. Whereas just 25 years ago no schools existed for girls, in 1995, the Omani
 Ministry of Education reported an enrollment rate of 86.7 percent for all girls eligi-
 ble for elementary school. In the 1994-95 school year, female students constituted
 48 percent of the total number of students attending public schools. Women con-
 stitute roughly half of the 3,000 students at Sultan Qaboos University. In November
 432 women and 307en                      members of the sixth graduating class.
 The University has a quota system with the apparent goal of increasing the number
 of men studying certain speialities.:Reportedly, women are being limited to 50 per-
 cent of the seats in the medical department, and are no longer permitted to take
 degrees in engineering. The quotas will allow women to constitute a majority in
 some other departments.
 Women have also made gains in the work force. Some educated women have at-
 tained positions of authority in government, business, and the media. Approximately
 19 percent of all civil servants are women. In both the public and private sectors,
 women are entitled to liberal maternity leave and equal pay for equal work. The
 bureaucracy, the country's largest employer of women, observes such regul!ations, as
 do many private sector employers. Still, many educated women face job discrimina-
 tion because prospective employers fear they might quit to marry or raise families.
 Several women employees in the Government have complained that they have been
 denied promotion in favor of less capable men. Government grants for study abroad
 are limited almost exclusively to males.
 
 
 1243
 Some aspcts of Islamic tradition also discriminate against women. Islamic law
 favors male heirs in adjudicating inheritance claims. Many women are reluctant to
 take an inheritance dispute to court for fear of alienating the family.
 Children.-The Government has made the health, education, and general welfare
 of children a budgetary priority. The infant mortality rate continues to decline and
 comprehensive immunization rates have risen. There is no pattern of familial or
 other child abuse. A few communities in the interior and in t&e Dhofar region still
 practice female genital mutilation (FMG). FMG is widely condemned by inter-
 national health experts as damaging to a girl's physical and psychological health.
 e         that the number of such cases is small and decningann
 P~eopeWt Disabilities.-aThe Government has mandated parkin       spaces and
 some ramps for wheelchair access in private and government office buildings and
 shopping centers. Compliance is voluntary. Students in wheelchairs have easy ac-
 ces to Sultan Qaboos University. The Government has established several rehabili-
 tation centers for disabled children. Disabled persons, including the blind, work in
 government offices. Free government medical assistance to all citizens includes
 physica] therapy and prosthetics support for the disabled.
 Religious Minorities.--ome members of the Shi'a Muslim minority claim they
 face discrimination in employment and educational opportunities. Some members of
 this same community, however, occupy prominent positions in both the private and
 public sectors.
 Nat ional/Racial/IEthnic Minorities.--Citizens of east African origin complain that
 they frequently face job discrimination in both the public and private sectors. Some
 public institutions reportedhy favor hiring members of one or another regional, trib-
 al, or religious grup. However, no group is banned from emplomnt.
 Members of the Shihuh tribe in the strategic province of Mueandam have charged
 that security authorities have harassed and detained tribe members who complain
 about alleged inattentioh or ill treatment by the central Government. Clashes be-
 tween Shiu    and security forces occur periodically, most recently in October 1994.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The Government has not yet promulgated a new
 labor law first drafted by the Ministry of Social Affairs and Labor in 1994. The Con-
 sultative Council later recommended some changes. The Government is currently
 reviewing additional changes to the proposed law recommended by the Consultative
 Council. Government officials have said that the new labor code will be consistent
 with international labor standards. It will reportedly contain a provision for the es-
 tablishment of worker committees in the work place and remove the prohibition
 against strikes. The current law stipulates that it is absolutely forbidden to pro-
 voke a strike for any reason.
 Labor unrest is rare. Although strikes are technically illegal, workers sometimes
 stage job actions. In general, these disputes are settled without police intervention.
 In 1994 the Government joined the International Labor Organization.
 b. The Right to Organze and Bargain Colectively.-The current law does not pro-
 vide for the right to collective bargaining. It requires, however, that employers of
 more than 50 workers form a joint labor-management committee as a communica-
 tion forum between the two groups. The implementation of this provision is uneven,
 and the effectiveness of these committees is questionable. In general the committees
 discuss such questions as living conditions at company-provided housing. They are
 not authorized to discuss wages, hours, or conditions of employment, Such issues
 are specified in the work contracts signed individually by workers and employers
 and must be consistent with the guidelines of the Ministry of Social Affairs and
 Labor.
 The current law defines conditions of employment for some Omanis and foreign
 workers. It covers domestic servants and construction workers, but not temporary
 workers or those with work contracts that expire within 3 months. Foreign workers
 constitute at least 50 percent of the work force and as much as 80 percent of the
 modern-sector work force.
 Work rules must be approved by the Ministry of Social Affairs and Labor and
 posted conspicuously in the work place by employers of 10 or more workers. Simi-
 larly, any employer with 50 or more workers must establish a grievance procedure.
 Regardless of the size of the company, any employee, including foreign workers, may
 file a grievance with the Labor Wefa  Board. Sometimes worker representatives
 file collective grievances, bumo t grievances are filed by individual workers. Lower
 paid workers use the procedure regularly. Plaintiffs and defendants in such cases
 maybe represented byegal ounsel.
 There are no export processing zones.
 
 
 1244
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The law prohibits compulsory
 labor but investigative and enforcement mechanisms are lacking. Foreign workers
 sometimes find themselves in situations amounting to forced labor. In such cases,
 employers withhold letters of release, a document releasin the worker from his em-
 ploy_ ment ontrat, thus allowing him to switch jobs. Withiout the letter, a foreign
 worker must continue to work for his current employer or become technically unem-
 ployed-which is sufficient grounds for deportation. Many foreign workers are not
 aware of their right to take such disputes before the Labor Wele Board. Others
 are reluctant to file complaints for fear of retribution by unscrupulous employers.
 In most cases, the board releases the grievant from service and awards compensa-
 tion for time worked under compulsion. Employers face no other penalty than to re-
 imburse the worker's back wages. In 1995, for example, workers at a construction
 company who had not been paid for 3 months staged a work action. The expatriate
 manager of the company was jailed briefly, but the Omani owner faced no legal ac-
 tion. The workers reportedly received only a promise of payment in the near future.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The law prohibits children under
 the age of 13 from working. The Ministry of Social Affairs and Labor enforces this
 prohibition. In practice, however, the enforcement often does not extend to some
 small family businesses which employ underage children, particularly in the agricul-
 tural and fisheries sectors. Children between 13 and 16 years of age may be em-
 ployed but must obtain the Ministry's permission to work overtime, at night, on
 weekends or holidays, or perform strenuous labor.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The Ministry of Social Affairs and Labor issues
 minimum wage guidelines for varous categories of workers. The minimum wage for
 nonprofessional workers is about $156 a month (60 rials). Minimum wage guidelines
 do not cover domestic servants, farmers, government employees, or workers in small
 businesses. Many foreigners work in fields exempt from the minimum wage statute.
 The Government is lax in enforcing minimum wage guidelines for foreign workers
 employed in menial jobs. However, foreign workers with high skills are frequently
 paid more than their Omani counterparts.
 The minimum wage is sufficient to provide a decent standard of living for a work-
 er and family. The compensation for foreign manual laborers and clerks is sufficient
 to cover living expenses and to permit savings to be sent home.
 The private sector workweek is 40 to 45 hours and includes a rest period from
 Thursday afternoon through Friday. Government officials have a 35-hour workweek.
 While the law does not designate the number of days in a workweek, it requires
 at least one 24-hour rest period per week and mandates overtime pay for hours in
 excess of 48 per week. Government regulations on hours of employment are not al-
 ways enforced. Employees who have worked extra.hours without compensation may
 file a complaint before the Labor Welfare Board, but the Board's rulings are not
 binding.
 Every worker has the right to 15 days of annual leave during the first 3 years
 of employment and 30 days per year thereafter. Employers provide many foreign na-
 tionals, including maids, with annual or biannual round-trip tickets to their coun-
 tries of
 All epoyers are required by law to provide first aid facilities. Work sites with
 over 100 employees must have a nurse. Employees covered under the labor law may
 recover compensation for injury or illness sustained on the job through employer-
 provided medical insurance. The health and safety standard codes are enforcedby
 inspectors from the Department of Health and Safety of the Directorate of Labor.
 As required by law, they make on-site inspections.
 The law states that employers must notplace their employees in situations in-
 volving dangerous work. However, the law does not specifically grant a worker the
 right to remove himself from dangerous work without jeopardy to his continued em-
 ployment.
