 OMAN
 The Sultanate of Oman is an absolute monarchy without popularly
 elected representative institutions. The reigning sultan,
 Qaboos bin Said Al Said, is the 14th ruler of the current
 dynasty. The State Consultative Council, formed in 1981,
 functions as an advisory body on economic and social
 questions. Members are appointed by the Sultan who has
 continued the House of Al Said's long tradition of firm control
 over all questions affecting the Omani State.
 National security remains a matter of continuing close
 attention. In the early years of the rule of Sultan Qaboos,
 the Government's concern was focused on quelling an
 insurrection in the southern province of Dhofar supported by
 the People's Democratic Republic of Yemen. The insurrection
 was finally defeated in 1975, but threats from South Yemen and
 later from Iran forced Oman to continue to devote much revenue
 to defense. As the nation on the south shore of the Strait of
 Hormuz, Oman has become the focus of attention for efforts to
 protect the flow of oil from the area, with concomitant
 increased expenditure on military modernization. Many key jobs
 in the Government, especially in the military and internal
 security services, are occupied by outsiders, including many
 British.
 Almost totally undeveloped in 1970, Oman has used its modest
 oil revenues to foster a remarkable degree of progress in the
 social, economic, and administrative spheres, achieving a
 significant improvement in the living standards of its people.
 The economic and social benefits that have accrued from the
 Government's efforts to modernize the country have won the
 allegiance of the urban population of the capital area and the
 provincial administrative centers. Sultan Qaboos has also
 built on a trend, already visible during the reign of his
 father, to bring notables of the tribal system of the interior
 into the national administrative system.
 There were no major developments in 1985 with significant
 impact on the human rights environment in Oman. Although
 lacking formal codification of civil and political rights, the
 Government is reasonably accessible to the people through their
 tribal leaders and walis (governors). The internal security
 services are large, efficient, and pervasive, but are not
 generally regarded as repressive, and the integrity of the
 individual is generally respected.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 There have been no known political killings in Oman in recent
 years.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no known disappearances in 1985.
 
 
 1345
 OMAN
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 Though Islamic law is administered throughout the country by
 Islamic judges, the amputations prescribed by such law are
 generally commuted by the Government to prison terms.
 Exceptions may occur in remote areas, or among Bedouin tribes,
 but there is no confirmation of such practices, nor do they
 have the central Government's sanction. Prison conditions are
 considered severe by Western standards; cells are not
 air-conditioned despite summer temperatures which can reach
 over 115 degrees Fahrenheit, and all prisoners must observe the
 fasting requirements during the Islamic month of Ramadan.
 There are no reports of torture or other forms of cruel
 punishment by Omani authorities.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Though Omani law does not provide for habeas corpus or its
 equivalent, the period of detention before trial in criminal
 cases is usually short. Abuses of the police power of arrest
 have occurred, but the criminal code imposes penalties for
 unjustified arrest or detention. Citizens have several
 channels through which they can seek redress of any grievance
 against law enforcement authorities, and these appear to
 function well, particularly in rural areas. Membership in
 certain unauthorized organizations is a criminal offense. A
 small number of former members of the Popular Front for the
 Liberation of Oman (PFLO) are reportedly still under detention,
 as are fewer than 50 guerrillas from the Dhofar Insurgency
 (1965-75).
 Approximately 500 Dhofaris returned to Oman in 1983 under an
 amnesty following the rapprochement between Oman and South
 Yemen. Smaller numbers continued to return in 1984 and 1985.
 All Omanis who were in exile under the previous Sultan were
 given the opportunity to return, and many thousands have done
 so since 1970. Incommunicado detention is not practiced.
 There is no forced labor.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Islamic law prescribes a fair and speedy trial before
 experienced and impartial judges, and judicial practice in Oman
 conforms largely to these prescriptions. In fact, however, the
 majority of cases are settled by out-of-court negotiations.
 There is no right under law to a jury, counsel, or public
 trial, but members of the public do attend trials and
 hearings. The defendant is formally charged, either before a
 magistrate of the police court in the capital area or a local
 magistrate (qadi) in outlying areas.  The defendant may call
 and question witnesses. If convicted, he may appeal his case
 to the chief magistrate of the police court system, and
 ultimately to the Sultan in cases involving serious offenses.
 The various judicial systems are technically subordinate to the
 Sultan, but they operate independently in the vast majority of
 cases.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 There are no reported instances in which the Government has
 interfered arbitrarily or unreasonably with the private lives
 of its citizens. However, warrants are not required to search
 
 
 1346
 OMAN
 private residences or offices. Such searches, as well as
 monitoring of telephones and private correspondence, are
 confined to cases where the Government perceives a security
 threat or criminal activity. There is no forced membership in
 political organizations. While there is no government policy
 to discourage the use of other languages in speech or print, or
 in religious instruction in the home, the Government has
 increasingly insisted that correspondence with it, and in
 public and legal documents, be in Arabic. Omani men have the
 right to marry as they choose but, in accordance with Islamic
 law, marriages between Omani women and non-Muslim men are not
 permitted.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 There are no guarantees in law which protect freedom of speech
 or freedom of the press. Criticism of the Sultan in any form
 or medium is prohibited by law. Criticism of individual
 officials, agencies, and their programs is tolerated, but is
 not given media coverage. The Government controls all radio
 and television broadcasting. Government control of all printed
 matter, including newspapers and magazines, is specified in the
 Press and Publication Law, issued in May 1984. The law imposes
 strict controls on, and a mechanism for prior censorship of,
 all information in printed form in both domestic and imported
 publications. The Government owns two of the three daily
 newspapers, one in Arabic and one in English. Subsidies to the
 several privately owned weekly and biweekly publications
 provide an effective incentive to self-censorship, although
 there have been arrests and closure for offensive articles.
 Thus, editorials and news coverage invariably reflect
 government views. Publications arriving in Oman from foreign
 countries are censored for politically or sexually offensive
 material and are occasionally banned. The censor's attention
 generally focuses on articles that directly attack or embarrass
 the Omani Government. In 1985, the Sultanate's only resident
 Western correspondent had his residence permit revoked and was
 forced to leave the country. Authorities are reported to have
 objected to his pursuit of news stories on sensitive matters.
 Such stories never appeared in the Omani media, but the
 authorities objected to their publication elsewhere. Academic
 freedom is not an issue as there are no institutions of higher
 education. Conversations with or among Omanis are candid on
 the subject of social, economic, and administrative development.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Freedom of assembly is not guaranteed by law. Associations of
 any kind must register with the Government, and those which
 oppose the political system of the Sultanate are prohibited.
 Labor unions and strikes are illegal, and there is no
 collective bargaining; although Oman's labor law specifically
 prohibits the right to strike, it does mention the concept of
 "collective grievance" and encourages conciliation of disputes
 through the formation of joint consultative bodies of labor and
 management. The organization of other professional groups is
 embryonic.
 
 
 1347
 OMAN
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Oman is an Islamic state and virtually all Omani citizens
 adhere to one or another sect of Islam, the exception being a
 small Hindu community made up of Omani citizens of Indian
 origin. Ibadhi Muslims are in an overall majority and include
 the Royal Family. However, members of the minority Sunni and
 Shi'a Muslim communities are found in all walks of life in both
 the public and private sector. Non-Muslim foreigners, both
 Christian and Hindu, are allowed to worship at designated
 locations. The Government of Oman has donated land for the
 purpose of building a Christian church and a new Hindu temple.
 Non-Muslims in Oman are prohibited from proselytizing.
 Conversely, conversion to Islam is encouraged and publiciied.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Omanis living abroad before 1970 have returned to Oman in large
 numbers with official encouragement and without legal
 obstacles. Several thousand ethnic Omani refugees from East
 Africa, particularly Zanzibar, have been successfully
 resettled. Many Omanis who had sought refuge in South Yemen
 during the insurgency in Dhofar (1965-75) have returned to Oman
 with official encouragement. Non-Omani refugees are not
 permitted to remain in Oman. Those few that reach Oman are
 generally returned to their homelands unless they can be
 quickly resettled in a third country.
 Omanis may travel abroad freely, although a woman must have
 authorization from her husband or father to obtain a passport.
 Many Omanis work abroad, particularly in the United Arab
 Emirates, where an estimated 30,000 Omanis are currently
 employed. Many of these people travel home to Oman on
 weekends. With the exception of a few military areas, there
 are no restrictions on travel by Omanis within their country.
 The Government's transportation program has greatly increased
 the ability to move within the country to heretofore
 inaccessible areas.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Oman is a monarchy in which the Sultan retains final word in
 all government decisions. Succession to the Sultanate is
 determined through a consensus of the Royal Family and leading
 public figures. There are no political parties, legal
 opposition groups, elections, or constitution. Citizens do
 have access to senior officials through the traditional
 practice of submitting petitions for the redress of
 grievances. Successful redress depends on the effectiveness of
 personal contact and the quality of the persons chosen as
 intermediaries. Outside of Muscat, the Government still
 reflects the tribal nature of Omani society. Traditional
 elites dominate the tribal and town councils, which settle
 intratribal disputes. Final authority, however, is with the
 walis (governors), who are appointed by the Sultan.
 In an effort to broaden participation in the Government, the
 Sultan formed the State Consultative Council in 1981. It
 consists of 55 members drawn from the Government, the business
 community, and the outlying districts. It includes members of
 every significant ethnic, geographic, and religious group. At
 
 
 1348
 OMAN
 present, the Council's role is an advisory one, limited to the
 social and economic sphbres.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The Government of Oman declined to receive a proposed Amnesty
 International mission in 1972 during the insurgency in Dhofar.
 Since then, there have been no known requests by international
 human rights organizations to visit Oman. There are no
 independent organizations in the country to monitor human
 rights violations. Freedom House rated Oman "not free."
 Amnesty International does not include Oman in its 1985
 report. Oman has played a passive role in the United Nations
 and regional bodies on human rights issues.
 ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND CULTURAL SITUATION
 Oman's population of 1,200,000 is growing at the rate of 3.4
 percent a year, boosted by an inflow of Omanis from overseas
 and of migrant workers from the Indian subcontinent and East
 Asia. Per capita gross national product is now over $6,250.
 Before 1970, the Government of Oman actively discouraged all
 forms of modernization. Oman was among the poorest countries
 in the world with a rudimentary economy and virtually no modern
 infrastructure. With the start of oil exports in 1967, the
 accession of the present Sultan to power in 1970, and the
 increase in oil prices in the 1970's, Oman has made remarkable
 advances in almost every index of development. Since 1970, the
 Government has devoted a large proportion of its oil revenues
 to infrastructure, industrialization, agriculture, fishing,
 expansion in communications, and the provision of a full range
 of social services to the population. The benefits of Oman's
 new prosperity have been by and large centered in the capital
 area and a few key provincial centers such as Salalah. The
 Government is aware of this imbalance, and has made some effort
 to redress it. Corruption in some areas has also siphoned off
 some of the gains from the commonweal, but the Government is
 taking steps to curtail corruption. Since 1970 the number of
 hospital beds has jumped from 12 to several thousand, the
 number of students in the schools from a few hundred to more
 than 200,000, and the length of paved roads from approximately
 10 kilometers to over 3,000. Life expectancy has increased to
 53.5 years, and programs for the eradication of endemic
 diseases are widespread. The infant mortality rate is 115 per
 1,000 live births. Many towns and most rural areas still lack
 reliable supplies of safe water and electricity. The adult
 literacy rate is still below 50 percent, and many primary age
 children are not in school.
 Since the early days of the reigning Sultan's rule, Oman has
 had a comprehensive labor law defining conditions of employment
 for both Omani and foreign workers, who constitute a large
 percentage of the work force. Reports are that the labor law
 is fairly enforced, and that workers' grievances, which are
 handled within the Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs, are
 generally given the benefit of the doubt in hearings conducted
 by labor inspectors.
 Employment of children (those under 13) is prohibited. Omani
 law regulates the employment of juveniles, defined as those
 between the ages of 13 and 16, prohibiting evening and
 
 
 1349
 OMAN
 nighttime work, strenuous occupations, and overtime and holiday
 work. A special section deals with employment conditions for
 women, prohibiting evening and nighttime work, safeguarding
 health and morals, and setting out their rights to maternity
 leave.
 Omani labor law is very specific on matters of occupational
 safety and access to medical treatment. Likewise, the workweek
 is set at 48 hours (36 hours for Muslims during Ramadan), and
 various categories of leave are set forth.
 Though conservative, Oman has not been extreme in its attempts
 to impose strict adherence to Islamic precepts on women. For
 example, women have shared in the benefits of the social and
 economic growth of recent years, and schooling for girls is
 available to the same extent as for boys in urban areas, less
 so in rural areas. However, for cultural reasons, the
 educational level of girls still lags behind that of boys.
 Many urban Omani women drive. A few women have reached high
 levels in the public sector. By and large, however,
 occupational advances available to women are limited to the
 traditional spheres of teaching, secretarial work, and
 nursing. Oman's labor laws are protective of women,
 guaranteeing maternity leave and working conditions.
 The gains achieved by a small minority of women are largely
 irrelevant to the great majority, both in the towns and in the
 rural areas, whose lives are carried out within the confines of
 the house and the local marketplace. The previous lack of
 adult education facilities means that all but the youngest
 females in rural areas are illiterate. This general lack of
 education, combined with communal and tribal customs which
 dictate a subsidiary role for women, makes it difficult for
 most adult women to participate fully in the modern sector.
 The expansion of educational facilities for girls (including
 the new university) will allow for some equalization of the
 position of women in the future, but the communal and tribal
 customs will continue to militate against full participation by
 women for the foreseeable future.
 
 
 1350
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: OMAN
 1983     1984     1985
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL...        15.1     15.0    20.0
 LOANS ..............   ... 12.5     10.0    15.0
 GRANTS ................   2.6      5.0      5.0
 A.AIO ....... ..............  15.0     15.0     20.0
 LOANS ..............   ... 12.5     10.0    15.0
 GRANTS ................    2.5      5.0     5.0
 (SEC.SUPP.ASSIST),...       15.0     15.0     20.0
 B.FOOO FOR PEACE .......       0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS .................    0.0      0.0     0.0
 GRANTS .............        0.0      0.0
 TITLE  I-TOTAL ........         0.0      0.0     0.0
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS .....        0.0     0.0      0.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR .....        0.0     0.0      0.0
 TITLE  Il-TOTAL .........      0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.RELIEF;EC.DEV & WFP.         0.0     0.0      0.0
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY.....         0.0      0.0     0.0
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST...         0.1      0.0     0.0
 LOANS ..............        0.0      0.0     0.0
 GRANTS ................    0.1      0.0     0.0
 PEACE CORPS ......        0.1      0.0     0.0
 NARCOTICS ........        0.0      0.0     0.0
 OTHER ..............     0.0       0.0     0.0
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL...        30.1     40.1    40.2
 LOANS ..............   ... 30.0     40.0     40.0
 GRANTS ................    0.1      0.1     0.2
 A.MAP  GRANTS ..........       0.0     0.0      0.0
 B.CREOIT FINANCING ....       30.0     40.0    40.0
 C.INTL MIL.ED.TRNG ....        0.1      0.1     0.2
 O.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK...         0.0      0.0     0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS ........        0.0     0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. & MIL...        45.2     55.1    60.2
 LOANS ............ ..      42.5     50.0     55.0
 GRANTS ................    2.7      5.1     5.2
 OTHER US LOANS ..........        0.0      0.0     0.0
 EX-IM BANK LOANS .......        0.0     0.0      0.0
 ALL OTHER .................    0.0      0.0     0.0
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1983     1984     1985     1946-85
 TOTAL ........     0.0     15.0     23.3    103.3
 IBRO               0.0     15.0     23.0   100.0
 IFC                0.0      0.0      0.0      2.0
 IDA                0.0      0.0      0.0     0.0
 IDS                0.0      0.0      0.0     0.0
 ADS                0.0      0.0      0.0     0.0
 AFD               0.0      0.0      0.0     0.0
 UNOP               0.0      0.0      0.0      5.5
 OTHER-UN           0.0      0.0      0.3     0.8
 EEC                0.0      0.0      0.0     0.0
 
 
 1351
