 OMAN
 The Sultanate of Oman is an absolute monarchy without popularly
 elected representative institutions. The reigning Sultan,
 Qaboos bin Said Al Said, is the 14th ruler of the current
 dynasty. The State Consultative Council, formed in 1981,
 functions as an advisory body on economic and social
 questions. Members are appointed by the Sultan who has
 continued the House of Al Said's long tradition of firm
 control over all questions affecting the Omani State.
 National security remains a matter of continuing close
 attention. In the early years of the rule of Sultan Qaboos,
 the Government had to focus its concern on quelling an
 insurrection in the southern province of Dhofar supported by
 the People's Democratic Republic of Yemen. The insurrection
 finally was defeated in 1975, but threats from South Yemen and
 later from Iran forced Oman to continue to devote considerable
 revenue to defense. As the nation on the south shore of the
 Strait of Hormuz, Oman has become the focus of attention for
 efforts to protect the flow of oil from the area, with
 concomitant increased expenditure on military modernization.
 Many key jobs in the Government, especially in the military
 and internal security services, are occupied by outsiders,
 including many British.
 Almost totally undeveloped in 1970, Oman has used its modest
 oil revenues to foster a remarkable degree of progress in the
 social, economic, and administrative spheres, achieving a
 significant improvement in the living standards of its people.
 The economic and social benefits that have accrued from the
 Government's efforts to modernize the country have won the
 allegiance of the urban population of the capital area and the
 provincial administrative centers. Sultan Qaboos has also
 built on a trend, already visible during the reign of his
 father, to bring notables of the tribal system of the interior
 into.the national administrative system.
 There was one noteworthy development in 1986 in the area of
 human rights in Oman. The Government banned, with a few
 insignificant exceptions, the marriage of Omanis to foreigners.
 The move was explained as an effort to stem the erosion of
 Omani culture. While civil and political rights are not
 formally codified, the Government is reasonably accessible to
 the people through their tribal leaders and walis (governors).
 The internal security services are large, efficient, and
 pervasive, but are not generally regarded as repressive, and
 the integrity of the individual is generally respected.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 There were no known political killings in Oman in 1986.
 b. Disappearance
 No cases of disappearance were reported in 1986.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 Though Islamic law is administered throughout the country by
 
 
 1260
 OMAN
 Islamic judges, the amputations prescribed by such law are
 generally commuted by the Government to prison terms. Prison
 conditions are considered severe by Western standards; cells
 are not air-conditioned despite summer temperatures which can
 reach over 115 degrees Fahrenheit, and all prisoners must
 observe the fasting requirements during the Islamic month of
 Ramadan. There were no reports of torture or other forms of
 cruel punishment by Omani authorities.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Though Omani law does not provide for habeas corpus or its
 equivalent, the period of detention before trial in criminal
 cases is usually short. Abuses of the police power of arrest
 have occurred, but the criminal code imposes penalties for
 unjustified arrest or detention. Citizens have several
 channels through which they can seek redress of any grievance
 against law enforcement authorities, and these appear to
 function well, particularly in rural areas. Membership in
 certain unauthorized organizations is a criminal offense. The
 Dhofar insurgency (1965-1975) led to the imprisonment of
 members of the Popular Front for the Liberation of Oman
 (PFLO). Although the PFLO remains a proscribed organization
 and a few of its members may remain in custody, numbers of
 former insurgents have benefited from an amnesty and returned
 to Oman from the bordering areas of South Yemen. All Omanis
 who were in exile under the previous Sultan were given the
 opportunity to return, as many thousands have done since
 1970. The grace period for those in self-imposed exile who
 wish to return to Oman ended, however, on December 31, 1986.
 Though police notification may sometimes be slow, incommunicado
 detention is not practiced. There is no forced labor.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Islamic law prescribes a fair and speedy trial before
 experienced and impartial judges, and judicial practice in
 Oman conforms largely to these prescriptions. In fact,
 however, the majority of cases are settled by out-of-court
 negotiations. There is no right under law to a jury, counsel,
 or public trial, but members of the public attend trials and
 hearings. The defendant is formally charged, either before a
 magistrate of the police court in the capital area or a local
 magistrate (qadi) in outlying areas. The defendant may call
 and question witnesses. If convicted, he may appeal his case
 to the chief magistrate of the police court system, and
 ultimately to the Sultan in cases involving serious offenses.
 The various judicial systems are technically subordinate to
 the Sultan, but they operate independently in the vast
 majority of cases.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 There were no reported instances in which the Government has
 interfered arbitrarily or unreasonably with the private lives
 of its citizens. However, warrants are not required to search
 private residences or offices. Such searches, as well as
 monitoring of telephones and private correspondence, are
 confined to cases where the Government perceives a security
 threat or criminal activity. There is no forced membership in
 political organizations. Although there is no government
 policy to discourage the use of other languages in speech or
 print or in religious instruction in the home, the Government
 has increasingly insisted that correspondence with it, and
 
 
 1261
 OMAN
 public and legal documents, be in Arabic. In a new 1986 law,
 marriages between Omanis and foreigners were forbidden. Those
 already married to foreigners had to register within a
 specified period or risk forfeiting their citizenship and that
 of their offspring.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 There are no guarantees in law which protect freedom of speech
 or freedom of the press. Criticism of the Sultan in any form
 or medium is prohibited by law. Criticism of individual
 officials, agencies, and their programs is tolerated but is
 not given media coverage. The Government controls all radio
 and television broadcasting. Government control of all printed
 matter, including newspapers and magazines, is specified in
 the Press and Publication Law, issued in May 1984. The law
 imposes strict controls on, and a mechanism for prior
 censorship of, all information in printed form in both domestic
 and imported publications. The Government owns two of the
 three daily newspapers, one in Arabic and one in English.
 Subsidies to the several privately owned weekly and biweekly
 publications provide an effective incentive to self-censorship,
 although there have been arrests and closure for offensive
 articles. Thus, editorials and news coverage invariably
 reflect government views. Publications arriving in Oman from
 foreign countries are censored for politically or sexually
 offensive material and are occasionally banned. The censor's
 attention generally focuses on articles that directly attack
 or embarrass the Omani Government. In 1986 the regional
 correspondent of a respected economic journal was warned of
 the consequences of critical coverage of Oman. Conversations
 with Omanis are relatively candid on economic matters, but
 political discussion is limited to foreign affairs.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Freedom of assembly is not guaranteed by law. Associations of
 any kind must register with the Government, and those which
 oppose the political system of the Sultanate are prohibited.
 Labor unions and strikes are illegal, and there is no
 collective bargaining. Although Oman's labor law specifically
 prohibits the right to strike, it does mention the concept of
 "collective grievance" and encourages conciliation of disputes
 through the formation of joint consultative bodies of labor
 and management. The organization of other professional groups
 is embryonic.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Oman is an Islamic state, and virtually all Omani citizens
 adhere to one or another sect of Islam, the exception being
 the small Hindu community made up of Omani citizens of Indian
 origin. Ibadhi Muslims are in the overall majority and
 include the ruling family. However, members of the minority
 Sunni and Shi'a Muslim communities are found in all walks of
 life in both the public and private sector. Non-Muslim
 foreigners, both Christian and Hindu, are allowed to worship
 at designated locations on land donated by the Government.
 Although there is no indigenous Jewish community or synagogue,
 Jews are not barred from living and working in Oman; religion
 is not a factor in gaining entry into Oman. Non-Muslims in
 Oman are prohibited from proselytizing. Conversion to Islam
 is encouraged and publicized.
 
 
 1262
 OMAN
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Omanis living abroad before 1970 have returned to Oman in
 large numbers with official encouragement and without legal
 obstacles. Several thousand ethnic Omani refugees from East
 Africa, particularly Zanzibar, have been successfully
 resettled. Many Omanis who had sought refuge in South Yemen
 during the insurgency in Dhofar (1965-75) have returned to
 Oman with official encouragement. Non-Omani refugees are not
 permitted to remain in Oman. Those few that reach Oman are
 generally returned to their homelands unless they can be
 quickly resettled in a third country. Omanis may travel
 abroad freely, although a woman must have authorization from
 her husband or father to obtain a passport. Many Omanis work
 abroad, particularly in the United Arab Emirates, where an
 estimated 30,000 Omanis are currently employed. Many of these
 people travel home to Oman on weekends. With the exception of
 a few military areas, there are no restrictions on travel by
 Omanis within their country. The Government's development of
 transportation has greatly increased the ability to move
 within the country to heretofore inaccessible areas.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Oman is a monarchy in which the Sultan retains the final word
 in all government decisions. Succession to the monarchy is
 determined through a consensus of the ruling family and
 leading public figures. There are no political parties, legal
 opposition groups, elections, or constitution. Citizens do
 have access to senior officials through the traditional
 practice of submitting petitions for the redress of grievances.
 Successful redress depends on the effectiveness of personal
 contact and the quality of the persons chosen as
 intermediaries. Outside of Muscat, the Government still
 reflects the tribal nature of Omani society. Traditional
 elites dominate the tribal and town councils, which settle
 intratribal disputes. Final authority, however, is with the
 walis (governors), who are appointed by the Sultan.
 In an effort to broaden participation in the Government, the
 Sultan formed the State Consultative Council in 1981. It
 consists of 55 members drawn from the Government, the business
 community, and the outlying districts. It includes members of
 every significant ethnic, geographic, and religious group. At
 present, the Council's role is an advisory one, limited to the
 social and economic spheres.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The Government of Oman declined to receive a proposed Amnesty
 International mission in 1972 during the insurgency in
 Dhofar. Since then, there have been no known requests by
 international human rights organizations to visit Oman. There
 are no independent organizations in the country to monitor
 human rights violations. Though Oman usually plays a passive
 role in the U.N. and other bodies on human rights issues, it
 has criticized Israel's practices in the territories under its
 occupation and the South African system of apartheid in U.N.
 forums.
 
 
 1263
 OMAN
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or'Social Status
 Though conservative, Oman has not been extreme in the
 interpretation of Islamic precepts on the status of women.
 Women have shared in the benefits of the social and economic
 growth of recent years, and schooling for girls is available
 to the same extent as for boys in urban areas, less so in
 rural areas. However, for cultural reasons, the level of
 education which girls attain is still behind that of boys.
 Many urban Omani women drive. A few women have reached high
 positions in the public sector. By and large, however,
 occupational advances available to women are limited to the
 traditional spheres of teaching, secretarial work, and
 nursing.
 The gains achieved by a small minority of women are largely
 irrelevant to the great majority, both in the towns and in the
 rural areas, whose lives are carried out within the confines
 of the house and the local marketplace. The previous lack of
 adult education facilities means that all but the youngest
 females in rural areas are illiterate. This general lack of
 education, combined with communal and tribal customs which
 dictate a subsidiary role for women, makes it difficult for
 most adult women to participate fully in the modern sector.
 The expansion of educational facilities for girls (including
 the new university) will allow for some equalization of the
 position of women in the future, but the communal and tribal
 customs will continue to militate against full participation
 by women for the foreseeable future.
 CONDITIONS OF LABOR
 Since the early days of the reigning Sultan's rule, Oman has
 had a comprehensive labor law defining conditions of employment
 for both Omani and foreign workers, who constitute a large
 percentage of the work force. The labor law reportedly is
 fairly enforced, and workers' grievances, which are handled
 within the Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs, are generally
 given the benefit of the doubt in hearings conducted by labor
 inspectors.
 Oman's labor law states that the Government can determine the
 minimum wage and make adjustments according to economic
 circumstances. In practice the minimum wage in Oman has
 covered only unskilled Omani workers and is currently set at
 75 Omani riyals (approximately $195) per month. Unskilled
 foreign workers are not covered by these provisions, but in
 many cases the respective embassies set suggested minimum
 wages.
 Employment of children (those under 13) is prohibited. Omani
 law regulates the employment of juveniles, defined as those
 between the ages of 13 and 16, prohibiting evening and
 nighttime work, strenuous occupations, and overtime and
 holiday work. A special section deals with employment
 conditions for women, prohibiting evening and nighttime work,
 safeguarding health and morals, and setting out their rights
 to maternity leave.
 Omani labor law is very specific on matters of occupational
 safety and access to medical treatment. Likewise, the
 workweek is set at 48 hours (36 hours for Muslims during
 Ramadan), and various categories of leave are set forth.
 
 
 1264
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.PISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COJNTRY: OMAN
 1984     1985     1986
 --      ------------------------------------------------------
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL...         15.0     20.0     19.6
 LOANS...............        10.0     15.0     14.6
 GRANTS ...............      5.0      5.0      5.0
 A.AID ..... ...............    15.0     20.0     19.6
 LOANS ..............    ... 10.0     15.0     14.6
 GRANTS ..............        5.0      5.0      5.0
 (SEC.SUPP.ASSIST.)...        15.D      23.0     19.6
 8.FOOO FOR PEACE .......         00.0              0.0
 LOANS .................     0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ...............      0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE  I-TOTAL ..........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS .....         0.0      0.0      0.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR .....         0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE  II-TOTAL .........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.RELIEF.EC.DEV ; WFP.          0.0      0.0      0.0
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY,.-..          0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST.          0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS ..............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 PEASE CORPS......          0.0      0.0      0.0
 NARCOTICS ........        0.0       0.0      0.0
 OTHER ................   00        0.0      0.0
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL,..         40.1     40.2      9.1
 LOANS ..............    ... 40.0     40.0      9.1"
 GRANTS ...............      0.1      0.2      0.0
 A.MAP GRANTS.                   0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.CREDIT FINANCIN;...          40.3     40.0      9.1
 :.INTL MIL.ED.TRNG ....         0.1      0.2      0.0
 D.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK..           0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS ........         0.0      0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. & MIL...         55.1     60.2     28.7
 LOANS ..............    ... 50.0     55.0     23.7
 GRANTS ...............      5.1      5.2      5.0
 --      ------------------------------------------------------
 OT4ER US LOANS.                   0.0      0.0      0.0
 EK-IN BANK LOANS ......          0.0      0.0      0.0
 ALL OTHER ........  .......      0.0      0.0      0.0
 --      ------------------------------------------------------
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1984     1985     1986      1946-86
 TOTAL .........   15.0      23.4     30.0    138.3
 IBRO              15.0      23.0     30.0    130.0
 IFC                0.0       0.0      0.0      2.0
 IOA                0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 103                0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 AD3                3.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 AFOB               0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 UNDP               0.0       0.1      0.0      5.5
 OTIER-UN           0.0      0.3'      0.0      0.8
 EE:                0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 
 
 1265
