 OMAN
 The Sultanate of Oman is an absolute monarchy with no
 machinery for the election of any institutions to share in the
 country's rule. The reigning Sultan, Qaboos Bin Said Al-Bu
 Said, is the 14th ruler of the current dynasty. The 14 years
 since his accession to power have witnessed a remarkable
 degree of progress in the social, economic, and administrative
 spheres. Almost totally undeveloped in 1970, Oman has used
 its modest oil revenues to foster such progress. During this
 period the Government has achieved a significant improvement
 in the living standards of its people. Development
 requirements have necessitated the influx of a large number of
 migrant workers, largely from the Indian subcontinent, but
 also from some countries in East Asia. The standard of living
 of some of these workers, while better than in their home
 countries, has not always kept pace with the standards enjoyed
 by the growing Omani middle class.
 Political development, however, is still embryonic. The State
 Consultative Council, formed in 1981, functions as an advisory
 body on economic and social questions. Its members, while
 broadly representative of the population, are appointed by the
 Sultan who has continued the House of Al-Bu Said's long
 tradition of absolute control over all questions affecting the
 Omani state.
 Despite its autocratic character, the Sultan's Government
 enjoys a high level of acceptance among the population. The
 economic and social benefits that have accrued from the
 current Government's efforts to modernize the country have won
 the allegiance of the urban population of the capital area and
 the provincial administrative centers. More importantly,
 Sultan Qaboos has been able to build on a trend already
 visible during the reign of his father to bring notables of
 the tribal system of the interior into the national
 administrative system. Historically, threats to a sultan's
 rule came from the ability of tribal leaders to organize
 opposition around the politico-religious institution and
 person of an imam (religious leader), located in the
 interior. The institution of the imamate was effectively
 suppressed in the 1950's, however, and many who would
 otherwise have given primary allegiance to the system of
 tribal authority have been offered positions in the
 administrative structure that has been steadily widening since
 1970.
 National security remains a matter of continuing close
 attention. In the early years of the rule of Sultan Qaboos,
 the Government's concern was focused on quelling an
 insurrection in the southern province of Dhofar. This
 insurrection was supported directly by the People's Democratic
 Republic of Yemen, with some Soviet and Chinese support. The
 insurrection was finally defeated in 1975, but continued
 hostility from South Yemen forced Oman to continue to devote
 much of its revenue to defense. This practice was c6ntinued
 with the growth of a new threat to its security and that of
 the entire Persian Gulf from Iran. As the nation on the south
 shore of the Strait of Hormuz, Oman has become the focus of
 attention for efforts to protect the flow of oil from the
 area, with concomitant increased expenditure on military
 modernization.
 There were no major incidents in 1984 with significant impact
 on the human rights environment in Oman. Although lacking
 
 
 1353
 OMAN
 formal codification of civil and political rights, the
 Government is reasonably accessible to the people through
 their tribal leaders and walis (governors) who have the role
 of ombudsmen. The internal security services are large,
 efficient, and pervasive, but are not generally regarded as
 repressive, and the integrity of the individual is generally
 respected.
 In the long term, the effects on human rights of rapid
 modernization are difficult to predict. The Omani Government
 sends large numbers of students abroad for university
 training, and many Omanis work and travel abroad, where they
 come into contact with currents of thought and opinion not
 readily available in Oman. To date, many key jobs in the
 Government, especially in the military and internal security
 services, are occupied by outsiders, including many British.
 Already, some demands for an increased pace in "Omanization"
 in the public sector have surfaced.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 There have been no known political killings in Oman in recent
 years.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no allegations of disappearances in 1984.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 Though Islamic law is administered throughout the country by
 Islamic judges, the physical mutilations prescribed by such
 law are generally commuted by the Government to prison terms.
 Exceptions may occur in very remote areas, or among Bedouin
 tribes, but there is no confirmation of such practices nor do
 they have the Central Government's sanction. Prison
 conditions are considered severe by Western standards; cells
 are not air conditioned despite summer temperatures which can
 reach over 115 degrees Fahrenheit, and all prisoners must
 observe the fasting requirements during the Islamic month of
 Ramadan. There are no reports of torture or other forms of
 cruel punishment by Omani authorities.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Though Omani law does not provide for habeas corpus or its
 equivalent, the period of detention before trial in criminal
 cases is usually short. Abuses of the police power of arrest
 have occurred, but the criminal code imposes penalties for
 unjustified arrest or detention. Citizens have several
 channels through which they can seek redress of any grievance
 against law enforcement authorities, and these appear to
 function well, particularly in rural areas. Organizational
 affiliation through membership in certain unauthorized
 organizations is a criminal offense. A small number of former
 members of the Popular Front for the Liberation of Oman (PFLO)
 are reportedly still under detention, as are fewer than 50
 insurgents from the Dhofar Insurgency (1965-75).
 
 
 1354
 OMAN
 Approximately 500 Dhofaris returned to Oman in 1983 under an
 amnesty following the rapprochement between Oman and South
 Yemen. Smaller numbers have continued to return in 1984. All
 Omanis who were in exile under the previous Sultan were given
 the opportunity to return to Oman, and many thousands have
 done so since 1970. Incommunicado detention is not practiced.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Islamic law prescribes a fair and speedy trial before
 experienced and impartial judges, and judicial practice in
 Oman conforms largely to these prescriptions. In fact,
 however, the majority of cases are settled by out-of-court
 negotiations. There is no right under law to a jury, counsel,
 or public trial, but members of the public do attend trials
 and hearings. The defendant is formally charged, either
 befose a magistrate of the police court in the capital area,
 or a local magistrate (qadi) in outlying areas. The defendant
 may call and question witnesses. If convicted, he may appeal
 his case to the chief magistrate of the police court system,
 and ultimately to the Sultan in cases involving serious
 offenses. In 1984 the Government announced the opening of
 several petty courts throughout the country to bring judicial
 services closer to the citizenry. The various judicial
 systems are technically subordinate to the Sultan, but they
 operate independently in the vast majority of cases.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Tnere are no reported incidents of the Government interfering
 arbitrarily or unreasonably with the private lives of its
 citizens. However, warrants are not required to search
 private residences or offices. Such searches, as well as
 monitoring of telephones and private correspondence, are
 confined to cases where the Government perceives a security
 threat or criminal activity. There is no forced membership in
 political organizations. While there is no government policy
 to discourage the use of other languages in speech or print,
 or in religious instruction in the home, the Government has
 increasingly insisted that correspondence with it, and in
 public and legal documents, be in Arabic. Omani men have the
 right to marry as they choose but, in accordance with Islamic
 law, marriages between Omani women and non-Muslim men are not
 permitted.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 There are no guarantees in law which protect freedom of speech
 or freedom of the press. Criticism of the Sultan in any form
 or medium is prohibited by law. Criticism of individual
 officials, agencies, and their programs is tolerated, but is
 not given media coverage. The Government controls all radio
 and television broadcasting originating in Oman. Government
 control of all printed matter, including newspapers and
 magazines, is specified in a new Press and Publications Law,
 issued in May 1984. The law imposes strict controls on and a
 mechanism for prior censorship of all information in printed
 form, both publications produced by local organizations and
 imported publications. The Government owns two of the three
 daily newspapers, one in Arabic and one in English. Subsidies
 
 
 1355
 OMAN
 to the several privately owned weekly and biweekly'
 publications provide an effective incentive to self-
 censorship, although arrests and closure for offensive
 articles have occurred. Thus, editorials and news coverage
 invariably reflect government views. Publications arriving in
 Oman from foreign countries are censored for politically or
 sexually offensive material and are occasionally banned. The
 censor's attention generally focuses on articles that directly
 attack or embarrass the Omani Government. Academic freedom is
 not an issue in Oman as there are as yet no institutions of
 higher education. Conversations with or between Omanis are
 candid on the subject of social, economic, and administrative
 development.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Freedom of assembly is not guaranteed by law. Associations of
 any kind must register with the Government, and those which
 oppose the political system of the Sultanate are prohibited.
 Labor unions and strikes are illegal, and the organization of
 professional groups is embryonic.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Oman is an Islamic state and virtually all Omani citizens
 adhere to one or another sect of Islam, the exception being a
 small Hindu community made up of Omani citizens of Indian
 origin. Ibadhi Muslims are in an overall majority and include
 the royal family. However, members of the Sunni and Shi'a
 Muslim minorities are found in all walks of life in both the
 public and private sector. Non-Muslim foreigners, both
 Christian and Hindu, are allowed to worship at designated
 locations. In fact, the Government of Oman has donated land
 for the purpose of building a Christian church and a new Hindu
 temple. The only restriction imposed by the Government on
 non-Muslims in Oman is a prohibition against proselytizing.
 Conversely, conversion to Islam is encouraged and publicized.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Omanis living abroad before 1970 have returned to Oman in
 large numners with official encouragement and without legal
 obstacles. Included in this group are several thousand ethnic
 Omani refugees from East Africa, particularly Zanzibar, who
 have been successfully resettled. Many Omanis who had sought
 refuge in the Peoples Democratic Republic of Yemen during the
 insurgency in Dhofar (1965-75) have returned to Oman with
 official encouragement. Non-Omani refugees are not permitted
 to remain in Oman. Those few that reach Oman are generally
 returned to their homelands unless they can be quickly
 resettled in a third country.
 Omanis may travel to foreign countries freely, although a
 woman must have authorization from her husband or father to
 obtain a passport. Many Omanis work abroad, particularly in
 the United Arab Emirates where an estimated 30,000 Omanis are
 currently employed. Many of these people travel home to Oman
 on weekends. With the exception of a few military areas,
 there are no restrictions on travel by Omanis within their
 country. The Government has undertaken an extensive program
 of road construction and instituted a comprehensive transport
 system which has greatly increased the ability to move within
 the country to areas that had heretofore been inaccessible.
 
 
 1356
 OMAN
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Oman is an absolute monarchy where the Sultan has ultimate
 authority over all government functions. Political parties,
 legal opposition groups, elections, and constitutions are
 unKnown. Thus, citizens have no right to change their
 government or to choose the laws that govern them. Citizens
 do have access to senior officials through the traditional
 practice of submitting petitions for the redress of
 grievances. Successful redress depends on the effectiveness
 of personal contact and the quality of the persons chosen as
 intermediaries. Outside of Muscat, the Government still
 reflects the tribal nature of Omani society. Traditional
 elites dominate the tribal and town councils, which settle
 intratribal disputes. Final authority, however, is with the
 walis (governors) who are appointed by the Sultan. In
 reality, therefore, citizens do not have the right to
 participate in the political process. In an effort to broaden
 participation in the Government, the Sultan formed the
 Consultative Council for the State in 1981. It consists of
 55 members drawn from the Government, the business community,
 and the outlying districts. It includes members of every
 significant ethnic, geographic, and religious group. At
 present, the Council's role is an advisory one, limited to the
 social and economic spheres.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Non-governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The Government of Oman declined to receive a proposed Amnesty
 International mission in 1972 during the insurgency in
 Dhofar. Since then, there have been no known requests by
 international human rights organizations to visit Oman. There
 are no independent organizations based in the country that
 monitor human rights violations. Freedom House rates Oman
 "not free.' Amnesty International, in its 1984 report, notes
 the release of a Bahrain customs officer who had been in
 prison in Oman since his deportation from Bahrain in 1973.
 Amnesty International had been following his case for 10 years
 and reports that no response had been received from Omani
 authorities to inquiries about him. Oman has played a passive
 role in the United Nations and regional bodies on issues
 dealing with human rights.
 ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND CULTURAL SITUATION
 Before 1970, the Government of Oman actively discouraged all
 forms of modernization. Oman was among the poorest countries
 in the world with a rudimentary economy and virtually no
 modern infrastructure. With the start of oil exports in 1967,
 the accession of the present Sultan to power in 1970, and the
 increase in oil prices in the 1970's, Oman has made remarkable
 advances in almost every index of development. Since 1970, the
 Government has devoted a large proportion of its oil revenues
 to building infrastructure, industrialization, improvement in
 agriculture and fishing, expansion in communications, and the
 provision of a full range of social services to the
 population. The number of hospital beds has jumped from 12 to
 several thousand, the number of students in schools from a few
 hundred to 167,000, and the length of paved roads from
 approximately 10 kilometers to over 3,000. Life expectancy
 has increased to 52, and programs for the eradication of
 
 
 1857
 OMAN
 endemic diseases are widespread. The infant mortality rate is
 118 per 1,000 births. Boosted by the inflow of Omanis from
 overseas and by migrant workers from the Indian subcontinent
 and East Asia, population growth now stands at 3.9 percent a
 year.
 Many towns and most rural areas still lack reliable supplies
 of safe water and electricity. The adult literacy rate is
 still below 50 percent, and many primary age children are not
 in school. Though per capita gross national product is now
 over $5,500 a year, for a population estimated at slightly
 more than 1 million, the benefits of the new prosperity have
 been by and large centered in the capital area and a few key
 provincial centers like Salalah. The Government is aware of
 this imbalance, and has made some effort to redress it.
 Corruption in some areas has also siphoned off some of the
 gains from the commonweal, but the Government is taking steps
 to curtail incidents of corruption.
 Though conservative, Oman has not been extreme in its attempts
 to impose strict adherence to Islamic precepts on women. For
 example, women have shared in the benefits of social and
 economic growth of recent years, and schooling for girls is
 available to the same extent as to boys in urban areas, less
 so in rural areas. However, for cultural reasons, the
 educational level of girls still lags behind that of boys.
 Many urban Omani women drive. A few women have reached high
 levels in the public sector. By and large, however,
 occupational advances available to women are limited to the
 traditional spheres of teaching, secretarial work, and
 nursing. The gains achieved by a small minority of women are
 largely irrelevant to the great majority, both in the towns
 and in the rural areas, whose lives are carried out within the
 confines of the house and the local marketplace. Lack of
 adult education facilities means that all but the youngest
 females in rural areas are illiterate. This lack of
 education, combined with communal and tribal customs which
 dictate a subsidiary role for women, makes it virtually
 impossible for most adult women to participate equally with
 men in the modern sector in Oman. The expansion of
 educational facilities for girls will allow for some
 equalization of the position of women in the future, but the
 communal and tribal customs will continue to militate against
 full participation by women for the foreseeable future.
 
 
 1358
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: OMAN
 1982     1983     1984
 ..........................................................
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL...         15.5     15.1     15.0
 LOANS ..............  ....  7.5     12.5     10.0
 GRANTS .............         8.0      2.6      5.0
 A.AID ................. ...... 15.0     15.0     15.0
 LOANS ..............  ....  7.5     12.5     10.0
 GRANTS .............         7.5      2.5      5.0
 (SEC.SUPP.ASSIST.)...         15.0     15.0     15.0
 B.FO0D FOR PEACE .......         0.0     0.0       0.0
 LOANS ..............  .... 0.0      0.0       0.0
 GRANTS .............         0.0     0.0       0.0
 TITLE I-TOTAL ..........        0.0      0.0       0.0
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS.....         0.0      0.0      0.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR .....        0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE I-TOTAL .........        0.0      0.0       0.0
 E.RELIEF.EC.DEV & WFP.         0.0      0.0      0.0
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY .....        0.0      0.0       0.0
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST...         0.5      0.1       0.0
 LOANS ....... :     ......  0.0      0.0       0.0
 GRANTS .............         0.5     0.1       0.0
 PEACE CORPS ......         0.5     0.1       0.0
 NARCOTICS ........         0.0      0.0      0.0
 OTHER ............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 II.NIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL...        30.1     30.1     40.1
 LOANS ................... 30.0      30.0     40.0
 GRANTS .............   ... 0.1      0.1       0.1
 A.MAP GRANTS ..........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.CREDIT FINANCING ....        30.0     30.0     40.0
 C.INTL MIL.EO.TRNG ....        0.1      0.1      0.1
 O.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK...         0.0      0.0       0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS ........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. & MIL...        45.6     45.2     55.1
 LOANS ................... 37.5      42.5     50.0
 GRANTS .............     .. 8.1      2.7      5.1
 OTHER US LOANS ..........        0.0      0.0       0.0
 EX-IM BANK LOANS .......        0.0      0.0      0.0
 ALL OTHER ..............  ....  0.0     0.0       0.0
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1982     1983     1984     1946-84
 TOTAL .........    16.8      0.0     15.0     85.0
 IBRO              15.0      0.0      15.0     77.0
 IFC                0.0      0.0      0.0       2.0
 IDA                0.0      0.0      0.0       0.0
 IDB                0.0      0.0      0.0       0.0
 ADS                0.0       0.0     0.0       0.0
 AFOB               0.0      0.0      0.0       0.0
 UNDP                1.8      0.0      0.0      5.5
 OTHER-UN           0.0       0.0      0.0      0.5
 EEC                0.0      0.0      0.0       0.0
 
 
 1359
