 OMAN
 The Sultanate of Oman is an absolute monarchy without popularly elected rep-
 resentative institutions or political parties at any level. Sultan Qaboos bin Sa'id al
 Sa'id, the 14th ruler of the current dynasty, celebrated the 22nd anniversary of his
 accession in 1992. Sultan Qaboos maintains the al Sa'id family's long tradition of
 firm control over all important matters affecting the State, while bringing notables
 from the tribal system into the national administration. Decisionmaking procedures
 are consensual in accordance with longstanding traditions. The Cabinet of Ministers
 is appointed by and responsible to the Sultan. The Majlis ash-Shura (consultative
 council) is charged with receiving all new laws in the economic development and so-
 cial fields for comment prior to their promulgation.
 Oman's strategic location on the south shore of the Strait of Hormuz exposed the
 country to the increased tension in the Persian Gulf area during the 1980's, cul-
 minating in the 1991 Gulf war against Iraq, in which Omani ground troops partici-
 pated. Because of its concerns about national security, the Government continues
 to devote a considerable share of its revenue to defense. There has been no credible
 internal security threat since the defeat of the insurrection in the southern province
 of Dhofar in 1975. According to the U.S. Arms Control and Disarmament Agency,
 total military expenditures for 1989 were $1,552 million. The Government has been
 examining ways to reduce these expenditures, but no reductions have been imple-
 mented. The security services are large and efficient but do not have a record of,
 or reputation for, abuse of human rights. There has been no organized opposition
 to the Government in recent years.
 
 
 1069
 Almost totally undeveloped when Sultan Qaboos came to power, Oman has used
 its modest oil revenues to achieve an improvement in living standards for its citi-
 zens. Oman's free market economy remains heavily dependent upon petroleum ex-
 ports. Public expenditures, the driving force in the economy, are determined largely
 by the price of oil.
 There was no significant change in the human rights situation in 1992. A number
 of rigts continued to be tightl, rsricted, particularly the freedoms of expression,
 peaefl assemly and asocaton, thre right Of citizens o cange ther government,
 and worker rights. Civil and political rights are not-formally codified. In the absence
 of any challenge to the current order, the authorities usually respect the integrity
 of the individual. Various forms of discrimination against women continued to occur.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from
 a. Political and Other Extra judicial Killing.-There were no known political or
 extrajudicial killings in 1992.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 Torture or other forms of cruel punishment are not systematically practiced or coun-
 tenanced by Omani authorities. There were no reports of physical beatings in prison
 in 1992.
 Prison conditions are harsh, with temperatures sometimes exceeding 120 degrees
 Fahrenheit in cells that are often without climate control or proper ventilation.
 However, the authorities began installing air conditioning at the main prison in the
 country at Ar-Rumais in 1992.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-Arbitrary detention and other abuses of
 the power of arrest have been infrequent. The Criminal Code imposes penalties for
 unjustified arrest or detention. Citizens have several channels through which to
 seek redress of grievances against law enforcement authorities. These channels in-
 clude traditional and tribal leaders, local sheikhs, and district administrators who
 mediate regularly on a broad variety of matters. The Civil Court has become aware
 of one or two cases of arbitrary detention annually in receit years, and it sought
 investigation of the circumstances and, if warranted, punishment of those respon-
 sible. However, there were no public disclosures of disciplinary actions against police
 officials, making it difficult tofully evaluate the effectiveness of the mechanisms of
 redress.
 The police do not require a judicial warrant to make an arrest but must obtain
 judicial concurrence to hold a suspect. Under current procedures, the police have 24
 hours after an arrest to file charges or submit papers to a magistrate showing the
 grounds for holding the arrestee. When the police provide the courts with documen-
 tary justification for an arrest, the magistrate may exercise his option to order bail
 or release the detainee into the custody of another or on his own recognizance. Al-
 ternatively, the judge may order that the suspect be held up to 14 days. If the  lice
 require more time to gather evidence, the judge may grant extensions of the deten-
 tion period.
 Although Omani law does not provide for habeas corpus or its equivalent, the pe-
 riod of detention prior to trial is usually short. Police notification to detainees' fami-
 lies is often slow and is made in response to inquiries rather than on police initia-
 tive. In the capital area, the authorities post outside the criminal court building a
 list of names of persons being held pending trial.
 The Civil Court publishes a semimonthly schedule assigning a "judge in charge"
 each day during of-duty hours and weekends. These magistrates are available to
 review charges or grounds for holding a detainee. The occasional failure of the police
 to promptly seek judicial approval has caused tension between the civil judges and
 the police.
 Incommunicado detention is rare, but the police do not always permit attorneys
 and visitors to see detainees. Judges occasionally intercede to ensure access to de-
 tainees. A detainee or persons interested in the detainee's case may appoint an at-
 torney upon arrest.
 After his accession in 1970, Sultan Qaboos granted amnesty to all Omanis who
 were in exile. Oman does not practice exile as a form of punishment.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-In addition to civilian courts, which treat mis-
 demeanor and felony criminal cases, the court system includes Shari'a courts, which
 handle family law; military tribunals, before which civilians do not appear; and an
 authority for the resolution of commercial disputes. A rarely used security court sys-
 tem handles internal security cases. Provincial governors arbitrate minor matters
 in rural areas.
 
 
 1070
 The various judicial systems are subordinate to the Sultan. In most cases they
 operate independently, but they are susceptible to his influence in cases of particu-
 lar interest, especially those concerning national security. Judicial practice in Oman
 conforms in most part to Islamic prescriptions for a fair trial before experienced and
 impartial judges. Oman's criminal and civil judges, both Omani and expatriate
 Arab, are professionals who have trained at legal institutions in various Arab coun-
 tries after completing bachelors degrees. In the Islamic, or Shari'a, court system,
 Omani high school graduates are able to join the ranks of expatriate qadis (judges)
 after completing a 5-year course at one of Oman's four higher institutes for Islamic
 studies. There were no reports in 1992 that judges were transferred or dismissed
 for political reasons.
 Oman's Criminal Code, enacted in 1974, does not explicitly state the rights of the
 accused during the criminal process but instead relies heavily on tradition. It has
 no rules for admission of evidence during trials or codified procedures for entering
 cases into the criminal system.
 In a criminal trial the accused is presumed to be innocent. He may be represented
 by an attorney, but this is not a legal requirement, and the Government will not
 pay for counsel. Defendants have the right to, and are expected to, be present at
 trial; they may present evidence; and they may confront witnesses by asking ques-
 tions put through the judge, who generally is the only one to question witnesses.
 Trial is before a single judge for misdemeanors and minor felonies and before a
 panel of three judges for serious felonies. There are no jury trials, and, while there
 is no explicit right to a public trial, courtproceedings are generally open to the pub-
 lic. The accused, or his lawyer, may read the police "charge sheet," which summa-
 rizes the case against him. There is no procedure by which the defense may seek
 the deletion of elements of the charge sheet prior to trial, but the magistrate may
 delete charges during the trial. The police or public prosecutor (a senior police offi-
 cer) may add charges after inspection of the file by the defense and during the trial.
 During the trial, witnesses may be called by the judge, prosecution, or defense.
 The prosecution or the defense may cross-examine witnesses through (and with the
 approval of) the judge, but there is no procedural right to cross-examine. The pros-
 ecution and defense may challenge the reliability of statements or authenticity of
 documents in their closing statements to the )udge. Judges frequently pronounce a
 verdict and sentence within 1 day after a trial s end.
 Jail sentences of over 3 months and fines of over $1,300 are subject to appeal.
 The public prosecutor's office may also appeal a sentence that it believes to be too
 light, although it may not appeal an innocent verdict. The President of the Mag-
 istrate Court chairs the Court of Appeal, which may opt not to consider an appeal
 it finds ill-grounded.
 A capital sentence requires the Sultan's ratification. There were no reports of po-
 litical prisoners in Oman in 1992.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The po-
 lice do not require a warrant to search a private residence, office, or vehicle. There
 is a widespread belief that the Government eavesdrops on both oral and written
 communications, and Omanis are guarded in both areas. Searches and monitoring
 of telephones and private correspondence are believed to be confined to cases in
 which the Government perceives a security threat or criminal activity.
 A 1986 law banned, with few exceptions, marriage between Omanis and foreign-
 ers. The law, promulgated in an effort to stem what the Government considere[ to
 be the erosion of Omani culture, is widely resented.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-There is no legal protection of speech or of the
 press. Criticism of the Sultan in any form or medium is prohibited by law. Criticism
 of individual officials, agencies, and their programs is tolerated but rarely receives
 media coverage. In a notable exception, television and print media coverage of the
 late May session of the new Majlis ash-Shura featured spirited questioning of a
 number of ministers by council members.
 The 1984 Press and Publication Law mandates government control over all print-
 ed matter, including newspapers and magazines. The law provides for strict prior
 censorship of all infoirmation in printed form in both domestic and imported publica-
 tions. Imported printed material is screened by government censors, and Omani
 publications operate under general unwritten government guidelines on tone and
 content. In practice, publishers in Oman censor themselves, avoiding anything that
 might be construed as an attack on the Government. Editors and reporters usually
 give government ministries an opportunity to respond before critical stories are
 printed. Friendly nations are also protected from direct attack. While the law pro-
 vides for censorship prior to publication, in practice, publications often receive pro
 
 
 1071
 
 forma clearance and are distributed and reviewed concurrently. There were no re-
 ports of publishers having been forced to recall any editions in 1992.
 The Government owns two of the four daily newspapers, and subsidies to the re-
 maining dailies and several privately owned periodicals provide an effective incen-
 tive for self censorship. Editorials and news coverage largely reflect the Govern-
 ment's views, though some leeway on forein policy issues is tolerated. Publications
 and video and audio cassettes arriving in 8man from foreign countries are censored
 for politically, culturally, or sexually offensive material and are occasionally banned.
 While there are no formal lists of objectionable material available to the public, the
 censors' attention focuses primarily on articles that directly attack or embarrass the
 Government.
 The Government controls all radio and television broadcasting and does not pro-
 vide for airing political debate or nonLvernment viewpoints. However, the Ministry
 of Information broadened dramatically the range of radio and television program-
 ming available to the public by permitting a free market in dish antennae.
 Oman has only one institution of higer learning, Sultan Qaboos University,
 which graduated its third class in 1992. Courses in politics and lectures on con-
 troversial subjects are prohibited, and access to the campus by persons outside the
 university community is limited.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-Freedom of assembly is not
 guaranteed by law, and public gatherings do not take place without government
 sponsorship.     iations of any kind must register with the Government and sub-
 mit their bylaws to the concerned ministry for approval. Those that oppose the pre-
 dominant social or political views of the Sultanate are prohibited.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-Orman is an Islamic state. Non-Muslims in the Sultanate
 are prohibited from proselytizing, and conversion to Islam is encouraged and pub-
 licized. There are ample facilities for the training of Muslim clergy and for religious
 instruction. Non-Muslim foreigners, both Christian and Hindu, are allowed to wor-
 ship at designated locations on land donated by the Sultan. Although there is no
 indigenous Jewish community, Jews are not barred from living and working in
 Oman. Religion is not a factor in gaining entry into Oman, nor is it commonly a
 basis for job discrimination (see also Section 5).
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-With the exception of a few military areas, there are no restrictions on
 travel by Omanis within their country. However, while male Omanis may travel
 abroad freely, a woman must have authorization from her husband, father, or near-
 est male relative to obtain a passport.
 Omanis living abroad before 1970 have returned to Oman in large numbers with
 official encouragement and without legal obstacles. The returnees include the many
 Omanis who sought refuge in Yemen during the 1965-75 Dhofar rebellion. Thou-
 sands of ethnic Omanis from east Africa, particularly Tanzania, have been resettled
 and integrated successfully.
 Oman does not have a standard policy on refugees and traditionally has not
 harbored stateless or undocumented aliens. Tight control over the entry of foreign-
 ers into the country has effectively screened out would-be refugees. The rare state-
 less or undocumented person who arrives in Oman may be detained pending a de-
 termination that he or she has not violated immigration or other laws. Persons
 seeking resettlement are dealt with by the Government on an ad hoc basis. Oman
 has assisted some non-Arab, Muslim refugees to find accommodations in third coun-
 tries.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Oman has no formal democratic institutions, and its citizens do not, therefore,
 have the ability peacefully to. change their leaders or the political system. Oman is
 an absolute monarchy in which the Sultan has the final word on all government de-
 cisions, in theory andin practice. The next successor to the monarchy will probably
 be determined through a ctnsensus of the royal family and leading public figures.
 There are no political parties, legal opposition groups, or elections, and there is
 no constitution. Citizens have indirect access to senior officials through the tradi-
 tional practice of petitioning local leaders for redress of grievances. Successful re-
 dress depends on the effectiveness of personal contact and the status and influence
 of the intermediary. The people have free access to their government at the level
 of provincial governor and to their district representatives m the Majlis ash-Shura;
 provincial and tribal leaders and Majlis members in turn have access to the Sultan,
 his advisers, and ministry officials to present the views of their constituents. The
 Sultan makes an annual 3-week tour of the country to listen directly to his subjects'
 problems. In rural areas, local government reflects the tribal nature of Omani soci-
 
 
 1072
 ety, as traditional elites dominate the tribal and appointive town councils. Final au-
 thority outside Muscat, however, is with the provincial governors, who are named
 by the Sultan.
 The Majlis ash-Shura, established in 1991, represents a modest effort to systema-
 tize and broaden popular participation. The Sultan chose 59 of its 60 members from
 among the nominees selected in caucuses held in the spring of 1991 in which hun.
 dreds of leading citizens in each district participated. In contrast to the practice
 under the predecessor Council, no serving government officials are eligible to sit as
 members of the new Majlis. In accordance with the Sultan's decree, the full body
 convened four times in 1992, while its five committees met on virtually a weekly
 basis, preparing reports on agenda items for the full Council. The Council's purposes
 are to serve as a conduit of information between the people and the government
 ministries and to provide a citizens' perspective, sometimes local in scope and some-
 times national, on issues which heretofore were the preserve of bureaucrats whose
 focus might be narrower.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 There are no independent organizations to monitor human rights violations. Pub-
 lic criticism of the Government s human rights practices would face major obstacles
 under the existing restrictions on freedoms of speech and association. There were
 no known requests by international human rights organizations to visit Oman in
 1992.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Language, or Social Status
 Omani society's interpretation of Islamic precepts on the status of women results
 in de jure and de facto discrimination in a number of areas. However, women have
 shared in thebenefits of the social and economic growth of recent years. A few
 women have reached high positions in the private and public sectors, and gradually
 the occupational areas available to women are expanding beyond the traditional
 field of teaching. Secretarial work, medicine, and communications have become ac-
 ceptable professional areas for women over the last several years.
 Schooling for girls is available to the same extent as for boys in urban areas and
 increasingly so in rural areas. In general, the level of education that girls attain re-
 mains below that of boys; however, girls reportedly made up just over half the
 29 000 students starting school for the first time in 1992. Women constitute roughly
 half of the 3,000 students at Sultan QaboQs University, and they composed two-
 thirds of the class that matriculated in September. Women constitute the majority
 of students in the college of arts and the college of education and Islamic sciences.
 Admission of women to faculties in the technical fields has become severely re-
 stricted in a reflection of a reluctance among employers to hire trained females for
 work in those fields outside of the capital area and among trained females (or their
 families) to accept work in them.
 The gains achieved by a small minority of women are largely irrelevant to the
 great majority who live their lives within the confines of the house. All but the
 youngest females in the rural areas are illiterate. This general lack of female edu-
 cation, combined with communal and tribal customs that dictate a subsidiary role
 for women, makes it difficult for most adult women to participate fully in the mod-
 ern sector. Educational facilities for girls (including university training) have ex-
 panded in recent years, but communal and tribal customs continue to work against
 equal opportunity for women.
 By law, women receive equal pay and benefits for equal work. The Government,
 by far the largest employer of women in the country, enforces this regulation within
 its ministries, where women serve in professional and senior managerial positions.
 Islamic inheritance laws are strictly interpreted in Oman. A woman may receive
 only one-eighth of her husband's property when he dies. Daughters receive less than
 sons. In urban, educated families, many women have property in their own names;
 less-educated women do not usually have that protection. Because of the relative
 lack of education among older women, many are unaware of their rights. Others are
 reluctant to use the court system out of fear that they might forfeit family support
 by bringing a matter before the court.
 Women have sometimes been the victims of spouse abuse in 1992; however, no
 statistics are available on its extent, and the anecdotal evidence does not suggest
 a trend. Communities in a few towns in the interior and in the Dhofar region prac-
 tice female genital mutilation (circumcision). The total number of cases nationwide
 is small and declining annually. However, in some regions the practice poses a sig-
 nificant health hazard, and the central Government continued its efforts in 1992 to
 educate the people against it.
 
 
 1073
 While there are no government restrictions directed against Omanis of East Afri-
 can origin, a few of them believe they face de facto discrimination in employment
 opportunities. Some pblic institutions ostensibly favor members of one or another
 regional, tribal, or religious group in their hiring. Each segment of the society has
 its effective patronage organizations; no group is barred from employment in any
 of them.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The Omani Labor Law does not anticipate or ad-
 dress the formation of labor unions. In practice, organizations formed to represent
 only workers do not exist in Oman, a fact which has been raised as a concern by
 the American Federation of Labor and Congress of Industrial Organizations. The
 Labor Law specifies that "it is absolutely forbidden to provoke a strike for any rea-
 son." Labor unrest has been rare during the two decades Oman has been developing
 a modern economy, and there were no reports of informal work stoppages or related
 activities in 1992.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Colectively.-According to the Labor Law
 employers of more than 50 workers are required to form a joint body of labor and
 management representatives as a forum for communication between the two groups.
 Generally, such committees discuss living conditions, for example in a company
 housing compound. Wages and hours are not under the purview of these commit-
 tees; they are agreed upon by workers and employers in individual contracts, within
 the guidelines delineated by the Ministry of Social Affairs and Labor under the law.
 The committees are not formed across company lines; membership is confined to
 management and labor representatives from each individual company.
 The 1973 Labor Law (as amended) defines conditions of employment for both
 Omanis and foreign workers, who constitute 50 percent of the work force (setting
 aside the traditional Omani occupations of fishing, subsistence farming, and
 herding, foreign nationals make up 80 to 90 percent of the work force in the modern
 sector.) Foreign nationals from India, Pakistan, the Philippines, Bangladesh, and
 Sri Lanka continue to seek employment in Oman in large numbers often entering
 into employment contracts prior to their arrival. Work rules must b approved by
 the Mimstry of Social Affairs and Labor and posted conspicuously in the workplace.
 Similarly, any employer with 50 or more workers must establish a grievance proce-
 dure.
 Regardless of the size of the company, any employee, Omani or expatriate, may
 rile a grievance with the Labor Wea  Board, which comprises 6 inspectors who
 arbitrate disputes. Lower paid workers such as clerks, mechanics, and salesmen use
 the board regularly. Both plaintiff and defendant may retain and be represented by
 counsel. Representative workers may present collective grievances but most cases
 are filed on behalf of individual workers. The board has a docket o? about 150 cases
 er month, about 80 percent of which involve foreign nationals. Sessions convene
 aily; procedures are informal and summary in nature. The Labor Welfare Board
 operates impartially and generally gives workers the benefit of the doubt in griev-
 ance hearings. Disputes that the board cannot resolve go to the Minister of Social
 Affairs and Labor for decision.
 There are no export processing zones in Oman.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-Although prohibited by law, a
 form of compulsory labor occurs occasionally. Some employers withhold the letters
 of releasethat foreign workers require in order to transfer employment and resi-
 dency sponsorslip from one employer to another. Failing to secure a letter of release
 and legal transfer to another firm in Oman, a forei$n national must either continue
 working at his current workplace or become technically unemployed. To avoid that
 status and the conseuent possibility of mandatory departure from the country,
 some employees submit to their employers' coercion. Some employers demand that
 foreign workers perform overtime or remain at a firm for several months against
 their wish, in some cases without compensation, in exchange for the promise of a
 release letter. This practice is proscribed by law; however, labor inspections in the
 workplace are rare, and it generally falls to the worker to approach the Labor Wel-
 fare Board to report a violation. Workers may en age attorneys to argue cases be-
 fore the Board, and in most cases the Board releases the employee immediately
 from service with back compensation for the time worked under compulsion. The
 employer faces no penal sanction. The only penalty against an employer is the loss
 of the worker and the compensation payment made to him.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-Under the law, children, defined
 as those under the age of 13, are prohibited from working. Juveniles, defined as
 those over 13 years and under 16 years of age, are prohibited from performing
 evening or night work or strenuous labor. Juveniles are also forbidden to work over-
 
 
 1074
 time or on weekends or holidays without Ministry of Social Affairs and Labor per-
 mission. Education is not compulsory, but the Government encourages school at-
 tendance; over 90 percent of eligible school age children begin primary school.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-Using its legal authority to determine the min-
 imum wage and make adjustments according to economic circumstances, the Gov-
 ernment issues minimum wage guidelines for various categories of workers. Mini-
 mum wage guidelines do not cover domestic servants, farmers, government employ-
 ees or workers in small businesses.
 ' here is also a statutory minimum wage for foreign workers. However many for-
 eign workers are in categories exempt from the minimum wage statute. Vor menial
 work that is subject to the minimum wage, lax enforcement usually permits employ-
 ers to pay less than the legal standard. The minimum wage is sufficient to provide
 an Omani worker in the capital area with a decent subsistence, with something left
 over to send to family members living in rural areas, as is the custom. The com-
 pensation for foreign manual laborers and clerks (mainly South Asians) is sufficient
 to maintain a standard of living in Oman superior to that which they left behind
 and to send a portion of their income home. The private sector workweek is 40 to
 45 hours (less for Muslims during Ramadan) and includes a rest period from Thurs-
 day afternoon to Saturday morning, which many shopkeepers and their employees
 opt not to observe. While the law does not designate the number of days in a work.
 week, it requires at least one 24-hour rest period per week and mandates overtime
 pay for hours in excess of 48 per week. In practice, the workweek is 5 days in the
 public sector and generally 5V2 days in the private sector. Some menial laborer not
 protected by the labor law are required by a few employers to work longer hours
 under substandard working conditions.
 Supplemental income through compensated overtime work is common for lower
 level employees. Every worker has the right to 15 days of annual leave during the
 first 3 years of employment and 30 days per year thereafter. Employers provide
 many foreign nationals, including maids, with annual or biennual round-trip tickets
 to their countries of origin. Employers commonly hold foreign workers' passports, as
 they are legally responsible for the workers' actions while they are in Oman.
 The labor law and regulations cover in detail issues of occupational safety and ac-
 cess to medical treatment. Employees covered under the labor law can recover com-
 pensation for industrial injury or illness through medical insurance, which the em-
 ployer must provide. The health and safety standard codes are scrupulously en-
 forced by inspectors who make frequent on-site inspections, as required by law. The
 laws on child and female labor are effectively and uniformly enforced by inspectors
 throughout the country.
