 OMAN
 The Sultanate of Oman is an absolute monarchy without
 popularly elected representative institutions. The reigning
 Sultan, Qaboos bin Said Al Said, is the 14th ruler of the
 current dynasty. The State Consultative Council, formed in
 1981, functions as an advisory body on economic and social
 questions. Members are appointed by the Sultan who has
 continued the house of Al Said's long tradition of firm
 control over all questions affecting the Omani State. At the
 same time, the Sultan has built on an earlier trend to bring
 notables of the tribal system of the interior into the
 national administrative system.
 National security remains an important concern. Although an
 insurrection in the southern province of Dhofar, supported by
 the People's Democratic Republic of Yemen (PDRY) was defeated
 in 1975, Oman has continued to devote considerable revenue to
 defense in the face of threats from the PDRY and, more
 recently, Iran. Oman's strategic location on the south shore
 of the Strait of Hormuz has exposed the country to the
 increased tension in the Persian Gulf area. The internal
 security services are large, efficient, and pervasive, but are
 not generally regarded as repressive. Many key jobs in the
 Government, especially in the military and internal security
 services, are occupied by outsiders, including many British,
 although the number of expatriates is declining.
 Almost totally undeveloped in 1970, Oman has used its modest
 oil revenues to foster a remarkable degree of progress in the
 social, economic, and administrative spheres, achieving a
 significant improvement in the living standards of its
 people. A sharp fall in oil prices in 1986, however, caused a
 cutback in government spending and triggered a recession,
 which is still continuing.
 There were no major developments in 1988 with significant
 impact on the human rights environment in Oman. While civil
 and political rights are not formally codified, the integrity
 of the individual is generally respected, particularly in the
 absence of any organized opposition to the Government. The
 people have reasonable access to their Government at the Wali
 (governor) level; the Walis and tribal leaders in turn have
 access to the Sultan, his advisers, and ministry officials to
 present the views of the people they represent.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 There were no known political killings in Oman in 1988.
 b. Disappearance
 No cases of disappearance were reported in 1988.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 
 
 1456
 OMAN
 Reports of torture or other forms of cruel punishment by Omani
 authorities are infrequent. Amputations and related
 punishments under Islamic law are no longer carried out.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Although Omani law does not provide for habeas corpus or its
 equivalent, the period of detention before trial in criminal
 cases is usually short. Police notification may be slow, but
 incommunicado detention is not practiced. Under current Omani
 practice, a person suspected of a crime may be held up to 15
 days while a case is under investigation, although this may be
 extended to a maximum of 70 days if approved by the
 magistrate. Attorneys are not always permitted access to
 their clients. While there have been abuses of the police
 power of arrest, the criminal code imposes penalties for
 unjustified arrest or detention. Citizens have several
 channels through which they can seek redress of any grievance
 against law enforcement authorities, and these channels appear
 to serve their purpose well, particularly in rural areas.
 Membership in certain unauthorized organizations is a criminal
 offense. The Dhofar insurgency (1965-1975) led to the
 imprisonment of members of the Popular Front for the
 Liberation of Oman (PFLO). All of those arrested during the
 rebellion have been released, and many former insurgents
 benefited from an amnesty and returned to Oman from the
 bordering areas of the PDRY. However, the PFLO remains a
 proscribed organization. All Omanis who were in exile under
 the previous Sultan were given the opportunity to return, as
 many thousands did after 1970. The grace period for those in
 self-imposed exile who wished to return to Oman formally ended
 on December 31, 1986, although amnesty has subsequently been
 granted to at least one additional returnee.
 With regard to forced or compulsory labor, see Section 6.c.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Oman's first criminal code was enacted in 1974. This code
 does not explicitly state the rights of the accused during the
 criminal process, nor does it have rules for admission of
 evidence during trials or codified procedures for entering
 cases into the criminal system. A draft revised criminal code
 was circulated for comment within the Government-in 1988 and
 is expected to address many of the existing shortcomings.
 Judicial practice in Oman largely conforms to the
 prescriptions under Islamic law for a fair and speedy trial
 before experienced and impartial judges. However, there is no
 right under law to a jury, counsel, or public trial, and
 attorneys are not provided for those who cannot afford them.
 If a case proceeds to trial, it is heard before a judge
 alone. Generally, all questioning is conducted by the judge,
 and there is no examination or cross-examination by the
 prosecution, accused, or attorney of the accused. Either side
 may request the judge to ask particular questions of a
 witness, however, and some judges do permit direct questioning
 of witnesses. At the discretion of the judge, the accused may
 call witnesses. Decisions are generally pronounced promptly,
 and sentencing is immediate. Verdicts are final, although
 there may be informa) appeals to the State Advisor for Penal
 Affairs and ultimately to the Sultan in cases involving
 serious offenses. The Sultan must approve death penalty
 verdicts. The various judicial systems are technically
 
 
 1457
 OMAN
 subordinate to the Sultan, but they operate independently in
 the majority of cases.
 Although Islamic law is administered throughout the country by
 Islamic judges (qadis) in Shari'a courts, the jurisdiction of
 the Shari'a court is limited to civil, including commercial,
 as well as minor criminal cases. Similarly, recently
 reconstituted "barzah" or people's courts--presided over by
 walis (governors), judges, and staff--handle personal and
 minor commercial disputes but not criminal cases. There is
 also a security court system that handles internal national
 security cases.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Warrants are not required to search private residences,
 offices, or vehicles. However, such searches, as well as the
 monitoring of telephones and private correspondence, are
 confined to cases where the Government perceives a security
 threat or criminal activity.
 Although there is no government policy to discourage the use
 of other languages in speech or print or in religious
 instruction in the home, the Government has increasingly
 insisted that correspondence with it, and public and legal
 documents, be in Arabic. A 1986 law banned, with a few
 insignificant exceptions, marriage between Omanis and
 foreigners. The move was explained as an effort to stem the
 erosion of Omani culture. Those already married to foreigners
 had to register within a specified period or risk forfeiting
 their citizenship and that of their offspring.
 Section 2 1 espect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 There are no provisions in law which protect freedom of speech
 or freedom of the press. Criticism of the Sultan in any form
 or medium is prohibited by law. Criticism of individual
 officials, agencies, and their programs is tolerated but is
 not given media coverage. The Government controls all radio
 and television broadcasting. Government control of all
 printed matter, including newspapers and magazines, is
 specified in the press and publication law, issued in May
 1984. The law imposes strict controls on, and a mechanism
 for, prior censorship of all information in printed form in
 both domestic and imported publications. The Government owns
 two of the three daily newspapers, one in Arabic and one in
 English. Subsidies to the several privately owned weekly and
 biweekly publications provide an effective incentive to
 self-censorship, although there have been arrests and closure
 for offensive articles. Thus, editorials and news coverage
 invariably reflect the Government's views.
 Publications arriving in Oman from foreign countries are
 censored for politically or sexually offensive material and
 are occasionally banned. The censor's attention generally
 focuses on articles that directly attack or embarrass the
 Government. In 1986 the regional correspondent of a respected
 economic journal was warned of the consequences of critical
 coverage of Oman, and one local English-language newspaper was
 shut down. In the last 2 years, three expatriate reporters
 have been deported for articles written about Oman.
 
 
 1458
 OMAN
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Freedom of assembly is not guaranteed by law. Associations of
 any kind must register with the government, and those which
 oppose the political system of the Sultanate are prohibited.
 For a discussion of freedom of association as it applies to
 labor unions, see Section 6.a.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Oman is an Islamic state, and virtually all Omani citizens
 adhere to one or another sect of Islam, the exception being
 the small Hindu community made up of Omani citizens of Indian
 origin. Ibadhi Muslims probably form the largest group of
 Muslims in Oman and include the ruling family. However, there
 may be as many or more Sunni Muslims in the country, and
 members of both the Sunni and small Shi'a communities are
 found in all walks of life in both the public and private
 sectors. Non-Muslim foreigners, both Christian and Hindu, are
 allowed to worship at designated locations on land donated by
 the Government. Although there is no indigenous Jewish
 community, Jews are not barred from living and working in
 Oman. Religion is not a factor in gaining entry into Oman.
 Non-Muslims in Oman are prohibited from proselytizing.
 Conversion to Islam is encouraged and publicized.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 With the exception of a few military areas, there are no
 restrictions on travel by Omanis within their country. The
 Government's development of transportation has greatly
 increased the ability to move within the country to heretofore
 inaccessible areas. Omanis living abroad before 1970 have
 returned to Oman in large numbers with official encouragement
 and without legal obstacles. Several thousand ethnic Omani
 refugees from East Africa, particularly from Zanzibar, have
 been resettled successfully. Many Omanis who had sought
 refuge in the People's Democratic Republic of Yemen during the
 insurgency in Dhofar (1965-1975) have returned to Oman with
 official encouragement. Non-Omani refugees are not permitted
 to remain in Oman. Those few that reach Oman are generally
 returned to their homelands unless they can be quickly
 resettled in a third country. Omanis may travel abroad
 freely, although a woman must have authorization from her
 husband or father to obtain a passport. Many Omanis work
 abroad, particularly in the United Arab Emirates, where an
 estimated 30,000 Omanis are currently employed. Many of these
 people travel home to Oman on weekends.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 The Sultanate of Oman has no formal democratic institutions.
 Consequently, its citizens do not have the ability peacefully
 to change their leaders or the political system. Oman is a
 monarchy in which the Sultan retains the final word in all
 government decisions. Succession to the monarchy is
 determined through a consensus of the ruling family and
 leading public figures. There are no political parties, legal
 opposition groups, elections, or constitution. Citizens have
 access to senior officials through the traditional practice of
 submitting petitions for the redress of grievances.
 Successful redress depends on the effectiveness of personal
 
 
 1459
 OMAN
 contact and the quality of the persons chosen as
 intermediaries. Outside of Muscat, the Government still
 reflects the tribal nature of Omani society. Traditional
 elites dominate the tribal and town councils, which settle
 intratribal disputes. Final authority, however, is with the
 walis, who are appointed by the Sultan.
 In an effort to broaden participation in the Government, the
 Sultan formed the State Consultative Council in 1981. It
 consists of 55 members drawn from the Government, the business
 community, and the outlying districts. It includes members of
 every significant ethnic, geographic, and religious group. At
 present, the Council's role is an advisory one, limited to the
 social and economic spheres.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The Government of Oman declined to receive a proposed Amnesty
 International mission in 1972 during the insurgency in
 Dhofar. Since then, there have been no known requests by
 international human rights organizations to visit Oman. There
 are no independent organizations to monitor human rights
 violations.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 Though conservative, Oman has not been extreme in the
 interpretation of Islamic precepts on the status of women.
 Women have shared in the benefits of the social and economic
 growth of recent years, and schooling for girls is available
 to the same extent as for boys in urban areas, less so in
 rural areas. However, for cultural reasons, the level of
 education which girls attain is still below that of boys.
 Many urban Omani women drive cars. A few women have reached
 high positions in the public sector, and a woman was named an
 undersecretary for the first time in 1988. By and large,-
 however, occupational advances available to women are limited
 to the traditional spheres of teaching, secretarial work, and
 nursing.
 The gains achieved by a small minority of women are largely
 irrelevant to the great majority, both in the towns and in the
 rural areas, who live their lives within the confines of the
 house and the local marketplace. The previous lack of adult
 education facilities means that all but the youngest females
 in rural areas are illiterate. This general lack of
 education, combined with communal and tribal customs which
 dictate a subsidiary role for women, makes it difficult for
 most adult women to participate fully in the modern sector.
 The expansion of educational facilities for girls (including
 the new university) will allow for some equalization of the
 position of women in the future, but communal and tribal
 customs will continue to work against full participation by
 women for the foreseeable future.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 Labor unions are illegal in Oman, and, as specified in Oman's
 labor law, "it is absolutely forbidden to provoke a strike for
 any reasons."
 
 
 1460
 OMAN
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 The labor law provides procedures for pursuing a "collective
 grievance" and encourages conciliation of disputes through the
 formation of joint consultative bodies of labor and
 management. Employers are forbidden by law from making a
 distinction between workers who belong to these consultative
 bodies and those who do not.
 Oman's labor law, issued in 1973, is a comprehensive document
 defining conditions of employment for both Omanis and foreign
 workers, who constitute 50 percent of the work force. Labor
 legislation and practice is uniform throughout the country.
 Work rules must be approved by the Department of Labor and
 posted conspicuously. Under Oman's labor court system, any .
 employee (Omani or expatriate) may file a grievance. The
 employer pays all costs incurred in the filing of the
 grievance, regardless of the verdict. The employee cannot be
 reprimanded or punished for filing a grievance. The labor law
 is reportedly fairly enforced, and the labor courts generally
 give workers the benefit of the doubt in grievance hearings.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 There is no forced or compulsory labor.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 Employment of children under the age of 13 is prohibited.
 Omani law regulates the employment of juveniles, defined as
 those between the ages of 13 and 16, prohibiting evening and
 nighttime work, strenuous occupations, and overtime and
 holiday work.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 The labor law states that the Government can determine the
 minimum wage and make adjustments according to economic
 circumstances. The minimum wage, which does not cover
 domestic servants, farmers, government employees, or workers
 in small businesses, is currently set at approximately $180,
 plus approximately $39 each for transportation and for food
 (if not provided). In fact, the minimum wage is not an issue
 for most Omanis as few are paid wages that low. For
 expatriate workers, who are also given lodging, the minimum
 wage plus benefits is enough to maintain an adequate standard
 of living. For foreigners not covered by the labor law, the
 respective embassies in many cases set suggested minimum wages.
 The workweek is set at 48 hours (36 for Muslims during
 Ramadan). Every worker has the right to 15 days of annual
 leave during the first 3 years of employment and 30 days per
 year thereafter. Oman's labor law and a subsequent 1976 law
 "governing compensation for occupational injuries and
 illnesses" cover in detail issues of occupational safety and
 access to medical treatment. Employees covered by the labor
 law can recover compensation for industrial injury or
 illness. The laws on child labor and conditions of work are
 enforced effectively and uniformly throughout the country.
 
 
 1461
