Pakistan
Since President Pervez Musharraf seized office in a military coup d’etat
five years ago, Pakistan’s military has acted with increasing impunity to
enforce its writ over the state and to protect its grip on Pakistan’s economic
resources, especially land. For instance, in the Okara district of
the military’s traditional stronghold of Punjab, paramilitary forces acting
in conjunction with the army killed and tortured farmers who
refused to cede their land rights to the army. Other pressing human
rights concerns in the country include a rise in sectarian violence; legal
discrimination against and mistreatment of women and religious
minorities; arbitrary detention of political opponents; harassment and
intimidation of the media; and lack of due process in the conduct of the
“war on terror” in collaboration with the United States. A major military
offensive against alleged Taliban and Al-Qaeda forces in the South
Waziristan area bordering Afghanistan resulted in massive displacement
of civilians and scores of deaths.
Gender-based Violence and Discrimination
Violence against women and girls, including domestic violence, rape,
“honor killings,” acid attacks, and trafficking, are rampant in Pakistan.
The existing legal code discriminates against women and girls and creates
major obstacles to seeking redress in cases of violence. Survivors of
violence encounter unresponsiveness and hostility at each level of the
criminal justice system, from police who fail to register or investigate
cases of gender-based violence to judges with little training or commitment
to women’s equal rights.
Under Pakistan’s existing Hudood Ordinance, proof of rape generally
requires the confession of the accused or the testimony of four adult
Muslim men who witnessed the assault. If a woman cannot prove her
rape allegation she runs a very high risk of being charged with fornication
or adultery, the criminal penalty for which is either a long prison sentence and public whipping, or, though rare, death by stoning. The
testimony of women carries half the weight of a man’s testimony under
this ordinance. The government has yet to repeal or reform the
Hudood Ordinance, despite repeated calls for its repeal by the government-
run National Commission on the Status of Women, as well as
women’s rights and human rights groups. Informed estimates suggest
that over 200,000 cases under the Hudood laws are under process at
various levels in Pakistan’s legal system.
According to Pakistan’s Interior Ministry, there have been more than
4,000 honor killings in the last six years. Nongovernmental groups
recorded more than 1,300 honor killings in 2003. Proposed legislation
on honor killings drafted in consultation with NGOs and the Human
Rights Commission of Pakistan was sidelined in favor of a far weaker
bill.
Religious Freedom
Sectarian violence increased significantly in Pakistan in 2004. While
estimates suggest that at least 4,000 people, largely from the minority
Shi’a Muslim sect, have died as a result of sectarian violence since 1980,
the last five years have witnessed a steep rise in incidents of sectarian
violence. For example, in October 2004, at least seventy people were
killed in sectarian attacks perpetrated by both Sunni and Shi’a extremist
groups in the cities of Multan and Karachi. In recent years, Sunni
extremists, often with connections to militant organizations such as
Sipah-e Sahaba Pakistan, have targeted the Shi’a. There has been a
sharp increase in the number of targeted killings of Shi’a, particularly
Shi’a doctors, in recent years. Those implicated in acts of sectarian violence
are rarely prosecuted and virtually no action has been taken to
protect the affected communities.
Discrimination and persecution on grounds of religion continued in
2004 and an increasing number of blasphemy cases were registered.
The Ahmadi religious community in particular was the target of religious
extremists. Ahmadis also continued to be arrested and faced
charges under various provisions of the Blasphemy Law for allegedly
contravening the principles of Islam. Charges filed include “preaching,”
distributing “objectionable literature,” and preparing to build a “place
of worship.” Other religious minorities, including Christians and
Hindus, also continue to face discrimination.
Military Impunity
In December 2003, in order to push through controversial constitutional
reforms that increased his powers, General Musharraf acceded to
widespread demands to step down as army chief as part of the process of
returning the country to civilian rule. But in October 2004, he reneged
on the pledge made to the country in a televised speech by securing the
passage of the “The President to Hold Another Office Act.”
During President Musharraf’s tenure, Pakistan’s military increased its
influence over the political and economic life of all Pakistanis. The
starkest example of military impunity came from the brutal repression
of a farmers’ movement in Okara district of Punjab province, where
tens of thousands of tenant farmers have resisted efforts by the military
to usurp their legal rights to some of the most fertile farmland in
Pakistan. Pakistani paramilitary forces subjected the farmers to a campaign
of murder, arbitrary detention, torture, “forced divorces,” and
summary dismissals from employment. On two occasions, the paramilitaries
literally besieged villages in the area of dispute, thus preventing
people, food, and public services from entering or leaving for weeks on
end. In Okara, senior military and political officials have either participated
in or allowed violations to occur. 
“War on Terror”
The conduct of the “war on terror” in Pakistan led to serious violations
of human rights. Suspects arrested and held on terrorism charges frequently
were detained without charge and subject to trials without
proper judicial process.
In September 2003, Pakistani authorities detained thirteen young men
and boys from Malaysia and Indonesia, the youngest of whom were
under sixteen at the time of arrest, legally attending an Islamic school in
Karachi. They were not alleged to have engaged in any illegal activity,
but were arrested on the claim that they were being trained to engage
in future terrorist activities. They were arrested by Pakistani security
forces, held incommunicado, and interrogated by Pakistani and U.S.
security personnel, and then shipped to their home countries. No
charges have been brought against any of them.
Since March 2004, the Pakistan Army has engaged in an ongoing operation
in Pakistan’s Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA) along
the Afghan border, with particularly heavy fighting in the South
Waziristan region. The Pakistan government did not apply international
humanitarian law to the conflict, arguing that though the offensive
was being conducted by its army, it was an anti-terrorist operation. The
government used the draconian Frontier Crimes Regulations to justify
the use of methods such as collective punishment, and economic blockades
of civilians. While Pakistani authorities have prohibited most independent
verification of the events in the South Waziristan, reports of
extrajudicial executions, house demolitions, arbitrary detentions, and
the harassment of journalists abound.
According to government sources, at least sixty-three foreign and local
combatants were killed in the operation. In addition, as the “spring
offensive” got underway, army and paramilitary troops reportedly evicted
between 25,000 and 35,000 civilians from the area in and around the village of Kalusha on March 16, 2004. Reports indicate that the
Pakistan government made no arrangements for those evicted and
scores of dwellings were destroyed in the subsequent fighting. Locals
reported that upon their return they found belongings and cattle stolen
and several homes arbitrarily converted into military check-posts.
In the immediate aftermath of the army operation, the Pakistan Army
reported the capture of 215 fighters, of whom at least seventy-three
were foreigners from Chechnya, China’s predominantly Muslim
Xinjiang province, Afghanistan, Uzbekistan, and various Arab countries.
There has been no confirmation from the Pakistan government about
the whereabouts of those arrested. Military operations are ongoing in
South Waziristan .
Arbitrary Arrest and Detention of Political Opponents
The government continued to use the National Accountability Bureau
(NAB) and a host of anti-corruption and sedition laws to jail political
opponents or blackmail them into changing their political stance or loyalties
or at the very least to cease criticizing the military authorities.
In April 2004, the president of an opposition party, Makhdoom Javed
Hashmi of the Alliance for the Restoration of Democracy, was sentenced
to twenty-three years in prison on sedition charges for reading
an anti-Musharraf letter to assembled journalists. Meanwhile, Asif
Zardari, husband of former Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto has begun
his ninth consecutive year in prison. Initially the government filed
twelve cases against Zardari, most based on charges of corruption and
financial impropriety. Though he has been bailed in eight and acquitted
in four of these, in December 2001 a thirteenth case was filed against
him on charges of evading duty on the import of a second-hand car.
Zardari awaits a bail hearing.
Freedom of Expression
The rights to free expression and dissemination of information were
persistently undermined through the arrest of editors and reporters
from local and regional newspapers on charges of sedition.
Rasheed Azam, a journalist and political activist from Khuzdar in
Balochistan province, claimed he was abused and tortured, including
being beaten while hung upside down and subjected to sleep deprivation.
He was released after several months in custody though charges of
sedition filed against him are still being processed. Similarly, Amir Mir,
a journalist working for the high-profile Karachi-based Herald magazine
was reportedly publicly threatened by President Musharraf on
November 20, 2003. Two days later, three unidentified persons set Amir
Mir’s car ablaze outside his house.
Two French journalists, Marc Epstein and Jean-Paul Guilloteau, and
their Pakistani assistant, Khawar Mehdi Rizvi, were arrested in Karachi
on December 16, 2003. They were reportedly preparing a report on
alleged links between Pakistani government agents and the Taliban
operating in neighboring Afghanistan. The Frenchmen were granted
bail and eventually allowed to leave Pakistan on January 12, 2004, after
paying a fine. However, Mehdi, reportedly tortured in custody,
remained incarcerated until March 29, 2004, when he was granted bail.
Mehdi faces sedition charges.
While the Pakistani government did not formally restrict access to
South Waziristan during the “spring offensive,” journalists were repeatedly
detained or prevented from reporting through tactics such as the
destruction or confiscation of equipment. Journalists were eventually
allowed limited access to the affected villages on March 28 upon the
conclusion of the first phase of the operation. However, media access to
FATA in general and South Waziristan in particular remains limited as
military operations continue.
Key International Actors
Pakistan remains heavily dependent on the United States for economic
and military aid. The U.S. has notably failed to press for human rightsrelated
legal reform in the country, in exchange for Pakistan’s support in
the U.S.-led “war on terror.” For its part, the government of Pakistan
has excused its failure to uphold human rights and the rule of law by
citing domestic political pressure from hard-line religious groups and
militant organizations.
Pakistan’s record of ratifying principal international human rights
treaties remains poor. To date, it is signatory to only five international
conventions, and has signed neither the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights nor the International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights.