 PAKISTAN
 Pakistan is an Islamic republic in which power is shared between the Prime Min-
 ister, as the leader of the National Assembly, and the President. The Chief of Army
 Staff also wields considerable influence on many major policy decisions and is the
 third member of the unofficial "troika" which governs the nation.
 This division of power was clearly illustrated in 1993, when Prime Minister
 Nawaz Sharif and President Ghulam Ishaq Khan engaged in a struggle for power
 that led to a compromise brokered by the Chief of Army Staff. Both the President
 and Prime Minister resigned, a neutral caretaker government was formed, and elec-
 tions for the National Assembly and provincial assemblies were held. The national
 and provincial assembly elections held on October 6 and 9 were generally seen by
 both international and domestic observers to have been relatively free and fair, and
 resulted in a new Government under the leadership of Prime Minister Benazir
 Bhutto of the Pakistan People's Party (PPP). PPP candidate Farooq Leghari was
 chosen President in indirect elections held November 13. In the early months of the
 new Parliament, both the Government and opposition participated 'n the legislative
 process, engendering considerable free and open public debate of issues.
 Responsibility for internal security restsprimarily with the police, although para-
 military forces, such as the Rangers and Frontier Constabulary, are charged with
 maintaining law and order in frontier areas. Police forces are under provincial con-
 trol, as are paramilitary forces when assisting in law and order operations. Both
 forces committed human rights abuses in 1993. The military continued its tradi-
 tional role as the guarantor of law and order when the police force, which is poorly
 equipped and trained, fails to meet its mandate. The army and paramilitary forces,
 under the nominal control of the Sindh provincial government (but under the effec-
 tive control of the army and central Government), continued their operation begun
 in May 1992 to help restore law and order in Sindh province, sparking credible
 charges of human rights violations by the army units involved and of selective
 targeting of certain political elements in Sindh.
 Pakistan, a poor country with a per capita income of $414, has a mixed economy
 of both state-run and private industries and financial institutions. The Constitution
 assures the right to private property and of private businesses to operate freely in
 most sectors of the economy. The Government is pursuing an ambitious program of
 economic reform, emphasizing the privatization of government-owned financial insti-
 tutions, industrial units, and utilities. Cotton textiles and apparel, rice, and leather
 products are the principal export products.
 There was no significant change in the human rights situation in 1993, with seri-
 ous problems remaining in several areas. Government harassment of political oppo-
 nents declined during the year, especially after the neutral caretaker government
 took power in July. However, repression against a Sindh-based political party con-
 tinued. The arbitrary detention, arrest, torture, and other abuse of prisoners and
 detainees continued to be a serious problem, and there were no significant efforts
 to reform the police or judicial systems or to prosecute and punish those responsible
 for abuses. Religious zealots continued to discriminate against and persecute non-
 Muslims, basing their activities in part on discriminatory legislation against reli-
 gious minorities. The Government did little to curb these activities. Sectarian riots
 between the Sunni and Shi'a communities were less intense, but religious and eth-
 nic-based rivalries resulted in numerous murders and occasional civil disturbances.
 Traditional social and legal constraints kept women in a subordinate position in so-
 ciety, and significant restraints remained on workers' rights. The use of child and
 bonded labor remained widespread in spite of legislation to restrict these practices.
 
 
 1371
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Induding Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-Extrajudicial killings, often in the
 form of staged "police encounters'-shootouts resulting in the death of suspects--
 continued in 1993. Most of these killings occurred in rural Sindh as part of the
 army's law and order program "Operation Cleanup." The frequency of such deaths
 at army hands, however, appeared to decline in 1993. There were also scores of
 credible reports from the media and human rights monitors concerning prisoners'
 deaths whie in police custody, including reports of instances in which prisoners al-
 leged to have been killed in shootouts probably died as a result of police torture.
 In May, Azeem Tariq chairman of the Mohajir Qaumi Movement (MQM) political
 party, was assassinated. Tariq was a controversial figure who had enemies within
 his own party as well as in the security forces. Two persons were arrested and
 charged with Tariq's death; their trial had yet to begin at year's end.
 In July a man in Islamabad accused of passing counterfeit currency was found
 hangingby the neck in the jail's bathroom following police interrogation. The police
 claimed the death was suicide, but the medical report did not support this cause
 of death and said there was evidence of torture. Following widespread news cov-
 erage of the case, former Prime Minister Sharif ordered an investigation, but no po-
 lice officials are known to have been charged or punished.
 In late July, Nazeer Ahmed was arrested by police in Karachi for alleged theft
 and severely tortured for several days until his death on August 3. The police offi-
 cial who arrested and allegedly tortured Ahmed reportedly sought revenge because
 of a personal vendetta. Ahmed had reportedly been subjected to numerous types of
 torture, including having his testicles ruptured with pliers. The case is being inves-
 tigated by local authorities. One of the five police officials accused of torturing
 Ahmed to death had been arrested by year's end.
 Law enforcement personnel were rarely charged or tried for killings, which are
 estimated to have numbered in the hundreds in 1993. According to government fig-
 ures, 660 prisoners died in Pakistani jails during the past 5 years, all reportedly
 from natural causes.
 Security forces also used excessive force which resulted in deaths of suspects. One
 such case occurred in May when Islamabad police stopped a businessman at a
 checkpoint and ordered him to prove his relationship to the woman traveling in his
 car. During the ensuing altercation, the businessman was shot and killed. At year's
 end the accused police officer remained in jail pending trial.
 The October elections were among the most peaceful in Pakistan's history. Still,
 numerous acts of violence, including the assassination of candidates occurred.
 Ghulam Haider Wyne, former Punjab Chief Minister and a Pakistan Muslim LAague
 (Nawaz Group) candidate for the National Assembly, was assassinated while cam-
 paigning in his home district. The police stated that the killing was an act of re-
 venge by a local criminal gang for the killing of one of its members by the police,
 which occurred while Wyne was Chief Minister. Two Pakistan People's Party provin-
 cial assembly candidates also were murdered during the campaign. No arrests were
 made in any of these cases. Several unsuccessful assassination attempts against
 candidates were reported during the campaign, and a number of political workers
 from various political parties were killed or injured.
 During 1993 numerous bombs were detonated in various parts of the country, es-
 pecially in Sindh and Punjab provinces, causing some deaths. The Government has
 been unable to determine the groups or individuals responsible. Some observers be-
 lieve the bombings are unrelated attacks aimed at rival ethnic or religious groups.
 Ethnic and sectarian tensions continued to be a cause of politicallyo motivated
 killings, as leaders of both Shi'a and Sunni organizations were assassinated. Ethnic
 and reigiously motivated riots also continued to occur, although to a lesser extent
 than in 1992. The most serious riot occurred in August, when Sunni and Shi'a orga-
 nizations clashed in Gilgit, leaving 12 dead and leading to the arrest of more than
 100 persons.
 Tribal violence in Balochistan often resulted in bloodshed. A continuing dispute
 between two factions of the Bugti tribe in Balochistan turned increasingly violent
 and led to the assassination of several tribal leaders. Some 27 persons were killed
 when two factions of the Magsi tribe clashed near Jhal Magsi, Balochistan.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of government-instigated disappear-
 ances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 There continued to be persuasive evidence of police mistreatment, including torture
 of detainees. Police and jailers routinely use force to elicit confessions and compel
 persons under detention to incriminate others. Beating, whipping the soles of the
 
 
 1372
 feet with rubber whips, sexual assault, and prolonged isolation continue to be seri-
 ous problems. When deaths result, suicide or natural causes are the commonly of-
 fered explanation.
 Police frequently use the threat of abuse to extort money from prisoners and their
 families. Whole families have been detained to force a relative, the subject of an ar-
 rest warrant, to surrender.
 There were continuing credible reports of the sexual abuse of women by police.
 Some women under detention are reportedly coerced by police officers to trade sex-
 ual favors for their release; other women are simply raped. Although there is in-
 creasingly widespread press coverage in the English-language print media of such
 cases, this abuse is often not reported due to societal taboos, police intimidation, and
 family pressure. There are few policewomen to perform matron duties despite regu-
 lations requiring that policewomen be present for the questioning or detention of fe-
 male suspects in station houses.
 Despite the promulgation of regulations in 1991 to prohibit police from keeping
 women overnight in custody, women are arbitrarily detained overnight and are sex-
 ually abused. Upon release, these women are often ostracized by their family and
 friends and barred from their homes. Government efforts to bring an end to sexual
 abuse by the police have had little effect. Police accused of abuse are seldom tried
 and punished. Police assigned to investigate abuses by other police generally shield
 their colleagues from such charges, and courts seldom charge policemen with of-
 fenses. Those who attempt to bring charges against police are often threatened and
 drop the charges. However, in December four police officers from Swabi were con-
 victed in Peshawar for illegal confinement and rape of a woman. They are appealing
 the conviction. In an effort to reduce police abuse of women, in the final 3 months
 of 1993 the new Government of Prime Minister Bhutto announced plans to open
 a                    I         e~ As oyear's end, one women'a
 "women'a police stations" staffed by female pesne.A    fyarsed      n   oe'
 police station had been opened in Rawalpindi.
 There continued to be credible reports that some ethnic political parties tortured
 opponents and, in some cases, used torture to enforeeart discipline among their
 own members. There were credible reports that the dissident rival faction of the
 MQM tortured some members of the mainline MQM.
 The Hadod Ordinances, promulgated by the central Government in 1979, were
 an attempt to make Pakistan's Penal Code more Islamic. These Ordinances provide
 harsh "hadd" punishments for violating the Islamic Code of Behavior, including
 stoning to death for unlawful sexual relations and the amputation of limbs for other
 crimes. In practice, the standards of evidence for imposing thesepunishments are
 exceptiona   high, and to date they have never been carried out. Nonetheless, these
 laws apply to Muslims and non-Muslims alike, and weigh most heavily on women.
 A woman who reports a case of rape to the authorities or files for a divorce can find
 herself charged with adultery under these ordinances. All consensual extramarital
 sexual relations are considered violations of the Hadod Ordinances. The predomi-
 nantly male police force reportedly uses the Hadod Ordinances to threaten people
 on the basis of personal and political animosities. Some human rights monitors be-
 lieve that international pressure and publicity surrounding the Hadod Ordinances
 have reduced the number of Hadood cases. They report that, in contrast to past
 years, women are now frequently granted bail for Hadod offenses, and convictions
 have been markedly reduced.
 Three classes of prison facilities exist. Class "c" cells generally hold common crimi-
 nals. They often have dirt floors, no furnishings, and poor food. The use of handcuffs
 and fetters is common. Prisoners in these cells reportedly suffer the most abusel
 such as beatings and being forced to kneel for long periods. Conditions in "b and
 "a" cells are markedly better, with the latter reserved for "prominent" persons.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-Pakistani Law permits the Deputy Com-
 missioner (DC) of a local district to order detention without charge for 30 days for
 persons suspected of threatening public order and safety. This preventive detention
 is renewable by the DC for 30 days at a time, uprtooa total of 90 days. For other
 alleged criminal offenses, a suspect may be held for 24 hours by police without
 charge. If the police can provide material proof that the physical detention of the
 accused is necessary to conduct the investigation, the court may extend detention
 without charges to a total of 15 days. In practice, laws on detention are not strictly
 observed. Poice often hold prisoners without charge until challenged by the court
 and then release them if they do not have a case. The police are not required to
 notify anyone when an arrest is made. There are allegations that the police some-
 times detain citizens arbitrarily without charge or on raise charges in order to extort
 pAym  tr Aor their release.
 The law on pretrial detention has recently been amended to require that suspects
 be brought to trial within 30 days of their arrest. However, in a case without coin-
 
 
 1373
 plications a trial will ususally commence about 6 months after the initial filing of
 charges. Family and lawyers are legally permitted to visit inmates. In practice this
 access is generally granted.
 The Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA) have a separate legal system,
 the Frontier Crimes Regulation (FCR), which recognizes the doctrine of "xllective
 responsibility." Under the FCR, legal procedures provide that fellow tribesmen of a
 suspect may be indefinitely detained or the village blockaded by the Government
 pending surrender or punishment of the suspect by the tribe. Such authority contin-
 ued to be exercised in 1993; in one case, over 40 members of the Afridi tribe were
 detained within the settled districts due to attacks by other Afridi tribesmen against
 a government rad project.
 The Sindh provinci   government detained hundreds of MQM Party workers and
 linked them to unsolved criminal cases, often with little evidence. Many of the PPP
 workers who were arrested in 1992 have been granted bail while they await trial
 on criminal counts. Some 200 political activists are still being held in Sindh.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-Pakistan's judicial system involves several dif-
 ferent court systems with overlapping and, in some instances, competing jurisdic-
 tions. There are civil and criminal tracks with special courts lir high-prffle cases
 and the federal Shari'a appeals courts for certain Hadood offenses. The progression
 in .he civil legal system is: civil court, district court, high court, and Supreme Court.
 The progression in the criminal system is: magistrate, sessions court, high court,
 and Supreme Court. The special courts were created to handle sensational cases or
 cases of great public interest. Such cases are referred to the special courts by the
 Federal Government. The Federal Shari'a court and the Shan a bench of the Su-
 preme Court serve as appeals courts for certain convictions in the criminal court
 under the Hadood Ordinances. In addition, the Federal Shari'a court may and does
 overturn legislation if it is not consistent with the tenets of Islam. However, these
 cases may be and are appealed to the Shari'a bench of the Supreme Court.
 The courts traditionally experience pressure from the executive. Critics point to
 the President's power to transfer high court justices or to decline to grant new ap-
 pointees tenure as devices that provide the executive undue influence over the pro-
 vincial high courts and especially over the lowerlevels of the judicial system, the
 special terrorist courts, and the so-called "speedy courts." Judges in the special
 courts are retired jurists who are hired on renewable contracts and many of whose
 decisions are influenced by their desire to maintain their position. However, the pro-
 vincial high courts and the Supreme Court exhibited independence, deciding a num-
 ber of important cases against the Government. For example the Court ruled that
 President Ghulam Ishaq]han's dismissal of Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif was un-
 constitutional (see Section 3). Nevertheless, the judicial process continued to be im-
 peded by bureaucratic infighting and inactivity and the overlapping jurisdictions of
 the different court systems. The creation of the "speedy courts" to speed up the judi-
 ciary system has not significantly eased the backlog of cases. Scores of positions in
 the lower magistracy remained unfilled. Persons in jail awaiting trial often are held
 for periods longer than the sentence they would receive if convicted. This problem
 is especially acute among Africans and citizens of other South Asian countries jailed
 for having overstayed their visas or for being involved in the drug trade.
 The civil judicial system provides for an open trial, cross-examination, representa-
 tion by an attorney, and appeal of sentences. Attorneys are appointed for indigents
 only in capital cases. There are no jury trials. Owing to the limited number of
 judges, the heavy backlog of cases, and outdated court procedures, cases routinely
 drag on for years. In both the Hadood and standard criminal codes there are bail-
 able and nonbailable offenses. According to the criminal procedures code the ac-
 cused in bailable offenses must be granted bail and the accused in "nonbaifable" of-
 fenses should be granted bail if accused of a crime where the sentence is less than
 10 years. In July the 1992 presidential ordinance revoking the statutory right to
 bail in cases where trials proved lengthy was allowed to lapse without being re-
 newed. However, human rights groups credibly complain that bail is set, often pur-
 posely, at unreasonably high levels for indigent defendants.
 A 1990 Shari'a court decision resulted in the Islamic concepts of Qisas (roughly
 an "eye for an eye") and Diyat ("blood money") being made part of the Penal Code,
 through the Qisas and Diyat Ordinance. The ordinance allows compensation to be
 paid to a victim's family in lieu of the accused receiving punishment. As a result,
 wealthy or influential persons can often escape punishment for such crimes as mur-
 der and assault. In one case, a convicted murderer received no punishment because
 he paid blood money to the victim's family, while his accomplices received sentences
 of life in prison. The right to seek pardon or commutation is not available to defend-
 ants under the ordinance. The Hadood, Qisas, and Diyat ordinances apply to both
 ordinary criminal courts and Shari'a courts. Appeals of certain Hadood convictions
 
 
 1374
 involving penalties in excess of 2 years' imprisonment are referred exclusively to the
 Shari'a courts.
 Under the Hadood Ordinances, evidence for cases involving the harsh "hadd" pun-
 ishments (see Section 1.c.) is given different weight depending on the religion and
 sex of the witness. A non-Muslim may not serve as a witness against a Muslim of-
 fender, but may offer testimony against another non-Muslim. Testimony of females
 is not admissible for the awarding of "hadd" punishments (as prescribed in the
 Koran, e.g., amputation, stoning, and lashes). In cases involving financial matters,
 the testimony of two women is required for the evidence to be admissible. The evi-
 dential laws that apply to awarding the lesser "tazeer" punishments are roughly
 based on English common law.
 There continued to be charges that magistrates and police, under pressure to
 achieve high conviction rates, persuade persons in custody to plead guilty without
 informing them of the consequences. Politically powerful persons also attempt to in-
 fluence magistrates' decisions and have used various forms of pressure, including
 the threat of transfer, to do so. Magistrates also perform a wide variety of adminis-
 trative functions for the provincial governments, reducing the time they devote to
 their judicial duties.
 Administration of justice in the Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA) is
 normally the responsibility of the elders and maliks (appointed leaders) of individ-
 ual tribes who, in response to complaints, conduct public hearings according to the
 dictates of Islamic law and tribal custom. There is no professional legal representa-
 tion for the accused, no provision for bail, and no appeal. The usual penalties consist
 of fines even for murder, although the Government's political agents directing the
 assemblies of elders and maliks (irgas) have the authority to levy prison terms of
 up to 14 years. In more remote areas outside the effective jurisdiction of the political
 agents, jirgas occasionally levy harsher, unsanctioned punishments, including flog-
 gingor death by shooting or stoning. A photograph of a public flogging in the tribal
 areas was prominently featured in a local paper in September. The accused received
 five lashes for selling and using heroin. Paramilitary forces under the direction of
 the political agents frequently perform punitive actions during enforcement oper-
 ations. For example, in raids on criminal activities the authorities have been known
 to damage surrounding homes as extrajudicial punishment of residents for having
 tolerated nearby criminal activity.
 Cases referred to the Federal Shari'a court are heard jointly by Islamic scholars
 and high court judges using ordinary criminal procedures. Cases referred to the
 Shari'a bench of the Supreme Court are heard jointly by Islamic scholars and Su-
 preme Court judges using ordinary criminal procedures. Judges and attorneys must
 be Muslim and be familiar with Islamic law. Within these limits, defendants in the
 Shari'a court are entitled to a lawyer of their choice. If accused of a bailable offense,
 defendants in the Shari'a court are entitled to bail and may be granted bail for
 nonbailable offenses, as noted above.
 The Suppression of Terrorist Activities (Special Courts) Act of 1975 established
 special courts to try cases involving crimes of a "terrorist" nature (e.g., murder and
 sabotage) expeditiously. In 1987 another ordinance was passed establishing special
 "speedy trial courts to circumvent the judicial backlog. The Twelfth Constitutional
 Amendment, passed by Parliament in July 1991, created another tier of special
 courts to deal with particularly heinous crimes. Cases involving bomb blasts, sabo-
 tage, highway robberies, banditry, or kidnaping may be brought before these three
 types of special courts, and the Government may transfer cases from any other court
 to one of the special courts, or from one special court to another (within the same
 province).
 In 1991 the President promulgated new versions of the Terrorist Affected Areas
 (Special Courts) Ordinance and the Special Courts for Speedy Trials Ordinance
 which made referring cases to special courts the exclusive domain of the Federal
 Government. Each special court has a list of scheduled offenses over which it has
 urisdiction. For the "speedy courts,* the criteria is that the case is sensational or
 has received widespread public attention. This determination is made by the Fed-
 eral Government. The ordinances also established that an appeal to a speedy court
 ruling goes to the Supreme Appellate Court rather than to the high courts. In addi-
 tion, the Government may refer a broader range of cases involving violent criminal
 offenses to the special courts.
 Many legal experts believe the special courts do not provide for a fair trial. Time
 constraints on investigations and trials, including the strict limitation on adjourn-
 ments, detract from the accused's right to an adequate defense. Some critics contend
 that the special courts' procedures have effectively repudiated the presumption of
 innocence. They also cite the encroachment of the federal authorities upon the pro-
 vincial government's constitutional authority to administer justice and the inherent
 
 
 1375
 unfairness of parallel courts to which cases may be assigned arbitrarily. Another
 problem faced by those brought to trial under the special courts is obtaining bail.
 Under the special courts' provisions bail is denied if it appears to the court that
 it is reasonable to believe the accused committed a scheduled offense.
 Government officials and some attorneys argue that, in spite of their short-
 comings, the special courts are necessary due to the judicial backlog. They also
 claim that all requirements of the rules of evidence still apply the accused has the
 right to counsel, and the judges must meet the same standards as those appointed
 to a high court. They note that decisions ththe speedy trial courts may be appealed.
 However, for these courts only one appeal is allowed and it may only be made
 through a special appellate bench appointed by the Government. In late 1993, the
 Bhutto Government announced that it would not refer any new cases to the special
 courts and would allow the constitutional authority for special courts to lapse in
 July 1994.
 In 1990 President Ghulam Ishaq Khan, after dissolving the Bhutto government
 established special "accountability" tribunals to try members of previous federal and
 provincial governments on criminal and corruption charges. However, oaly members
 of the Bhutto government, all of whom belong to the PPP, were charge   wit cor-
 ruption and misconduct. No members of other political parties were ever brought
 to trial. Trials under these tribunals continued in 1993, although bail had been
 granted in all cases. International observers maintain that the accountability tribu-
 nals have not met the minimum standards for due process needed to ensure fair
 trials and that the trial procedures prevented the accused from presenting a full de-
 fense. Some Pakistani attorneys and judges, however, maintain that the actual con-
 duct of the tribunals has been balanced and fair. In early 1993, bail was granted
 to Asif Zardari husband of Benazir Bhutto, in his accountability and criminal cases.
 At year's end, kardari was still under trial in one remaining accountability case. He
 has been acquitted in the 12 other cases. In the remaining "Presidential reference"
 cases, most notably the seven against Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto and the ap-
 peal of the conviction of former law Minister Iftikhar Gilani, there was no move-
 ment in 1993. These cases remain before the accountability tribunals.
 There are individuals in Pakistan imprisoned for attempting to exercise their
 human rights, including those charged with blasphemy, and some political workers
 who may be imprisoned on trumped-up charges. In addition, there are others who
 were convicted in trials which may not have been fair. While it is not possible to
 cite a specific number, it is likely that the number of political prisoners could be
 as many as a few hundred (see appendix A for the definition of "political prisoner")
 at year's end.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-Police
 are required by law to obtain a warrant from a magistrate to search a house. (No
 warrant is required to search a person.) However, police often enter a home without
 a warrant. In the absence of a warrant, a policeman is subject to charges of criminal
 trespass. In practice, policemen are seldom, if ever, punished for illegal entry. Paki-
 stan maintains several domestic intelligence services which monitor politicians, po-
 litical activists, suspected terrorists, and suspected foreign intelligence agents. In-
 formed sources maintain that wiretapping is commonplace, mail is occasionally
 intercepted and opened, and surveillance is often used.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of speech
 and the press. Pakistanis are generally free to discuss and debate public policy is-
 sues. However, some laws restrict free speech, such as laws against bringing Islam
 or the armed forces into discredit or ridicule and the Shari'a bill signed by the Presi-
 dent in 1991, which calls for promoting Islam through the mass media and the cen-
 soring of "objectionable" and "obscene material. In addition, the Pakistan Penal
 Code mandates the death sentence for anyone convicted of blaspheming the Prophet
 Muhammad. Most of those accused of blasphemy are Ahmadis or Christians. Two
 persons have been convicted of blasphemy and sentenced to death. Their cases are
 on appeal. (See Section 2.c.)
 The press enjoys a high degree of freedom, but some restrictions apply. A govern-
 ment-owned press trust still controls two newspapers, an English-lan  age daily
 and an Urdu daily. One of the two main wire services is controlled by the Mistry
 of Information, the other is privately owned. There are numerous privately owned
 newspapers, and their circulation far exceeds that of the government-owned news-
 papers.
 There was relatively free discussion of government policies and open criticism of
 the Government in the privately owned press. The press routinely reports remarks
 critical of the Government made by opposition politicians, and editorials reflect a
 
 
 1376
 
 broad spectrum of views. Government newspapers and wire services, however, are
 circumspect in their coverage of the news and generally follow the government line.
 Press criticism of the military is usually circumspect.
 The Constitution provides for the death penaty for those who damage the Con-
 stitution by any act, including publishing statements against the spirit of the Con-
 stitution. Reporters and editors generally exercise self-censorship in these areas.
 However, the Government exploits the privately owned newspapers' dependence
 on government advertising, an important source of revenue for them, as a way of
 influencing editorial policy. The duty-free importation of newsprint is also controlled
 by the Government, nominally on the basis of a newspaper's circulation. Journalists
 complain that newspapers that criticize the Government are provided less than
 their due and must pay market prices to make up the difference.
 Incidents of harassment of individual journalists, including a spate of burglaries
 at journalists' homes, occurred in 1993, though the incidence was less than in pre-
 vious years. The Sharif government harassed news organizations that criticized it,
 i   by     using the tax laws to threaten foreclosure. Two prominent  ppe
 ad sbtantial tax bills levied against them far in excess of the taxes levied on
 other newspapers with comparable tax liabilities. The cases were reportedly re-
 solved when the news organizations agreed to change editorial content and transfer
 some personnel.
 The Government owns and operates all radio and all but one semiprivate tele-
 vision station and strictly controls the news they carry. The Shalimar Television
 Network (STN), a semiprivate television station, provides programs with consider-
 able independence from government oversight. STN began broadcasting Cable News
 Network (CNN) programs in 1990; CNN is shown live, but segments considered so-
 cially offensive are censored by the Government. Satellite television reception, which
 has bcome increasingly widespread, is not subject to censorship or scrambling. Dur-
 ing the first half of 1993, the Sharif government severely limited the amount of cov-
 erage given to opposition activities during government-controlled news broadcasts.
 In contrast, the news broadcasts during the tenure of the two caretaker govern-
 ments displayed greater objectivity. Nevertheless, many media watchers complain
 the government-controlled media continues to avoid reporting on controversial do-
 mestic subjects.
 After passage of the Shari'a law, there was a significant increase in censorship
 of "objectionable material" on television, which continued in 1993. The Ministry of
 Information keeps close watch on advertisements broadcast by STN, editing or re-
 moving those deemed objectionable.
 Conservative religious and political groups have been active in promoting their
 own code of morality for Pakistani society. The Shari'a bill's passage in 1991 bol-
 stered these groups' efforts by placing greater pressure on individuals to conform
 to Islamic sensibilities. In early 1993, there was a campaign by religious groups and
 provincial governments to crack down on "obscene" video cassettes. While no guide-
 lines were established on obscene material, media reports stated that thousands of
 video cassettes were destroyed by police officials and over 100 persons were ar-
 rested. Some were reportedly sentenced to several years imprisonment.
 However, literary and creative works remain generally free of censorship. Obscene
 literature, a category broadly defined by the Government, is subject to seizure. Au-
 thorities have occasionally banned or confiscated books and magazines dealing with
 sensitive political topics. A bookstore in Islamabad was raided and temporarily
 closed by police on December 18 following reports that the store was selling the book
 "Encyclopedia of Religion," which allegedly contains remarks offensive to Islam and
 images of the prophet Mohammad. The Muslim owner was charged with blasphemy
 under Section 295 C of the Penal Code. The case was pending at years end. How-
 ever, dramas and documentaries on once taboo subjects, including corruption, social
 privilege, narcotics, violence against women, and female inequality, are now shown
 on Pakistani television.
 A Print, Press, and Publications Ordinance requires the registration of printing
 presses and newspapers and allows the Government to confiscate newspapers or
 magazines deemed objectionable. Foreign books must pass government censors be-
 fore being reprinted, although the importation of the books is freely allowed. Publi-
 cations are occasionally banned, usually for objectionable religious content or politi-
 cal views. The provincial government of Balochistan banned two books which alleg-
 edly promoted secessionist political movements.
 Academic freedom is generally recognized by government and university authori-
 ties. The atmosphere ofviolence and intolerance fostered by student organizations,
 typically tied to political parties, is a threat to academic freedom. On campuses
 well-armed groups of students of varying political persuasions clash frequently and
 
 
 1377
 intimidate other students, instructors, and administrators on matters of language,
 syllabus, examination policies, doctrine, and dress.
 Human rights groups remain concerned about the implementation of a 1992 Su-
 preme Court ruling that prohibits student political organizations on campuses.
 While they acknowledge the ruling led to a reduction in violence on campuses in
 1993.they question the legality of school officials determining guilt or innocence and
 epligstudents they find guilty of belonging to a political organization.
 e     of Peaceful Assembly and   sociation.-Peacefu  assembly was gen-
 erally permitted. District magistrates occasionally exercised their power under Sec-
 tion 144 of the criminal procedure code to ban meetings of more than four people
 when demonstrations seemed likely to result in violence. This p revision was invoked
 frequently and arbitrarily in Sindh Province during the first half of 1993. Political
 parties had to apply for special permission to hold any outdoor political rallies. The
 Sindh government during this period tended to allow its supporters to hold rallies
 and toeblock its opponents from doing so. Section 144 was als apied by the na-
 tional and provincial interim governments in numerous locations throughout Pai-
 stan during the fall general election campaign. While imposition of Section 144 may
 not have been necessary in every instance to maintain security, there is no indica-
 tion that the interim governments applied section 144 in a biased manner. When
 it was imposed in Karachi during the election campaign, for example, rallies of all
 major parties were banned.
 Most political leaders were able to travel freely and address large rallies; however,
 leaders of politico-religious parties were sometimes barred from travel to certain
 areas if their presence was deemed likely to increae sectarian tensions. Article 17
 of the Constitution provides for freedom of association subject to restrictions by gov-
 ernment ordinance and law. There have been no recent cases of banned groups or
 parties.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-Pakistan is an Islamic republic with a population that
 is 97 percent Muslim. The Constitution requires all laws to be consistent with
 Islam. With notable exceptions (see below), members of minority groups may prac-
 tice their own religion openly, maintain inks with coreligionists in other countries,
 and travel for religious purposes. Conversions are permitTted, but the Government
 prohibits proselytizing among Muslims.
 Minority groups fear that the 1991 Shari'a law's goal of uIslamizing ~ all aspects
 of Pakistan's government and society may further restrict freedom to practice their
 religion. The reliious legislation has encouraged an atmosphere of religious intoler-
 ance which has ed to acts of violence directed at Ahmadis and Christians. For ex-
 ample, in 1993 a landlord from Sindh province bulldozed over 30 homes, a church,
 andsa school, destroying a 30-year old Christian village, rather than wait for a civil
 court's order in a land dispute. No action had been taken against the landlord as
 of the year's end.
 A 1974 constitutional amendment declared Ahmadis to be a non-Muslim minority
 because they do not accept Muhammad as the last prophet of Islam. The AhTadis,
 however, look on themselves as Muslims, for wham many Muslim practices are an
 important feature of their religion. In 1984 the Government inserted Section 298(c)
 into the Pakistan Penal Code which made it illegal for an Ahmadi to call himself
 a Muslim and banned Ahmadis from using Muslim terminology. The punishment is
 up to 3 years' imprisonment and a fine. Section 298(c) has been used since 1984
 to harass Ahmadis. According to an Ahmadi rights organization, as of the end of
 1992 at least 2,133 Ahmadis had criminal cases brought against them, most of
 which were still pending before the courts. New cases were brought during 1993.
 Attacks on Ahmadi places of worship contne  in 1993. On June 20 three youths
 attempted to set fire to an Ahmadi house of worship in Lahore while Ahmadi elders
 waee prayinger "  there. The incident was reported to the police, but no action was
 In 1986 legislation was passed inserting Section 295(c) into the Pakistan Penal
 Code, making blaspheming the Prophet Muhammad a capital offense. The law was
 apparently aimed at Amsdis but has been increasingly used against Christians
 and Muslims as well. In 1992 the Senate unanimously adopted a bill to amend the
 blasphemy law so that the death  nalty is mandatory in cases of conviction for de-
 filing the name of the prophet 4uh ammad, and in 1993 a bill was introduced to
 extend the law to include defiling the names of the Prophet Muhammad's family
 and companions. The latter bill, generally supported by anti-Shi'a groups as a
 means of persecuting the Shia's, had yet to be acted upon. According to a respected
 Pakistani human rights organization, since 1986, 107 Ahmadis have been charged
 with blasphemy under section 295(c) in at least 25 separate cases. As of the end
 of 1993, there had been no convictions. On ae had been dropped, and two persons
 had been acquitted. A   t efour Amadis were charged with blasphemy in 1993.
 
 
 1378
 Eight Christians have reportedly been charged with blasphemy. Two other Chris-
 tians were stabbed to death by their accusers without formally being charged. Of
 those charged before 1993, Tahir Iqbal died under mysterious circumstances in jail
 in 1992 while awaiting trial, Gul Masih was convicted in 1992 and his appeal was
 still pending, and Sarwar Masih was still awaiting trial. One individual was acquit-
 ted in January but remains in fear for his life from local religious groups. Four of
 the eight were charged in 1993. In one case, three Christians were arrested in May
 and accused of writing blasphemous words on a mosque wall in violation of Section
 295(c). One of those accused was Salamat Masih, a 13-year-old illiterate boy.
 Salamat was released on 50,000 rupees bail ($1,666) on November 8. At year's end
 the two adults remain in prison. In another case, Anwar Yaqoob Masih was charged
 with blasphemy following an argument with a shopkeeper over 1 rupee (less than
 4 cents) worth of candy. When the shopkeeper, who was a friend of Anwar Masih,
 refused to press charges, a local Muslim religious leader filed the charges instead.
 The most prominent case of a Muslim charged with blasphemy is that of Dr.
 Akhtar Hameed Khan, a noted social worker, who was charged with blasphemy in
 both Sindh and Punjab provinces. In 1992 charges were dropped in Sindh. However
 the charges were not dropped in Punjab, and at the end of the year he remained
 subject to arrest in that province.
 Tre Muslims are known to have been charged with blasphemy in 1993. Moham-
 mad Arshad Javed was convicted of blasphemy and sentenced to death in February,
 despite being found insane by two government-appointed doctors. His case has been
 appealed to the Lahore High Court.
 In late 1992, the Supreme Court issued a ruling favorable to the Ahmadis by
 granting bail to members of an Ahmadi family accused of using Islamic expressions
 on wedding invitations. In its ruling, the Court observed that use of Islamic expres-
 sions by Ahinadis "does not create in a Muslim, or for that matter anyone else, any
 of the feelings of hurt, offence or provocation, nor is it derogatory to the holy Proph-
 et Muhammad."
 In 1993, however, the Supreme Court ruled against the Ahmadis in a major case
 regarding the constitutionality of Section 298(c). Rejecting the argument that it vio-
 lated the fundamental rights of freedom of speech and freedom of religion guaran-
 teed in the Constitution, the Court upheld the law. The judge writing for the major-
 ity found that Islamic phrases are in essence a copyrighted trademark of the Islamic
 religion. Therefore, use of the Islamic epithets by Ahmadis was equivalent to copy-
 right infringement and violated the Trademark Act of 1940. The majority also found
 that use of certain Islamic phrases was equivalent to blasphemy. Ahmadis and some
 human rights monitors fear the Supreme Court judgment upholding the law will
 lead to more cases being brought against Ahmadis and possibly more rapid convic-
 tions.
 Pakistani passports carry a designation of religion which the Ahmadis find espe-
 cially vexing. Ahmadis are classified as 'non-Muslims" on their passports, leading
 Saudi authorities to prevent them from performing the religious ilgrimage, the
 haji. Despite having issued an order in 1992 requiring that a similar designation
 be included on the national identity card, the Government did not submit imple-
 menting legislation in 1993. Although the order has not been formally withdrawn,
 widespread protests in 1992 appeared to have persuaded the Government to aban-
 don the proposal, which is a longstanding demand of fundamentalist religious par-
 ties.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-Pakistanis generally enjoy freedom of movement within the country
 and to travel abroad. The Government occasionally prohibits movement of individ-
 uals within Pakistan through "externment orders" when it believes their presence
 will lead to a threat to public order. Travel to Israel is legally prohibited. Pakistanis
 succeed In traveling to Jerusalem for religious purposes. Government employees
 must obtain "no objection certificates" before traveling abroad. Students are also re-
 quired to have these certificates from their institutions. The Sharif government
 briefly used the exit control list during 1993 to prohibit the travel of political oppo-
 nents. The prohibitions were lifted following the dismissal of the Shanf government
 in July. In November the Bhutto Government also placed restrictions on the exit
 of certain businessmen involved in an investment scandal. The exit control list con-
 tinues to be used against serious criminals.
 With the exception of those on the exit control lists, Pakistanis have and regularly
 exercise the right to emigrate.
 More than 3 million Afghans fled to Pakistan as a result of the Soviet invasion
 of Afghanistan and the ensuing civil war there. The movement and employment of
 Afghans in Pakistan has generally not been restricted, and many Afghans reside
 outside the camps set aside for them in the Northwest Frontier Province (NWFP),
 
 
 1379
 
 Pun'ab, and Balochistan. With the change of government in Kabul in 1992, over a
 million Afghans returned to their homes. Repatriation continued in 1993, although
 at a much lower rate. The outbreak of new righting in Kabul in early 1993 among
 different factions of the Government sparked a new flow of thousands of refugees
 into Pakistan. Despite its reluctance in August 1992 to accept new refugees the
 Government subsequently allowed as many as 80,000 new refugees to enter Paki.
 stan.
 Approximately 1.4 million Afghan refugees remain in Pakistan, where they have
 greater security, more economic opportunities social welfare benefits, and a better
 human rights situation than in Afghanistan. Security concerns among the refugees,
 including mtraparty rivalries that mirrored the unsettled conditions in Afghanistan,
 have improved as the political parties focused their energies on disputes inside Af-
 ghanistan. There has also been an improvement in the access of women and girls
 to education and health care as group leaders gradually begin to accept the benefits
 of these services. Nevertheless, life in the camps can be frustrating. The many refu-
 gees who have found employment are outside of the limited security net provided
 yPakistani labor laws. The refugees have limited access to legal protection and
 are for the most part dependent on group leaders to negotiate disputes in Pakistani
 society and within their own society.
 Hundreds of illegal Bangladeshi immigrants are held in prisons throughout Paki-
 stan, charged with immigration violations. Almost all of these detainees are without
 the documents necessary to prove Bangladeshi citizenship. Many of the women are
 alleged to be in Pakistan as a result of trafficking in women for purposes of prostitu-
 tion, and some are detained under the Hadood Ordinances. The Government, with
 the help of the Bangladesh Government, took steps in 1990 to document and repa-
 triate some of these Bangladeshis, but the influx continues, and few are able or will-
 ing to return to Bangladesh. Many are released from jail into the custody of their
 exploiters, and the cycle repeats itself.
 The repatriation to Pakistan of the Biharis (Urdu-speaking immigrants from the
 Indian state of Bihar who went to East Pakistan, now Bangladesh, at the time of
 partition in 1947) continued to be a contentious issue. Approximately 250,000
 Biharis have been in refugee camps in Bangladesh since 1971, waiting to be brought
 to Pakistan. Their repatri~ation continues to be a Pakistani political issue tied to the
 country's various ethnic problems. While the Mohajir community, made up of Paki-
 stanis who emigrated from India during partition, actively supports Bihari repatri-
 ation, ethnic Sindhis oppose the move. In 1992 the Government of Pakistan an-
 nounced that repatriation of the Biharis would begin. In January 342 Biharis were
 flown to Pakistan and placed in temporary housing in central Punjab. No further
 repatriation occurred in 1993.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 The citizens of Pakistan have the right and the ability to change their government
 peacefully. The President, who is indirectly elected, is given the power to dissolve
 the Government by Amendment 8 to the Constitution. This controversial authority
 was used twiceduring 1993 by former President Ghulam Ishaq Khan. In April the
 President dissolved the Government, but his decision was overturned by the Su-
 preme Court. In July the President again dissolved the Government, this time at
 the Prime Minister's request, in a political compromise which allowed for new elec-
 tions in October. The national and provincial assembly elections held on October 6
 and 9 were seen by both international and domestic observers to have been rel-
 atively free and fair. Although some losing candidates alleged voter manipulation
 and fraud, they failed to produce compelling evidence. Election observers docu-
 mented several problems, however including outdated and poorly prepared electoral
 rolls which disenfranchised some legitimate voters while allowing some fraudulent
 voting to take place. Some individuals were arrested and summarily fined for violat-
 ing election laws on polling day. Despite these isolated incidents, there is no compel-
 ling evidence that vote manipulation changed the outcome of the elections in any
 constituencies. Following the elections, in which the Pakistan People's Party (PPP)
 won a plurality of seats in the National Assembly, Benazir Bhutto was elected
 Prime Minister. In the November 13 indirect presidential elections, PPP-supported
 candidate Farooq Leghari was selected President.
 With certain exceptions, Pakistanis aged 21 and over have the right to vote by
 secret ballot. In August the National Election Commission informed a human rights
 organization that bonded laborers and nomads, of which there are several million,
 are not qualified to be registered voters because they do not "ordinarily reside in
 an electoral area, nor do they own/possess a dwelling or immovable property in that
 area." Political parties have been allowed to operate freely since the lifting of mar.
 
 
 1380
 tial law in 1985 and 1986, and in 1988 the Supreme Court struck down a law ban-
 ning unregistered political parties from participating in elections.
 Local governments and the provincial and national assemblies are directly elected.
 The Senate is elected by the members of the four provincial assemblies. The Presi-
 dent is indirectly elected by an electoral college consisting of the members of the
 national and provincial assemblies and the Senate. The Constitution provides that
 members of the national and provincial assemblies shall serve terms o 6 years, un-
 less the Assembly is dissolved. The Senate is not subject to dissolution by the Presi-
 dent. The President is elected every 5 years and senators are elected for 6-year
 terms.
 The more than 2 million Pushtun ethnic people living in the FATA do not partici-
 pate in direct election of their National Assembly representatives and have no rep-
 resentation in the NWFP provincial assembly. In keeping with local traditions,
 FATA's National Assembly members are elected by the tribal maliks who have been
 appointed in the NWFP Governor's name by the central Government's political
 agents. People living in this area have expressed dissatisfaction at having no rep-
 resentation in any legislature. The vast majority of Pushtun ethnic people, however,
 live outside the FATA and, while retaining their tribal identity, are fully integrated
 into the political, social, and economic life of Pakistan.
 Because of a longstanding territorial dispute with India, the political status of the
 Northern Areas (Hunza, Gilgit, and Baltistan) has never been resolved. As a result,
 more than 1 million inhabitants of the Northern Areas are not covered under any
 constitution and have no representation in the national Government. The area is
 administered by a civil servant appointed by the Government of Pakistan. While
 there is an elected Northern Areas Council, this body serves in an advisory capacity
 to the Federal Government and has no legislative authority. The people of this re-
 gon do not enjoy the democratic right to change their government. In 1993 the Azad
 Tammu and Kashmir (AJK) High Court ruled that the Northern Areas should be
 incorporated into the semiautonomous state of Azad Jammu and Kashmir and its
 citizens be given a right to be represented in the AJK legislative assembly. The Fed-
 eral Government is appealing the ruling to the Supreme Court of the AJK.
 On May 5, by-elections were held in Sindh Province to fill 20 vacant provincial
 assembly seats. The MQM, an urban-based party in Sindh, boycotted the elections
 because it alleged the provincial government and army prevented it from campaign-
 ing openly. Partly as a result of the MQM's boycott, there was only a 5 percent voter
 turnout in the by-elections in Karachi and Hyderabad.
 The Constitution requires that the President and Prime Minister be Muslims.
 Members of minority religious groups are not permitted to vote in Muslim constitu-
 encies. They must cast their ballots in countrywide, at-large constituencies reserved
 for them in the national and provincial assemblies, an arrangement that has been
 widely criticized. Many Ahmadis, disputing their designation as non-Muslims, have
 refused to exercise this option. Minorities, especially Christians and Hindus, com-
 plain that this system of separate electorates has marginalized their voting power,
 allowing the local Muslim candidates to ignore them as a voting block. As a result,
 minority areas receive significantly less development funds and other government
 assistance.
 Although women participate in government, as evidenced by Prime Minister
 Bhutto, gender roles make it difficult for most of them to succeed in politics, and
 women are underrepresented in political life at all levels. At the federal level, the
 statute creating 20 reserved seats for women in the National Assembly lapsed in
 1990, and its renewal was not supported by the Government then led by Benazir
 Bhutto. In 1993 the Senate Standing Committee on Women's Development rec-
 ommended the restoration of the reserved women's seats. Despite statements by the
 Sharif government that the seats would be restored, no legislation was submitted.
 In the October elections, only 11 women were nominated by the political parties to
 stand as candidates for general seats in the National Assembly and of these only
 4 were elected.
 Some women are often dissuaded from voting in elections by family, religious, and
 social custom in the rural areas of Pakistan. In some areas, women are discouraged
 from voting by the authorities' failure to provide separate voting facilities for women
 who observe "purdah" (seclusion of women from public observation) restrictions. The
 lack of women's polling booths is a very limited problem and contrary to government
 policy. However, where it occurs it may represent a deliberate attempt by local offi-
 cials in very traditional areas to discourage women from voting.
 
 
 1381
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 ve8tigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 There are a number of domestic human rights organizations, and new human
 rights and legal aid groups continue to form and are generally free to operate with-
 out government restriction. Their reports receive extensive coverage in the press.
 There was, however, one reported incident of official harassment of a human rights
 organizations.In March federal security agents raided the Lahore headquarters of
 the Human Rights Commission of Pakistan (HRCP), a leading nongovernmental
 human rights organization. The security agents detained several staff members, in-
 cluding the director, and confiscated posters critical of President Ghulam Ishaq
 Khan. No charges were brought against HRCP members, nor were any of the fed-
 eral security agents involved in the incident disciplined. The local police and civil
 authorities deny any knowledge of the raid.
 In 1993 the Senate formed a permanent committee on human rights to advise the
 Government on various aspects of human rights, including child and bonded labor,
 women's issues, and abuse of prisoners. The committee has yet to take any specific
 action. Persons affiliated with various international human rights organizations
 have been permitted to visit Pakistan and travel freely.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 Women.-In 1991 the Government passed the Shari'a Bill, a law aimed at bring-
 ing all aspects of government and society in Pakistan into conformity with the te-
 nets of Islam. Human rights monitors and women's groups feared that the law
 would have a harmful effect on women's and minority riohts. The final version in-
 cluded language ensuring that women's and minority rights protected under the
 Constitution would not be affected. No enabling legislationhas been passed, and the
 Shari'a law's direct impact on these roups remained limited. Nonetheless, its pas-
 sage influenced popular attitudes and perceptions, contributing to an atmosphere in
 which discriminatory treatment against women and non-Muslims is more readily ac-
 cepted.
 Aside from the specific Sharia legislation, some Islamic leaders continued to
 stress a conservative interpretation of Islamic injunctions to justify discrimination
 against women. Many Pakistanis interpret the Koran's injunctions an modesty to
 mean that women should remain either at home or veiled. It remains accepted prac-
 tice to assign women subordinate roles in the civil, political, and managerial
 hierarchies.
 Despite clear injunctions in the Koran and the civil laws that provide for the right
 of women to inherit, in practice women generally do not receive (or are pressedto
 surrender) their due share in family inheritance. In rural Pakistan the practice of
 a woman "marrying the Koran" is still widely accepted if her family cannot arrange
 a suitable marriage or to keep the family wealth intact. A woman who is married
 to the Koran is forbidden to have any contact with males, including her immediate
 family members, over 14 years of age. A petition filed in a Lahore court in 1992
 challenging the practice has yet to be heard. Both civil and religious laws protect
 women s rights in cases of divorce, but, as in the case of inheritance laws, many
 women are unaware of them, and often the laws are not observed.
 In 1992 the Supreme Court invalidated the requirement that a husband give writ-
 ten notice of a divorce to a local union council. Thus, the husband's statement of
 divorce, with or without witnesses, is the defining legal step and one which he can
 confirm or deny at will. The woman, lacking written proof of divorce, remains legally
 and socially vulnerable. Human rights organizations expressed concern that a
 woman could be charged with adultery if her former spouse were to deny having
 divorced her. This occurred in February, when a district and sessions court sen-
 tenced Nasreen Bibi to be stoned to death and sentenced her second husband to 100
 lashes when her first husband denied divorcing her. Upon appeal, the Federal
 Shari'a court acquitted both Bibi and her husband because there was sufficient evi-
 dence to prove they had entered into marriage in the belief that Bibi was divorced.
 Although a small number of women study and teach in the universities, post-
 graduate employment o portunities remain largely limited to teaching, medical
 services, and the law. Nevertheleas, an increasing number of women are entering
 the commercial and public sectors. Karachi lawyers estimate that the number of
 women judges in civil courts there has increased to about 30 percent of the total.
 There are reports that women who apply to professional colleges face discrimination.
 Women may now participate in international athletic competition, although few do.
 In rural areas, women in small farm families generally work alongside men in the
 fields. However, they remain subordinate to men and suffer discrimination in edu-
 cation, employment, and legal rights.
 
 
 1382
 There is no reliable information on the extent of domestic violence against women
 in Pakistan, primarily because it is viewed as a private matter and many women
 do not even acknowledge domestic violence as a serious problem. While abusive
 spouses may be charged under Pakistani law for assault, in practice cases are rarely
 filed. Police usually return to her abuser a victim who tries to file a complaint.
 Legal experts report there have been no reported convictions of men for domestic
 violence.
 Rape is a widespread problem in Pakistan. Marital rape is not a crime under Pak-
 istam law, and rape of a another man's wife is a common method of seeking revenge
 in rural and tribal areas. A nongovernmental organization caled War Against Rape
 (WAR), which is dedicated to publicizing the problem and providing victim assist-
 ance, reported that, in 1992, 1,300 cases of rape were filed in Punjab province. They
 conservatively estimate that, because of social and family pressures against report-
 ing rape, the actual number of rapes is at least four times that number . A WAR
 study of 60 publicly reported rape cases in Lahore during January found that police
 officials were allegedly implicated in nearly 20 percent of these cases. Police are fre-
 quently unresponsive in investigating rape cases, especially when police officials are
 implicated. WAR also estimates that one third of the victims are under 18 years of
 age.
 In the interior of Sindh, Balochistan, and Southern Punjab, the primarily Baloch
 tribal custom of Karo Kari exists in which men and women believed to have had
 sexual relations outside of marriage are both murdered to protect the honor of the
 women's family. Such cases are rarely reported to the police or seriously inves-
 tigated. While the problem is widely acknowledged to exist, reliable statistics are
 unavailable. One magazine that investigated the problem estimated there were hun-
 dreds of cases each year. While Karo Kari technically means the killing of both per-
 sons, women are more frequently killed, while the man is often able to pay com-
 pensation to the "wronged" family.
 In 1993 the press continued to draw attention to the problem of so-called "dowry
 deaths," in which women are burned to death, allegedly in kitchen stove accidents.
 Many of these deaths are believed to be murders perpetrated by husbands or in-
 laws. It is difficult to differentiate criminal "dowry deaths" from common kitchen
 stove accidents that occur as a result of the use of unsafe wood or gas stoves com-
 bined with the highly flammable material commonly worn by women in Pakistan.
 Women also continued to be killed or mutilated by male relatives who suspect them
 of adultery. Few such cases are investigated seriously.
 Women's organizations operate throughout the country but primarily in Paki-
 stan's urban centers. Many concentrate on educating women about existing legal
 rights. Other groups concentrate on providing legal aid to poor women in prison who
 may not be able to afford an attorney.
 Children.-The Government commits a share of its national budget to children's
 welfare but does not publish the figures for such expenditures. Parts of the budgets
 for health, education, and various social service programs are components of the
 total federal child welfare expenditures. In addition to the federal expenditures,
 each province also commits funds to similar programs. Despite a 1962 law that re-
 quires each province to designate areas where primary education is compulsory,
 none of the provinces has designated such areas. Therefore, in fact, primary edu-
 cation is not compulsory. Schools are available in most localities but they have very
 limited space, staff, and resources. According to government figures, less than 65
 percent of children between 5 and 9 attend primary school and more than 50 per-
 cent of those drop out before finishing their primary education. Many observers be-
 lieve even these figures are optimistic. The Government claims that overall literacy
 is about 30 percent, although many educators believe actual functional literacy is
 about 15 percent. The budget introduced by the Government in July reduced edu-
 cation expenditures by nearly 2 percent.
 Legal rights for children are theoretically protected by numerous laws which in-
 corporate elements of the U.N. Convention on the Rights of the Child. Legal enforce-
 ment of these laws, however, is frequently lacking. According to an independent
 study, 12,198 children under 21 years of age were detained while under trial in
 Punjab province during 1991. Some 2,095 were eventually convicted, of whom 129
 were under 14. Federal law allows, but does not require, offenders under the age
 of 14 to be placed in reform schools; however, no such facilities exist. There is only
 one jail in each province set aside for convicted prisoners under age 21. Although
 Punjab and Sindh provinces have laws mandating special judicial procedures for
 child offenders, in practice, children and adults are essentially treated equally.
 According to the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF), Pakistan has one of
 the highest reported ratios of males to females in the world. One of the reasons for
 the high ratio of males is the preference for boys within the family structure. Ac-
 
 
 1383
 
 cording to one stud,, female children are provided less food and medical care than
 male children, leading to a higher percentage of female children dying before their
 5th birthday. Many oiservers believe female infanticide occasionally occurs, espe-
 cially in poorer areas where the family may not be able to support the child.
 Nationai/Racil/Ethnic Minorities.-Discrimination on ethnic and linguistic
 grounds underlies ethnic conflicts in several areas. In Sindh there continue to be
 conflicts between Sindhis and Mohajirs (Urdu-speaking immigrants originally from
 India).
 Non-Punjabis throughout Pakistan resent what they see as Punjabi domination
 of the bureaucracy, the police, and the armed forces. Social stratification also con-
 tributes to discrimination. Socially prominent Pakistanis generally suffer less at the
 hands of officials than those less well off, partly because of their ability to recip-
 rocate favors and partly because of the general deference accorded social "betters"
 in Pakistani society.
 Reigious Minorities.-There is much discrimination against religious minority
 grups in employment and education, and several International Labor Organization
 odies expressed concern in 1993 that Pakistani laws facilitate discrimination in
 employment based on religion. In Pakistan's early years minorities were able to rise
 to the senior ranks of the military and civil service. Today, many are unable to rise
 above mid-level ranks. Because of the lack of educational opportunities for some re-
 ligious minority groups, discrimination in employment is believed to be increasingly
 prevalent. Christians, in particular, have difficulty fiding jobs above those of me-
 nial labor.
 Officially designated as non-Muslims, Ahmadis in particular suffer from harass-
 ment and discrimination and have limited chances or advancement in the public
 sector. Young Ahmadis and their parents complain of increasing difficulty in gaining
 admittance to good colleges, forcing many children to go overseas for higher edu-
 cation. They complain that charges are often filed against them for the purpose of
 harassment or extortion and that the police will not accept their complaints when
 they and their property are attacked; few cases ever come to trial. Among religious
 minorities, there is a belief that the authorities, even if they do not prosecute them,
 afford them less protection under the law than is afforded Muslim citizens. There
 were several incidents in 1993 in which Ahmadis were physically assaulted by both
 police and civilians.
 Many Christians continue to express the rear of forced marriage of Christian
 women to Muslims, although some human rights monitors believe the practice is
 relatively rare. Many Christians also believe they are subject to harassment by the
 authorities. They cite difficulty in obtaining permission to build churches and the
 blasphemy laws as primary examples.
 People with Disabiitis.-Pakistan has no laws requiring equal accessibility to
 public buildings for disabled persons.
 According to a 1987 government study, more than 10,000 disabled children were
 enrolled in the 158 special education centers administered by the Government and
 nongovernmental organizations. This represented about 1.7 percent of the estimated
 population of disabled children in Pakistan. Pakistan law reserves 1 percent of pub-
 lic sector jobs for disabled persons, although human rights monitors say this quota
 has never been met. The caretaker government of Prime Minister Qureshi an-
 nounced in September that the quota would be raised to 2 percent.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Assciation.-The right of industrial workers to form trade unions
 is enunciated in the Industrial Relations Ordinance (IRO) of 1969 but is subject to
 major restrictions in some employment areas. In practice, labor laws place signifi-
 cant constraints on the formation of unions and their ability to function effectively.
 Workers in export processing zones (EPZ's) currently are prohibited from forming
 trade unions, although a proposal to apply Pakistani labor laws to the EPZs was
 before the Cabinet for decision. As part of the Government's trade policy over the
 past year, the Finance Act of 1992 extended this prohibition to all export-oriented
 units that export at least 70 percent of their production, although this decision has
 not yet been implemented.
 The All Pakit stan Federation of Labour (APFOL) charges that trade unionists
 seeking to organize workers employed in the construction of the Islamabad-Lahor
 Motorway were arrested and mistreated by police while in custody. APFOL also al-
 legs that somre terminated frm the project, which is being car-
 ried out by the Daewoo Corporation, and that the government of Putjab went to
 court to block the registration of the union. Government of Punjab officials deny
 that any abuses took place while the workers were in police custody. The Punjab
 Secretary of Labor said in December that the government had dropped its objection
 
 
 1384
 to the registration of the union and that the union would be allowed to register. In
 October the Federal Government also rescinded its previous application oTthe Es-
 sential Services Act to the motorway project. The Essential Services Act severely re-
 stricts normal union activities in sectors associated with the "administration of the
 State."
 The right of unions to strike is severely constrained by legally required concilia-
 tion proceedings and cooling-off periods and especially by the Government's author-
 ity to ban any strike found to cause "serious hardship to the community" or preju-
 dice to the national interest, or in any case after any strike has continued unre-
 solved for 30 days. Strikes continue to be rare; when they do occur, they are usually
 illegal and short. Police do not hesitate to crack down on worker demonstrations.
 Union members make up only about 13 percent of the industrial labor force and
 10 percent of the total estimated work force. Contract labor continues to flourish,
 undercutting the power of the unions and exploiting workers willing to work on tem-
 porary contracts. These workers receive fewer benefits and have no job security.
 Trade unions of all political orientations are permitted, and the political leanings
 of labor leaders cover the entire spectrum. While many unions remain aloof from
 party politics, it appears that the most powerful are those associated with political
 parties. After the PPP caeto power in 1988, it successfully organized trade unions
 under the banner of the People s Labor Bureau (PLB). The PLB's main competitors
 are the Jamaat-i-Islami's National Labor Federation and the MQM-backed labor
 unions.
 Labor federations are free to affiliate with international federations and confed-
 erations. International Labor Organization (ILO) committees have criticized Paki-
 stan for years for its failure to abide by Convention 87 regarding freedom of associa-
 tion and Convention 98 on the right to organize and bargain collectively, both of
 which it has ratified. The charges, repeatedly raised by Pakistani trade unions, have
 focused on the limitations on union formation, strikes, and collective bargaining. Ex-
 cept for lifting the ban on an airline employee union no Pakistani government has
 made any serious effort to change the laws criticized in the ILO reports. Even the
 employers' members of the ILO Conference Committee in 1993 accused the Govern-
 ment of bad faith in failing to take remedial action it had promised. The decision
 to extend union membership to certain state-owned enterprises had been taken dur-
 ing the Bhutto government's previous tenure but had not yet been implemented
 when her government fell in 1990. The administration of former Prime Minister
 Nawaz Sharif subsequently reversed this decision. There is a proposal before the
 Cabinet to allow employees of other government entities, including Pakistan Tele-
 vision, to form unions.
 The ILO continues to encourage the Government to lift prohibitions against union
 activity in EPZ's and with respect to radio, television, and hospital employees, as
 well as to rescind the existing ban on strikes. Pakistan was also asked to amend
 any provision of the 1RO, the Press and Publications Ordinance, and the Political
 Parties Act which impose compulsory prison labor in a manner inconsistent with
 ILO Convention 105. In response to a request by Pakistan, the ILO agreed to pro-
 vide technical assistance to bring the country's labor laws into conformity with the
 world body's conventions.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The right of workers to form
 associations and freely elect representatives to act as collective bargaining agents
 is established in law. Section 15 of the IRO specifically prohibits antiunion discrimi-
 nation by employers. Current laws, however, place major limitations on the extent
 and effectiveness of such activities. Industrial workers have the right to organize
 and bargain collectively under the IRO, although large sections of the labor force
 do not enjoy similar rights. Agricultural workers, who are not defined as "industrial
 workers" under the 1RO, have the right to organize and form associations, but they
 are not guaranteed the right to strike, bargain collectively, or make demands on em-
 ployers.-Under the Essential Services Maintenance Act of 1952 (ESA), normal union
 activities are severely restricted in sectors associated with "the administration of
 the State," which covers a wide range of government services and state enterprises,
 such as education, health care, oil and gas production, and transport.
 For each industry found subject to the ESA, a finding that must be renewed every
 6 months, a specific determination is made by the Government as to what con-
 stitutes the limits of union activity. In cases in which collective bargaining has been
 barred, individual wage boards decide wage levels. The Minimum Wage Ordinance
 of 1961 provides the authority under which minimum wage boards are formed. Min-
 imum wage boards are constituted at the provincial level and are comprised of an
 industry representative, a labor representative and an at-large member generally
 chosen from the senior ranks of the provincial fabor ministry. A chairman provided
 by the provincial labor ministry presides over the board's deliberations, and addi-
 
 
 1385
 tional industry and labor representatives may be added at the discretion of the
 chairman. Despite the presence of a labor representative on the minimum wage
 board, labor organizations are generally dissatisfied with the board's finding. Dis-
 putes are adjudicated before the National Industrial Relations Commission. A work-
 er's right to quit may also be curtailed under this act, and a fired worker has no
 recourse to the labor courts. Collective bargaining and even strikes tske place in
 some job areas covered by the sct, e.g., the nationalized banks. Most unions con-
 tinue to call for the abolition of the ESA.
 The ILO has advised the Government that a 1980 ordinance permitting it to ex-
 empt EPZ's from the prvisions of any law is inconsistent with the requirements of
 Io Conventions 87 and 98. An EPZ, with its own labor regulations, includin re-
 lations governing how workers may bargain collectively, is functioning in  arac
 Over the years, the ILO hss also expressed concern about the ban on trade union
 activities in several specific organizations, including the government-ron Pakistan1
 television station. It ha aed hat ollective bargaining rights be given to bank
 officers and employees, denouncing the practice in the foreign banking sector of
 granting false promotions to employees in order to remove them from the category
 of workers having the right to organize.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-Fored labor is specifically prohib-
 ited by law. However, critics argue that the ESA's limitation on some employees'
 rights to leave their jobs constitutes a form of compulsory labor. The Government
 informed the ILO's Committee on the Application of Standards in 1990 that amend-
 ments were under consideration to rectify the problem and that steps had been
 taken to address other forced labor issues. However, the Government has taken no
 further action on the ESA issue.
 llegal bonded labor is widespread. Bonded labor is common in the brick, glas,
 and fishing industries and is found among agricultural and construction workers in
 rural areas. The total labor force in Pakistan is approximately 33.8 million people,
 and while there are no reliable figures available on the number of bonded laborers,
 conservative estimates put the figure at several million. In late 1992, a private jail
 was discovered in the Sindh provine in which over 200 people had been incarcer-
 ated for up to 10 years. The detainees were being used to provide forced labor on
 the surrounding farmland. The local landord, who owned the jail, wan not charged
 in the case, but his son was charged and is currently a fugitive.  he detainees con-
 tinue to be held by local police at the private jail as material witnesses in the case.
 Human rights monitors believe that such private jails are common, particularly in
 Sindh, Bachistan, and Southern Punjab.
 In die brick kiln industry, a workers' association succeeded in bringing the plight
 of bonded brickmakers in Punjab before the Supreme Court. The Court's 1989 com-
 promise ruling reinforced prohibitions on forced labor and forcible collection of debts
 and limited salary advances to 1-week's wages but upheld the legality" of existing
 debts. The Court granted laborers the right to work wherever they wished and to
 make arrangements other than bonded labor to pay their existing debts.
 The Bonded Labor System (Abolition) Act, adopted in March 1992, is the first law
 officially recognizing the existence of bonded labor in Pakistan. It outlaws the bond-
 ed labor system, cancels all existing bonded debts, and forbids lawsuits for the re-
 covery of existing bond  debts. In prindple, the law enables laborers to work where
 they wish and should result in all bonded debt recovery cases brought by employers
 being thrown out of court. The new legislation was not yet fully Implemented but
 offers a basis for court cases which could imprve the bonded labor situation.
 However, little progress was made in 1993 in the industries employing bonded la-
 borers. A significant impediment to the law's implementation is the absence of any
 credible enforcement mechanism at the provincial level, as required by the law.
 While enforcement of antibonded labor statutes has always rested with the prov-
 inces, enforcement mechanisms historically have been deficient. Provinces have at
 their disposal cadres of labor inspectors, but their numbers are consistently inad-
 equate to meet the reuirements oft the law. Plas  ei rthe formation of vigi-
 lance committees" which would assist in the collectimn of information concerning
 possible labor code violations. As of the end of 1993, however, none of the vigilance
 committees had been constituted. Accordingly, no bonded labor petitions ha been
 accepted by provincial courts, which are designated by federal law as having juris-
 diction. In addition resistance to the new law among employers was strong, reports
 of violations continued to appear, and the wores  movementhwas divide over the
 issue. Due to the lack of employment alternatives, many workers voluntarily re-
 turned to bonded labor at the kilns and elsewhere. The newly formed Senate
 Human Rights Committee announced in 1993 that bonded labor was to be one of
 itu highest priorities.
 
 
 1386
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-Despite legal limitations, child
 labor is common. Child labor is limited by at least four separate statutes and Article
 11 of The Constitution. The Employment of Children Act of 1991 defined the child
 as "a person who has not completed his 14th year of age." The Act also set 7 hours
 as the maximum workday for a child, inclusive of 1-hour's rest after 3 hours of con-
 tinuous work, and reiterated restrictions against the employment of children in haz-
 ardous industries. The Act remains essentially unimplemented and did little to pro-
 mote much needed enforcement mechanisms.
 While much child labor is in the traditional framework of family farming or small
 business, the abusive employment of children in larger industries and government
 business is also widespread. Child labor is widely employed in the carpet industry,
 much of which is family-run, cottage industry production. This appears to be the
 only export industry in which child labor is employed on a significant scale. Al-
 though there are no reliable official statistics, unofficial surveys and occasional
 press articles suggest that violations of existing laws are common. Unofficial esti-
 mates indicate that one-third of Pakistan's total labor force of 33 million is made
 up of workers under age 18. The employment of children is sometimes linked with
 stories of child prostitution and abuse.
 The manager of the ILO program on the elimination of child labor visited Paki-
 stan in December to discuss the development of a program for the elimination of
 child labor in Pakistan. The ILO has earmarked $600,000 for project development
 over the next several years, which will include a grassroots campaign to raise
 awareness about child labor, as well as a review and revision of Pakistani legisla-
 tion on child labor.
 A Punjab labor department study concluded that about a million children are en-
 gaged in carpet weaving, mostly in the cottage industry, throughout Pakistan. In
 addition to suffering work-related health problems and receiving beatings if they try
 to avoid work, these children remain uneducated, 42 percent never having attended
 school and 58 percent having dropped out.
 The smuggling of young Pakistani children to the Gulf countries reportedly con-
 tinued. Most of the boys, many of whom are preschool age, are used as jockeys in
 camel races. Thousands of young Pakistanis reportedly have been smuggled to the
 Gulf in recent years. In some cases the children, usually from rural areas, were kid-
 naped. In other cases, poor parents are said to have sold their children to the traf-
 fickers.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-Labor regulations are governed by federal stat-
 utes applicable throughout the country. The minimum wage is approximately $50
 (1,500 rupees). Although this wage is ostensibly enough to support a small family,
 minimum wage benefits are extended to only a minority of the work force by virtue
 of an extensive list of exempted activities. The law, applicable nationally, provides
 for a maximum workweek of 54 hours, rest periods during the workday, and paid
 annual holidays. These regulations specifically do not apply to agricultural workers,
 to workers in Pakistan's numerous small factories with fewer than 10 employees,
 and to the small contract groups of under 10 workers into which factory work forces
 are increasingly divided. Due in part to a lack of education, many workers are un-
 aware of the regulations protecting their rights. In September the Government
 amended laws relating to workmen's compensation, payment of wages, old-age pen-
 sions, social security, workers' children education, gratuity, and workers' share in
 companies' profits to expand those benefits to workers earning approximately $100
 or less per month. Previously, the ceiling on salary for the receipt of such benefits
 was set at about $50 per month.
 Enforcement of labor regulations, the responsibility of provincial governments,
 has generally been ineffective. The attention given to enforcement varies among the
 provinces in proportion to the significance of industrial labor. In all cases, limited
 resources, corruption and inadequate regulatory structures hamper the effort. In
 general worker health and safety standards are poor, and little is being done to im-
 prove them. Organized labor is occasionally able to press for improvements, and
 some legal protections apply, although they are weakly enforced.
