 PAKISTAN
 Pakistan is an Islamic republic in which power is shared between the Prime Min-
 ister, as the leader of the National Assembly, and the President. The Chief of Army
 Staff also wields considerable influence on many major policy decisions and is the
 third member of the unofficial "troika" which governs the nation. During 1994,
 Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto dominated political policymaking, with President
 Farooq Leghari playing a complementary role. Chief of Army Staff General Abdul
 Waheed consulted closely with the Government but avoided active involvement in
 governing.
 Responsibility for internal security rests primaril with the police, although para-
 military forces, such as the Rangers and Frontier Constabulary, are responsible for
 maintaining law and order in frontier areas. On November 30, the Army and para-
 military forces ended their operation, begun in 1992, to help restore law and order
 in Sindh province. Provincial governments control the police and paramilitary forces
 when they are assisting in law and order operations. Both forces committed abuses
 in 1994.
 Pakistan is a poor country, with great extremes in the distribution of wealth, an
 extremely high rate of illiteracy, and a per capita income of $400. Its economy in-
 cludes both state-run and private industries and financial institutions. The Con-
 stitution assures the right to private property and the right of private businesses
 to operate freely in most sectors of the economy. The Government continues to pur-
 sue economic reform, emphasizing the privatization of government-owned financial
 institutions, industrial units, and utilities. Cotton, textiles and apparel, rice, and
 leather products are the principal exports.
 Although the Government made strong public commitments to address human
 rights concerns, particularly those involving women, child labor, and minority reli-
 gions, most human rights abuses are rooted deeply in the social fabric. At year's
 end, these efforts had not resulted in a significant change in the overall human
 rights situation. Serious problems continue in many areas. Government forces con-
 tinued to use arbitrary arrest and detention, and have tortured or otherwise abused
 
 
 1246
 prisoners and detainees. They are unchecked by any serious government effort to
 reform the police or judicial systems or to prosecute those responsible for abuse.
 This Government, as did previous ones, continued to harass political opponents
 andto repress the Sindh-based Mohajir Qaumi Movement (MQM) political party
 Islamic religious zealots continued to discriminate against and persecute religious
 minorities, basing their activities in part on discriminatory legislation against those
 religious minorities. The Government proposed changes in the enforcement of the
 so-called blasphemy law to limit its abuse, but no changes were enacted and abuse
 continued. However, in November the Lahore High Court overturned the 1992 blas-
 pheny conviction of a Christian, Gul Masih.
 Religious and ethnic-based rivalries resulted in numerous murders, mosque bomb-
 ings, and occasional civil disturbances. Traditional social and legal constraints kept
 women in a subordinate position in society. They continued to be subjected to mur-
 der, torture, rape, and other forms of degradation both by agents of the State and
 societal elements. The Government and employers continued to restrict workers'
 rights significantly. The use of child and bonded labor remained widespread in spite
 of both legislation to restrict these practices and the signing of a Memorandum of
 Understanding- (MOU) on child labor with the International Labor Organization
 (ILO). Little was done to improve basic conditions for women and children. Female
 children continued to fall behind their male counterparts in such measures as levels
 of health care and education.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-Extrajudicial killings, often in the
 form of staged "police encounters" in which the police or military shoot and kill the
 suspects--many of them unarmed-continued in 1994. Most of these killings oc-
 curred in rural Sindh Province as part of the Army's law and order program, "Oper-
 ation Cleanup," which ended on November 30. A survey conducted in June by the
 Human Rights Commission of Pakistan (HRCP) reported that the incidence of ex-
 cesses committed by or attributed to the Army and the police in Sindh had dimin-
 ished in early 1994. However the frequency of extrajudicial killing throughout Paki-
 stan reportedin the press indicates that this continues to be a serious problem.
 A typical case occurred on May 3, when police killed five men in Sukkur, Sindh
 province. An HRCP investigation determined that the men were rounded up,
 brought to a police clerk's residence, tied up and killed with automatic weapons in
 a wel-planned operation. The Government denied this allegation, saying the victims
 were dangerous criminals who were killed during a 2-hour "encounter" with police.
 The HRCP reported 32 extrajudicial deaths in Sindh between January and May.
 Many are believed to have died as a result of police torture. The Government did
 not charge or try any law enforcement personnel for these killings.
 The Government used excessive force to control political demonstrations in Kara-
 chi. At least 13 people were killed and 87 injured during police clashes with MQM
 demonstrators from April 29 to May 1. The opposition claims that the police killed
 two demonstrators in October during an opposition-organized strike in Punjab.
 Ethnic and sectarian tensions rose during 1994. Members of Shi'a and Sunni Mus-
 lim organizations targeting rival groups set off numerous bombs, especially in Sindh
 and Punjab provinces, causing over a dozen deaths. The Government made few ar-
 rests. Some of the bombs were set off following inflammatory sermons delivered dur-
 ing Friday prayers. Ethnic and religiously motivated riots continued to occur. In Ka-
 rachi, people were killed almost daily in fighting among factions of the MQM, and
 between the MQM and Sindhi nationalists. The rate of killings increased in the sec-
 ond half of the year.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reported disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 There continued to be credible evidence that police tortured and otherwise mis-
 treated detainees. For example, the HRCP reported that Bakhshan Khan Bhatti
 died in jail on July 25. Prisoners claim that Bhatti was hung upside down and beat-
 en. However, the authorities maintained that he died from illness and internal pain.
 In other cases, 13 police officers were charged with torturing to death Pervez
 Akhtar in a police lockup on June 17 in GujarKhan, Punjab. The Government ar-
 rested four officers in connection with Akhtar's death, but released them on bail and
 took no further action. According to a May 25 press report, a Christian boy was tor-
 tured to death while in Gjra Sadar police custody. In one egregious case, security
 forces arrested a 25-year-old MQM activist in Sindh province on June 21, reportedly
 blindfolded and stripped him, and questioned him about the location of MQM weap-
 ons. The activist died in custody. Afer family members recovered the man's body,
 
 
 1247
 they reported that his eyes had been gouged out, his neck drilled, his ears chopped
 off, and his shoulder and backbone broken.
 Police and jailers so routinely use force to elicit confessions and compel detainees
 to incriminate others that the practice has become standard procedure. Torture
 methods included: beating, burning with cigarettes, whipping the soles of the feet,
 sexual assault, prolonged isolation, electric shock, deal.of ood or sleep, hanging
 upside down, forced spreading of the legs, and public humiliation including stripping
 in public. Some magistrates and doctors helped cover up the abuse by issuing inves-
 tigation and medical reports that the victims died of natural causes.
 Police frequently use the threat of abuse to extort money from prisoners and their
 families. In some cases, the authorities have detained whole families to force a rel-
 ative, the subject of an arrest warrant, to surrender.
 Upon assuming his position, the superintendent of the Karachi central jail report-
 edly ordered 450 prisoners stripped, and many of them beaten, injuring at least 50.
 During this period from January 13 to 15, the prisoners were kept in a 24-hour lock-
 up, with no toilet facilities, no water, and little food. The superintendent justified
 his actions as part of his mandate to clean up corruption at the jail. Abuse is re-
 ported to have continued in the jail throughout the year.
 Despite regulations that prohibit the poice from detaining women overnight,
 some women continue to be arbitrarily detained overnight and sexually abused. The
 police reportedly gang raped five women in a village in Sindh province on January
 18. Although there is increasing coverage of rape in the English-language press,
 rape victims often do not file reports because of social taboos, police intimidation,
 and family pressure. There are few policewomen to perform matron duties, despite
 regulations requiring that policewomen must be present in station houses during
 the questioning or detention of females. To address this problem, the Government
 opened "women's police stations" in several cities staffed by female personnel. How-
 ever, the press has reported that the staff is poorly trained. The Government is of-
 fering these officers additional training.
 Rape, along with other forms of police and military abuse, takes place in a climate
 of impunity caused by the failure of successive Governments to prosecute and pun-
 ish the abusers. This failure is the single largest obstacle to ending or even reducing
 the incidence of abuse. The authorities transfer or arrest offending officers, but sel-
 dom prosecute or punish them. There were no known court convictions of abusive
 police officers in 1994. In general, investigating officers shield their colleagues. Per-
 sons who attempt to bring charges against police officers are often threatened by
 other officers and drop the charges. However according to one human rights advo-
 cate, the Government took action in several cases-a move which reportedly re-
 suited in a decline of such sexual abuse cases in 1994.
 The incidence of torture and abuse was not restricted to the security forces. There
 were reports that different factions of the MQM tortured and killed members of
 rival groups. Three persons were killed on July 16 in Karachi. According to the
 press, two of the victims were members of the MQM's Altaf group. Their bodies were
 discovered in a field with marks of torture, including burn wounds and broken
 bones. The other victim, a member of the MQM's Haqiqi group, was gunned down
 in the street along with his 5-year-old niece. MQM gunmen are also suspected of
 murdering six Karachi policemen on June 28.
 The Hadood Ordinances, promulgated by the central Government in 1979, were
 an attempt to make the Penal Code more Islamic. These Ordinances provide harsh
 punishments for violating Islamic law, or Shari'a, including death by stoning for un-
 lawful sexual relations and amputation for some other crimes. In practice, the
 standards of evidence for imposing these punishments are exceptionally high, and
 to date they have never been carried out.
 Nonetheless, these laws apply to Muslims and non-Muslims alike and weigh most
 heavily on women. Under these ordinances, a woman who reports that she has been
 raped or files for divorce may find herself charged with adultery. All consensual ex-
 tramarital sexual relations are considered violations of the Hadood Ordinances.
 However, according to a lawyer from the HRCP, the Government has brought fewer
 charges against women under the Hadood Ordinances than in the past, and the
 courts have shown greater leniency toward women in their sentences and in the
 granting of bail.
 There are three classes of prison facilities: Class "C" cells generally hold common
 criminals--convicts and those in pretrial detention. Such cells often have dirt floors,
 no furnishings, and poor food. The use of handcuffs and fetters is common. Prisoners
 in these cells reportedly suffer the most abuse such as beatings and being forced
 to kneel for long periods. Conditions in "B" and "A cells are markedly better. The
 authorities reserve the latter for "prominent" persons.
 
 
 1248
 There were several reports in 1994 that wealthy landlords or political parties op-
 erated private jails. Many such jails are believed to exist in trfbal and feudal areas.
 Some of the prisoners have reportedly been held in them for man years. The police
 raided several such jails in 1994 and released the prisoners. In February the police
 raided a private jail operated by a local landlord in Umerkot, Sindh province. They
 released 13 men, 11 women, 9 girls, and 7 boys. The police arrested four persons
 during the raid.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile&-The law permits a Deputy Commissioner
 (DC) of a local district to order detention without charge for 30 days of persons sus-
 pected of threatening public order and safety. The DC may renew detention in 30-
 day periods, for a total of 90 days. For other criminal offenses, the police may hold
 a suspect for 24 hours without charge. If the police can provide material proof that
 detention is necessary for an investigation, a court may extend detention for a total
 of 15 days.
 In practice, the authorities do not strictly observe the limits on detention. The po-
 lice are not required to notify anyone when an arrest is made, and often hold detain-
 ees without charge until they are challenged by a court. The police sometimes de-
 tain individuals arbitrarily without charge, or on false charges, in order to extort
 payment for their release. The law stipulates that detainees must be brought to trial
 within 30 days of their arrest. However, in many cases trials do not start until
 about 6 months after the filing of charges.
 The authorities generally permit family members and lawyers to visit inmates.
 However, in some cases the authorities refuse such visits, even though the detainee
 has been held for years awaiting trial. A report published by the HRCP on a visit
 to a prison in Sukkur, Sindh province, in July cited 11 detainees who had been
 awaiting trial from 1 to 3 years. HRCP officials speculate that detainees in other
 areas may have been held for over 10 years.
 The Government uses mass arrests to quell civil unrest. The army arrested over
 800 MQM party workers from May 4 to 7, following 5 days of violence in Karachi.
 The arrested included 3 MQM Senators and 11 MQM members of the Sindh Provin-
 cial Assembly. Almost all were released within 1 week. The authorities established
 detention facilities near the Provincial Assembly building to allow jailed assembly
 members to attend sessions.
 The Federally Administered Tribal Areas have a separate legal system, the Fron-
 tier Crimes Regulation, which recognizes the doctrine of "collective responsibility."
 Under this regulation, the authorities are empowered to detain the fellow members
 of a fugitive's tribe, or to blockade the fugitive's village, pending his surrender or
 punishment by his own tribe, as is the local tradition. The Government exercised
 such authority in 1994. After the Supreme Court ruled that all federal laws extend
 to tribal areas, the tribes in the Malakand Division of the Northwest Frontier prov-
 ince clashed with government forces, demanding a return to Islamic law. The tribes
 blockaded roads and an airport, killed a member of the Provincial Assembly, and
 held numerous officials hostage. In response, government forces were called in to
 pacify the area, and burned several houses beonging to the leaders of the unrest.
 In November the provincial government agreed to a return to Shari'a law in
 Malakand Division after 30 Islamic activists and soldiers were killed in the fighting.
 In August the Inter-Services Intelligence Agency (ISI), the Government's military
 intelligence organization, detained Shaukat Ali Kashmiri, the Secretary General of
 the Jammu and Kashmir People's National Party. In September the ISI released
 Mr. Kashmiri from Attock Fort Detention Center, but denied that it had held him
 in detention.
 The authorities arrested more than 1,100 political opponents of Prime Minister
 Bhutto, including 45 members of the provincial and national assemblies, prior to or
 during the October 11 general strike. The authorities charged only a few of them
 and released most within a month. The Government filed criminal charges, ranging
 from murder to possession of illegal weapons, against five opposition members of the
 National Assembly who were arrested on October 11. Three were later released on
 bail but two refused to apply for bail and remained in custody at year's end.
 e. Denial of Fair Pubi Trial.-The judicial system involves several different
 court systems with overlapping and sometimes competing jurisdictions. There are
 civil and criminal systems with special courts for high-profile cases, as well as the
 Federal Shari'a appeals courts for certain Hadood offenses. The appeals process in
 the civil system is: civil court, district court, high court, and Supreme Court. In the
 criminal system, the progression is: magistrate, sessions court, high court, and Su-
 preme Court.
 The civil judicial system provides for an open trial, cross-examination, representa-
 tion by an attorney, and appeal of sentences. Attorneys are appointed for indigents
 only in capital cases. There are no jury trials. Owing to the limited number of
 
 
 1249
 u hof cases, and outdated court procedures, cases routinely
 jdges th hryeavy    bet the Hadod and standard criminal codes, there are bail-
 dr gon  for years.  I
 able and nonbailable offenses. According to the Criminal Procedures Code, the ac-
 cused in bailable offenses must be granted bail and the accused in "nonbailable* of-
 fenses should be granted bail if accused of a crime where the sentence is less than
 10 years. Bail is set, often purposely, at unreasonably high levels for indigent de-
 fendants.
 The Federal Shari'a Courtand the Shari'a Bench of the Supreme Court serve as
 appeals courts for certain convictions in the criminal court under the Hadood Ordi-
 nances. The Federal Shari'a Court also may overturn legislation judged to be incon-
 sistent with the tenets of Islam. However, these cases may be appealed to the
 Shari'a Bench of the Supreme Court.
 The judicial process continued to be impeded by bureaucratic infighting and inac-
 tivity and the overlapping jurisdictions of the different court systems. Scores of posi-
 tions in the lower magistracy remained unfilled. Persons in jail awaiting tri  are
 sometimes held for periods longer than the sentence they would receive if convicted.
 Cases involving bombings, sabotage, highway robberies, banditry, or kidnaping
 may be brought before three types orspecial courts. These include the special courts
 established by the Suppression of Terrorist Activities Act of 1975 to try "terrorist"
 cases and the "speedy trial courts," established by a 1987 ordinance to circumvent
 the judicial backlog. The Government abolished both of these courts in July. A third
 type of court, established in 1991 by the Constitution's 12th amendment, adju-
 dicates heinous crimes. In 1991 the President promulgated new ordinances which
 gave the Federal Government the exclusive authority to refer cases to these courts.
 In practice, the Government refers cases involving violent criminal offenses to these
 courts.
 Many legal experts believe the special courts do not provide for a fair trial. They
 maintain that the short time for investigations and trials detract from the accused's
 right to prepare an adequate defense. Some observers maintain that trial procedures
 have efectively repudiated the presumption of innocence. They also cite the en-
 croachment by federal authorities on the provincial government's constitutional au-
 thority to admi-ister ustice and the inherent unfairness of parallel courts to which
 cases may be assiged arbitrarily. Moreover, the special courts may deny bail if the
 judges decide that the accused may have reasonably" committed an offense.
 Government officials and some attorneys maintain that despite the deficiencies,
 the special courts are necessary because of the judicial backlog. They also maintain
 that the rules of evidence apply in the courts, defendants have the right to counsel,
 and the judges must meet the same standards as those appointed to a high court.
 Defendants also have the right to appeal, but only one appeal is allowed.
 In late 1993, the Government announced that it would allow the speedy trial
 courts ordinance to lapse in July 1994. After that date, the Government transferred
 all pending cases and investigations before the speedy courts to the regular courts.
 The special terrorist courts still exist.
 The judiciary is not independent. Through the President's power to transfer High
 Court justices and grant tenure to new appointees, the executive branch is able to
 influence the provincial High Courts, and especially the lower levels of the judicial
 system. Judges in the special courts are retired jurists, who are hired on renewable
 contracts. The desire to maintain their positions influences many of their decisions.
 Despite the Government's promise to strengthen judicial independence, it took
 several measures regarded as efforts to influence the court for political reasons. In
 February, in a ruling regarded as politically motivated, the Supreme Court upheld
 the right of two members of the Northwest Frontier Provincial Assembly, who were
 members of the Muslim League Nawaz group, to join the Pakistan People's Party
 (PPP). Their move allowed the PPP to gain control of the assembly. In other moves
 regarded as politically motivated, the PPP government and the President trans-
 ferred the well-respected chief justice of the Sindh High Court to the Federal Shari'a
 court, replacing him with a judge considered loyal to the PPP. There was also criti-
 cism of the appointment of 20 new judges to the Lalore High Court. The Govern-
 ment also refused to confirm six judges named to the High Court in Sindh province,
 and several High Court judges in Punjab, who had been appointed when the opposi-
 tion party was in power.
 After dissolving the first Bhutt government in 1990, President Ghulam Ishaq
 Khan established special 'accountability" tribunals to try members of previous fed-
 eral and provincial governments on criminal and corruption ch       owever, only
 members of the Bhutto government-all of whom belong to the PPP-were charged
 with corruption and misconduct. No members of other political parties were brought
 to trial. In 1994 the tribunals acquitted the accused.
 
 
 1250
 
 In 1994 the Government brought numerous criminal cases against members of the
 former Nawaz Sharif government, their businesses and their political supporters.
 The Government also filed cases to have Nawaz Shiarif and other members of his
 party disqualified from the National Assembly. The Government incarcerated sev-
 eral accused persons, including Nawaz Shari's 76-year-old father, who was arrested
 in November for tax evasion and money laundering. The authorities released the fa-
 ther after 4 days, but at year's end his case and those of the others were pending.
 A 1990 Shari'a court decision resulted in the introduction of the Islamic concepts
 of Qisas-roughly an "eye for an eyet-and Diyat-blood money"-into the Penal
 Code. The Qisas and Diyat Ordinance allows compensation to be paid to a victim's
 family in lieu of the accused receiving punishment. As a result, wealthy or influen-
 tial persons sometimes escape punishment for such crimes as murder and assault.
 The right to seek pardon or commutation is not available to defendants under the
 ordinance. The Hadood and Qisas and Diyat ordinances apply to both ordinary
 criminal courts and Shari'a courts.
 Appeals of certain Hadood convictions involving penalties in excess of 2 years' im-
 prisonment are referred exclusively to the Shari'a courts. Cases referred to the Fed-
 eral Shari'a court are heard jointly by Islamic scholars and High Court judges using
 ordinary criminal procedures. Cases referred to the Shari'a bench of the Supreme
 Court are heard jointly by Islamic scholars and Supreme Court judges using ordi-
 nary criminal procedures. Judges and attorneys must be Muslim and be familiar
 with Islamic law. Within these limits, defendants in the Shari'a court are entitled
 to the lawyer of their choice. There is a system of bail.
 Under the Hadood Ordinances, evidence is given different weight depending on
 the religion and sex of the witness. A non-Muslim may not be a witness against a
 Muslim but may offer testimony against another non-Muslim. Testimony of females
 is not admissible for the harsher punishments (lashing, amputation, and stoning).
 In cases involving financial matters, the testimony of two women is required for it
 to be admitted as evidence. The evidentiary laws that apply to lesser punishments
 are roughly based on English common law.
 There continued to be charges that magistrates and police, under pressure to
 achieve high conviction rates persuade detainees to plead gilty without informing
 them of the consequences. Politically powerful persons aso attempt to influence
 magistrates' decisions and have used various forms of pressure on the magistrates,
 including the threat to transfer them to other assignments. Magistrates also per-
 form a wide variety of administrative functions for the provincial governments, re-
 ducing the time devoted to judicial duties.
 Administration of justice In the Federally Administered Tribal Areas is normally
 the responsibility of tribal elders and maliks, or leaders. They may conduct hearings
 according to Islamic law and tribal custom. In such proceedings, the accused have
 no right to legal representation, bail, or appeal. The usual penalties consist of fines
 even for murder. However, the Government's political agents who are federal civil
 servants assigned to local governments, oversee such proceedings and may impose
 prison terms of up to 14 years.
 In remote areas outside the jurisdiction of the Political Agents, tribal councils oc-
 casionally levy harsher, unsanctioned punishments, including flogging or death by
 shooting or stoning. Paramilitary forces under the direction of the political agents
 frequently perform punitive actions during enforcement operations. F or example, in
 raids on criminal activities the authorities have been known to damage surrounding
 homes as extrajudicial punishment of residents for having tolerated nearby criminal
 activity.
 There are fewer than 10 known political prisoners. Several are serving sentences
 under the laws concerning the Ahmadi religious sect. One person is appealing the
 death sentence for blasphemy (see Section 2.c.).
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-By law
 the police must obtain a warrant to search a house but do not need a warrant to
 search a person. However, the police often enter homes without a warrant. In the
 absence of a warrant, a policeman is subject to charges of criminal trespass. How-
 ever, policemen are seldom punished for illegal entry.
 The Government maintains several domestic intelligence services which monitor
 politicians, political activists, suspected terrorists, and suspected foreign intelligence
 agents. Credible reports indicate that the authorities commonly resort to wire-
 tapping and occasionally intercept and open mail.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of speech
 and the press, and citizens are generally free to discuss public issues. However, the
 Constitution stipulates the death penalty for anyone who damages the Constitution
 
 
 1251
 by any act including the publicationrtlatementsagainst the spirit of the Con-
 stitution. he Constitution prohibits the ridiculeof Islam, the armed forces, or the
 judiciary. Moreover, the Penal Code mandates the death sentence for anyone con-
 victed of blaspheming the Prophet Muhammad (see Section 2.c.). Journalists censor
 themselves on such subjects.
 A Print, Press, and Publications Ordinance requires the registration of printing
 presses and newspapers and allows the Government to confiscate newspapers or
 magazines deemed objectionable. Foreign books must pass government censors be-
 fore being reprinted, although the importation of books is freely allowed. Govern-
 ment censors occasionally ban publications, usually for objectionable religious con-
 tent, but for other reasons as well. In 1994 the Government banned a book entitled
 "The Political Role of Intelligence Agencies in Pakistan" because it contained a criti-
 cal view of intelligence agencies.
 A government-owned press trust controls two newspapers--an English-language
 and an Urdu daily. The Ministry of Information controls one of the two mai wire
 services; the other is privately owned. The numerous privately owned newspapers
 have a circulation that far exceeds that of the government-owned newspapers. Tlhe
 government newspa ers and wire services are cumspect in their coverage of the
 news and generally follow the government line.
 Nevertheless, the press has enjoyed an increasing level of freedom since 1989. Pri-
 vately owned newspapers freely discuss public policy and criticize the Government.
 They report remarks made by opposition politicians and their editorials reflect a
 spectrum of views.
 The Government attempts to influence editorial policy at privately owned news-
 papers by its power to allocate duty-free newsprint and its placement of government
 advertising-an important source of newspaper revenue. n the first half of 1994,
 the Ministry of Information stopped placing advertising for several months with two
 leading Urdu dailies, Khabrain and Nawa-e-Waqt, claiming they had engaged in ir-
 responsible journalism. There were also widespread reports that journalists took
 bribes from government or opposition political parties.
 Various political parties and the police harassed journalists and newspaper com-
 panies. The police arrested Farooq Aqdas, senior poitical correspondent of an Urdu
 iaily, Jang, during the summer and detained him for several hours on charges filed
 against him a year and a half earlier by another journalist. On December 4, uniden-
 tifed gunmen assassinated Muhammad Salahuddin, the editor of the weekly
 Takbeer in Karachi. Salahuddin was known for his criticism of the MQM and PPP
 and he had been the victim of previous attacks on his home and office in 1990 and
 1991. On December 6, unidentified assailants shot dead the General Manager of an
 Urdu daily, Parcham, in his Karachi office.
 The Government owns and operates all radio stations, and all but one semiprivate
 television station. It strictly controls their news broadcasts. However, the Shalimar
 Television Network (STN), a semiprivate television station, provides programs in-
 cluding Cable News Network (CNN) and British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC)
 programs, with considerable independence from government oversight. The Govern-
 ment censors segments of CNN and BBC considered socially offensive. The Ministry
 of Information monitors the advertisements on STN, editing or removing those
 deemed objectionable.
 Conservative religious and political proups have been active in promoting their
 own code of social morality. The Shari a Law has bolstered such efforts by placing
 greater pressure on individuals to conform to Islamic sensibilities. In 1994 there
 were occasional reports of campaigns to remove obscene materials from video stores,
 but book and video stores generally operated without hindrance.
 Literary and creative works remain generally free of censorship. Obscene lit-
 erature, a category broadly defined by the Government, is subject to seizure. Dram-
 as and documentaries on previously taboo subjects, including corruption, social
 privilege, narcotics, violence against women, and female inequality, are now broad-
 cast on television.
 The Government and universities generally respect academic freedom. However,
 the atmosphere of violence and intolerance fostered by student organizations, typi-
 cally tied to political parties, is a threat to academic freedom. On some campuses,
 well-armed groups of students of varying political persuasions clash with and in-
 timidate other students, instructors, and administrators on matters of language, syl-
 labus, examination policies, doctrine, and dress.
 Human rights groups remain concerned about the implementation of a 1992 Su-
 preme Court ruling that prohibits student political organizations on campuses.
 While they acknowledge the ruling led to a reduction of campus violence, they ques-
 tion the legality of school officials expelling students they find guilty of mem rship
 in a political organization.
 
 
 1252
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Government generally
 permits peaceful assembly. District magistrates occasionally exercised their power
 under the Criminal Procedures Code to ban meetings of more than four people when
 demonstrations seemed likely to result in violence. This provision was invoked fre-
 quently in June during the Islamic month of Muharram, when tensions between
 Sun    and Sha Muslims traditionally peak. Many observers attributed the rel-
 atively peaceful month of Muharram to these measures. The Government usually
 did not interfere with large political rallies, although in an attempt to prevent a
 strike, it arrested over 1,000 opposition members in October.
 Opposition leader Nawaz Sharif and a large number of supporters traveled
 unhindered across the country in September, holding large rallies critical of the
 Government. However, the authorities sometimes prevented leaders of politico-reli-
 gious parties to travel to certain areas if they believed their presence would increase
 sectarian tensions.
 The Constitution provides for freedom of association subject to restrictions by gov-
 ernment ordinance and law. There have been no recent cases of banned groups or
 parties.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-Pakistan is an Islamic republic in which 97 percent of
 the people are Muslim. The Constitution requires that laws must be consistent with
 Islam. The Government permits Muslims to convert to other faiths but prohibits
 proselytizing among Muslims.
 Minority groups fear that the Shari'a Law and its goal of 'Islamizing" government
 and society may further restrict the freedom to practice their religion. Many report-
 edly live in terror because the religious legislation has encouraged an atmosphere
 of religious intolerance which has led to acts of violence directed at Ahmadis, Chris-
 tians, Hindus, Zikris, and others. Several incidents in 1994 heightened the sense of
 insecurity and fear among the religious minorities.
 In April men riding a motorcycle shot and killed Manzoor Masih, a Christian, as
 he departed a courthouse in Lahore where he was being tried for blasphemy. The
 authorities had arrested Masih and two other Christians, including a 13-year-old
 boy, in 1993 for allegedly writing blasphemous remarks about the Prophet Muham-
 mad on a wall-even though two of the three were illiterate. Two other persons with
 Manzoor were injured in the attack. The police arrested three suspects, among them
 the complainants who brought the blasphemy case against Masih. At year's end, the
 suspects were free on bail. While government officials condemned the incident,
 Christian leaders and human rights groups maintain that the Government reacted
 weakly and has done little to discourage extremists or offer increased protection to
 religious minorities. In at least two other instances, the inhabitants of two villages
 of Christians, including Masih's village, were forced to move after receiving threats
 from Muslim extremists.
 A 1974 constitutional amendment declared Ahmadis to be a non-Muslim minority
 because they do not accept Muhammad as the last prophet of Islam. However,
 Ahmadis regard themselves as Muslims and observe many Islamic practices. In
 1984 the Government inserted Section 298(c) into the Penal Code which prohibited
 an Ahmadi from calling himself a Muslim and banned Ahmadis from using Islamic
 terminology. The punishment is up to 3 years' imprisonment and a fine. Since 1984,
 the Government has used Section 298(c) to harass Ahmadis.
 In 1993 the Supreme Court ruled against the Ahmadis in a case on the constitu-
 tionality of Section 298(c). The Court upheld that section of the law, rejecting the
 argument that it violated the right of freedom of speech and religion. The judge
 writing for the majority found that Islamic phrases are in essence a copyrighted
 trademark of the Islamic religion. He reasoned that the use of Islamic phrases by
 Ahmadis was equivalent to copyright infringement and violated the Trademark Act
 of 1940. The majority also found that the use of certain Islamic phrases by Ahmadis
 was equivalent to blasphemy.
 The judgment has emboldened anti-Ahmadi groups and resulted in more court
 cases against Ahmadis. In 1994 the Government promised that it would defend Sec-
 tion 298(c) from an appeal on other grounds. In the first 9 months of 1994, 17 cases
 under Section 298(c) were filed against Ahmadis resulting in 1 conviction. Rashood
 Ahmad of Sangahr was sentenced to 2 years in prison and fined $166 for displaying
 a verse from the Koran on his wall.
 In January the authorities arrested five journalists, including the septuagenarian
 editor of Al Fazal, the Ahmadi daily, under Section 298(c). The arrests were made
 because of general complaints that the writers in Al Fazal had propagated their
 faith and passed themselves off as Muslims, thus injuring the feelings of Muslims.
 The five were released on bail on March 7. At year's end, their case was pending
 in the courts.
 
 
 1253
 In another incident, the Rawalpindi Development Authority demolished an
 Ahmadi center in Rawalpindi on September 15. The Government claimed that the
 land was illegally converted to a place of worship-despite the fact that the land
 had been used for worship for 40 years. On the building plans submitted to the city,
 the Ahmadi community did not describe the building on the land as a mosque, be-
 cause that would have violated Section 298(c). In other incidents, several prominent
 Ahmadis, including a university professor, were killed during the year in what some
 regard as sectarian murders. Investigations of the cases are continuing.
 he Government classifies Ahmadis as "non-Muslims" on their passports. This
 has led the authorities in Saudi Arabia to prevent Ahmadis from performing the re-
 ligious pilgrimage to Mecca. In 1992 the Government ordered nationa identity cards
 to convey the bearer's religion, but so far the Government has not submitted imple-
 menting legislation.
 In 1986 the Government inserted Section 295(c) into the Penal Code which stipu-
 lates the death penalty for blaspheming the Prophet Muhammad. This provision has
 been used by litigants against Ahmadls, Christians, and even Muslims. In 1992 the
 Senate unanimously adopted a bill to amend the Blasphemy Law so that the death
 penalty is mandatory upon conviction.
 According to Ahmadi sources, 5 blasphemy cases, involving 15 persons, were reg-
 istered against Ahmadis in the first 9 months of 1994. Since 1986 over 100 blas-
 phemy cases have been registered against Ahmadis with no convictions. In the same
 penou, at least nine blasphemy cases have been brought against Christians and
 seven against Muslims.
 Two persons were convicted of blasphemy and sentenced to death: Mohammad
 Arshad Javaid of Bahawalpur, a 37-year-old Muslim who is reportedly mentally un-
 sound and remains in prison, and Gul Masih, a Christian of Sargodha. However,
 Gul Masih was acquitted of blasphemy by the Lahore High Court on November 27
 and released from prison.
 The Blasphemy Law has also been used to justify extrajudicial killings. In
 Gujranwala, Punjab, a mob lynched a Muslim in April in front of the police station
 after falsely accusing him of burning a copy of the Koran. In May a judge sentenced
 a Muslim accused of killing a Christian school teacher to 14 years in prison. Never-
 theless, some observers criticized the ruling because the judge took into account the
 defendant's claim that he committed the offense because the teacher had blas-
 phemed the Prophet Muhammad. The judge reportedly stated that blaspheming the
 Prophet would be conducive to a total loss of control by every Muslim.
 When such religious cases are brought to court, extremists often pack the court-
 room and make public threats against an acquittal. As a result judges and mag-
 istrates often continue trials indefinitely, and the accused is burdened with further
 legal costs and repeated court appearances.
 A Sunni Muslim group, the Anjuman Sipah-i-Sahaba, unsuccessfully sought to in-
 troduce legislation in 1994 that would have declared the Zikri sect in Balochistan
 as a non-Muslim sect. There were also continued reports in the year of attacks by
 extremists on Hindus.
 The security of religious minorities was a major issue of discussion in the Govern-
 ment and the press in 1994. The Government promised to introduce measures to
 reduce the abusive litigation under the blasphemy laws, but defended the laws
 themselves. At year's end, the Government had not taken any remedial action.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-Most citizens enjoy freedom of movement within the country and to
 travel abroad, but the Government occasionally prohibits movement of persons with-
 in Pakistan through "externment orders" when it believes their presence will lead
 to a threat to public order. Travel to Israel is legally prohibited. Government em-
 ployees must obtain "no objection certificates" before traveling abroad. Students are
 also required to have these certificates from their institutions. Pakistanis have and
 regularly exercise the right to emigrate. Exit control lists are used to prevent the
 departure of wanted criminals.
 The resumption of civil war in Afghanistan in early 1994 created a new wave of
 refugees. In response to this new influx, the Government closed its borders with Af-
 ghanistan and officially admitted only those Afghans who were properly documented
 or in need of humanitarian assistance. Despite these restrictions over 66,000 new
 refugees arrived in the first 9 months of 1994.
 Approximately 1.4 million Afghan refugees remain in Pakistan. They have limited
 access to legal protection and depend on the ability of the leaders of their groups
 to resolve disputes among themselves and with Pakistani society. Women and giris
 have obtained better education and health care as group leaders gradually secured
 such services. Many refugees have found employment but are not covered by the
 labor laws.
 
 --    11
 
 
 1254
 Traffickers in women bought or lured hundreds of women from Bangladesh with
 promises of a better life. They transported the women across India and placed them
 with families as domestic servants or as prostitutes in brothels. The authorities de-
 tained some of the women for prostitution under the Hadood Ordinances. Few are
 able or willing to return to Bangladesh. Many are released into the custody of their
 exploiters, who set them to work as prostitutes again. Efforts to repatriate
 Bangladeshis in 1994 were mostly unsuccessful.
 The "repatriation" of Biharis continued to be a contentious issue. The Biharis are
 Urdu-speaking people from the Indian state of Bihar who went to East Pakistan,
 now Bangladesh, at the time of partition in 1947. Since 1971, after Bangladesh
 gained its independence, approximately 250,000 Biharis have been in refugee camps
 in Bangladesh. The repatriation of these people is tied to Pakistan's various ethnic
 problems. While the Mohajir community, made up of Pakistanis who emigrated from
 India during partition, supports the repatriation, the Sindhi community opposes the
 move. In 1993 the Government flew 342 Biharis to Pakistan and placed them in
 temporary housing in central Punjab. No further repatriation has occurred.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights. The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens have the right and the ability to change their government peacefully.
 With certain exceptions, citizens aged 21 and over have the right to vote. However,
 several million bonded laborers and nomads may not vote because the National
 Election Commission has ruled that they do not "ordinarily reside in an electoral
 area, nor do they own/possess a dwelling or immovable property in that area.  Polit-
 ical parties have been allowed to operate freely since the lifting of martial law in
 1985 and 1986. In 1988 the Supreme Court struck down a law banning unregistered
 political parties from participating in elections.
 The Senate is elected by the members of the four provincial assemblies. Senators
 serve for 6 years. The President is indirectly elected by an electoral college consist-
 ing of the members of the national and provincial assemblies and the Senate. The
 President serves for 5 years. Members of the national and provincial assemblies
 serve 5 years, unless the President dissolves the Assembly. The Senate may not be
 dissolved by the President. The President has the constitutional authority to dismiss
 the Government arbitrarily, but a 1993 Supreme Court ruling significantly limited
 that ability.
 The Constitution requires that the President and Prime Minister be Muslims.
 Members of minority religious groups may not vote in Muslim constituencies. They
 cast their ballots for candidates running for special at-large seats reserved for them
 in the national and provincial assemblies. Most Ahmadis, disputing their designa-
 tion as non-Muslims, have refused to vote for such representatives. Christians and
 Hindus note that this system marginalizes religious minorities, by allowing the
 Muslim candidates to ignore them as a voting block. As a result, areas where mi-
 norities predominate receive significantly less government development and assist-
 ance funds.
 Local governments and the provincial and national assemblies are directly elected.
 However, local government bodies were dissolved in 1993 as the result of a political
 compromise between the ruling party and the opposition. New elections have not
 been held. In the meantime, provincial and federal officials are responsible for gov-
 ernance.
 The more than 2 million Pushtun people living in the Federally Administered
 Tribal Areas do not vote for their National Assembly representatives and have no
 representation in the assembly of the Northwest Frontier province. In keeping with
 local traditions, FATA's National Assembly members are elected by tribal leaders,
 or maliks, who are appointed in the Governor's name by the central Government's
 political agents. Many people living in this area have expressed dissatisfaction at
 having no vote. However, the majority of Pushtun people live outside the FATA and,
 while retaining their tribal identity, are fully integrated into politics and society.
 Because of a longstanding territorial dispute with India, the political status of the
 Northern Areas-Hunza, Gilgit, and Baltistan-is not resolved. As a result, mere
 than 1 million inhabitants of the Northern Areas are not covered under any con-
 stitution and have no representation in the federal legislature. The area is adminis-
 tered by an appointed civil servant. While there is an elected Northern Areas Coun-
 cil, this body serves in an advisory capacity to the Federal Government and has no
 legislative authority. In 1994 in response to concerns of lack of representation, the
 Federal Cabinet decided that residents of the Northern Areas would vote in elec-
 tions for representatives to serve on an expanded Council. However, the expanded
 Council does not have the authority to change laws or raise and spend revenue.
 
 
 1255
 
 In 1993 the High Court of Azad Jammu and Kashmir (AJK) ruled that the North-
 ern Areas should be incorporated into the semiautonomous state of Azad Jammu
 and Kashmir and its inhabitants given a right to be represented in the AJK legisla-
 tive assembly. In August the High Court ruled that the Federal Government has
 authority over the Northern Areas until final status of Jammu and Kashmir is re-
 solved.
 Although women participate in government, they are under represented in politi-
 cal life at all levels. Only 4 women hold seats in the 217-member National Assem-
 bly. However, for the first time, the Government appointed at least five women to
 the previously all-male high court benches. While women participate in large num-
 bers in elections, some women are dissuaded from voting in elections by family, and
 religious and social customs in rural areas.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 There are several domestic human rights organizations, and new human rights
 and legal aid groups continue to form and are generally free to operate without gov-
 ernment restriction. Senior members of the Bhutto government, including the
 former Minister of Law and Justice, have been active members of respected human
 rights organizations and participate in human rights organization functions.
 Religious extremists distributed material that accused several human rights activ-
 ists of blasphemy and called for them to be killed. Various international human
 rights organizations have been permitted to visit Pakistan and travel freely.
 In 1994 the Government formed a human rights unit in the Ministry of Interior
 as a sort of ombudsman for human rights. The unit brought attention to the prob-
 lem of spouse abuse by arranging visits by the Prime Minister to hospitaliz  a use
 victims. A human rights committee was also established in the National Assembly;
 a similar committee was formed in the Senate in 1993. These committees have
 taken little action to date.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 Women.-There are significant harriers to the advancement of women, beginning
 at birth. In general, female children are less valued and cared for than male chil-
 dren. According to a United Nations study, girls receive less nourishment, health
 care, and education than their brothers. According to the Government, only 23.5
 percent of the females over 10 years old are literate, compared with 48.9 percent
 r males. Only 12 percent of women use family planning methods. As a result the
 fertility rate is six children per woman. In rural areas, women in small farm fami-
 lies generally work alongside men in the fields. However, they remain subordinate
 to men and suffer discrimination in education, employment, and legal rights.
 Human rights monitors and women's groups fear that the Shari'a Law would have
 a harmful effect on the rights of women and minorities. However, the Law states
 that women's and minority rights protected under the Constitution would not be af-
 fected. The Law's impact on these groups has been limited because the Government
 has not passed enabling legislation. Nonetheless, the Law reinforces popular atti-
 tudes and perceptions, and contributes to an atmosphere in which discriminatory
 treatment of women and non-Muslims is more readily accepted.
 Some Islamic leaders continue to stress a conservative interpretation of Islamic
 injunctions to justify discrimination against women. Many citizens interpret the Ko-
 ran's inunctions on modesty to mean that women should remain either at home or
 veiled. It remains accepted practice to assign women subordinate roles in the civil,
 political, and managerial hierarchies.
 Both civil and religious laws protect women's rights in cases of divorce, but, as
 in the case of inheritance laws, many women are unaware of them, and often the
 laws are not observed. In such cases women generally do not receive-or are pressed
 to surrender-their due share of the inheritance. In rural areas,the practice of a
 woman "marrying the Koran" is still widely accepted if her family cannot arrange
 a suitable marriage or wants to keep the family wealth intact. A woman married
 to the Koran is forbidden to have any contact with males over 14 years of age, in-
 cluding her immediate family members.
 In 1992 the Supreme Court invalidated the requirement that a husband must give
 written notice of a divorce to a local union council. The husband's statement, with
 or without witnesses, is the defininglegal step. The woman, lacking written proof
 of divorce, remains legally and socially vulnerable. Human rights organizations ex-
 pressed concern that a woman could be charged with adultery if her former spouse
 were to deny having divorced her.
 
 
 1256
 Although a small number of women study and teach in universities, postgraduate
 employment opportunities remain largely limited to teaching, medical services, and
 the law. Nevertheless, an increasing number of women are entering the commercial
 and public sectors. Karachi lawyers estimate that the number of female judges in
 civil courts there has increased to about 30 percent of the total. There are reports
 that women who apply to professional colleges face discrimination. Women may now
 participate in international athletic competition, although few do.
 There is no reliable information on the extent of domestic violence, primarily be-
 cause it is viewed as a private matter and many women do not acknowledge that
 it is a serious problem. A survey of burn victims at two hospitals in Rawalpindi and
 Islamabad conducted by the Progressive Women's Association from March to Octo-
 ber reported 35 cases of burned women, only 4 of whom survived. So far the Govern-
 ment has taken legal action against the perpetrators in seven cases and obtained
 two convictions.
 While abusive spouses may be charged for assault, cases are rarely filed. Police
 usually return battered wives to their abusive husbands. A notable exception oc-
 curred in 1994 when a man convicted of mutilating his wife was sentenced to 30
 years in prison and required to pay $4,000 in compensation. That case had received
 extensive media overage and the attention of the Prime Minister.
 Rape is a widespread problem, although there was a slight decline in the reported
 incidence of rape during 1994 compared to 1993. There were about 800 cases of rape
 reported in the press during the year. It is estimated that less than one-third of all
 rapes are reported to the police. Marital rape is not a crime. The rape of another
 man's wife is a common method for revenge in rural and tribal areas.
 The HRCP reports that there were 92 cases of public humiliation of women during
 1994, including stripping in public, dragging them by the hair through the streets,
 throwing acid in their face, or public sexual harassment. There is little evidence of
 efforts by police to stop such activities.
 In 1994 the press continued to draw attention to the problem of so-called dowry
 deaths in which married women may be killed by relatives in a dowry dispute. Most
 of the victims are burned to death, allegedly in kitchen stove accidents. It is difficult
 to differentiate criminal conduct from stove accidents which are common because of
 the use of unsafe wood or gas stoves and because women wear garments of highly
 flammable material.
 There are an increasing number of reports of women killed or mutilated by male
 relatives who suspect them of adultery. Few such cases are investigated seriously.
 An article in the magazine Newsline alleged that hundreds of men and women from
 Balochistan and rural areas of Sindh and Punjab provinces are killed annually for
 illicit sexual relations. While the tradition of such killing applies equally to offend-
 ing men and women, women are more likely to be killed than men.
 Women's organizations operate primarily in urban centers. Many concentrate on
 educating women about existing legal rights. Other groups concentrate on providing
 legal aid to poor women in prison who may not be able to afford an attorney.
 The Government began implementation of an internationally funded program to
 train and deploy 33,000 female health care workers in rural areas. By December,
 it had hired 1,760 workers. The Government also produced television documentaries
 on women in development and family planning, and promoted population services
 in advertisements and by enlisting the support of religious leaders. The Prime Min-
 ister spoke at the September 1994 Cairo International Conference on Population
 and Development. All these efforts were seen as important for the reversal of Paki-
 stan's poor record in this area.
 Children.-Legal rights for children are theoretically protected by numerous laws
 which incorporate elements of the U.N. Convention on the Rights of the Child. How-
 ever, the Government frequently fails to enforce these laws. Federal law allows but
 does not require, offenders under the age of 14 to be placed in reform schools; how-
 ever, no such facilities exist. There is only one jail in each province for convicted
 prisoners under age 21. A United Nations report estimates that there are 250 chil-
 dren under the age of 14 in Pakistani prisons at any time. Although Punjab and
 Sindh provinces have laws mandating special judicial procedures for child offenders,
 in practice, children and adults are essentially treated equally. Very young children
 accompany their convicted mothers to jail.
 Many children begin working at a very early age. At the age of five or six, female
 children are often responsible for younger siblings. Children are sometimes kid-
 naped to be used as forced labor, for ransom, or to seek revenge against an enemy.
 The HRCP reported an average of 400 kidnapings of children per month in Punjab
 province alone in 1993. The HRCP also reportedthat half of the 4,000 rapes that
 were registered in Pakistan in 1993 were of minors or teenagers.
 
 
 1257
 Child prostitution involving boys and girls is widely known to exist but is rarely
 discussed. The Government does little to deter it. In Lahore, there are reported to
 be 2,900 full-time prostitutes in over 1,200 brothels. It is estimated that 20 percent
 of the prostitutes are minors.
 In July human rights groups and the press reported that 27 boys were being kept
 in chains in an Islamic school in the Punjab. The boys, who had been turned over
 to the school by their parents, often for disciplinary reasons, had been shackled in
 groups to wooden blocks. Some had been chained for several years. The school's ex-
 istence and the chain  was known to the parents and the community where it had
 operated for 20 years. Police raided the facility and cut the chains but no further
 action was taken to arrest the school's owner or remove the children. There were
 unconfirmed reports of the existence of other such institutions.
 Religious Minorities.-In addition to the violence and harassment noted in pre-
 vious sections of this report, religious minority groups experience much discrimina-
 tion in employment and education; Pakistani laws facilitate discrimination in em-
 ployment based on religion. In Pakistan's early years, minorities were able to rise
 to the senior ranks of the military and civil service. Today, many are unable to rise
 above midlevel ranks. Because of the lack of educational opportunities for some reli-
 gious minority groups, discrimination in employment is believed to be increasingly
 prevalent. Christians, in particular, have difficulty finding jobs above those of me-
 nial labor. Ahmadis find that they are prevented from entering management levels
 in government service. Even the rumor that someone may be an Ahmadi or have
 Ahmadi relatives can stifle opportunities for employment or promotion.
 Officially designated as non-Muslims, Ahmadis in particular, suffer from harass-
 ment and discrimination and have limited chances for advancement in the public
 sector. Young Ahmadis and their parents complain of increasing difficulty in gaining
 admittance to good colleges, forcing many children to go overseas for higher edu-
 cation. Among religious minorities, there is a well-founded belief that the authori-
 ties afford them less legal protection than they afford Muslim citizens.
 Many Christians continue to express the fear of forced marriages between Muslim
 males and Christian women, although the practice is relatively rare. Christians are
 also subject to harassment by the authorities notably including the blasphemy laws
 and difficulty in obtaining permission to build churches.
 People With Disabilities.-Pakistan has no laws requiring equal accessibility to
 public buildings for disabled persons.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The Industrial Relations Ordinance of 1969 (IRO)
 enunciates the right of industrial workers to form trade unions but is subject to
 major restrictions in some employment areas. In practice, labor laws place signifi-
 cant constraints on the formation of industrial unions and their ability to function
 effectively. For example, the law prohibits workers in export processing zones
 (EPZ's) from forming trade unions. Under the Essential Services Maintenance Act
 of 1952 (ESA), workers in sectors associated with "the administration of the State,"
 which covers a wide range of government services and state enterprises, such as
 education, health care, oil and gas production, and transport, are alowed to form
 unions. However, the ESA sharply restricts normal union activities, usually prohib-
 iting, for example, the right to strike in affected industries.
 Lnion members make up only about 13 percent of the industrial labor force and
 10 percent of the total estimated work force. Contract labor continues to flourish,
 undercutting the power of the unions and exploiting workers willing to work on tem-
 porary contracts. These workers receive fewer benefits and have no job security.
 There is no provision in the law granting the right of association to agricultural
 workers.
 Legally required conciliation proceedings and cooling-off periods constrain the
 right to strike, as does the Governments authority to ban any strike that may cause
 "serious hardship to the community" or prejudice to the national interest. The Gov-
 ernment may also ban a strike that has continued for 30 days.
 Strikes are rare. When they occur, they are usually illegal and short. The Govern-
 ment regards as illegal any strike conducted by workers who are not members of
 a legally registered union. Police do not hesitate to crack down on worker dem-
 onstrations.The law prohibits employers from seeking retribution against leaders
 of a legal strike and stipulates criminal penalties for offenders. The courts may im-
 prison employers for violating this prohibition but they are more likely to fine them.
 The law does not protect leaders of illegal strikes.
 Unions may belong to federations. There are seven major federations which are
 free to affiliate with international federations and confederations. The Government
 permits trade unions of all political orientations. While many unions  remain aloof
 
 
 1258
 from party politics, the most powerful are those associated with political parties.
 After the PPP came to power in 1988, it successfully organized trade unions under
 the banner of the People's Labor Bureau (PLB). The PLB's main competitors are the
 Jamaat-i-Islami's National Labor Federation and the MQM-backed labor unions.
 The International Labor Organization (ILO) encourages the Government to lift
 prohibitions against union activity in EPZ's and with respect to radio, television,
 and hospital employees, as well as to rescind the existing ban on strikes. The Gov-
 ernment was also asked to amend any provisions of the Industrial Relations Ordi-
 nance, the Press and Publications Ordinance, and the Political Parties Act which
 impose compulsory prison labor in a manner inconsistent with ILO Convention 105.
 In response to a government request, the ILO agreed to provide technical assistance
 to bring the country's labor laws into conformity with the world body's conventions.
 In 1994 a government task force on labor prepared a report recommending im-
 provements on worker rights problems.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The right of industrial work-
 ers to organize and freely elect representatives to act as collective bargaining agents
 is established in law. The IRO prohibits antiunion discrimination by employers. If
 found guilty of antiunion discrimination, employers are required to reinstate work-
 ers fired for union activities.
 In general, legally constituted unions have the right to bargain collectively. How-
 ever, the many restrictions on forming unions discussed above preclude collective
 bargaining by large sections of the labor force, e.g., agricultural workers, who are
 not guaranteed the right to strike, bargain collectively, or make demands on em-
 ployers.
 The Essential Services Act also restricts collective bargaining. For each industry
 subject to the ESA, the Government must make a finding, renewable every 6
 months, on the limits of union activity. In cases in which the Government prohibits
 collective bargaining, special wage boards decide wage levels.
 These boards are established at the provincial level and are comprised of rep-
 resentatives from industry, labor, and the provincial labor ministry, which provides
 the chairman. The chairman may name additional industry and labor representa-
 tives to the board. Despite the presence of the labor representatives, unions are gen-
 erally dissatisfied with the boards' findings. Disputes are adjudicated before the Na-
 tional Industrial Relations Commission (NIRC). A worker's right to quit may also
 be curtailed under the Essential Services Act. Dismissed workers have no recourse
 to the labor courts. Most unions call for the abolition of the ESA.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The Constitution and the law pro-
 hibit forced labor. However critics argue that the ESA's limitation on some worker
 rights constitutes a form of compulsory labor. The Government informed the ILO's
 Committee on the Application of Standards in 1990 that amendments were under
 consideration to rectify the problem. However, the Government has taken no further
 action.
 Illegal bonded labor is widespread. Bonded labor is common in the brick, glass,
 and fishing industries and is found among agricultural and construction workers in
 rural areas. Conservative estimates put the figure of bonded workers at several mil-
 lion.
 The Bonded Labor System (Abolition) Act, adopted in 1992, outlawed bonded
 labor, canceled all existing bonded debts, and forbade lawsuits for the recovery of
 existing debts. However, the provincial governments, which are responsible for en-
 forcing the law, have failed to establish enforcement mechanisms. Hence, the law
 is largely ineffective. Lacking employment alternatives, many workers have volun-
 tarily returned to bonded labor.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-Child labor is common and results
 from a combination of severe poverty, weak laws, and inadequate enforcement of
 those that do exist. A key factor is the absence of any compulsory primary edu-
 cation. The Government acknowledges that violations of existing laws are common.
 Unofficial estimates indicate that workers under 18 years old make up one-third
 of the total labor force. While much child labor is in the traditional framework of
 family farming or small business, the employment of children in larger industries
 and, according to labor activists, in state-sponsored training programs, is also wide-
 spread. Childlabor is widely employed in the carpet industry, much of which is fam-
 ily-run. This appears to be the only export industry in which child labor is employed
 on a significant scale.
 In June the Government signed a Memorandum of Understanding with the ILO
 on cooperation toward elimination of child labor. The two sides will conduct a na-
 tionwide survey to develop an accurate assessment of the scale of child labor.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-Labor regulations are governed by federal stat-
 utes applicable throughout the country. The monthly minimum wage is approxi-
 
 
 1259
 mately $50 (1,500 rupees). Although this wage provides a meager subsistence living
 for a small family, minimum wage benefits affects only a small part of the work
 force.
 The law, applicable nationally, provides for a maximum workweek of 54 hours,
 rest periods udring the workday, and paid annual holidays. These regulations do not
 apply to agricultural workers, workers in factories with fewer than 10 employees,
 and to the small "contract groups," which are subdivisions within factories of 10 or
 fewer workers. Many workers are unaware of the regulations protecting their rights
 because of their lack of education.
 The provinces have been ineffective in enforcing labor regulations, because of lim-
 ited resources, corruption, and inadequate regulatory structures. In general, health
 and safety standards are poor. Although organized labor presses for improvements,
 the Government has done little and weakly enforces existing legal protections.
