PAKISTAN
The report on Pakistan for 1991, like last year's, provides a factually accurate and comprehensive discussion of the human rights situation in the country. Its major failing is that, except for issues facing the press, the report largely ignores the responsibility of the national government under Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif to address the serious human rights problems facing the country. Law and order, and hence many basic human rights issues, are largely matters under the jurisdiction of the provincial governments. However, the national government sets the framework for provincial governments to follow, by both enacting national legislation and defining the government's moral agenda. In these respects, the Islami Jamhoori Ittehad (IJI) government of Prime Minister Sharif has fared poorly — yet the State Department report serves to deflect, rather than focus, attention on Islamabad's failings on human rights issues.
The report's introduction states that "[t]here was improvement in some aspects of human rights in 1991 . . .," but fails to provide a single, new development. Instead, the report cites positive changes regarding freedom of expression and the influence of human rights groups that actually began several years ago, but which continue to the present. The State Department should not be calling these "improvements" for 1991. There were no major positive human rights developments in Pakistan in 1991 and die report should have so stated.
The report fails to draw a connection between human rights violations and important political developments in Pakistan. For instance, it states in strong terms that "Sindh Chief Minister Jam Sadiq Ali abuses executive and judicial power" against the Pakistan People's Party (PPP) and other opposition parties. However, nowhere in the report is it pointed out that the Sindh government is Ul-controlled and that it has the backing of the national government. Except for an ineffectual government inquiry into the situation in Sindh, mentioned in the report, the Prime Minister did not take action against the massive arrests and harassment of the political opposition there.
253
Pakistan
In a similar manner, the report understates the politics behind the special "accountability" tribunals set up to try members of the former PPP government on criminal and corruption charges. The report states criticisms of the tribunals leveled by domestic and international rights groups. But while noting that only PPP members were charged before these courts, the report does not make clear that the courts have been employed by the current government as a means of continually harassing PPP leader Benazir Bhutto and other top PPP officials. The trials are being conducted very slowly and carry not only possible criminal punishment, but also a seven-year ban on running for the national assembly. The result is that indicted PPP leaders must devote considerable energy to the proceedings against them and face the continual threat of being barred from politics. The fact that "some Pakistani attorneys and judges have found the conduct of the courts to have been balanced and apparently fair" — misses the point. That the day-to-day conduct of the trials is conducted fairly in no way lessens the serious hardship placed on the opposition.
The report inaccurately presents a picture of calm in the political atmosphere of the national government. The report's first line states that President Ghulam Ishaq Khan and Prime Minister Sharif "continued to work together in governing the country." This ignores the serious constitutional problems concerning the respective powers of the President and the Prime Minister. The division of powers between these two offices remain ambiguous and confusing, and little effort was made in 1991 to resolve this far-reaching problem. The report should have noted the connection between the close relationship of Ishaq Khan and Nawaz Sharif and the president's own silence regarding government abuses against the political opposition.
Much the same can be said for the report's failure to discuss the 484-page report, "How An Election Was Stolen," issued in June by the PPP-led People's Democratic Alliance. The report alleges that large-scale election rigging occurred during the 1990 elections. Also ignored was the open admission of the chief minister of Baluchistan to rigging the elections and his decision to dismiss some senior bureaucrats on charges of vote fraud. Election rigging gets to the heart of whether the 1990
254
Pakistan
elections were free and fair. The State Department's report should have presented and analyzed the important claims made.
The report's analysis of the pervasive problem of sexual assault against women in police custody is detailed and accurate. However, the discussion of the Veena Hayat rape case obscures many of the political considerations surrounding the incident and significantly understates allegations of the government's involvement. In her statement to the police, Veena Hayat said that her attackers repeatedly questioned her about her association with Benazir Bhutto and her husband. One attacker told her that they had "to obey Marwat's orders," an apparent reference to Irfanullah Marwat, the home affairs advisor to Sindh Chief Minister Jam and the son-in-law of President Ishaq Khan. The government's reaction to the case was more than "inaction." Marwat's response was to suggest that the crime was committed by terrorists connected to Bhutto's PPP and later to accuse the PPP of demeaning themselves by using their "ladies" to achieve political gains.
The Veena Hayat case was especially important because it brought to national attention the obstacles to the prosecution of rape, particularly when the authorities are implicated. The report notes that a judicial inquiry determined that there was "insufficient evidence" to pursue the case, but fails to provide information that raised questions about the partiality of the judicial inquiry. For instance, the judge dismissed the allegations of rape because there was no supporting evidence "except for her [Hayat's] oral words," even though he criticized the police for failing to conduct a proper investigation. For similar reasons the judge exonerated Irfanullah Marwat of any wrongdoing and suggested that Veena Hayat had an ulterior political motive in implicating him.
The report notes the government's "ambitious program" of privatizing government-owned businesses. This positive assessment should have been tempered by noting that many of the banks and commercial units for sale are being purchased by friends and political allies of Prime Minister Sharif at prices believed to be well below their market value.
255
Pakistan
The section on torture provides a long list of abuses that "occur" in Pakistani jails. Such abuses are widespread and routine and the report should have made that clear. The report should also have mentioned the wide use of fetters against persons who are in pre-trial detention. This violates Rule 33 of the UN Minimum Rules on the Treatment of Prisoners, which prohibits the use of chains or irons as restraints. The report provides a detailed account of the torture of PPP student activist Rahila Tiwana at the Central Investigative Agency (CIA) in Karachi in January. The report should have made clear that this was one of several cases during the year in which the CIA in Karachi was implicated in sexual abuse and torture of persons in custody. Another case that received attention was that of Zarina, a tailor, who was tortured and held in CIA custody for 15 months before being released on bail.
The discussion of the Hadood Ordinances is generally very good. It should make clear that all consensual extramarital sexual relations, not merely "adultery," are considered violations of die Hadood prohibition against zina. Hie discussion of punishments handed down under the Hadood Ordinances should have included a case from Toba Tek Singh in Punjab. In June a judge sentenced a couple to death by stoning for committing zina. The case was still pending at year's end before the Lahore High Court.
The report discusses recent developments concerning the Shari'a Islamic courts, including the government's approval of a law requiring a mandatory death penalty for the offense of defiling the name of the Prophet Muhammad. However, the report downplays the potential impact of the Enforcement of Shariat Act 1991, enacted in May 1991. The law, which requires the government to bring all laws into conformity with Islam, may require important changes to the justice system in the future regarding, for example, criminal punishments and the treatment of women.
The report downplays executive branch interference with the courts. Although Pakistani judges have exerted their independence, doing so entails risks of political attack, denial of promotions and other actions by the executive. The report gives a detailed account of the
256
Pakistan
special anti-terrorist courts and fair trial concerns. As in previous years, the State Department cites the views of both critics and supporters of the special courts, as if both opinions carried equal weight, and neglects to provide its own view of the courts.
The report should contain a fuller discussion of the political debate surrounding the resettlement of the Biharis, a Bangladeshi minority that has sought since 1981 to emigrate to Pakistan. The dispute is important because it reflects on important ethnic issues, especially in Sindh province. Many ethnic Sindhis oppose the large-scale repatriation of Biharis to Sindh because they would add to the population of Urdu-speaking Mohajirs in the province. As the report notes, there has been intense economic competition, political confrontation and violence between ethnic Sindhis, who primarily live in rural areas, and the more urban Mohajirs, who came to Pakistan from India after the partition in 1947.
The section on freedom of religion should have noted that Christians are unable to obtain a divorce under Pakistani law. The courts have ruled, however, that if the wife of a Christian couple converts to Islam, the marriage automatically ends. As a result, a large number of married Christian women are converting to Islam to end their marriages.
As with last year's report, the section on freedom of speech and the press is excellent. Particularly useful is the account of harassment of the print media in Karachi by members of the political party Mohajir Qaumi Movement and the failure of the national government to respond to the violence against the press.
257
