PAKISTAN
The Report on Pakistan covers most of the human rights problems there during 1985, but frequently understates the seriousness of those practices. It also misleadingly implies that the year-end lifting of martial law, which had been in effect since 1977, brought greater improvements in the human rights situation than the facts warrant.
An example of the latter is the Report's treatment of the right to a fair trial. In general, the discussion candidly acknowledges the virtually wholesale denial of due process by the military courts that usurped civilian court jurisdiction during martial law. (Curiously, however, the Reports notes that a 1985 report by the Lawyers Committee for Human Rights "outlined the alleged deterioration of Pakistan's legal system under martial law" (emphasis added), as though that deterioration were a matter of opinion.) The Report proceeds to note:
Among the steps taken to pave the way for the lifting of martial law, the regime took action which transferred to civilian courts all cases being tried in military courts under certain martial law orders.
The Report fails to note that, in November and December, large numbers of pending cases were hastily tried before military courts, applying summary justice, in an effort to clear their dockets before the lifting of martial law. This effectively prevented many defendants from benefiting from the restoration of civil court jurisdiction. At least 26 people convicted by special military courts in that period received death sentences, a fact the Report also omits.
While noting that there were "credible allegations that...torture of detainees took place in 1985," the Report does not state, as it should.
77
that domestic human rights groups estimate that as many as 200 deaths in police custody have occurred annually in recent years and that the number may have risen in 1985.
The Report misleadingly states that "the Government investigates most publicized allegations of mistreatment, [though] it has failed to institute systematic reforms aimed at eliminating them." The government has not even initiated investigations into charges of mistreatment of defendants in three highly-publicized political trials described in the State Department's Report, though the cases ended in mid-1985.
The Report's discussion of the number of political detainees is confusing. While noting that "perhaps as many as 1,000 activists of political parties opposing the polls" were detained before the February elections, it later estimates that "in 1985 there were as many as 60 political detainees in Pakistan."
The Report ignores the amendments to the Bar Councils Act which place tight restrictions on lawyers. President Zia unilaterally put the amendments into effect after the February elections but before the National Assembly took office. Despite announcements by the Prime Minister that the changes would be revoked, the Act remains in effect.
The Report is most misleading in its discussion of political rights. Elections to the national and provincial assemblies in 1985 were held under strict controls. No political parties were allowed to participate and candidates were not allowed to run with party affiliation. The Report barely hints at these restrictions, and instead implies that candidates who refused to run on a non-party basis were solely responsible for their own non-participation:
Although the Government declared its intention to allow most members of the [Movement for the Restoration of Democracy] to stand as individuals, the opposition alliance boycotted the elections, calling for immediate restoration of the 1973 Constitution. However, two of the four most prominent parties in
78
the country chose to participate actively in the elections. A large number of candidates — including many former members of the boycotting parties --ran....
The Report is also misleading in its sweeping statement that "[ojutside observers...generally believe that there was little government interference in the elections." In fact, the government not only excluded party participation in the elections, but also forbade advocacy of a boycott, and erected rules limiting campaign activities and externing politicians from provinces in which they wanted to travel.
The Report asserts that "[t]he Government has been careful to build a consensus for its program of gradual transition to constitutional government...." In fact, the current constitutional arrangement, in which General Zia ul-Haq remains Chief of Army Staff as well as President, is highly unpopular in Pakistan.
The President's highly-centralized power is all the stronger because the President and the former military government are immune from challenge for all actions taken from 1977 through 1985. Not only are decisions taken in that period immune from challenge, but some of the orders promulgated under martial law remain in force.
Political parties remain proscribed at least through 1986. Under the Political Parties Act, future political participation by parties will require the consent of the government. Thus consensus-building is questionable at best, since President Zia will not have to contend with a legislature of popularly-elected parties.
Finally, persecution of the Ahmadi religious sect was far more serious in 1985 than the Report indicates. A 1984 presidential order restricting the rights of Ahmadis (to which the Report does refer) has been the basis of trials against Ahmadis — a fact the Report does not make clear. Instead, the Report seeks to shift responsibility for their arrests to the Ahmadis themselves, noting:
79
In what appeared to be deliberate efforts to court arrest, a number of Ahmadis were detained...for wearing badges bearing the Islamic profession of faith.
The Report does not state that four Ahamdis have had death sentences confirmed by President Zia, and await execution. Nor does it state that both the President and Prime Minister have regularly made anti-Ahmadi public assertions, or that Pakistanis are required to sign anti-Ahmadi statements in order to get passports.
Despite this government-instigated campaign against the Ahmadis, the Report seeks to shift responsiblity for violent attacks against Ahmadis away from the government. It states:
Sporadic clashes between the Ahmadis and anti-Ahmadi groups continued throughout the year. A number of prominent Ahmadis were murdered in the Sind Province presumably by anti-Ahmadi fanatics.
80
