 PAKISTAN
 In the third year since Pakistan's return to democratic rule,
 the Prime Minister, leader of the Islamic Jamhoori Ittehad
 (IJI), and the President continued to work together in
 governing the country. Senate elections were held, marking the
 first time a group of senators (those elected in 1985)
 completed their prescribed 6-year term of office and were
 replaced through the electoral process% The political
 opposition remained active but was subjected to harassment and
 political victimization, notably by the provincial government
 in Sindh.
 Responsibility for internal security rests primarily with the
 police, although the army was called upon to help restore order
 during civil disturbances on several occasions in 1991.
 Paramilitary forces are charged with maintaining law and order
 in frontier areas. Police forces are under provincial control,
 as are paramilitary forces when assisting in a law and order
 situation; both forces were guilty of human rights abuses in
 1991.
 Pakistan has a mixed economy comprising both state-run
 industries and banks along with private businesses, which
 operate freely in most sectors of the economy. The public
 sector share has diminished in recent years, now accounting for
 only about 30 percent of total manufacturing output; this trend
 should continue as the Government of Prime Minister Nawaz
 Sharif has begun an ambitious program of privatizing
 government-owned financial institutions, industrial units, and
 utilities, and encouraging private investment from both
 domestic and foreign sources. Cotton textiles and apparel,
 rice, and leather products are the principal export products.
 The Constitution assures the right to private property.
 There was improvement in some aspects of human rights in 1991,
 but in other areas serious abuses continued. Human rights
 groups continued to enjoy access to officials and to the media,
 and there continued to be considerable freedom of expression by
 the press and political organizations. However, the situation
 deteriorated significantly in the Sindh province, where the
 government of Sindh Chief Minister Jam Sadiq Ali abused
 executive and judicial power to arrest and detain members of
 the opposition and failed to take decisive action to uphold
 press freedom in the face of physical violence perpetrated
 apparently for political reasons.
 As in the past, ethnic and religious tensions led to a serious
 deterioration in law and order in many areas, and provincial
 government forces sometimes resorted to excessive force in
 dealing with local incidents. The arbitrary detention, arrest,
 torture, and other abuse of prisoners and detainees by the
 police continued to be a serious problem, and the authorities
 again did little to prosecute and punish those responsible.
 Religious minorities continued to face discrimination and
 harassment, social and legal constraints kept women in a
 subordinate position in society, and significant restraints
 remained on worker rights.
 
 
 1549
 PAKISTAN
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing
 There were no reports of government or government-instigated
 political killings. However, extrajudicial killings, often in
 the.form of staged "police encounters"-shootouts resulting in
 the death of suspects-continued in 1991, as did deaths
 resulting from physical abuse of prisoners and detainees by
 police (see Section 1.c.). Ethnic and sectarian tensions were
 also a cause of politically motivated killings, as rival
 ethnic/political parties and organizations and their student
 wings frequently clashed.- The murder of Maulana Esar-Ul-Haq
 Qasmi, a member of the National'Assembly and the leader of the
 radical Sunni party Anjuman-I-Sipah-I-Sahaba, in Jhang in
 January resulted in a sectarian battle that left scores dead or
 injured throughout the city. Because of the random and often
 spontaneous nature of these incidents, the political
 connections of many of the perpetrators, and the weaknesses in
 the police establishment and lower courts, the authorities have
 met with little success in preventing this type of violence or
 punishing those responsible.
 Government officials were also victims of political killings at
 the hands of unknown perpetrators. In May a Sindh high court
 judge, Nabi Sher Junejo, presiding over a special terrorist
 court, was gunned down in Karachi in broad daylight. Also in
 Karachi, a ranking customs officer, who had spearheaded a
 government campaign against prominent drug traffickers, was
 assassinated in July. In August a police inspector involved
 in several investigations directed against political figures
 was shot dead in Karachi.
 The Afghanistan country report deals with the numerous
 killings, kidnapings, and other human rights abuses which
 occurred in Pakistan but were connected to the conflict in
 Afghanistan.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no reports of government-instigated disappearances,,
 but there were credible reports of government-instigated
 abductions-in which the victims were subsequently found to have
 been detained in government custody or arrested (see Section
 l.d.). There were also some reports in Sindh of kidnapings by
 rival ethnic/political parties. Perpetrators were rarely
 apprehended. Most victims were eventually released.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 There continues to be persuasive evidence of misuse of police
 powers. Corruption, including extortion, is rampant. Police
 and jailers often use force to coerce confessions and to compel
 detainees and prisoners'to incriminate others. Beating,
 whipping the soles of the feet with rubber whips; sexual
 assault, and prolonged isolation occur in Pakistani jails.
 When deaths occur, suicide is the commonly offered explanation.
 In January a female People's Pakistan Party (PPP) student
 activist was tortured by police officials during interrogation
 at-the central investigative agency in Karachi. The young
 
 
 1550
 PAKISTAN
 woman was hung by her arms, severely beaten, and reportedly
 sexually abused in an attempt to extract a confession of
 complicity in alleged terrorist activities. Despite the
 credibility of the victim's testimony and widespread press
 coverage of the incident, the provincial government denied that
 any torture occurs in Sindh detention facilities.
 There were numerous credible reports from media and human
 rights activists concerning prisoner deaths while in police
 custody, including instances in which prisoners alleged to have
 been killed in shootouts probably died as a result of police
 torture.
 Police frequently use the threat of abuse to extort money from
 prisoners and their families. Whole families have been held to
 force a relative who is the subject of an arrest warrant to
 surrender. Women in police custody, or who go to a police
 station to file a report or inquire after a detainee, have been
 sexually abused. This abuse is often unreported due to
 societal taboos, police intimidation, and family pressure.
 There are few policewomen to perform matron duties, despite
 regulations requiring that policewomen be present for the
 questioning or detention of female suspects in stationhouses.
 Some women under detention are reportedly coerced by police
 officers to trade sexual favors for their release; other women
 are simply raped. Upon release from prison, women are often
 ostracized by their family and friends and barred from their
 homes.
 In September a woman named Aasia Ayub alleged that she had been
 physically and sexually assaulted while being held overnight
 for questioning in a stationhouse in Rawalpindi. After her
 story gained wide media attention and the support of various
 social organizations and politicians, the Government called for
 the suspension of the police officers involved. A case was
 filed in the special "speedy trials" courts against the two
 policemen involved. Human rights activists involved in the
 Aasia case believed there was compelling medical evidence that
 Aasia had been sexually assaulted. In December the judge
 hearing the case acquitted the police officers involved,
 despite acknowledging that proper procedures were not
 followed. The judge found that there was insufficient medical
 evidence to support the woman's allegation that she had been
 physically or sexually abused. At year's end, Aasia Ayub's
 defense team was planning to file an appeal of the case-
 Women's groups and human rights activists expressed outrage
 following the November 27 assault and alleged gang rape of
 Veena Hyatt, a close friend of PPP leader Benazir Bhutto. It
 is widely believed that the assault was politically motivated.
 The incident also prompted protests from human rights groups
 who criticized the Government's initial inaction on the case.
 A judicial investigation decided there was insufficient
 evidence.to pursue the case.
 In February the daily The Nation published a report that 1,900
 juveniles were being held in Punjab jails-and that these
 children were often subjected to mistreatment ranging from
 beatings to rape and sodomy. The report, prepared by human
 rights activists, prompted the Chief Justice of the Lahore High
 Court to order an inquiry into the status of juveniles in the
 Punjab jails and brought to the public's attention the lack of
 proper detention facilities or reform centers for juveniles.
 At subsequent hearings, human rights lawyers and activists
 
 
 1551
 PAKISTAN
 testified about the abuses in the Punjab and other provincial
 jails, noting that many of the abused prisoners were below the
 age of 14 (all detainees below the age of 21 are kept in
 juvenile wards). In one jail, medical reports indicated that
 36 out of 116 juveniles had been sexually assaulted, either by
 guards or fellow inmates. The hearings concluded in March,
 with the Chief Justice ordering the immediate release of 155
 juvenile prisoners and limiting the number of offenses for
 which children could be detained.
 Police accused of abuse are seldom tried and punished; they are
 generally released on bail or quietly transferred to another
 district. Police assigned to investigate abuses by other
 police generally shield their colleagues from such charges, and
 courts seldom charge policemen with offenses other than
 contempt of court. Provincial governments must generally give
 permission to prosecute police officials--it is seldom given.
 Those who attempt to bring charges against police are often
 threatened and end up dropping the charges. In 1989 the
 Federal Ministry of Interior established an office to monitor
 instances of arbitrary arrest, brutality, and extortion within
 the police forces, but there is little evidence that its work
 has had any significant effect.
 In Karachi a citizens-police liaison committee exists, as does
 a provincial crimes committee in Lahore. Both these
 organizations are intended to provide a forum for citizen-
 police cooperation and an outlet for complaints against police
 abuses. There continue to be credible reports that some
 ethnic/political parties have tortured opponents and, in some
 cases, used torture to enforce party discipline among their own
 members.
 The Hadood Ordinances, promulgated by the central Government in
 1979, provide harsh punishments for violating the Islamic code
 of behavior.. They apply to Muslims and non-Muslims alike, but
 weigh most heavily on women. A woman who reports a case of
 rape to the authorities or files for a divorce can find herself
 charged with adultery under these Ordinances. The
 predominantly male police force reportedly use  the Hadood
 Ordinances to threaten people on the basis of personal and
 political animosities. The Committee for the Repeal of the
 Hadood Ordinances estimates that over 2,000 women are in jails
 in Pakistan awaiting trial under this law. It is estimated
 that two-thirds of the female prisoners in Karachi and Lahore
 are awaiting trial or are imprisoned under these ordinances.
 In the Punjab in April, 21 children between the ages of 11 and
 14 were being held on charges of adultery under these
 Ordinances. Four minors were also being held because they were
 classified as "addicts" under the Hadood prohibition ordinance.
 Extended imprisonment is the most common punishment for those
 convicted under the Hadood Ordinancet, although there have also
 been reports of floggings. No punishments involving stoning or
 amputation are reported to have been carried out under the
 Ordinances. However, in January in the Khyber agency (a part
 of the federally administered tribal area in which the
 Government of Pakistan does not exercise direct control over
 the judicial process) harsh, and in at least one case, lethal
 physical punishments were administered. A crowd of 15,000
 tribesmen witnessed the public flogging of a man found guilty
 of involvement in a rape and abduction case. The man was
 sentenced by tribal religious leaders to receive 100 lashes,
 which were subsequently administered despite a request from the
 local political agent for them not to carry out the flogging.
 
 
 1552
 PAKISTAN
 Also in the Khyber agency, a man was stoned to death in
 February after a tribal Jirga (group of elders) found him
 guilty of rape.
 Three classes of prison facilities exist. Class "C" cells-
 which generally hold common criminals, suspected terrorists,
 and low-level political workers--are the worst. They often
 have dirt floors, no furnishings, and poor food. The use of
 handcuffs and fetters is common. Prisoners in these cells
 reportedly suffer the most abuse, such as beatings and being
 forced to kneel for long periods. Conditions in "B" and "A"
 cells are markedly better, with the latter reserved for
 .prominent" persons. In 1990 a Jails Reform Committee, formed
 by the Minister of Interior to improve the living conditions of'
 prisoners, made several nonbinding recommendations to the
 provincial governments. The committee did not continue under
 the Nawaz Sharif Government.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Pakistani law permits detention of persons suspected of
 threatening public order and safety for 30 days under court
 order. Such court orders are renewable for 30 days at a time,
 up to a total of 90 days, if the Government can demonstrate
 that the detainee threatens public safety. Under the law,
 detainees must be informed expeditiously of the reason for
 their detention, but this requirement is not always met. The
 Sindh government made liberal use of this law to detain
 hundreds of opposition PPP workers between December 1990 and
 April 1991. Many of the detained PPP workers were held for
 long periods of time without charge or were falsely implicated
 in criminal cases. Some of them, however, were charged with
 what observers considered to be legitimate criminal counts.
 There were also credible reports of the Sindh provincial
 government's complicity in the abduction and detention of five
 opposition members of the provincial assembly (MPA's) in Sindh
 in late February. The MPA's were reportedly abducted from
 their homes by police officials. Two days later, one of the
 MPA's was discovered to have been sent to judicial remand for 1
 week. The whereabouts of the other four was not known until
 they appeared to cast ballots on the day of the Senate
 elections. Sindh Chief Minister Jam Sadiq Ali denied knowledge
 of the incident and publicly blamed the PPP for the
 abductions. Most observers believed that, during their time in
 detention, the MPA's had been persuaded not to cast their votes
 for their party's candidates. This incident resulted in a
 boycott of the National Assembly by the PPP and its allies in
 the Peoples' Democratic Alliance (PDA) until the IJI government
 finally agreed to sponsor an inquiry into the PPP's allegations
 of "political victimization" in Sindh. The inquiry did not
 result in any diminution of the harassment of the PPP in Sindh,
 which continued throughout the year.
 Following the murder of Special Court Judge Nabi Sher Junejo in
 Karachi in May, the Sindh government reportedly rounded up over
 700 PPP workers and supporters as "suspects" in the case.
 Almost all were released within 2 days. Sardar Zehri, a member
 of the National Assembly (MNA) from Baluchistan, was arrested
 in Sindh on charges of possessing unlicensed arms and
 narcotics. The arrest was reportedly ordered by Jam Sadiq Ali
 in order to prevent Zehri from campaigning on behalf of the PDA
 candidate for the Jacobabad byelection in Sindh. Jam Sadiq
 subsequently apologized for the arrest, claiming that it was a
 mistake. By late December, the Sindh government had detained
 
 
 1553
 PAKISTAN
 hundreds of opposition activists, accusing them of being
 "terrorists." The number of opposition members (both PPP and
 Jeay Sindh, a Sindhi nationalist party) being held--either
 under preventive detention or in pretrial status on criminal
 charges--was credibly estimated to be around 1,000. Former
 detainees claim that prisoners under preventive detention
 frequently are held incommunicado. The PPP made repeated and
 credible charges that many of the detained workers were moved
 to station houses and detention centers far from their homes
 and that family members were often unable to locate them for
 several days or weeks. The detention of two dissident Mohajir
 Qaumi Movement (MQM) leaders in Lahore in June was also linked
 to government law enforcement agencies. The two were released
 after being held in police custody for several days when a
 judge found their remand papers to be fake.
 The police sometimes detain citizens without charge in order to
 extort payment for their release. Exile is not used by the
 Government as a means of political control.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The civil judicial system, modeled after the British system,
 provides for an open trial, cross-examination, representation
 by an attorney, and appeal of sentences. Attorneys are
 appointed for indigents in capital cases. There are no
 juries. Owing to the limited number of judges, the heavy
 backlog of cases, and outdated court procedures, cases can drag
 on for years.
 The judicial process is being impeded by bureaucratic
 infighting and inactivity on a considerable scale.
 Appointments of judges to fill vacancies on the Lahore high
 court continued to be delayed. A large number of seats on the
 Karachi high court also remained vacant, and scores of
 positions in the lower magistracy remained unfilled. Karachi
 human rights activists believe there are dozens of people
 awaiting trial in Sindh jails who have been held for periods
 longer than the sentence they would receive if convicted.
 In some cases, although provided for by law, bail was
 arbitrarily denied. Human rights groups complain that bail is
 often set at unreasonably high levels for indigent defendants.
 In Karachi judges began to try certain criminal cases in the
 jails rather than in the courtroom, expressing concern about
 the security situation. When'legal proceedings against Asif
 Zardari, the husband of former Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto,
 for his alleged involvement in the 1990 killing of MQM party
 loyalists was resumed October 20 in Karachi's Landhi jail, the
 proceedings were closed. Human rights activists voiced their
 worry that this process could result in numerous due process
 abuses.
 Although the courts have traditionally experienced pressure
 from the executive, the high courts in particular have
 exhibited a marked degree of independence, deciding a number of
 important cases against the Government. There continued to be
 concerns, however, that the judiciary's independence from the
 executive is not yet complete, particularly at levels below the
 highest courts.
 Human rights activists continue to charge that magistrates and
 police, under pressure to achieve'high conviction rates,
 persuade persons in custody to plead guilty without informing
 
 
 1554
 PAKISTAN
 them of the consequences. Politically influential persons also
 attempt to influence magistrates' decisions and have used
 various forms of pressure, including the threat of transfer, to
 do so. Magistrates also perform a wide variety of
 administrative functions for the provincial government, which
 allows them less time to devote to their judicial duties.
 A special Shari'a court operates as an appeal court for cases
 relating to the enforcement of the Hadood Ordinances and also
 rules on whether laws are offensive to Islam. The Shari'a
 court-decision of-October 1993 making death the punishment for
 anyone who is convicted of intentionally uttering contemptuous
 remarks or offering insult to the Prophet Muhammad, or to any
 of the prophets, was supported by the Federal Cabinet which
 voted in July to bring the Pakistan penal code into compliance
 with the court's finding. However, no one was sentenced under
 this new amendment in 1991.
 Another 1990 Shari'a court decision called for the Islamic
 concepts of Qisas (roughly an "eye for an eye") and Diyat
 ("blood money") to be made part of the penal code. The Qisas
 and Diyat Ordinance, promulgated to comply with the court
 ruling, was enacted in 1990, amended twice in 1991, and remains
 in effect. The Ordinance allows compensation to be paid to a
 victim's family in place of punishment. The right to seek
 pardon or commutation is not available to defendants under the
 Ordinance.
 Cases referred to the Shari'a courts are heard jointly by
 Islamic scholars and judges from the civilian court system who
 usually employ ordinary criminal procedures. Both judges and
 attorneys must be-Muslim and be familiar with Islamic law.
 Defendants in the Shari'a courts are entitled to bail and
 lawyers of their choice.
 In 1987 the Government established--under the Suppression of
 Terrorist Activities (Special Courts) Act of 1975--special
 courts to try cases involving crimes of a terrorist nature
 (murder, sabotage, etc.). In 1987 another ordinance was passed
 establishing special "speedy trials" courts. The
 jurisdictional authority of both types of special courts was
 modified under amendments made in 1988, and they have continued
 to operate since that time. The Twelfth Constitutional
 Amendment, passed by Parliament in July, created another tier
 of special courts to deal with particularly heinous crimes.
 Cases involving bomb blasts, sabotage, highway robberies,
 banditry, or kidnaping may be brought before these courts, and
 the Government may transfer cases from any other court to a
 special court. Persons tried in these courts are charged with
 violent criminal offenses, not nonviolent or political acts.
 In September the first verdict was handed down by a special
 trial court created under the 12th amendment. An accused
 rapist, who was also charged with subsequently murdering his
 victim, a young girl, was convicted and sentenced to 60 lashes,
 a fine Qf approximately $3,200 dollars, 37 years of rigorous
 imprisonment, and death. Other similarly confusing verdicts
 have been passed by other speedy trial courts.
 Critics, including many lawyers and human rights activists,
 express concern about the special courts. First, the accused
 may be hampered in preparing an adequate defense and calling
 witnesses because of the short time allowed before trial.
 Second, the decision to refer a case to this system is an
 arbitrary one, made by senior officials in the provincial
 government. The criteria for deciding which cases can be tried
 
 
 1555
 PAKISTAN
 by these courts, in particular those established under the 1987
 law, are broad enough to enable provincial authorities to abuse
 the system. Another problem faced by those brought to trial
 under the special courts is getting bail. Under the special
 courts provisions, bail is denied unless the court is convinced
 on preliminary evidence that the accused is innocent.
 Government officials and some attorneys argue that, in spite of
 their disadvantages, these courts are necessary to circumvent
 the judicial backlog; that all requirements of the rules of
 evidence still apply, including the right to counsel; and that
 the judges must meet the same standard as those appointed to a
 high court. They note that for the courts set up under the
 1987 law, decisions may be appealed to the Supreme Court.
 However, for the special courts established under the Twelfth
 Amendment, only one appeal is allowed and it may only be made
 through a special appellate bench appointed by the Government.
 The press reported a number of convictions in these courts,
 usually for illegal possession of arms or kidnaping.
 In September two American citizens were tried by one of the
 Twelfth Amendment courts. They were convicted of armed robbery
 and possession of stolen .goods and were awarded "Hadd"
 sentences--Islamic punishments under the Hadood Ordinances. In
 these cases the sentences included amputation of a hand and a
 foot. Their conviction and sentence received international
 media coverage, primarily because the accused were Americans,
 and raised concern among human rights groups that the
 jurisdiction of these new special courts had not been
 adequately legislated. According to the Hadood Ordinances, the
 Americans had the right to appeal any "Hadd" convictions to the
 Shari'a court. Their convictions and sentences were overturned
 on appeal to the special appeals bench, However, questions
 about the jurisdiction of the court to hear Hadood cases remain
 unresolved.
 After the dissolution of the Bhutto government in 1990,
 President Ghulam Ishaq Khan, citing a 1977 law, established
 special "accountability" tribunals to try members of the
 previous federal and provincial governments on criminal and
 corruption charges. Trials under these tribunals continued in
 1991. Only members of the Bhutto government, all of whom
 belong to the PPP, were charged with corruption and misconduct,
 while no members of other political parties were brought to
 trial. In March a Canadian legal observer issued a report on
 the conduct of the special tribunals which concluded that the
 "accountability trials" do not meet minimum standards of due
 process. The observer found that the trial procedures could
 prevent the accused from presenting a full defense, restrict
 the right against self-incrimination, and impose an unfair
 standard of proof. Because a finding of guilt would result in
 a serious penalty, he argued that the respondent should be
 entitled to the full protections of an accused in a criminal
 trial. Other international observers have made similar
 criticisms. However, some Pakistani attorneys and judges have
 found the conduct of the courts to have been balanced and
 apparently fair.
 By December, two former federal officials and one PPP MNA had
 been found guilty of corruption:  all three filed appeals that
 were pending at year's end.
 There are no definitive estimates by press or human rights
 organizations of the total number of political prisoners in
 Pakistan. However, hundreds of opposition members who were
 
 
 1556
 PAKISTAN
 arrested and detained throughout the year were considered by
 many human rights groups to be "political prisoners."
 Certainly a large number of these continued to be in detention
 at the end of the year, particularly in interior Sindh.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Although police are required by law to obtain a warrant before
 entering a private home, this legal requirement is often
 ignored, particularly during arrests of suspected bandits and
 during communal disturbances.
 Pakistan maintains several domestic intelligence services which'
 monitor politicians, political activists, suspected terrorists,
 and suspected foreign intelligence agents. Informed sources
 maintain that wiretapping is commonplace, mail is occasionally
 intercepted and opened, and surveillance is often used.
 g. Use of Excessive Force and Violations of Humanitarian
 Law in Internal Conflicts
 Ethnic divisions in the province of Sindh continued to lead to
 incidents of communal violence in which persons belonging to
 one ethnic group were killed in indiscriminate attacks by rival
 groups. Similar incidents between Shi'a and Sunni Muslims
 occurred in areas of the Punjab where sectarian tensions caused
 violent conflicts. During 1991 the province of Balochistan
 also witnessed violent clashes between Pathans and Baluchis.
 Police on occasion used excessive force in dealing with these
 incidents, but there was no evidence of intentional killings by
 the police.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Pakistanis generally discuss and debate public policy issues
 freely, but some laws restrict free speech. Laws against
 bringing Islam or the armed forces into discredit or ridicule
 remain in force, and the Shari'a bill signed by the President
 in June calls for promoting Islam through the mass media and
 the censoring of "objectionable" and "obscene" material.
 Article 6 of the 1985 Constitution provides for the death
 penalty for those who damage the Constitution by any act, which
 includes publishing statements against the spirit of the
 Constitution. As noted in Section i.e., the Federal Cabinet in
 1991 approved the enforcement of the death penalty for anyone
 who defames the Prophet Muhammed. Reporters and editors
 exercise self-censorship in these areas.
 A government-owned press trust controls four of the larger
 newspapers. Although the Sharif Government has not yet acted
 on its promise to disband the press trust, it began a process
 of privatizing some government-owned publications during 1991.
 One of the two main wire services is controlled by the Ministry
 of Information. Other newspapers are privately owned and their
 circulation far exceeds that of the government-owned press.
 The Government owns and operates the radio and television
 stations and strictly controls the news they carry. The
 People's Television Network (PTN), a semiprivate television
 station established in 1990, operates as a subsidiary of the
 government station. PTN began broadcasting Cable News Network
 (CNN) programs in 1990; CNN is shown live most of the time, but
 
 
 1557
 PAKISTAN
 visual segments that are considered socially offensive are
 blacked out to thd local audience. The Shari'a bill did not
 include guidelines for censorship. However, after the passage
 of the bill, some human rights activists claimed that there was
 a significant increase in censorship of "objectionable
 material" on television. The Ministry of Information also
 keeps a close watch on advertisements broadcast by PTN, in some
 cases editing or removing them if found to be objectionable.
 Since 1985 there has been relatively fiee discussion of
 government policies and open criticism of the Government,
 especially in the privately owned press. The press routinely
 reports remarks critical of the Government made by opposition
 politicians, and editorials reflect a broad spectrum of views.
 The government newspapers and wire services, however, are
 circumspect in their coverage of the news. The Sharif
 Government continued to use the government press to project the
 government line, just as preceding governments had. During the
 Persian Gulf War, government-controlled media did not cover
 antigovernment and anticoalition demonstrations and rallies
 being staged by the opposition and other political parties.'
 In July journalists participating in a discussion of the
 Twelfth Amendment on the PTV program "Dateline Pakistan"
 complained that censors deleted almost all comments critical of
 the Government's position.
 The Government also exploits the newspapers' dependence on
 government advertising, an important source of revenue for
 them, as a way of influencing editorial policy. During the
 year,,several publications complained that the Government-had
 withdrawn advertisements because it disagreed with the papers'
 political leanings. The Government removed the tariff on
 newsprint but moved to reinstate controls over the quota of'
 newsprint allocated to publications. Government officials no
 longer call editors to demand the inclusion or exclusion of
 particular stories, but the practice of giving informal
 "advice" on stories still exists and the advice is often
 followed. Throughout the year, the Government publicly
 criticized the press for being sensationalist and
 irresponsible, raising concern about the Government's
 commitment to a free pres-s. The final version of the Shari'a
 bill contained a provision limiting the use of confidential
 sources in press stories about the Government or prominent
 politicians. While no journalist has yet been accused under
 this provision, some observers fear it may be used to restrict
 press reporting.
 A print, press, and publications ordinance requires the
 registration of printing presses and newspapers and allows the
 Government to confiscate newspapers or magazines deemed
 objectionable. This ordinance also requires government
 permission before a newspaper may launch a new publication.
 A 1989 press act allows journalists access to all federal and
 provincial government files except "highly sensitive defense
 files." Under this act, publication permits are still required
 but in theory may be obtained at the local level; in practice,
 however, journalists say that they have never been allowed
 access to any government files.
 The actions of some political and ethnic/religious pressure
 groups posed a serious threat to press freedom in 1991. In
 March, 20 Mohajir Qaumi Movement (MQM) activists reportedly
 raided the home of the editor of Takbeer, a pro-Jamaat-Islaami
 publication that had printed stories critical of the MQM.
 
 
 1558
 PAKISTAN
 Later that month, the offices of Takbeer were burned, and in
 October the editor's house was set on fire. Also in March, a
 prominent journalist, Zafar Abbas, was attacked and severely
 beaten in his Karachi apartment by seven assailants. Most
 journalists and political observers blamed the attack on the
 leadership of the MQM who were upset over portrayals of the
 party's factionalization in articles written by Abbas. During
 the same week, editors of the weeklies Herald and Newsline
 received threats from the MQM. On March 21, the management of
 the Herald publications announced that it was suspending
 distribution of Dawn, Pakistan's largest circulation
 English-language daily newspaper, in Karachi and interior
 Sindh, after what it called a week-long "terror campaign"
 against Dawn and its sister publications. MQM harassment,
 which 'included the widespread burning of papers and threats of
 violence and intimidation against vendors, distributors, and
 hawkers, was launched after the Dawn group of papers publicly
 criticized the MQM for its attack on Abbas. Scores of hawkers
 were assaulted by MQM workers, and some vendors were reportedly
 kidnaped and subsequently released. In some instances, the
 police stood by while copies of the papers were burned by the
 MQM activists.
 On March 22, an agreement was reached between the
 representatives of the All-Pakistan Newspapers Society (APNS)
 and The Council of Pakistan Newspaper Editors (CPNE) and the
 MQM. The agreement did not refer to the violence the MQM had
 earlier perpetrated, and it included a retraction by the
 editors of some earlier press stories that were critical of the
 MQM. Some journalists criticized the agreement, stating that
 the press management had caved in to political pressure and
 intimidation. The result of the agreement was a tacit
 acknowledgement that restraint would be exercised by the
 editors before publishing stories about the MQM. Some
 journalists resisted the pressure and continued to publish
 stories critical of the MQM. However, later in the year, most
 journalists in the Karachi area--MQM's stronghold--admitted to
 exercising "self-censorship" when reporting on the MQM. The
 alliance between the MQM and the government of Jam Sadiq Ali in
 Sindh led to the perception that the provincial government, if
 not active in harassing the press, at least gave tacit approval
 to MQM activities. On the federal level, the lack of
 government action in response to these events, coupled with
 open criticism of the press by high government officials, led
 to concern that the Government was not doing enough to prevent
 violence against the press. This concern was heightened when
 another journalist, Kamran Khan, was attacked in Karachi on
 September 23. Khan had published an investigative story
 critical of police abuses in the central investigative cell in
 Karachi. The press used this attack as a vehicle to highlight
 "government-instigated" violence against the press and to drive
 home its point that press freedom was under siege throughout
 Pakistan. At year's end, threats and attacks on journalists
 were on the rise, and threats to press freedoms had spread to
 areas outside of Sindh.
 Academic freedom is generally recognized by government and
 university authorities. A threat to academic freedom is the
 atmosphere of violence and intolerance'among student
 organizations, which typically are tied to political parties.
 Violent demonstrations during the Gulf War led to the temporary
 closure of several of the large universities. Student unions
 were legalized in early 1989 by Prime Minister Bhutto and
 continue to operate without interference. On campuses,
 well-armed groups of students of varying political persuasions
 
 
 1559
 PAKISTAN
 clash frequently and intimidate other students, instructors,
 and administrators on matters of language, syllabus,
 examination policies, doctrine, and dress.
 Literary and creative works are generally free of censorship.
 Obscene literature, a category broadly defined by the
 Government, is subject to seizure. Authorities have
 occasionally banned or confiscated books and magazines dealing
 with sensitive political topics. Senior officials continued to
 stress the Government's intention to prosecute anyone violating
 the Official Secrets Act. Dramas and documentaries on once
 taboo subjects, such as narcotics, violence against women, and
 female inequality, were shown on Pakistani television during
 the Bhutto administration and continue to be broadcast.
 Conservative religious and political groups have been active in
 enforcing their own code of morality on Pakistani society.
 Human rights activists and women's groups remain concerned that
 the Shari'a bill may be interpreted in the extreme sense,
 although this has not yet proven to be the case. The
 Jamaat-I-Islami party again successfully kept New Year's
 celebrations around the country to a minimum, often through
 acts of intimidation.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 The right of peaceful assembly was respected in most cases.
 Political leaders were able to travel freely and address large
 rallies.  Large demonstrations and rallies protesting the
 Government's procoalition stance took place in all the major
 cities during the Gulf War. In August the Government allowed
 the opposition PDA to stage a hunger strike across from the
 Parliament building in Islamabad.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Pakistan is an Islamic republic with a population that is 97
 percent Muslim, and the Constitution requires all laws to be
 consistent with Islamic ideology. Generally, members of
 minority groups may practice their own religion openly,
 maintain links with coreligionists in other countries, and
 travel for religious purposes. Foreign clergy may enter the
 country to serve congregations. Conversions are permitted, but
 the Government prohibits proselytizing among Muslims and has
 refused to renew the residence permits of some foreign
 missionaries who have ignored this ban. Although enabling
 legislation has yet to be passed, some minority groups fear
 that the Shari'a bill's goal of "Islamizing" all aspects of
 Pakistan government and society may further restrict their
 freedom to practice their religion.
 A 1974 constitutional amendment declared Ahmadis to be a
 non-Muslim minority because they do not accept Muhammad as the
 last prophet.' The Ahmadis, however, continue to look on
 themselves as Muslims, for whom many Muslim practices are an
 important feature of the practice of their religion. In 1984
 the Government made it illegal for an Ahmadi to call himself a
 Muslim and banned Ahmadis from using Muslim terminology.
 Violators are subject to prosecution. Legislation, passed in
 1986 and apparently aimed at Ahmadis, making blaspheming the
 Prophet Muhammad a capital offense was upheld by the Shari'a
 court in 1990 and supported by the Federal Cabinet in 1991 (see
 Section i.e.). In May the advocate general of Punjab argued
 that parents who raise their children as Ahmadis are inciting
 their children to apostasy and are punishable by law as
 
 
 1560
 PAKISTAN
 committing a capital crime. The Lahore High Court upheld the
 Government's prohibition of the centenary celebration of the
 Ahmadi sect, which was scheduled to be held in Rabwah in March,
 1989, claiming the celebration would have caused public
 disorder.
 Ahmadis were detained again in 1991 for displaying the Islamic
 Profession of Faith (Kalima) and other Koranic verses. Most
 were released, but several were tried, convicted, and received
 prison sentences. One Ahmadi was convicted for wearing a ring
 inscribed with the Kalima and was sentenced to 3 years'
 imprisonment. There were new reports of the forced conversion
 of female members of the Ahmadi sect. Police continued to
 close. down Ahmadi places of worship, which cannot be called
 mosques under Pakistani law. A number of attacks on individual
 congregations were reported.
 Christians have had difficulty obtaining permission from local
 and federal officials to build new churches and work through
 the courts to regain possession of educational institutions
 that were nationalized during the 1970's. Hindus complain of
 continued kidnapings and forced conversion of young women,
 confiscation of Hindu shrines and temples, disruption of prayer
 services, and the burning of Hindu texts as well as the torture
 of detained Hindus. However, the Hindu community has not been
 barred from celebrating its festivals.
 Among Muslims, sectarian violence broke out between the
 majority'Sunnis and minority Shi'a populations in a number of
 cities throughout Pakistan. In January the assassination of a
 Sunni religious and political leader in Jhang sparked sectarian
 riots and attacks against local Shi'a leaders.
 Under pressure from fundamentalist Muslims, who wield
 substantial influence over their coreligionists out of
 proportion to their numbers, the Government continues to be
 reticent in investigating and otherwise trying to prevent
 incidents of discrimination against minorities.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Pakistanis generally enjoy freedom of movement within the
 country. Previous governments banned individual political
 leaders from traveling to certain provinces for a specified
 time through use of "externment" notices.
 Pakistanis are generally free to travel abroad. Travel to
 Israel and South Africa, which are not recognized by the
 Government, is legally prohibited, but Pakistanis nevertheless
 occasionally travel to Jerusalem for religious purposes.
 Government employees must obtain "no objection certificates"
 (NOC's) before traveling abroad. Students are also required to
 have NOC!s from their institutions. The exit control list,
 used broadly by previous governments to control foreign travel,
 remains a tool available to the Government but was reportedly
 used by the Sharif Government only against serious criminals,
 such as drug traffickers and certain officials involved in the
 widely publicized cooperatives banking scandal. However, in
 May a leader of the National People's Party challenged in court
 the Government's order restricting him from leaving Pakistan.
 More than 3 million Afghans fled to Pakistan as a result of the
 Soviet invasion of Afghanistan and the ensuing civil war
 
 
 1561
 PAKISTAN
 there. A voluntary repatriation program, begun in 1990 by the
 Government and U.N. agencies to encourage the refugees to
 return, has enjoyed limited success. Under the auspices of the
 United Nations, the Government administers and supports some
 350 Afghan refugee camps, at significant cost, to care for the
 large number of remaining refugees. The movement of Afghan
 refugees has not generally been restricted, although employment
 opportunities and possibilities are greater in the NWFP and
 city of Peshawar than elsewhere.
 The plight of illegal Bangladeshi immigrants detained by police
 continued to receive prominent press coverage in Pakistan.
 Hundreds of Bangladeshis (some accompanied by children) are
 held in prisons throughout Pakistan and charged with
 immigration violations. Almost all of these detainees are
 without the documents necessary to prove Bangladeshi
 citizenship. Many of the women are alleged to be in Pakistan
 as a result of trafficking in women for purposes of
 prostitution, and some are detained under the Hadood
 Ordinances. The Government of Pakistan, with the help of the
 Bangladesh Government, took steps in 1990 to document and
 repatriate some of these Bangladeshis, but the problem remains
 largely unsolved.
 The repatriation to Pakistan of the Bihari community in
 Bangladesh (immigrants from the Indian state of Bihar who
 migrated to East Pakistan--now Bangladesh--at the time of
 partition) continues to be a contentious domestic issue.
 Approximately 250,000 Biharis remain in refugee camps in
 Bangladesh, waiting to be brought to Pakistan. There was no
 change in this situation in 1991.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 The citizens of Pakistan have the right and the ability to
 change their government peacefully. All Pakistanis aged 21 and
 over have the right to vote by secret ballot in elections.
 Political parties have been allowed to operate freely since the
 lifting of martial law in 1985 and 1986, and in 1988 the
 Supreme Court struck down a law banning unregistered political
 parties from participating in elections. -
 Local governments and the provincial and national assemblies
 are directly elected. The President is also indirectly elected
 by an electoral college consisting of the members of the
 National and provincial Assemblies and the Senate. The
 Electoral Commission continued its review of complaints filed
 regarding the 1990 national and provincial elections. This
 resulted in one case in the overturning of results and the
 holding of a byelection in the Jacobabad (Sindh) constituency.
 In March elections to elect one half of the Senate were held.
 Senators are elected through a complicated process of
 nomination and election by members of the four provincial
 assemblies.
 In Sindh, the abduction of five MPA's immediately prior to the
 Senate elections (see Section l.c) led to speculation that the
 Sindh government was trying to "coerce" certain MPA's to cast
 their votes for government-backed candidates. All but one of
 the MPAs reappeared on the day of the vote in the Senate
 elections, but the PDA disputed the results and subsequently
 staged a boycott of the National Assembly in protest against
 the abductions and what they termed "rigging" of the Senate
 elections.
 
 
 1562
 'PAKISTAN
 The Constitution provides that members of the national and
 provincial assemblies shall serve terms of 5 years, unless the
 assembly is dissolved. The President is elected every 5 years,
 and Senators are elected for 6-year terms. Local byelections"
 were held for provincial and National Assembly seats in several
 constituencies in 1991. In the Jacobabad byelection there were
 credible reports of vote-rigging on both sides, although the
 preponderance of evidence demonstrated that the Government had
 instigated a deliberate effort (including the arrest of a
 Baluch MNA-see Section l.c.) to thwart the election campaign
 of the PDA-backed candidate. There was also credible evidence
 that the police participated in the blocking of polling booths
 on the day of the election.
 Elections in the semiautonomous state of Azad Kashmir (AJK)
 (the Pakistani-controlled portion of the disputed territory of
 Jammu and Kishmir) in June prompted accusations by the AJK
 People's Party that the Federal Government had rigged the
 elections in favor of the IJI-supported Muslim Conference.
 Most observers agreed, however, that while irregularities may
 have occurred, they did not affect the outcome. Former AJK
 Prime Minister Rathore, who had called the elections, was
 arrested by the Federal Government in accordance with its
 powers under the Pakistani and AJK constitutions when he
 refused to step down and accept the results. He was released
 after several days and later filed a petition challenging the
 Government's actions. The petition was rejected by the AJK
 Supreme Court.
 While women participate in government and politics and Benazir
 Bhutto was the first female head of government of an Islamic
 country, traditional attitudes toward the role of women make it
 difficult for most women to succeed, and they are
 underrepresented in politics at all levels. At the federal
 level, the statute creating 20 reserved seats for women in the
 National Assembly has lapsed, and in 1990 only 6 women were
 nominated by the political parties to stand as candidates for
 general seats in the next Assembly, and of these only 2 were
 elected.
 The Constitution requires that the President and Prime Minister
 must be Muslims. Although members of minority religious
 groups--for example, Ahmadis, Christians, and Parsis--have held
 political office and are represented in the economic,
 political, and social life of the country, they 'are not
 permitted to vote in Muslim constituencies but must seek office
 and cast their ballots in countrywide, at-large constituencies
 reserved for them in the National and Provincial Assemblies, an
 arrangement widely criticized by minority and human rights
 groups. Ahmadis, disputing their minority status and their
 designation as non-Muslims, have refused to exercise these
 electoral options. Minorities, especially Christians and
 Hindus, complain that they are unable to vote for or influence
 the parties that will be able to form the government.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 Domestic human rights organizations operate free of official
 harassment, and their reports receive extensive coverage in the
 press. New human rights and legal aid groups continue to form
 and operate without government restriction. Persons affiliated
 with various international human rights organizations have been
 permitted to visit Pakistan and travel freely.
 
 
 1563
 PAKISTAN
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 In May the IJI Government fulfilled one of its campaign
 promises by passing the Shari'a bill, a law aimed at bringing
 all aspects of government and society in Pakistan into
 conformity with its views on the tenets of Islam. While many
 human rights activists and women's groups feared that the
 legislation would have a deleterious effect on women's and
 minority rights, the final version of the bill included
 language ensuring that women's and minority rights protected
 under the Constitution would not be affected by the law. By
 year's end, no enabling legislation had been passed, and the
 Shari'a bill's effects were limited. However, some Islamic
 leaders continued to stress a conservative interpretation of
 Islamic injunctions to justify discrimination against women.
 It remains accepted practice to assign women subordinate roles
 in terms of civil, political, managerial, and individual
 rights, although there are several women at high levels of
 government. Many Pakistanis interpret the Koran's injunctions
 on modesty to mean that women should remain either at home or
 veiled. In rural areas, although women of small farm families
 generally work alongside men in the fields, they remain
 subordinate to men and suffer discrimination in education,
 employment, and legal rights. Women are often discouraged from
 voting in elections by family, religious, and social custom in
 the rural and more conservative parts of Pakistan. In some
 areas, women are discouraged from voting by authorities who do
 not provide separate voting facilities for women who observe
 Purdah restrictions; these women are unwilling to unveil
 themselves to-male poll officials who seek to confirm their
 identity. In rural Sindh, women are sometimes barred from
 voting because they refuse to divulge their given name in
 public or to a stranger. Despite clear injunctions in the
 Koran and the civil laws that provide for the right of women to
 inherit, in practice women generally do not receive or are
 pressed to surrender their due share in family inheritance.
 Both civil and religious laws protect women's rights in cases
 of divorce, but, as in the case of inheritance laws, many women
 are unaware of them. These attitudes have contributed to a
 very low adult female literacy rate, estimated, for example, to
 be only 4 percent among rural women.
 A small number of urban women study and teach in the
 universities, but postgraduate employment opportunities remain
 largely limited to teaching, medical services, and the law,
 with a small number of women entering the commercial and public
 sectors. There are reports that women who apply to
 professional colleges face discrimination. Women may now
 participate in international athletic competition.
 A 1989 ruling of the Federal Shari'a Court upheld the
 distinction under the Hadood Ordinances between evidence
 presented in court by a man and that presented by a woman. The
 court ruled that only men could testify as witnesses in certain
 cases; in other cases only women's evidence would be
 acceptable. In certain cases the testimony of two women is
 required to equal that of one man.
 There is no reliable information on the extent of violence
 against women in Pakistan. Abuse within the family is usually
 treated as a private matter in this traditional society,.and
 there are few instances in which redress is sought in the
 -courts. However, there has been increased press reporting in
 recent years about the unresponsiveness or even involvement of
 
 
 1564
 PAKISTAN
 police in incidents of abuse or rape of women. Cases involving
 the gang rape of village women by police and paramilitary
 forces in rural Sindh received wide press coverage in January.
 A Karachi-based group called War Against Rape (WAR) was formed
 in 1990 to change attitudes about rape and to assist rape
 victims. The press continued to draw attention to the problem
 of women being burned to death, allegedly in kitchen
 accidents. Many of these deaths are believed to be murders
 perpetrated by husbands or in-laws. Women have also been
 killed or mutilated by male relatives who suspect them of
 adultery. 7ew such cases are investigated seriously.
 Women's organizations operate throughout the country, but
 primarily in Pakistan's urban centers. Many concentrate on
 educiting women about existing legal rights. Other groups
 concentrate on providing legal aid to poor women in prison who
 may not be able to afford an attorney. Women's groups
 successfully lobbied the Government to change the draft Shari'a
 bill to ensure the inclusion of language protecting women's
 rights.
 There is much discrimination against religious minority groups
 in employment and education. In the early years of Pakistan's
 history, minorities were able to rise to the senior ranks of
 the military and civil service. Today, however, some minority
 group members contend that many of their number are unable to
 rise above midlevel ranks. Discrimination on ethnic and
 linguistic grounds underlies the repeated ethnic conflicts in
 several areas over recent years. In Sindh there continue to be
 conflicts between Sindhis and Mohajirs (Urdu-speaking
 immigrants originally from India). Non-Punjabis resent what
 they see as Punjabi domination of the bureaucracy, the police,
 and the armed forces. Officially designated as "non-Muslims,"
 Ahmadis are subject to discrimination and occasional harassment
 and have limited chances for advancement in the public sector.
 Young Ahmadis and their parents complain of increasing
 difficulty in gaining admittance to good colleges, forcing many
 children to go overseas for higher education. Ahmadis'
 resentment is strengthened by their conviction that they too
 are Muslims. They complain that charges are often filed
 against them for the purpose of harassment or extortion and
 that the police will not accept their complaints when they and
 their property are attacked--few cases ever come to trial.
 There are credible reports of Ahmadis being denied promotions
 in the military and civil service.
 By March all the Ahmadis who had been expelled from the village
 of Chak Sikander in 1989 had been able to return, and Ahmadi
 leaders in Punjab believed that the incidence of discriminatory
 acts against Ahmadis in 1991 had declined from previous years.
 Members of the Christian community complain that barriers make
 it difficult for Christians to rise to high positions in public
 service, public corporations, universities, and the military.
 Some, however, are successful in doing so. During the Persian
 Gulf War some Christian churches and graveyards were desecrated
 by demonstrators who viewed the war as a conflict between
 Christianity and the Muslim world. The Christian community
 reported that in one neighborhood in Lahore, Muslim landlords
 evicted several Christian families without cause because they
 viewed Christians as the "enemies of Islam." In another
 reported incident, Muslim demonstrators in Peshawar threw acid
 on several Christian girls. Christian groups rarely press
 charges against the perpetrators of such incidents and
 
 
 1565
 PAKISTAN
 acknowledge that, even if they did, authorities are unlikely to
 pursue the cases.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 The right of industrial workers to form trade unions is
 provided for in the Industrial Relations Ordinance, but is
 subject to major restrictions in some employment areas. In
 practice, labor laws place significant constraints on the
 formation of unions and their ability to function effectively.
 Workers in the Export Processing Zones (EPZ's) are strictly
 forbidden to form trade unions.
 The right of unions to strike in Pakistan is severely
 constrained by legally required conciliation proceedings and
 cooling-off periods and especially by the Government's
 authority to ban any strike found to cause "serious hardship to
 the community" or prejudice to the national interest, or in any
 case after it has continued unresolved for 30 days. Strikes
 continue to be rare; when they do occur, they are usually
 illegal and short. There-are also periodic work slowdowns on
 the part of low-ranking government employees. Police do not
 hesitate to crack down on worker demonstrations.
 Union members still make up only about 6 percent of the
 industrial labor force and 3 percent of the total estimated
 work force. Contract labor continues to flourish, undercutting
 the power of the unions and employing workers willing to work
 on temporary contracts. These workers receive fewer benefits
 and have no job security. Trade unions of all political
 orientations are permitted, and the political leanings of labor
 leaders cover the entire spectrum. While many unions remain
 aloof from party politics, it appears that the most powerful
 are those associated with political parties. After~the PPP
 came to power in 1988, it successfully organized trade unions
 under the banner of the People's Labor Bureau (PLB). The PLB's
 main competitors are the Jamaat Islami's National Labor
 Federation and the MQM-backed labor unions. Labor Unions and
 federations freely exercise the right to affiliate with and
 participate in international organizations.
 Pakistan has been criticized for years by International Labor
 Organization (ILO) committees for its failure to abide by
 Convention 87 on freedom of association and Convention 98 on
 the right to organize and collective bargaining. The charges,
 repeatedly raised by Pakistani trade unions, have focused on
 the limitations on union formation, strikes, and collective
 bargaining. No Pakistani government has yet made any serious
 effort to change the laws criticized in the ILO reports. ILO
 criticism in 1991 also focused on continuing problems
 concerning forced or compulsory labor in law and practice and
 on child labor problems.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 The right of workers to form associations and freely elect
 representatives to act as collective bargaining agents is
 established in law. Current laws, however, place major
 limitations on the extent and effectiveness of such
 activities. Large sections of the labor force are excluded
 from the right to organize and bargain collectively under the
 Industrial Relations Ordinance, including the.53 percent of
 Pakistan's labor force employed in agriculture. Under the
 
 
 1566
 PAKISTAN
 Essential Services Maintenance Act of 1952 (ESA), normal union
 activities are severely restricted in sectors associated with
 "the administration of the State," which covers a wide range of
 government services and state enterprises, such as education,
 medical, oil and gas production, and transport.
 For each industry found subject to the ESA, a finding that must
 be renewed every 6 months, a specific determination is made by
 the Government as to what constitutes the limits of union
 activity. In cases in which collective bargaining has been
 barred, individual wage boards decide wage levels. Disputes
 are adjudicated before the National Industrial Relations
 Commission. A worker's right to quit may also be curtailed
 under this act, and a fired worker has no recourse to the labor
 courts' Collective bargaining and even strikes are known in
 some job areas covered by the Act, e.g., the nationalized
 banks. Most unions continue to call for the abolition of the
 ESA.
 Section 15 of the Industrial Relations Ordinance of 1969
 specifically prohibits antiunion discrimination by employers.
 Should there be charges that an employer has violated this
 provision, the aggrieved party or his representative may lodge
 a complaint with the labor court established by the ordinance.
 A provincial high court judge, assigned to the labor court,
 will review the complaint and determine whether any action
 against the employer, including prosecution, is warranted. In
 certain cases, generally those involving national unions,
 appeals of labor court decisions may be taken to the national
 industrial relations court. Both labor and employers appear to
 be satisfied with the effectiveness of the labor courts as a
 mechanism for problem resolution.
 The ILO has advised the Government that a 1980 ordinance
 permitting it to exempt EPZ's from the provisions of any law is
 inconsistent with the requirements of ILO Conventions 87 and 98
 and urged that the ordinance be rescinded. An EPZ, with its
 own labor regulations, including regulations governing how
 workers may bargain collectively, is functioning in Karachi.
 The Government has not taken the action requested by the ILO.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 Forced labor is specifically prohibited by the Constitution.
 There is no evidence that any form of slavery or bonded labor
 has received official sanction. However, critics argue that
 the ESA's limitation on some employees' right to leave their
 jobs constitutes a form of dompulsory labor. The Government
 informed the ILO's Conference Committee on the Application of
 Standards in 1991 that steps had been taken to address other
 forced labor issues. However, the Government said the ILO
 Committee of Experts' estimate that there were 20 million
 bonded laborers in 1989, including 2 million families at the
 brick kilns alone and 7.5 million children, was grossly
 exaggerated. The Committee expressed its regret that
 legislation inconsistent with ILO conventions on forced labor
 had not yet been repealed.
 Illegal bonded labor is widespread. Bonded labor is common in
 the brick, carpet, glass, and fishing industries and is found
 in agricultural and construction work in rural areas. In the
 brick kiln industry, a workers' association succeeded in
 bringing the plight of bonded brickmakeis in Punjab before the
 Supreme Court. The Court's 1989 compromise ruling reinforced
 prohibitions on forced labor and forcible collection of debts
 
 
 1567
 PAKISTAN
 and limited salary advances to 1 week's wages but upheld the
 legality of existing debts. Although the ruling was seen at
 the time as an important gain for bonded workers, little
 progress has been made since then in the industries employing
 bonded laborers. Resistance to the ruling has been strong,
 reports of violations continue to appear, and the workers'
 movement has split into competing factions over the issue.
 Moreover, due to the lack of alternatives, many workers have
 returned to bonded labor at the kilns. Despite continued
 publicity surrounding the bonded labor issue, no action was
 taken to remedy the situation during 1991.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 Despite legal limitations, child labor is common in Pakistan.
 Child labor is limited by at least four separate statutes and
 Article 11 of the Constitution. These laws present a confusing
 picture, variously limiting employment in certain fields to
 those over 14 or 15, and, in one case, permitting factory work
 by children under 14 (in apparent contradiction of the
 Constitution) if a government doctor issues a certificate of
 fitness. None of these regulations is effectively enforced.
 Regulations requiring school attendance are also rarely
 enforced. A 1991 amendment to the Child Labor Act of 1936
 reiterated restrictions against employment of children in
 hazardous industries but did little to strengthen much needed
 enforcement mechanisms.
 While much child labor is in the traditional framework of
 family farming or small business, the abusive employment of
 children in larger industries and government businesses is
 widespread. Although there are no reliable official
 statistics, unofficial surveys and occasional press features
 suggest that violations of existing laws are common.
 Unofficial estimates indicate that one-third of Pakistan's
 total labor force is made up of workers under age 18; 45
 percent of Pakistan's population is estimated to be under 15
 years of age. The employment of children is occasionally
 linked with stories of bonded or forced labor and child
 prostitution.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 Labor regulations in Pakistan are governed by federal statutes
 applicable throughout the country. These provide for, or
 require the provincial governments to provide for, a legal
 minimum wage as well as certain worker protection and welfare
 services. The minimum wage, which varies from province to
 province, is not enough to support even a small family. The
 Prime Minister promised to more than double the minimum wage,
 but implementing legislation has not yet been introduced. The
 law provides for a maximum workweek of six 9-hour days
 totalling 54 hours, rest periods during the workday, and one
 day off per week. These regulations apply, however, only to a
 small minority of the labor force; they specifically do not
 apply to agricultural workers, to workers in Pakistan's
 numerous small factories with fewer than 10 employees, and to
 the small contract groups of under 10 workers into which
 factory work forces are increasingly divided. Due in part to a
 lack of education, many workers are not aware of the
 regulations protecting their rights.
 Although the national Labor Code establishes minimum
 regulations governing acceptable cohditions of work, including
 worker health and safety, the enforcement of labor regulations
 
 
 1568
 PAKISTAN
 is left to the provincial governments, all of which are largely
 ineffective in this area. The attention given to enforcement
 varies among the provinces in proportion to the significance of
 industrial labor. In all cases, :limited resources, corruption,
 and inadequate regulatory structures hamper the effort. In
 general, worker health and safety standards are poor, and
 little is being done to improve them. Organized labor is
 occasionally able to press for improvements in this area, and
 some legal protection-apply, although they are weakly
 enforced.
 
 
 1569
