Pakistan
In office since a 1999 coup d’etat, President Pervez Musharraf’s military-backed
government did little in 2006 to address a rapidly deteriorating human rights situation.
Ongoing concerns include arbitrary detention, lack of due process, and the
mistreatment, torture, and “disappearance” of terrorism suspects and political
opponents; harassment and intimidation of the media; and legal discrimination
against and mistreatment of women and religious minorities.
Significant developments with human rights implications in 2006 included the
passage of the Women’s Protection Bill amending the discriminatory Hudood
Ordinances, a marked increase in hostilities between the government and armed
militants in the mineral rich south-western province of Balochistan, a controversial
peace deal between the government and Taliban supporters in Waziristan,
and reconstruction efforts in post-earthquake Pakistan-administered Kashmir,
which were marred by allegations of corruption.
Gender-Based Violence and Legal Discrimination
In a significant though partial step towards ending legal discrimination against
women, Pakistan’s National Assembly passed the Women’s Protection Bill on
November 15 with the support of the opposition Pakistan Peoples Party. The passage
of the bill removed some of the most dangerous provisions of the Hudood
Ordinances. Judges have now been given authority to try rape cases under criminal
rather than Islamic law. One important consequence of the change is that a
woman claiming rape need no longer produce four witnesses, a requirement
which had made successful prosecution almost impossible and put the rape victim
at risk of being charged with adultery. The amendments also include dropping
the death penalty and flogging for persons convicted of having consensual nonmarital
sex.
However, the Women’s Protection Bill fails to comply with many of Pakistan’s obligations
under the Convention on the Elimination of Discrimination against
Women, which calls on states to modify or abolish laws that discriminate against
women. Discriminatory provisions of the Hudood Ordinances that criminalize nonmarital sex—which remains punishable by a five-year prison sentence and a
fine—remain in place and the law fails to recognize marital rape.
As in previous years, violence against women and girls, including domestic violence,
rape, “honor killings,” acid attacks, and trafficking, remained serious problems
in Pakistan. Survivors of violence encounter unresponsiveness and hostility
at each level of the criminal justice system, from police who fail to register or
investigate cases of gender-based violence to judges with little training or commitment
to women’s equal rights. According to Pakistan’s Interior Ministry, there
have been more than 4,100 honor killings since 2001. However, provisions of
Pakistani law that allow the next of kin to “forgive” the murderer in exchange for
monetary compensation remain in force, and continue to be used by offenders to
escape punishment in cases of honor killings.
Religious Freedom
Discrimination and persecution on grounds of religion continued in 2006, and an
increasing number of blasphemy cases were registered. As in previous years, the
Ahmadi religious community was a particularly frequent target. Ahmadis have
been legally declared non-Muslims under Pakistani law and they can be charged
under the blasphemy law for simply calling themselves Muslims. Scores were
arrested in 2006. In June, three Ahmadis were badly beaten by a mob, while 10
houses, a mosque, and shops and other property belonging to Ahmadis were set
on fire in a village near the town of Daska in Punjab province.
Other religious minorities, including Christians and Hindus, also continue to face
legal discrimination, though the government appears to have instructed the
police to avoid registering blasphemy cases against them.
“War on Terror”
Counterterrorism operations in Pakistan continue to be accompanied by serious
violations of human rights. Suspects held on terrorism charges frequently are
detained without charge or tried without proper judicial process. Human Rights
Watch has documented scores of illegal detentions, instances of torture, and “disappearances” in Pakistan’s major cities. Counterterrorism laws also continue
to be misused to perpetuate vendettas and as an instrument of political coercion.
Pakistani authorities have presented figures suggesting that more than 1,000 terrorism
suspects have been arrested in the five years since 2001. The Pakistani
government has processed only a fraction of the cases through the legal system.
Hundreds of suspects have been handed over to the United States, often for sizeable
bounties; many have ended up at Guantanamo. Among the “high-value” terrorism
suspects whom Pakistan is believed to have handed over to the United
States is Syrian-Spanish citizen Mustafa Setmariam Nasar, who was reportedly
arrested in late October or early November 2005 in Quetta, Pakistan.
It is impossible to ascertain numbers of people “disappeared” in counterterrorism
operations because of the secrecy surrounding such operations and the likelihood
that the families of some of the “disappeared” do not publicize their cases
for fear of retaliation. Notable “disappearance” cases in 2006 include Haji Yasin,
an Afghan national who was abducted in Peshawar on June 22, and Imran Munir,
who was summoned by Pakistan’s Inter-Services Intelligence (ISI) in late July
2006 and failed to return. The families of some 41 other “disappeared” persons
publicly alleged in 2006 that their loved ones were being illegally detained.
Until a September peace agreement between the government and tribal leaders
and militants closely allied with the Taliban, the Pakistan Army engaged in
aggressive counterterrorism operations in Pakistan’s Federally Administered Tribal
Areas along the Afghan border, with efforts particularly focused on the Waziristan
region. Authorities restricted access to the region, but there were steady reports
of extrajudicial executions, house demolitions, arbitrary detentions, and harassment
of journalists.
Serious questions remain about the security of both Afghan people living across
the border and residents of Waziristan after the signing of the peace deal. Armed
groups in Pakistan’s tribal areas have engaged in vigilantism and violent attacks,
including murder and public beheadings, and the government has done little to
apprehend, let alone prosecute Taliban and militant leaders guilty of committing
serious human rights abuses across the border in Afghanistan and, increasingly,
in Pakistan.
On October 30, the government’s aerial bombing in Bajaur Agency of the tribal
areas killed 82 people, including several children. The Pakistan government
claimed all the dead were militants and rejected requests for an independent
investigation. On November 8, in a retaliatory attack, 42 soldiers at a military
training camp were killed by a suicide bomber in the town of Dargai in the North
West Frontier Province.
Repression of Political Opponents
The government continues to use the National Accountability Bureau and a host
of anti-corruption and sedition laws to keep in jail or threaten political opponents,
particularly members of former Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto’s Pakistan
Peoples Party and the Pakistan Muslim League (Nawaz). As elections approach in
2007, such persecution is expected to increase. Makhdoom Javed Hashmi, of the
Alliance for the Restoration of Democracy, who received a 23-year sentence for
sedition in April 2004, a charge brought against him for reading an anti-Musharraf
letter to journalists, remained in jail at this writing.
Political unrest in the southwestern province of Balochistan took a serious turn
for the worse in 2006. Though the dispute in Balochistan is essentially political,
centered on issues of provincial autonomy and exploitation of mineral resources,
the Pakistani military and Baloch tribal militants have increasingly sought a military
solution to their disagreements.
The Balochistan Liberation Army, a guerilla outfit comprising tribal militants, has
not limited its attacks to Pakistani military targets, but has also attacked economic
infrastructure and civilians using rockets and landmines. Meanwhile, hundreds
of Baloch political activists have been arbitrarily detained, scores have been disappeared,
and torture by security forces of political opponents has become routine.
Military operations in the province have frequently been accompanied by
allegations of the excessive use of force, particularly in periodic attacks on Dera
Bugti, the stronghold of tribal chieftain Nawab Akbar Bugti. The August 26, 2006,
killing of Bugti in a controversial military operation plunged Balochistan into further
unrest and was followed by a new round of arbitrary arrests and “disappearances.”
Freedom of Expression
Though media freedoms have increased in recent years, particularly for the
English-language press, free expression and dissemination of information were
persistently undermined in 2006 by the murder, torture, kidnapping, illegal
detention, and coercion of reporters working for local, regional, national, and
international media.
In Waziristan, journalist Hayatullah Khan was found dead six months after he was
abducted in December 2005. Powerful circumstantial evidence suggested the
involvement of Pakistan’s Inter-Services Intelligence agency. In the southern
province of Sindh, journalist Mehruddin Mari went missing on June 27. Mari, a
correspondent for the Sindhi-language newspaper The Daily Kawish, was taken by
police, according to journalists who witnessed his detention. On June 22, Mukesh
Rupeta and Sanjay Kumer were finally produced in court and charged after being
held illegally by the Pakistani intelligence services for more than three months.
The two were tortured while detained for filming a Pakistani air force base. Saeed
Sarbazi, a newspaper reporter, was released on September 23 after being beaten
and interrogated for three days by intelligence agents on suspicion of supporting
Baloch militants. On September 17, two journalists from Pakistan’s ATV and a correspondent
of the Dubai-based satellite news channel ARY One World were badly
beaten and injured by police in Lahore as they covered a religious gathering. The
above list is far from exhaustive. In addition, many print and television journalists
were verbally threatened by intelligence personnel, government officials, and
non-state actors.
Tight controls on freedom of expression have also been a hallmark of government
policy in Azad Kashmir. Pakistan has prevented the creation of independent
media in the territory through bureaucratic restrictions and coercion. Publications
and literature favoring independence are banned. While militant organizations
promoting the incorporation of Indian-administered Jammu and Kashmir state
into Pakistan have had free rein to propagate their views, groups promoting an
independent Kashmir find their speech sharply, sometimes violently, curtailed.
Key International Actors
President Musharraf remains heavily dependent on the Bush administration for
political support, while Pakistan remains equally dependent on the United States
for economic and military aid. The United States has notably failed to press
strongly for human rights improvements in the country, muting its criticism in
recent years in exchange for Pakistan’s support in the US-led “war on terror.”
International donors have poured billions of dollars of urgently needed relief and
reconstruction aid into Pakistan-administered Azad Kashmir since the October
2005 earthquake. Before the earthquake struck, Azad Kashmir was one of the
most closed territories in the world. Corruption allegations in late 2006 against
senior government officials highlighted serious ongoing weaknesses in governmental
accountability in the region. Donors have not used their leverage to insist
on improvements in human rights practices and the rule of law.
Pakistan’s record of ratifying principal international human rights treaties remains
poor. It has signed only five international conventions which notably do not
include either the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights or the
International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights. Pakistan played a
negative role as a member of the new UN Human Rights Council and fought
doggedly within the council to shield OIC states from criticism.