 PAKISTAN
 Pakistan is an Islamic republic in which power is shared between the Prime Min-
 ister, as the leader of the National Assembly, and the President. The Chief of Army
 Staff also wields considerable influence on many major policy decisions and is the
 third member of the unofficial "troika" that governs the nation. During the first 10
 months of 1996, Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto dominated political policymaking,
 with President Farooq Leghari playing a complementary role. Chief of Army Staff
 General Jehangir Karamat consulted closely with the Government but avoided open
 involvement in governing. The Constitution provides for an independent judiciary;
 however, it is subject to executive branch influence.
 
 
 1465
 On November 5, 1996, President Leghari, invoking Section 58 (2)b of the Constitu-
 tion, dismissed Prime Minister Bhutto and her Cabinet, and dissolved the National
 Assembly. Over the subsequent 2 weeks the provincial assemblies were also dis-
 solved. President Leghari and caretaker Prime Minister Meraj Khalid have stated
 that new national elections would be held on February 3, 1997. Bhutto has chal-
 lenged her dismissal and the dissolution of the National Assembly in the Supreme
 Court.
 Responsibility for internal security rests primarily with the police, although para-
 military forces, such as the Rangers and Frontier Constabulary are responsible for
 maintaining law and order in Karachi and frontier areas. Provincial governments
 control the police and paramilitary forces when they are assisting in law and order
 operations. Members of the security forces committed numerous human rights
 abuses.
 Pakistan is a poor country, with great extremes in the distribution of wealth and
 social stratification. Its per capita annual income is $495, and its rate of illiteracy
 is extremely high and is increasing, especially among women. The economy includes
 both state-run and private industries, and financial institutions. The Constitution
 provides for the right of private businesses to operate freely in most sectors of the
 economy. The Government continues to pursue economic reforms, emphasizing the
 privatization of government-owned financial institutions, industrial units, and utili-
 ties. Cotton, textiles and apparel, rice, and leather products are the principal ex-
 ports.
 Although the Government has publicly pledged to address human rights problems,
 particularly those involving women, child labor, and minority religions, the overall
 human rights situation remains poor. Security forces committed extrajudicial
 killings, used arbitrary arrest and detention, tortured or abused prisoners and de-
 tainees, and raped women. The police, investigative and intelligence agencies, and
 politically motivated court cases were used to harass and arrest political opponents
 of the Government. Prison conditions are poor. The judiciary has been subject to in-
 fluence through constitutionally permitted transfers of judges and appointment of
 temporary judges to the High and Supreme Courts. A Supreme Court ruling in
 March however has limited the Government's power over judicial appointments
 and transfers. There was no serious government effort to reform the police or judi-
 cial systems or to prosecute those responsible for abuse. Police continued to conduct
 illegal searches and infringe on citizens' privacy, for example through mail censor-
 ship. Case backlogs led to ong delays in trials, and lengthy pretrial detention is a
 problem. The Government imposes limits on the freedom of assembly, religion, and
 movement.
 Political groups including the Mohajir Quami Movement (MQM) and their oppo-
 nents were responsible for a large number of killings in Karachi. Religious zealots
 continued to discriminate against and persecute religious minorities, basing their
 activities in part on legislation that discriminates against non-Muslims. Govern-
 ment-imposedprocedural changes have made the registration of blasphemy charges
 more difficult. Religious and ethnic-based rivalries resulted in numerous murders
 and civil disturbances. Traditional social and legal constraints kept women in a sub-
 ordinate position in society. They continued to be subjected to abuse, rape, and other
 forms of degradation by their spouses and members of society at large. The Govern-
 ment and employers continued to restrict worker rights significantly. The use of
 child and bonded labor remained widespread, inspite of legislation to restrict these
 practices and the signing of a memorandum of understanding on child labor with
 the International Labor Organization (ILO). Little was done to improve basic condi-
 tions for children. Female children actually fell further behind their male counter-
 parts in such measures as levels of health care and education.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-The number of extrajudicial killings
 committed by security forces, often in the form of deaths in police custody or staged
 encounters in which the police shoot and kill the suspects, increased. Prior to the
 removal of the Bhutto government, police killings of suspected criminals and others
 had become so common that no government officials gave due attention to the prac-
 tice. There are allegations that rival political groups and mafias use police to kill
 each other's activists in such fake encounters. There are also widespread reports
 that suspected criminals are murdered by the police to prevent criminals from impli-
 cating police in crimes during court proceedings. Police officials agree in private that
 due to the lack of concrete evidence, to corruption in the judiciary, and sometimes
 to political pressure, courts often fail to punish criminals involved in serious crimes.
 
 
 1466
 The police view these killings as appropriate in light of the lack of action by the
 judiciary against criminals.
 President Leghari charged in his dissolution order against Prime Minister
 Bhutto's government that thousands of persons in Karachi and other parts of Paki-
 stan, who were killed in police encounters and under police custody, had been de-
 prived of their right to life in violation of Article 9 of the Constitution. Most such
 killings occurred in Sindh province in clashes between the Government and factions
 of the Mohajir Quami Movement (MQM).
 The MQM was formed in 1984 as a response to a set of real and perceived politi-
 cal grievances of the part of the Mohajirs, the Urdu-speaking Muslims who migrated
 from India to Pakistan following partition in 1947. The MQM, in part because of
 its successful organizational structure and its willingnes to use violence and intimi-
 dation to further its ends, grew to become a dominant political party in urban
 Sindh, sweeping to power in November 1987 local elections in Karachi and
 Hyderabad. Relations between the MQM and the national Government have been
 contentious and often violent. Repeated government crackdowns against the party
 and its activists have failed to diminish, and may have increased, support for the
 party among the Mohajirs. Negotiations between the MQM and the Government
 have failed to make progress toward a political settlement in Karachi.
 In Karachi the Government regularly used excessive force, including torture and
 alleged encounter killings, against MQM activists. Press reports put the total num-
 ber of political killings at around 500, a sharp decrease from last year. Most of the
 MQM activists killed in encounters with police were not criminal suspects, and a
 sampling of cases shows that the official version of the encounters was often contra-
 dicted by other evidence.
 In January MQM activist Faheem Bhoora died in police custody. The police
 claimed that Bhoora had taken them to a building under construction to recover
 arms that he had hidden there. According to the police, Bhoora then tried to escape
 by leapin g from the second story, falling to his death. According to press reports,
 Bhoora's injuries-skull crushed from behind, broken ribs, and internal injuries-
 could not have occurred in the fall.
 In March Rangers shot and killed Naeem Sherri and Anmjad Beg, claiming that
 the two had opened fire on them. Sherri had been accused of numerous crimes, in-
 cluding murder. The Government claimed that the two were killed in a shootout in-
 side Beg's house. Other witnesses reported that Sherri was trying to hide behind
 a stand when he was shot numerous times at close range. Beg was reportedly taken
 alive, moved outside, and then shot and killed in the street.
 In June MQM activist Nadeem Sarwar was killed in an encounter with the police.
 The MQM claimed that he was killed after being arrested. Also in June two MQM
 workers were killed in an encounter. The police claimed that the two were driving
 an unregistered vehicle and opened fire on police when asked to stop. Other wit-
 nesses reported that the men were brought to the area in a olice van.
 In September police shot and killed Murtaza Bhutto, the brother of the Prime
 Minister, and seven of his supporters near his residence in Karachi. The police
 claimed that they intended only to arrest some of Bhutto's armed bodyguards. After
 the incident, there was confusion and delay over the registration by police of first
 information reports (FIR's) for the case, and one of the policemen allegedly injured
 in the encounter later died under circumstances that many view as suspicious. On
 December 18, prosecutors charged Asif Ali Zardari, the husband of former Prime
 Minister Bhutto, with the murder of her brother. A former intelligence chief was
 also charged withi the killing, and several poliemen were arrested but not charged.
 At year's end, a tribunal in Karachi was continuing its investigation into the case,
 and Asif Zardari remained in custody.
 During 1996 the Lahore High Court (LHC) ordered an inqui.ry into several cases
 of such alleged fake enounters, but no polie official was convited. In a few cases
 of extrajudicial killings, in which allegedly innocent people wer targeted, some po-
 lice officials were suspended and arrested, but their cases are still under trial.
 In a similar case in January, Lahore police shot and killed a man named Tanveer.
 Police arrested Tanveer for his alleged involvement in multiple murders and armed
 robberies. During the interrogation police sent him to a hospital in police custody,
 but he escaped. In a subsequent encounter, the police shot him when he allegedly
 opened fire on them. The press declared the incident a staged encounter. The
 Human Rights Commission of Pakistan (HRCP) reports that during the interroga-
 tion police nad tortured Tanveer so harshly that he had to be sent to a hospital.
 Upon doctors' refusal to treat him and fearing that he might die from his injuries,
 the police shot him. Lahore police also killed other persons in questionable encoun-
 ters and in custody.
 
 
 1467
 In July Bahawalnagar district police killed a schoolteacher and wounded his
 brother in a police encounter. Accordi  to the police, the teacher, Ashraf, was want-
 ed for robbery. When police attempted to arrest him, Ashraf and his brothers fired
 on the police party, and in an exchange of fire Ashraf was killed and his brother
 was wounded. However, according to friendly relatives, Ashraf had a long-running
 property dispute with hostile relatives who paid police to kill him, allowmg them
 to take his property. Following Ashraf's death, the friendly relatives, colleagues, and
 neighbors demonstrated in front of the police station and the residence of the police
 officer in charge. The police opened fire on the demonstrators, killing 4 persons and
 injuring 10. The Punjab Chief Minister ordered that a murder case be registered
 against the Deputy Superintendent of Police and the police station house officer.
 In March an employee of the Criminal Investigation Agency and several col-
 leagues reportedly killed a Christian laborer to avenge a purported insult. Following
 the Christian community's protest, a case was regsterd against the police, but no
 action had been taken against them by year's end.
 In A ril in a clash with Pakistan Muslim League-Nawaz (PML-N) activists, police
 killed PML-N Lahore Additional Secretary General Javed Ashraf and wounded two
 other persons. Police arrested 10 PML-N activists and registered a case against
 them on charges of attacking the police, burning a police kiosk, and damaging public
 property. Police claimed that Ashraf and his associates then tried to break into a
 nearby bank and that the bank guard fired on them. The PML-N leaders, however,
 claimed that the police had fired on the procession without provocation and that
 they had deliberately targeted Javed Ashraf on the instructions of the Government.
 PML-N leaders charged that the Government killed Ashraf in order to warn PML-
 N activists that they could meet the same fate if they took part in the opposition's
 campaign against the Government.
 At times police used excessive force against demonstrators. In June police killed
 three antigovernment marchers in a clash with protesters (see Section 2.b.). Also in
 June, police killed 4 Jamaat-i-Islami (J) demonstrators in Rawalpindi and wounded
 about 100 (see Section 2.b.).
 In October army major Arshad Jamil was hanged for the murder of nine members
 of a family during an anticriminal operation in Sindh in 1992.
 In November the Lahore District Magistrate ordered his subordinates to follow up
 and resolve all allegations of killings in police custody. At year's end, over a dozen
 were reportedly completed. However, neither the results of the investigations nor
 any charges were publicly announced. Also in November in Karachi, the caretaker
 Sindh provincial Government initiated a wholesale housecleaning of the local police
 department, which had been accused of extrajudicial killings.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no known politically motivated disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 Torture and other cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment by police remained com-
 mon practice. Police routinely use force to elicit confessions.
 Common torture methods include: Beating, burning with cigarettes, whipping the
 soles of the feet, sexual assault, prolonged isolation, electric shock, denial of food
 or sleep, hanging upside down, forced spreading of the legs, and public humiliation.
 Some magistrates and doctors help coverup the abuse by issuing investigation and
 medical reports stating that the victims died of natural causes.
 The overall failure of successive governments to prosecute and punish abusers is
 the single greatest obstacle to ending or even reducing the incidence of abuse. The
 authorities sometimes transferred, suspended, or arrested offending officers, but sel-
 dom prosecuted or punished them. Investigating officers generally shield their col-
 leagues.
 A presidential ordinance, promulgated in April 1995, which permits confessions
 or statements against third persons obtained during police interrogations in parts
 of the country declared to be "terrorist-affeted areas" to be used in court, remains
 on the books. The law is currently not applied, because no part of the country has
 been declared a terrorist-affected area.
 According to press reports, torture is common at Hyderabad Central Prison. In
 July three newspapers published photographs of prisoners inside the prison who
 were blindfolded and being held in cross-bar fetters. Prisoners who were awaiting
 trial claimed that they were kept in chains, fetters, and handcuffs, unable to move
 or sleep. The immediate reaction of the prison officials to the story was to file a law-
 suit against the reporter. The reporter's case was taken up by the HRCP, and the
 reporter was granted bail. At year's end hearings in the case had not taken place.
 The superintendent of Hyderabad prison has been suspended. In September the
 news magazine Herald published similar pictures and stories from prisoners.
 Poie and p ris n officials frequently use the threat of abuse to extort money from
 prisoners and their families. Police accept money for registration of cases on false
 
 
 1468
 charges and may torture innocent citizens. For example, in July a 75-year old man,
 Muhammad Ali was physically tortured and brutalized by a Gujranwala plice sub-
 inspector. People pay police to humiliate their opponents and to avenge their per-
 sonal grievances.
 In July the Inspector General of Police Punjab (IGP) stated that political inter-
 ference was the major factor affecting the performance of the police. He added that
 successive governments recruited police officers in violation of merit considerations
 and the department's regulations. In some instances, recruits had criminal records.
 The Government's decision to appoint police officials at the direction of par-
 liamentarians has greatly damaged police effectiveness. In response to political pres-
 sure, police officials sometimes follow orders of legislators to harass political oppo-
 nents. In return the legislators shield illegal activities by police.
 Addressing a seminar in the spring, President Leghari alleged that police stations
 are sold-meaning that police officials pay bribes to the politicians and senior offi-
 cials in the department in order to get posted to police stations of their choice. They
 then recoup their investments by extorting money from the citizenry.
 The womens' police stations staffed by female personnel in Karachi, Lahore,
 Faisalabad, and Rawalpindi remained understaffed. Despite court orders and regu-
 lations requiring that female suspects only be interrogated by female police officers,
 they continued to be detained overnight at regular police stations and abused by
 male officers. According to HRCP's monthly report of incidents for January, a young
 woman was raped in a police station in front of her mother by police attempting
 to find the whereabouts of her son, and a wife was sexually and physically abused
 in front of her husband to force him to confess to a criminal charge. A female pris-
 oner confined under the Hadood Ordinances was raped by the jail warden that same
 month. HRCP officials claim that the number of such incidents is increasing. Ac-
 cording to human rights advocate Hina Jilani, the majority of women in jails were
 subjected to torture and sexual abuse by the jail staff. She claimed that 85 percent
 of women were tortured and 62 percent raped by prison officials in 1996. There is
 no independent confirmation of these claims. In 1995 the High Court ruled that no
 woman should be kept in any police station overnight without a male person from
 her family. According to human rights advocates, these High Court orders were
 rarely enforced in 1996.
 The Hadood Ordinances promulgated by the central Government in 1979, were
 an attempt to make the Penal Code more Islamic. These ordinances provide for
 harsh punishments for violations of Islamic law, or Shari'a, including death by ston-
 ing for unlawful sexual relations and amputation for some other crimes. In practice
 the standard of evidence for imposing these punishments is exceptionally high and
 to date they have not been carried out. Nonetheless, these laws have been applied
 to Muslims and non-Muslims alike and weigh most heavily on women (see Section
 5).
 Prison conditions are poor. Overcrowding is a problem. For example, according to
 the then provincial Law Minister, in August there were 41,605 prisoners in Punjab
 prisons which have space for only 17,271. There are three classes (A, B, and C) of
 prison facilities. Class "C" cells generally hold common criminals and those in pre-
 trial detention. Such cells often have dirt floors, no furnishings, and poor food. The
 use of handcuffs and fetters is common. Prisoners in these cells reportedly suffer
 the most abuse, such as beatings and being forced to kneel for long periods. Condi-
 tions in "B" and WA" cells are markedly better. The authorities reserve the latter
 for prominent persons. Especially prominent individuals, including some political
 figures, are sometimes held under house arrest and permitted to receive visitors.
 The Government permits prison visits by human rights monitors.
 There were reports that wealthy landlords or political parties operated private
 jails. Many such jails are believed to exist in tribal and feudal areas. Some of the
 prisoners have reportedly been held in them for many years.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The law regulates arrest and detention
 procedures; however, the authorities do not always, comply with its provisions. The
 law permits a Deputy Commissioner (DC) of a local district to order detention with-
 out charge for 30 days of persons suspected of threatening public order and safety.
 The DC may renew detention in 30-day periods, for a total of 90 days. For other
 criminal offenses, the police may hold a suspect for 24 hours without charge. If the
 police can provide material proof that detention is necessary for an investigation,
 a court may extend detention for a total of 15 days.
 In practice, however, the authorities do not fully observe the limits on detention.
 Police are not required to notify anyone when an arrest is made and often hold de-
 tainees without charge until they are challenged by a court. The police sometimes
 detain individuals arbitrarily without charge, or on false charges, in order to extort
 payment for their release. Some women continue to be arbitrarily detained and sex-
 
 
 1469
 ually abused (see Section 1.c.). Police also detain relatives of wanted criminals in'
 order to compel suspects to surrender (see Section 1.f.). The law stipulates that de-
 tainees must be brought to trial within 30 days of their arrest. However, in many
 cases trials do not start until about 6 months aiter the filing of charges.. .
 The authorities generally permit family members and lawyers to visit inmates.
 However, in some cases, authorities refuse such visits. In the case of politicians and
 party workers charged with various offenses, the Government incarcerated some of
 them outside their home districts, thereby discouraging visits by family members,
 supporters, and attorneys.
 Te Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA) have a separate legal system,
 the Frontier Crimes Regulation, which recognizes the doctrine of collective respon-
 sibility. Authorities are empowered to detain the fellow members of a fugitive's
 tribe, or to blockade the fugitive's village, pending his surrender or punishment by
 his own tribe in accordance with the local tradition. The Government exercised such
 authority in 1996. In one instance, in August the Government used this authority
 in the Khyber Agency following the kidnaping and murder of an income tax official.
 Police may arrest individua s on the basis of a First Information Report (FIR)
 filed by a complainant. The police have been known to fie FIR's without supporting
 evidence. FIR's are thus frequently used to harass or intimidate individuals.
 Charges against an individual may also be based on a "blind" FIR, which lists the
 perpetrators as "person or persons unknown." If the case is not solved, the FIR is
 placed in the inactive file. When needed, a FIR is reactivated and taken to a mag-
 istrate by the police, who then name a suspect and ask that the suspect be re-
 manded for 14 days while they investigate further. After 14 days, the case is
 dropped for lack of evidence, but another FIR is then activated and brought against
 the accused. In this manner, rolling charges can be used to hold a suspect in contin-
 uous custody.
 If the police can provide material proof that detention (physical remand or police
 custody for the purpose of interrogation) is necessary for an investigation, a court
 may extend detention for a total of 15 days. Such proof, however, may be little more
 than unsubstantiated assertions by the police. The Government sometimes uses
 mass arrests to quell civil unrest. For example, in June the Northwest Frontier pro-
 vincial (NWFP) government arrested several leaders of the All Pakistan Clerk's As-
 sociation in an effort to quell their almost year-long antigovernment protest.
 The Government selectively used criminal charges and arrests to harass political
 opponents who were perceived as potential threats. In July police arrested four op-
 position leaders on different charges. Two of them, including General Secretary of
 the Metropolitan Muslim League Pervez Rashid, were arrested on charges of in-
 volvement in bomb explosions, They were later released on bail by the Lahore High
 Court when it became clear that there was no credible evidence to support police
 claims. Opposition leaders alleged that the Government had implicated these activ-
 ists in false cases in order to discourage opposition activists from participating in
 antigovernment campaigns.
 Political activists are sometimes arrested on trumped up criminal charges. It is
 possible that hundreds of people are incarcerated under these circumstances, though
 the exact number is unknown. MQM claims that 5,000 of its workers are held in
 prison on trumped up charges for what were, in reality, political activities. However,
 this number is impossible to confirm.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The Constitution provides for an independent judi-
 ciary, however, in practice, the judiciary is not independent. Through the President's
 power to transfer High Court justices and appoint temporary and ad hoc justices
 the executive branch has been able to influence the Supreme Court, the provincial
 high courts, and the lower levels of the judicial system.
 The judicial system involves several different court systems with overlapping and
 sometimes competing jurisdictions. There are civil and criminal systems with special
 courts for high-profil-e cases, as well as the federal Shari'a appeals courts for certain
 Hadood offenses. The appeals process in the civil system is: Civil court, district
 court, high court, and the Supreme Court. In the criminal system, the progression
 is magistrate, sessions court, high court, and the Supreme Court.
 It had become standard practice to appoint judges to the high courts and Supreme
 Court on a temporary basis for a period of 1 year and later confirm or terminate
 their appointments after an evaluation of their performance. Legal experts say that
 temporary judges, eager to be confirmed following their probationary period, tend
 to favor the Government. The permanent judges of the high courts who can serve
 until retirement-age 62-are also vulnerable to the executive in that they could be
 transferred to the Federal Shari'a Court (FSC), which is deemed by many to signal
 the end of their career. Judges in the Special Courts for Suppression of Terrorist
 Activities and banking tribunals are appointed directly by the Government and are
 
 
 1470
 
 hired on renewable contracts. Their appointments can be terminated any time with-
 out going through the Supreme Judicial Council, which is applicable to the judges
 of the high courts and Supreme Court. However, executive branch power regarding
 some judicial appointments was restricted early in the year.
 On March 20, a full bench of the Supreme Court of Pakistan (SC) issued orders
 curtailing the powers of the executive to appoint and transfer judges of the high
 courts. The SC made the consent of the chief justices of the high courts and Su-
 preme Court mandatory in the appointment and transfer of any high court judge.
 It also ruled that it is not desirable to send a SC judge as acting Chief Justice (CJ)
 to a high court and that no ad hoc judge can be appointed to the SC when perma-
 nent vacancies exist. The full bench directed the executive to fill permanent vacan-
 cies of judges to the high courts and appoint permanent chief justices in high courts
 within 30 days of the issuance of the orders. Chief Justice of Pakistan Sajiad Ali
 Shah directed chief justices of all provincial high courts to process the cases of the
 judges affected by the Supreme Court's verdict within 30 days. The SC verdict was
 widely welcomed by the legal community, as well as by opposition political parties.
 Former Prime Minister Bhutto, on the floor of the house, criticized the judicial ver-
 dict, saying that the Chief Justice had issued the verdict in anger and accused him
 of amending the Constitution by exceeding his jurisdiction.
 Despite its strong opposition to the ruling, the Government replaced ad hoc or act-
 ing chief justices of the high ourts in Puinjab, Sindh, and NWFP with those rec-
 ommended by the Chief Justice of Pakistan. The new Chief Justices of Lahore and
 NWFP high courts recommended termination of 14 judges (11 from the Lahore High
 Court) who had been appointed in violation of the Constitution as interpreted by
 the SC in its March verdict. The Chief Justice of the LH-C stopped referring cases
 to the affected judges. All affected judges have subsequently resigned. The LHC, en-
 titled to have 50 judges, is now functioning with only 29 judges, which is causing
 delays in the judiciaprocess. In September President Leghan app roved 29 judges
 appointed by the PPP Government to the Sindh, Lahore, and Peshawar high courts
 and denotifled (removed) 11. The 11 denotified were among the 17 justices not rec-
 ommended by the Chief Justice following the March 20 ruling on appointments. The
 other six had already resigned after having their judicial work taken away. The ef-
 fects of the SC ruling appeared quickly. In April a division bench of the LHC grant-
 ed bail to Punjab opposition leader Shahbaz Sharif, whose appeals for bail hearings
 had been repeatedly delayed since his arrest in November 1995.
 The civil judicial system provides for an open trial, cross-examination by an attor-
 ney, and appeal of sentences. Attorneys are appointed for indigents only in capital
 cases. There are no jury trials. Owing to the limited number of judges, the heavy
 backlog of cases, and lengthy court procedures, cases routinely take years, although
 defendants are required to make frequent court apearances. Under both the
 Hadood and standard criminal codes, there are bailabe and nonbailable offenses.
 According to the Criminal Procedures Code, the accused in bailable offenses must
 be granted bail and the accused in nonbailable offenses should be granted bail if
 accused of a crime that carries a sentence of less than 10 years.
 The Federal Shari'a Court and the Shari'a Bench of the Supreme Court serve as
 appeals courts for certain convictions in criminal court under the Hadood Ordi-
 nances. The Federal Shari'a Court also may overturn any legislation judged to be
 inconsistent with the tenets of Islam. However, these cases may be appealed to the
 Shari'a Bench of the Supreme Court.
 The judicial process continued to be impeded by bureaucratic infighting, inac-
 tivity, and the overlapping jurisdictions of the different court systems. Scores of po-
 sitions in the lower magistracy remained unfilled. Persons in jail awaiting trial are
 sometimes held for periods longer than the sentence they would receive if convicted.
 An HRCP team recently interviewed a prisoner in Dadu prison, Sindh, who had
 been in the jail for the last 9 years and had never been produced before a court.
 Arrested in a theft case, the prisoner's trial continued being adjourned due to the
 inability of the police to produce records. If convicted, he would have been sentenced
 to not more than 3 years imprisonment.
 The Government may refer cases involving terrorism, bombings, sabotage, high-
 way robberies, banditry, kidnaping, or similar offenses to special terrorism courts
 established by the Suppression of Terrorist Activities Act of 1975. Many legal ex-
 perts believe the special courts do not provide a fair trial. They maintain that the
 short time for investigations and trial procedures have effectively repudiated the
 presumption of innocence. They also cite the encroachment by federal authorities on
 the provincial governments' constitutional authority to administer justice and the
 inherent unfairness of parallel courts to which cases may be assigned arbitrarily.
 Moreover, the special courts may deny bail if the judges decide that the accused
 may have reasonably committed an offense. These courts had hundreds of cases
 
 
 1471
 pending in 1996. The court in Hyderabad alone had 380 cases pending at the begin-
 ningof the year.
 Government officials and some attorneys maintain that despite their deficiencies,
 the special courts are necessary because of the judicial backlog. They also maintain
 that the rules of evidence apply in the courts, defendants have the right to counsel,
 and the judges must meet the same standards as those appointed to a high court.
 Defendants also have the right to appeal, but only one appeal is allowed.
 The Penal Code incorporates the doctrines of Qisas (roughly, an eye for an eye)
 and Diyat (blood money), with the result that compensation is sometimes paid to
 the family of a victim in place of punishment of the wrngdoer. Consequently,
 wealthy or influential persons sometimes escape punishment for such crimes as
 murder and assault. The right to seek pardon or commutation is not available to
 defendants under the ordinance. The Hadod and Qisas and Diyat ordinances apply
 to both ordinary criminal courts and Shari'a courts. According to Christian activists,
 if a Muslim murders a non-Muslim, he can compensate for the crime by payingthe
 victim's family diyat; however, if a non-Muslim murders a Muslim, he does nothiave
 the option of p aying dyat and must serve a jail sentence or face the death penalty
 for his crime. However there were no reported cases of this during the year. Ap-
 peals of certain Hadood convictions involving penalties in excess of 2 years' impris-
 onment are referred exclusively to the Shari'a courts and are heard joiny by Is-
 lamic scholars and high court judges using ordinary criminal procedures. Cases re-
 ferred to the Shari'a Benc of theSupreme Court are heard jointly by Islamic schol-
 ars and Supreme Court judges using ordinary criminal procedures. Judges and at-
 trneys must be Muslim and be familiar with Islamic law. Within these limits, de-
 fendants in a Shari'a court are entitled to the lawyer of their choice. There is a sys-
 tem of bail.
 The Hadood Ordinances criminalize nonmarital rape, extramarital sex (including
 adultery and fornication), and various gambling, alchol, and property offenses. Of-
 fenss are distinguished according to punishment, with some offenses liable to Hadd
 (Koranic punishment) and others to Tazir (non-Koranic punishment) (see Section
 l.c.). Although both types of cass are tried in ordinary criminal courts, special rules
 of evidence apply in  add cases. A non-Muslim, for example, may not testify against
 a Muslim but may testify against another non-Muslim. Likewise, the testimony of
 a woman is not admissible in cases involving harsher punishments (lashing, ampu-
 tation, and stoning), and a woman's testimony regarding financial matters is not ad-
 missible unless corroborated by another woman.
 There continued to be charges that magistrates and police, under pressure to
 achieve high conviction rates, persuade detainees to plea d guilty without informing
 them of the consequences. Politically powerful persons also attempt to influence
 magistrates' decisions and have used various forms of pressure on magistrates, in-
 cluding the threat to transfer them to other assignments.
 Administration of justice in the FATA is normally the responsibility of trial el-
 ders and maliks, or leaders. They may conduct hearings according to Islamic law
 and tribal custom. In such proceedings, the accused have no right to legal represen-
 tation, bail, or appeal. The usual penalties consist of fines, even for murder. How-
 ever, the Government's political agents, who are federal civil servants assiged to
 local governments, oversee such proceedings and may impose prison terms of up to
 14 years. In remote areas outside the jurisdiction of federal political agents, tribal
 councils occasionally levy harsher, unsanctioned punishments, including flogging or
 death by shooting or stoning. Paramilitary forces under the direction of the political
 agents frequently perform punitive actions during enforcement operations. For ex-
 ample in raids on criminal activities, the authorities have been nown to damage
 surrounding homes as extrajudicial punishment of residents for having tolerated
 nearby criminal activity.
 In Jul a full bench of the LHC declared the constitution of banking tribunals and
 Special ourts for Suppression of Terrorist Activities to be unconstitutional. The full
 bench observed that appointment of judges to these courts are made by the Federal
 Government in its sole discretion, in some cases of persons who were officeholders
 of the ruling party and in other cases of persons   may not be qualified to be
 appointed as a judge of the high court or a district judge. The LHC's decision was
 welcomed by the public, the legal community, and opposition political parties. The
 opposition had been alleging that the Governent victimized it by referring opposi-
 tion leaders' cases to the special tribunals and courts, which were headed by the
 PPP-afiliated judges. However, in response to a government appeal, the SC stayed
 action on the LHC's decision.
 One example of the alleged victimization of opposition leaders through the special
 tribunais and courts is an August judgment of the baing tribunal,  sore, which
 ordered the Ittefaq group (owned by opposition leader Nawaz Sharif's family) to ia-
 
 
 1472
 
 mediately return 409 million rupees (approximately $10,200,000) worth of loans to
 banks. The judgment was issued by the banking tribunal despite the fact that the
 defendants had moved an application in the LHC for transfer of the case to the LHC
 and that the LHC had stayed proceedings at the banking tribunal.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-By law
 the police must obtain a warrant to search a house but do not need a warrant to
 search a person. However, the police often enter homes without a warrant and have
 been known to steal valuables during searches. In the absence of a warrant, a po-
 liceman is subject to charges of criminal trespass. However, policemen are seldom
 punished for illegal entry. Paramilitary forces sometimes damage homes as
 extrajudicial punishment of residents for having tolerated nearby criminal activity
 (see Section 1.c.).
 The Government maintains several domestic intelligence services that monitor
 politicians, political activists, suspected terrorists, and suspected foreign intelligence
 agents. Credible reports indicate that the authorities commonly resort to wire-
 tappin and occasionally intercept and open mail. In his order dismissing former
 PrimneMinister Bhutto, President Leghari accused the Government of massive ille-
 gal wiretapping, including the telephone conversations of judges, political party
 leaders, andmilita anand civilian officials. On December 15, the caretaker govern-
 ment announced that effective immediately all foreign and domestic mail was to be
 subject to censorship by the Special Branch and the Intelligence Bureau.
 Police arrest and detain reatives of wanted criminals in an attempt to compel
 suspe cts to surrender. In some cases, the authorities have detained whole families
 toirea relative who was the subject of an arrest warrant to surrender.
 The Frontier Crimes Regulation, the separate legal system in the FATA, permits
 Scollective responsibility, and empowers the authorities to detain innocent members
 of the suspect's tribe, or blockade an entire village (see Section 1.d.).
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speeh and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of speech
 and the press, and citizens are generally free to discuss public issues. There were
 increasedefforts by the Government and private groups to restrict press freedom,
 but those efforts had little practical effect on press reporting. The Constitution stip-
 ulates the death penalty for anyone who damages the Constitution by any act, in-
 cluding the publication of statements against the spirit of the Constitution. The
 ConsTitution prohibits the ridicule of Islam, the armed forces, or the judiciary. More-
 over, the Penal Code mandates the death sentence for anyone convicted of blas-
 pheming the Prophet Mohammed (see Section 2.c.). Journalists censor themselves
 on such subjects. The competitive nature of Pakistani politics helps to ensure press
 freedom since the media serve as a forum for political parties to compete with one
 another.
 The state-wned dailies Pakistan Times and Mashriq were sold to the private sec-
 tor in 1996. The Ministry of Information controls one of the two main wire services,
 the other is privately owned. The wire services are circumspect in their coverage
 of the news and generally follow the Government line. A Print, Press, and Publica-
 tions Ordinance requires the registration of printing presses and newspaers and
 allows the Government to cnflscate newspapers or magazines deemed objc ion-
 able. Foreign books must pass government censrs before being reprinted, although
 the importation of books is freely allowed. Government censors occasionally ban
 publications, usually for objectionable religious content, but for other reasons as
 well.
 Privately owned newspapers freely discuss public policy and criticiz e th Govern-
 ment. They report rmarks made by opposition politicians, and their editorials re-
 flect a wide spectrum of views. The Government continued to influence editorial pol-
 icy of privately owned newspapers by its power to allocate duty free newsprint and
 its pacement of government advertising, an important source of newspaper revenue.
 The Government owns and operates most rai taions. Private rado stations op-
 erate in Islamabad, Rawalpindi, Lahore, and Karachi, but they are not allowed to
 report news independent of that supplied by the government-run Associated Press
 of Pakistan (APP.) The Government also operates all but one semiprivate television
 station. It strictly controls their news broadcasts. However, the semiprivate
 Shalimar Television Network (STN) provides programs including Cable News Net-
 work (CNN) and British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC) programs, with consider-
 able independence from government oversight. The Government censors segments
 of CNN and BBC programs considered socially offensive but rarely if ever censors
 the news content. TheMinistry of Information monitors the advertisements on STN,
 editing or removing those deemed objectionable. Satellite dishes are readily avail-
 able on the local market, and many Pakistanis use them to watch uncensored for-
 
 
 1473
 eign broadcasts. Government-owned electronic media continued to convey the views
 of-the party in power.
 Literary and creative works remain generally free of censorship. Obscene lit-
 erature, a category broadly defined by the Government is subject to seizure. Dramas
 and documentaries on previously taboo subjects, including corruption, social privi-
 lege, narcotics, violence against women, and female inequality, are frequently broad-
 cast on television.
 In July a senior subeditor of the newspaper Dawn was abducted at night from
 outside his residence in Karachi. He later said publicly that he had been interro-
 gated by personnel of a government security agency regarding the whereabouts of
 an alleged fugitive. He was released the next day.
 Zafaryab Ahad, a free-lance Lahore-based journalist was arrested in 1995 and
 charged with sedition after he reported on child labor. He was accused of working
 with Indian intelligence to damage Pakistan's carpet industry exports through false
 reporting. Atyear's end, he was out on bail and Is case still pending in the courts.
 The Law of Defamation often makes it difficult for the press to report events of
 great public importance. Similarly, the Law of Contempt bars public debate on mat-
 ters of public importance under litigation on the grounds that it would influence the
 process of adjudication. A March judgment by the LHC in a defamation case met
 with widespread approval from journalists. The court observed that to prove defa-
 mation the complainant must demonstrate malice or personal ill will on the part
 of the press. The court also observed that since public men are public property, dis-
 cussion or criticism of their public conduct is in the public interest.
 According to the HRCP, different law enforcement agencies and the Ministry of
 Information employed extralegal methods under various pretexts. These included:
 Harassment, attempts to influence photographers and reporters, interference in the
 distribution of publications, and delays and discrimination in the issuance of secu-
 rity passes to report on events of great public interest.
 Thdepress and electronic media continued facing nonstate pressure as well. Dif-
 ferent poitical parties, ethnic, sectarian, and religi~ous groups, and militant student
 bodies tried to influence the policies of the media through demonstrations and phys-
 ical threats. The Government rarely if ever takes legal action in response to the ac-
 tivities of these groups.
 In May activists of Jamaat-i-Isami (JI) attacked the Film Censor Board's office
 in L.hore, ransacked the office, and injured the staff. They demanded that the staff
 ban an Urdu feature film that they deemed obscene. The producer had to obtain a
 court order to continue showing the film publicly. In July activists of a Shi'a organi-
 zation Tehrik-I-Jafria Pakistan (TJP) demonstrated in front of an Urdu daly's of-
 rice. JI and other religious groups' activists also demonstrated against Pakistan Tel-
 evision (PTV) for telecasting obscene programs and, on several occasions, threatened
 PTV officials.
 The Government and universities generally respect academic freedom. However,
 the atmosphere of violence and intolerance fostered by student organizations, typi-
 cally tied to political parties, continued to threaten academic freedom. On some cam-
 puses, well-armed groups of students, primarily from radical religious organizations,
 clash with and intimidate other students, instructors, and admnistrators on mat-
 ters of language, syllabus, examination policies, doctrine, and dress. These groups
 facilitate cheating on examinations, interfere in the hiring of staff at the campuses,
 control new admissions, and sometimes control the funds of their institutions. At
 Punjab University, the largest university in the province, Islami Jamiat-e-Tulaba
 (IT-student wing of the JI) frequently imposes its self-styled code of conduct for
 teachers and other students.
 Human rights groups remain concerned about the implementation of a 1992 Su-
 preme Court ruling that prohibits student political organizations on campuses.
 While they acknowled e that the ruling led to a reduction in campus violence, they
 question the legality of school officials expelling students for membership in a politi-
 cal organization.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution provides for
 freedom "to assemble peacefully and without arms subject to any reasonable restric-
 tions imposed by law in the interest of public order." Although the Government gen-
 erally permits peaceful assembly, it occasionally interferes with large political ral-
 lies, which are held by all political parties.
 The Constitution provides for freedom of association subject to restriction by gov-
 ernment ordinance and law. There are no banned groups or parties. District mag-
 istrates occasionally exercised their power under the Criminal Procedures Code to
 ban meetings of more than four peope when demonstrations seemed likely to result
 in violence.Trhis provision was invoked frequently in May during the Islamic month
 of Muharram, when tensions between Sunni and Shi'a Muslims traditionally peak.
 
 
 1474
 The Government usually did not interfere with large political rallies. However, po-
 lice killed three Jamaat-i-Islami protesters during a clash with antigovernment
 marchers in June. Opposition leader Nawaz Sharifand other opposition politicians
 traveled largely unhindered across the country throughout the year, holding large
 rallies critical of the Government. However, the authorities sometimes prevented
 leaders of politico-religious parties from traveling to certain areas if they believed
 that the presence of such leaders would increase sectarian tensions or cause public
 violence.
 In June police used batons and tear-gas and fired on JI demonstrators in Rawal-
 pindi, killing 4 and injuring about 100. The demonstrators were trying to force their
 way through a maze of bar ed wire to stage a sit-in in front of the Prime Minister's
 Secretariat against the "harsh tax-laden budget.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-Pakistan is an Islamic republic in which 96 percent of
 the people are Muslim. The Constitution requires that laws be consistent with
 Islam The Government permits Muslims to convert to other faiths but prohibits
 proselytizing among Muslims. "Islamiyyat" (Islamic studies) is compulsory for all
 Muslim students in state-run schools. Students of other faiths are not required to
 study Islam but are not provided with parallel studies in their own religion. In prac-
 tice, however, many non-Muslim students are compelled by teachers to complete the
 Islamiyyat studies.
 Minority religious groups fear that the Shari'a Law and its goal of Islamizing the
 Government and society may further restrict the freedom to practice their religions.
 Discriminatory religious legislation has encouraged an atmosphere of religious intol-
 erance, which has led to acts of violence directed at Ahmadis, Christians, Hindus,
 and Zikris.
 A 1974 constitutional amendment declared Ahmadis to be a non-Muslim minority
 because they do not accept Mohammed as the last prophet of Islam. However,
 Ahmadis regard themselves as Muslims and observe many Islamic practices. In
 1984 the Government inserted Section 298(c) into the Penal Code (PC), which pro-
 hibited an Ahmadi from calling himself a Muslim and banned Ahmadis from using
 Islamic terminology. The punishment is up to 3 years' imprisonment and a fine.
 Since that time, the Government has used this provision to harass Ahmadis.
 In 1986 the Government inserted Section 295(c) into the Penal Code, which stipu-
 lates the death penalty for blaspheming the Prophet Mohammad. This has been
 used by litigants to threaten and intimidate Ahmadis, Christians, and even Muslims
 in the past. According to the HRCP, the Government's unofficial changes to the pro-
 edures for fling formal blasphemy charges, made in 1995, have been followed by
 a significant drop in the number of blasphemy charges. According to the HRCP, one
 FIR was registered against a Christian, Ayu Masih under section 295(c) in 1996.
 No such charge was brought against a Muslim this year. However, three cases were
 filed under this section against Abmadis. Under the new procedures, magistrates
 are now required to investigate allegations of blasphemy to see whether they are
 credible before filing formal charges.
 In October in one well-publicized case, 14 (some say 19) Christian families fled
 the Punjab village Number 35 Eb Arfiwala following the arrest of one of their com-
 munity for alleged blasphemy. The families allegedly feared attack by Muslim
 neighbors angered over the alleged incident. By December the families had not re-
 turned to their homes in the village.__
 Abmadis continue to suffer from a variety of problems, including violation of their
 places of worship, barring them from burial in Muslim graveyards, denial of freedom
 of faith, speech and assembly, restrictions on their press, a social boycott, and al-
 leged official support of extremist elements who act against the Ahmadi community.
 Several Ahmadi mosques remained closed. In 1996 dozens of Ahmadis were charged
 with preaching their faith, which is illegal under the law. According to the Amir
 of the Islamabad Ahmadi community, there are approximately 140 Ahmadis charged
 with representing themselves as Muslims, most of whom are presently out on bail.
 Scores of Ahmadis were injured in attacks by religious extremists.
 The police at times refuse to prevent harassment and violence against Ahmadis
 or to prosecute those who commit such acts. In January a group of Khatm-e-
 Nabuwwat Youth Force (Finality of Prophethood Youth Force) accompanied by po-
 lice attacked the house of an Ahmadi in Abbottabad, NWFP, where Ahmadis were
 offering their Friday prayer. (Use of the house was necessary because activists of
 this militant organization had earlier demolished the Ahmadi mosque.) The mob
 dragged the Ahimadis out of the building and beat them in the presence of the po-
 lice. The police refused to register a case against the attackers. An Urdu daily added
 to the tension by reporting that Ahmadis had attacked the Khatm-e-Nabuwwat Vice
 President which resulte[ in threats to Ahmadis living across the district. Under
 pressure by the mullahs, the district administration sealed the Ahmadi house that
 
 
 1475
 had been used as a place of worship, and charged seven Ahmadis under Section
 298(c) of the PC.
 In April an Ahmadi, Abdul Khaliq, was arrested in Faisalahad under Section 188
 of the PC for tearing an anti-Ahmadi poster printed and displayed by local mullahs.
 He was later released on bail by the court. The outraged mullahs exploited the situ-
 ation by holding public meetings. The authorities arrested 22 Ahmadis and 12
 mullahs who were later released. The mullahs, however, succeeded in getting an el-
 derly Ahmadi, Mohammad Iqbal, arrested under section 298(c).
 In March two Ahmadi women were attacked in Karachi for reportedly using a
 piece of cloth with Koranic inscriptions. Both were seriously injured. Under pressure
 from the militant Sunni organization, Sunni Tehrik, police registered a case against
 the women under section 295(a) and 295(c) of the PPC. The sessions court released
 the women on bail, finding that the piece of cloth had no script on it.
 In December demonstrations broke out in Karachi against the appointment of an
 Ahmadi to the caretaker Sindh government.
 Accordin to a press report, in January there were 658 cases under blasphemy
 and anti-A   adi laws pending in different courts across the country. Reportedly,
 2,467 individuals either are on bail or in jail under blasphemy charges, awaiting a
 decision on their cases.
 When such religious cases are brought to court, extremists often pack the court-
 room and make public threats about the consequences of an acquittal. As a result,
 judges and magistrates, seeking to avoid a confrontation with the extremists, often
 continue trials indefinitely, and the accused is burdened with further legal costs and
 repeated court appearances. Lahore High Court Justice Arif Iqbal Hussain Ehatti,
 one of the two judges who in 1995 ruled to acquit accused Christian blasphemers
 Salamat and Rehmat Masih has received several death threats.
 In May the Peshawar High Court acquitted on appeal two Shi'a Afghans con-
 demned to death in January 1995 for blasphemy. The Afghans had been convicted
 of violating Penal Code Section 295(c) prohibiting the use of representations of the
 Prophet Mohammad after they allegedly attempted to have 10,000 copies made of
 a " photo print" of the Prophet. The High Court concluded that the prosecution had
 failed to substantiate the blasphemy charges.
 In September, 20 persons were killed in an attack by gunmen on a Sunni mosque
 in the Punjab city ofMultan.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-Most citizens enjoy freedom of movement within the country and to
 travel abroad, but the Government occasionally prohibits the movement of persons
 within Pakistan through "externment orders" when it believes that their presence
 will lead to a threat to public order. Travel to Israel is legally prohibited. Govern-
 ment employees must obtain "no objection certificates" before traveling abroad. Stu-
 dents are also required to have these certificates from their institutions, however,
 this requirement is rarely enforced. Citizens have and regularly exercise the right
 to emigrate. Exit control -ists (ECL), however, are used to prevent the departure of
 wanted criminals. The Government increasingly included businessmen, journalists,
 and political figures on the exit control list as a form of political harassment. No
 judicial action is required to add a name to the exit control st, and there is no judi-
 cial recourse or formal appeal mechanism if one's name is added. However, in some
 cases courts have directed the Government to lift restrictions on some ECL-listed
 politicians' travel abroad.
 The Government cooperates with the Office of the United Nations High Commis-
 sioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and other humanitarian organizations in assisting ref-
 ugees. First asylum has been provided to refugees from Afghanistan since 1979,
 when several million Afghans fleeing Soviet occupation fled across the border into
 Pakistan. There are currently over 865,000 Afghan refugees in Pakistan who have
 been granted first asylum. Between September and December, approximately 40,000
 Afghans returned to Pakistan fleeing a resumption of fightin in  abul. Initially the
 Government closed the border but soon after reopened it, allowing the refugees to
 enter Pakistan unhindered.
 The Government has not legally granted permanent resettlement to Afghan refu-
 gees but allows them to live andwork in Pakistan. Many are self-supporting and
 live outside of refugee camps.
 According to the UNHCR, there were no reports of forced return of persons to a
 country where they feared persecution. Also according to the UNHCR, approxi-
 mately 1.3 to 1.4 million registered and unregistered Afghan refugees remained in
 Pakistan at year's end. A total of 105,000 Afghan refugees were repatriated in the
 first 8 months of 1996. Since 1988 over 2.5 million Afghans have been repatriated
 from Pakistan.
 
 
 1476
 Afghan refugees in Pakistan have limited access to legal protection and depend
 on the ability of the UNHCR and leaders of their groups to resolve disputes among
 themselves and with Pakistani society. Police also frequently prevent Afghan na-
 tionals from entering the cities. Most able-bodied male refugeeshave foun  at east
 intermittent employment but are not covered by labor laws. Women and girls ob-
 tained increasingly better education and health care as NGO's provided increased
 services.
 The repatriation of Biharis continued to be a contentious issue. The Biharis are
 Urdu-speaking people from the Indian State of Bihar who went to East Pakistan-
 now Bangladesh-at the time of partition in 1947. Since 1971 when Bangladesh be-
 came independent, approximately 250,000 Biharis have been in refugee camps in
 Bangladesh. The repatriation of these people is tied to Pakistan's various ethnic
 problems. While the-Mohajir community:-descendants of Muslims who emigrated to
 present-day Pakistan from India during partition-supports repatriation, the Sindhi
 community opposes the move. In 1993 the Government flew 342 Biharis to Pakistan
 and placed them in temporary housing in central Punjab. No further repatriation
 occurred in 1996.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens have the right and the ability to change their government peacefully.
 With certain exceptions, citizens 21 years of age and over have the right to vote.
 However, several million bonded laborers and nomads may not vote because the Na-
 tional Election Commission has ruled that they do not "ordinarily reside in an elec-
 toral area, nor do they own or possess a dwelling or immovable prperty in that
 area." Political parties have been allowed to operate freely since the full lifting of
 martial law in 1988. Unregistered political parties are permitted to participate in
 elections. Members of the national and provincial assemblies are directly elected.
 The Constitution requires that the President and Prime Minister be Muslims. In
 February the federal abinet approved the Electoral Reforms Bill that, among other
 changes, abolished the requirement that a voter's identity card be presented during
 polling. The opposition parties called the electoral reforms a government ploy to rig
 elections, and the opposition party PML-N stressed that it would not take part in
 the elections under the new electoral reforms.
 In July the Muslim Conference boycotted the elections of the constituent assembly
 of Azad Jammu and Kashmir for the Kashmiris living in Puhjab. The Muslim Con-
 ference alleged that with the abolition of the identity card requirement, the PPP
 massively rigged the polls. They also alleged that the Government brought non-
 Kashmiris to the polling stations to cast bogus votes. These allegations appear to
 be valid.
 Under the p resent system, minorities vote for reserved at-large seats, not for non-
 minority candidates who represent actual constituencies. Because of this, local par-
 liamentary representatives have little incentive to promote their minority constitu-
 ents' interests. The Electoral Reforms Bill would give religious minrities the right-
 to vote for at-large candidates as well as local candidates (the so-called "double
 vote") but different Muslim religious groups and the main opposition party-the
 PMLN-rejected the bill, alleging that it ignored the feelings of the Muslim major-
 ity. To date the bill has not been ado pted by the Parliament. The Government
 claimed that the double vote right had been introduced in order to give minorities
 the leverage to influence their local members of the Parliament. The Government
 did not have the two-thirds majority necessary to pass the measure in the National
 Assembly.
 In May the SC stayed further action on the new electoral rolls which were re-
 cently revised by the Election Commission of Pakistan. In their petition, opposition
 PML-N leaders alleged that the PPP Government had harassed election commission
 officials to enroll bogus voters and delete PML-N voters. A final decision in the case
 has not yet been made.
 In June the Supreme Court restored the Pnjab local government bodies that
 were dissolved in 1993 by the caretaker government based on charges of corruption.
 However, these local bodies were suspended a day later when the Punab Assembly
 repealed the 1979 Local Government Ordinane under which the local bodies oper-
 ated. The opposition alleged that the Government repealed the ordinance because
 the restored local bodies were dominated by PML-N members.
 The more than 2 million Pashtun peo ple ve lvn ine FATA do nt ote for their
 National Assembly representatives and have no representation in the assembly of
 the Northwest Frontier province. In keeping with local traditions, FATA's National
 Assembly members are elected by tribal leaders, or maliks, who are appointed in
 the governor's name by the central Government's political agents. Many people iv-
 
 
 1477
 ig in this area have expressed dissatisfaction at having no vote. However, the ma-
 jority of Pashtun people live outside the FATA and, while retaining their tribal iden-
 tity, are fully integrated into politics and society. On December 15, the caretaker
 Government announced that all eligible voters in the tribal areas would be reg-
 istered for the general elections. By year's end, over 370,000 persons, including al-
 most 75,000 women, had registered to vote. However, rejecting the enrollment of fe-
 male voters in the tribal areas, a grand jirga (council) of the Afridi tribe of the Khy-
 ber Agency unanimously decided on December 31 to impose a penalty of 1 million
 rupees and demolish the home of any woman who registers with the voters list.
 Because of a longstanding territorial dispute with India, the political status of the
 northern areas-Hunza, Gilgit, and Baltistan-is not resolved. As a result, more
 than 1 million inhabitants of the northern areas are not covered under any constitu-
 tion and have no representation in the federal legislature. The area is administered
 by an appointed civil servant. While there is an elected Northern Areas Council, this
 body serves in an advisory capacity to the Federal Government and has no authority
 to change laws or raise and spend revenue.
 Although women participate in government they are underrepresented in political
 life at all levels. Only 4 women.-including the then-Prime Minister-held seats in
 the 217-member National Assembly that was dissolved in November. While women
 participate in large numbers in elections, some women are dissuaded from voting
 m elections by family, religious, and social customs in rural areas.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 There are several domestic human rights organizations, and new human rights
 and legal aid groups continue to form. These groups are generally free to operate
 without government restriction. The Government has provided protection to human
 rights lawyers defending accused blasphemers following threats and attacks on the
 lawyers by religious activists.
 International human rights organizations have been permitted to visit Pakistan
 and travel freely. The Government has not always been responsive to foreign NGO's,
 however. The Government's Human Rights Cell established branch offices in Kara-
 chi, Lahore, and Peshawar. The Cell brought attention to theproblem of spousal
 abuse by arranging visits by the then-Prime Minister to hospitaized abuse victims
 and began a television and radio campaign to educate the public on human rights
 issues.
 The Government established a new Ministry of Human Rights in November 1995.
 The caretaker Government has merged the Ministry of Human Rights into the Min-
 istry of Law, Justice, Human Rights, and Parliamentary Affairs. The former min-
 istry did not accomplish much of note prior to and following the merger.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution provides for equality before the law for all citizens and broadly
 prohibits discrimination based on race, religion, caste, residence, or place of birth.
 pnractice, however, there is significant discrimination based on these factors.
 Women.-Domestic violence is a widespread and serious problem. The Ministry of
 Women's Development estimates that 80 percent of women are victims of domestic
 violence. The press continued to draw attention to murders of married women by
 relatives over dowry or other family related disputes. Most of the victims are burned
 to death, allegedly in kitchen stve accidents. The police rarely visit the scene of
 the crime or conduct investigations to determine how the woman was burned. In-
 creased media coverage of cases of wife burnings, spousal abuse, spousal murder,
 and rape cases has helped to raise awareness about violence against women
 While abusive spouses may be charged for assault, cases are rarely fied. Police
 usually return battered wives to their abusive husbands. Women are reluctant to
 file charges because of societal mores that stigmatize divorce and make women eco-
 nomically and psychologically dependent on their husbands and male relatives. Rel-
 atives are also reluctant to report cases of abuse in order to protect the reputation
 of the family.
 Re is a widespread problem. However, it is estimated that less than one-third
 of al rapes are reported to the police. According to a police official, in a majority
 of rape cases the victims are pressured to drop rape charges because of the threat
 of Hadood adultery charges being brought against them. All consensual extramarital
 sexual relations are considered violations of the Hadood Ordinances. However, ac-
 cording to an HRCP lawyer, the Government has brought fewer charges against
 women under the Hadood Ordinances than in the past, and the courts have shown
 greater leniency toward women in their sentences and in the granting of bail. Nev-
 
 
 1478
 ertheless, according to a July HRCP report, 90 per cent of the reported rape victims
 are in prisons because of their failure to present credible witnesses, in strict terms,
 as required under the Hadood Ordinances. In Hadood cases, a woman or non-Mus-
 lim witness is not accepted. This means that if a man rapes a woman in the pres-
 ence of several women, he cannot be convicted under the Hadood Ordinances be-
 cause female witnesses will not be accepted. Similarly, if a Muslim man rapes a
 Christian woman in the presence of several Christian men and women, he cannot
 be convicted under Hadood Ordinances because non-Muslim witnesses are not ac-
 cetecd
 Marital rape is not a crine. The 1979 Hadood Ordinances abolished punishment
 for raping one's wife. It is a common practice in Pakistan, that "nikah (marriage
 registration) is performed whereas "rukh sati" (consummation of marriage) takes
 place some years later. The "nikah" (non-consummated) marriage is also regarded
 as a formal marital relationship. In one such case a 13-year-old girl, whose nikah
 had been performed but rukhsati had not taken place, decided to divorce her hus-
 band. The husband kidnaped the girl, raped her, and then released her. The police
 refused to register a rape case arguing that they were a married couple.
 In 1996 there were scores of incidents involving violence against women. For ex-
 ample, in one period of 33 days (May 11 to June 13) 212 cases of violence against
 women were reported in the newspapers. Sixty-one women were killed by husbands,
 in-laws, relatives, or criminals. Forty-six women were burned, most of them seri-
 ously. Relatives often claimed that they were preparing food when their clothes acci-
 dentally caught fire. Of the 46 women who were burned, 9 were burned to death
 by their husbands and in-laws for domestic reasons. Most human rights monitors
 believe that the "stove deaths" are in fact murders based upon a suspicion of illicit
 sexual relationship or on dowry demands.
 During this same period from May to June, 67 women were reported kidnaped,
 and most of them are still missing. Twenty-eight women, including some young
 girls, were reported to have been gang-raped, and several subsequently died from
 shock or torture. There were several press reports of in-laws burning daughters-in-
 law with boiling water or oil, acid, or fire. In some incidents, parents killed daugh-
 ters to prevent love marriages. In one incident a man disfigured a woman by throw-
 ing acid on her face because she had refused to marry him. A woman was badly
 beaten by her husband because she insisted on working. In few of these types of
 cases do the police or courts become involved, and it is rare for the perpetrator of
 domestic rape or murder to be convicted. There were several reports in 1996 of par-
 ents arranging marriages for their daughters with elderly men for financial gain.
 Reports of feudal landlords raping peasant women in the rural areas continued to
 appear in the press in 1996.
 There are an increasing number of reports of women killed or mutilated by male
 relatives who suspect them of adultery. Few such cases are investigated seriously.
 Scores of men and women from Baluchistan and rural areas of Sindh and Punjab
 provinces are killed annually for alleged illicit sexual relations. While the tradition
 of such killing applies equally to offending men and women, women are more likely
 to be killed than men.
 There are significant barriers to the advancement of women, beginning at birth.
 In general female children are less valued and cared for than male children. Accord-
 ing to a United Nations study, girls receive less nourishment, health care, and edu-
 cation than boys. According to the Government, only 23.5 percent of females over
 10 years of age are literate, compared with 48.9 percent of males; the level of lit-
 eracy among females is declining. Discrimination against women is particularly
 acute in rural areas.
 Human rights monitors and women's groups believe that the Shari'a Law has had
 a harmful effect on the rights of women and minorities, reinforcing popular atti-
 tudes and perceptions, and contributing to an atmosphere in which discriminatory
 treatment of women and non-Muslims is more readily accepted.
 Both civil and religious laws protect women's rights in cases of divorce, but, as
 in the case of inheritance laws, many women are unaware of them, and often the
 laws are not observed. In inheritance cases women generally do not receive-or are
 pressed to surrender-their due share of the inheritance. In rural areas, the practice
 of a woman "marrying the Koran" is still widely accepted if the family cannot ar-
 range a suitable marriage or wants to keep the family wealth intact. A woman
 "married to the Koran" is forbidden to have any contact with males over 14 years
 of age, including her immediate family members. The Government's Council of Is-
 lamic Ideology (CII) condemned the practice as un-Islamic, but the CHI ruling is not
 legally binding. Press reports indicate that the practice of buying and selling brides
 still takes place in parts of NWFP and the Punjab. In September a Lahore High
 Court judge ruled that a woman's marriage without the consent of her parents or
 
 
 1479
 
 guardian is invalid. The judge further ruled that children born of such an invalid
 marriage are to be considered illegitimate, and that widows and divorcees also are
 forbidden to marry without the consent of their parents or guardians.
 In 1992 the Supreme Court observed that under Islamic law, a husband is not
 required to give written notice of a divorce to a local union council. The husband's
 statement, with or without witnesses, is the defining legal step. The woman, lacking
 written proof of divorce, remains legally and socially vuinerable. Human rights orga-
 nizations expressed concern that a woman could be charged with adultery if her
 former spouse were to deny having divorced her. However, the Court's opinion was
 never implemented.
 There are also limits on the admissibility and value of women's testimony in court
 (see Section i.e.).
 Women's organizations operate primarily in urban centers. Many concentrate on
 educating women about existing legal rights. Other groups concentrate on providing
 legal aid to poor women in prison who may not be able to afford an attorney.
 According to an independent observer, the Government through 1996 had trained
 and deployed over 40,000 female rural health workers. The Government plans to
 train another 10,000 in 1997 with the goal of having a total of 100,000 by 1998.
 The Government also produced television documentaries on women in development.
 Although a small number of women study and _teach in universities, postgraduate
 employment opportunities remain largely limited to teaching, medical services, and
 the law. Nevertheless, an increasing number of women are entering the commercial
 and public sectors. In the urban areas of the Punjab, more and mre parents send
 their daughters to schools.
 Children.-There is no federal law on compulsory education, and neither the fed-
 eral or provincial governments provide sufficient resources to assure universal edu-
 cation. Government provision of health care is somewhat better-especially with the
 program deploying rural health workers-but health care services in most areas re-
 main seriously inadequate. Many children begin working at a very early age. At the
 age of 5 or 6, female children are often responsible for younger siblings. Children
 are sometimes kidnaped to be used as forced labor, for ransom, or to seek revenge
 against an enemy (see Sections 6.c. and 6.d.). Child prostitution involving boys and
 girls is widely known to exist but is rarely discussed. The Government does little
 to deter it.
 Legal rights for children are theoretically protected by numerous laws that incor-
 porate elements of the U.N. Convention on the Rights of the Child. However, the
 Government frequently fails to enforce these laws. Federal law allows, but does not
 require, offenders under the age of 14 to be placed in reform schools; however, no
 such facilities exist. There is only one jail in each province for convicted prisoners
 under the age of 21. A 1995 HRCP report estimated that there were more than a
 thousand children in various jails nationwide. Although Punjab and Sindh provinces
 have laws mandating special judicial procedures for child offenders, in practice, chil-
 dren and adults are essentially treated equally. Very young children accompany
 their convicted mothers to jail.
 Incidents of kidnaping, rape, and murder of minor teenage children are on the
 rise. In January two girls in Faisalabad, both 4th grade students, were kidnaped
 and killed. The culprit was immediately arrested and sentenced to death by a spe-
 cial court. In such incidents against children, the courts appear to be far more active
 than in cases of domestic violence.
 According to press reports, there are several madrassahs (religious schools) in
 southern Punjab where children are illegally confined and kept in unhealthy condi-
 tions. In March Multan district police raided such a madrassah where 22 children,
 8 to 14 years of age, were kept chained by the superintendent of the madrassah.
 According to the assistant commissioner, the children were chained round the clock,
 and some of them had been chained for over 1 year. Following the police raid, there
 was no reported judicial action taken against officials of the madrassah.
 People With Disabilities.-There are no laws requirn equal accessibility to public
 buildings for disabled persons. The Human Rights Cell has requested all city admin-
 istrations to incorporate facilities for the disabled-including wheelchair access
 ramps and elevators-in local building codes.
 Religious Minorities.-Government authorities afford religious minorities less
 legal protection than is afforded to Muslim citizens. Members of religious minorities
 are subject to violence and harassment, and police at times refuse to prevent such
 actions or to charge those who commit them. Ahmadis are often targets of violence,
 often instigated by local religious leaders
 A Sunni Muslim shopkeeper stabbed and seriously wounded an Ahmadi teacher
 in Khushab. According to Ahmadi sources, the attack was instigated by the anti-
 
 
 1480
 Ahmadi speech of a local mullah. A case could not be registered against the culprit
 because the hospital refused to issue a report of attempted murder.
 In May about 300 religious extremists demolished an Ahmadi place of worship in
 Dulmial. When the district administration barred them from occupying the mosque,
 furious mullahs forced Ahmadi shopkeepers to evacuate properties owned by non-
 Ahmadis, boycotted businesses owned by Ahmadis, forced parents to withdraw their
 children from a school owned by an Ahmadi, and filed false cases against several
 Ahmadis.
 Human rights activist and lawyer Asma Jehangir, who represents minorities in
 cases involving religious persecution, remained the target of religious extremists'
 criticism. She is accused by extremists of being "an infidel" and "a foreign agent."
 Following an attack on her family last year, widely assumed to have been carried
 out by religious extremists, Jehangir now is accompanied by an armed guard.
 In April the district Sessions Court of Lahore acquitted three persons accused of
 murdering an alleged Christian blasphemer, Manzoor Masih. Masih was killed al-
 legedly by religious extremists in April 1994. The court refused to accept written
 evidence of two eyewitnesses, Salamat and Rehmat Masih (accused along with the
 deceased in the 1995 blasphemy case) who fled to Germany following their acquittal.
 Due largely to the efforts of the Milli Yakjehti Council (MYC-Alliance of Religious/
 Sectarian Groups to Develop Tolerance and Harmony) and strict measures taken by
 the Punjab government, in 1996 there were no bombings or attacks on Shi'a or
 Sunni places of worship. However, tension botween the Sunni extremist organiza-
 tion Sipah-i-Sahaba Pakistan (SSP), and the Shi'a organizations Tehrik-i-Jafria
 Pakistan (TJIP) and Sipah-i-Muhammad Pakistan (SMP) erupted in mid-year with
 a rash of sectarian-motivated killings. Those murdered included the Commissioner
 of Sargdha division, an excise and taxation officer, a renowned poet, and the
 spokesman of the extremist Shi'a organization SMP. Government officials have pub-
 licly blamed the SSP and the SMP for these murders.
 According to a press report, from January 1 to August 19, 52 people were killed
 and 100 injured in 53 sectarian-motivated incidents across the country. In 2 weeks
 of August alone, 25 people were killed. On August 14, 11 people were killed when
 an Indendence Day rally m Karachi, organized by the Sunni militant organization
 SSP, was attacked by unknown gunmen. Also in August, armed persons fired on a
 Shi'a religious gathering in Vehari district, killing 14 persons.
 Religious minority grups also experience considerable discrimination in employ-
 ment and education; the laws facilitate discrimination in employment based on reli-
 gion In Pakistan's early years, minorities were able to rise to the senior ranks of
 flhe military and civil servie. Today, many are unable to rise above mid level ranks.
 Because of the lack of educational opportunities for some religious minority groups,
 discrimination in employment is believed to be increasingly prevalent. There are
 also restrictions on testimony in court by non-Muslims (see Section i.e.).
 Christians in particular have difficulty finding jobs other than those of menial
 labor. Many Christians continue to express the fear of forced marriages between
 Muslim males and Christian women, although the practice is relatively rare. Chris-
 tians are among the least educated citizens. According to one Christian rights advo-
 cate, only 8 percent of Christian males and 6 percent of Christian females are lit-
 erate.
 Ahmadis suffer from harassment (see Section 2.c.) and discrimination and have
 limited chances for advancement into management levels in government service.
 Even the rumor that someone may be an Ahmadi or have Ahmadi relatives can sti-
 fle opportunities for employment or promotion. Young Ahmadis and their parents
 complain of increasing difficulty in gaining admittance to good colleges, forcing
 many children to go abroad for higher education.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The Industrial Relations Ordinance of 1969 (IRO)
 enunciates the right of industrial workers to form trade unions but is subject to
 major restrictions in some employment areas. The Essential Services Maintenance
 Act of 1952 (ESA) covers sectors associated with "the administration of the State,"
 i.e., government services and state enterprises, such as oil and gas production, elec-
 tricity generation and transmission, the state-owned airline, and ports. Workers in
 these sectors are allowed to form unions. However, the ESA sharply restricts normal
 union activities, usually prohibiting, for example, the right to strie in affected orga-
 nizations. In response to international criticism, the Government took steps in 1995
 to limit application of the ESA. In addition in 1996 the Cabinet decided to withdraw
 the exemption of the export promotion zones (EPZ's) from the IRO's provisions
 granting the right to workers to form trade unions.
 
 
 1481
 Union members make up only about 10 percent of the industrial labor force and
 3 percent of the total estimated work force. Contract labor continues to flourish, un-
 dercutting the power of the unions and exploiting workers willing to work on tem-
 porary contracts. These workers receive fewer benefits and have no job security.
 There is no provision in the law granting the right of association to agricultural
 workers.
 Legally required conciliation proceedings and cooling-off periods constrain the
 right to strike, as does the Government's authority to ban any strike that may cause
 "serious hardship to the community" or prejudice to the national interest. The Gov-
 ernment may also ban a strike that has continued for 30 days.
 Strikes are rare. When they occur, they are usually illegal and short. The Govern-
 ment regards as illegal any strike conducted by workers who are not members of
 a legally registered union. Police do not hesitate to crack down on worker dem-
 onstrations. The law prohibits employers from seeking retribution against leaders
 of a legal strike and stipulates criminal penalties for offenders. The courts may im-
 prison employers for violating this prohibition, but they are more likely to fine
 them. The law does not protect leaders of illegal strikes.
 Unions may belong to federations, and there are seven major federations in Paki-
 stan. The Government permits trade unions all across the political spectrum. While
 many unions remain aloof from party   litics, the most powerful are those associ-
 ated with political parties. After the PPP came to power in 1988, it successfully or-
 ganized trade unions under the banner of the People's Labor Bureau (PLB). The
 LB's main competitors are the Jamaat-i-Islami's National Labor Federation and
 the MQM-backed labor unions.
 The International Labor Organization (ILO) has stated that current law and prac-
 tice violate the Government's commitments under ILO Convention 87. The ILO has
 urged the Government to lift prohibitions against union activity in respect to teach-
 ers, radio, television railway, forestry, hospital, and other government employees,
 as well as to rescind the existing ban on strikes. The ILO also expressed concern
 about the practice of artificial promotions that exclude workers from the purview
 of the Industrial Relations Ordinance and stated that nonapplication of labor laws
 in proposed new "special industrial zones" would be a violation of Convention 111.
 In response to a Government request, the ILO has provided technical assistance to
 help bring the country's labor laws into conformity with the world body's conven-
 tions. In 1994 a government task force on labor prepared a report recommending
 improvements on worker rights problems, which were the basis for the development
 of a new labor policy by the Government. As of year's end, the Government had not
 yet approved the new labor policy
 Federations are free to affiliate with international federations and confederations.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The right of industrial work-
 ers to organize and freely elect representatives to act as collective bargaining agents
 is established in law. The IRO prohibits antiunion discrimination by employers. If
 found guilty of antiunion discrimination, employers are required to reinstate work-
 ers fired for union activities.
 In general legally constituted unions have the right to bargain collectively. How-
 ever, the many restrictions on forming unions (see Section 6.a.) preclude collective
 bargaining by large sections of the labor force, e.g., agricultural workers, who are
 not guaranteed the right to strike, bargain collectively, or make demands on em-
 ploy ers.
 The ESA also restricts collective bargaining. For each industry subject to the ESA,
 the Government must make a finding, renewable every 6 months, on the limits of
 union activity. In cases in which the Government prohibits collective bargaining,
 special wage boards decide wage levels.
 These boards are established at the provincial level and are comprised of rep-
 resentatives from industry, labor, and the provincial Labor Ministry, which provides
 the chairman. The chairman may name additional industry and labor representa-
 tives to the board. Despite the presence of the labor representatives, unions are gen-
 erally dissatisfied with the boards' findings. Disputes are adjudicated before the Na-
 tional Industrial Relations Commission. A workers right to quit may also be cur-
 tailed under the ESA. Dismissed workers have no recourse to the labor courts.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The Constitution and the law pro-
 hibit forced labor. However, critics argue that the ESA's limitation on some worker
 rights constitutes a form of compulsory labor. The Government informed the ILO's
 Committee on the Application of Standards in 1990 that amendments were under
 consideration to rectify the problem. However, the Government has taken no further
 action.
 Illegal bonded labor is widespread. Bonded labor is common in the brick glass,
 and fishing industries and is found among agricultural and construction workers in
 
 
 1482
 rural areas. Conservative estimates put the figure of bonded workers at several mil-
 lion.
 According to press reorts, in the remote areas of rural Sindh reports of bonded
 agricultural labor and debt slavery have a long history. Landlords have kept entire
 families in private prisons and families have been sold by one landlord to another.
 Press and other sources report that raids by government officials and human rights
 activists this year liberated a few of the bonded laborers.
 In January a raid led by government human rights officials freed about 30 bonded
 laborers from three different private jails run by local landlords. According to gov-
 ernment officials, the freed laborers were taken to safe places with relatives, but
 other prisoners in the same jails had been raped or killed, and the landlords fled.
 In April, 140 bonded laborers were freed from two different landlords in rural
 Sindh in a raid conducted by the police and the HRCP. A few of the laborers had
 been held in bondage for as long as 25 years. The police allegedly acted only after
 urging by the HRCP, which had gathered videtapedevidence of the abuses.
 The Bonded Labor System (Abolition) Act adopted in 1992, outlawed bonded labor,
 canceled all existing bonded debts, and forbade lawsuits for the recovery of existing
 debts. However the provincial governments, which are responsible for enforcing the
 law, have failed to establish enforcement mechanisms. Hence, the law is largely in-
 effective. Lacking employment alternatives, many workers have voluntarily re-
 turned to bondedlabor.
 Children are sometimes kidnaped to be used as forced labor.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.--Child labor is common and results
 from a combination of severe poverty, employer greed, and inadequate enforcement
 of laws intended to control it. The current estimate of working children is between
 8 and 10 million. In response to international criticism, however, the Government
 has begun to push provincial authorities to enforce child labor laws. In the first 6
 months of 1996, according to the Labor Minister, 7,003 raids on businesses sus-
 pected of violating child labor laws had been made, resulting in 2,538 prosecutions
 and 395 convictions. Fines have ranged from $10 to $117. There have been no re-
 ported jail terms. Private sector exporters and nongovernmental organizations, sup-
 ported by the Government, are creating an independent child labor welfare organi-
 zation to oversee implementation of a child labor free certification system as well
 as education and welfare programs for working children. The Government is offering
 financial support and nationally known human rights activists have agreed to sit
 on the proposed board.
 While much child labor is in the traditional framework of family farming or small
 business, the employment of children in large industries and, according to labor ac-
 tivists, in state-sponsored training programs, is also widespread.  id labor is
 widely employed in the carpet industry, much of which is family run. Children have
 also been employed in other export industries, such as textiles, leather tanning, sur-
 gical instruments, and sporting goods, though the extent is unclear. Children are
 sometimes kidnaped to be used as forced labor (see Section 6.c.). The Government
 is establishing a pilot program of 24 rehabilitation centers for former child laborers
 in cooperation with the ILO's International Program for the Elimination of Child
 Labor (IPEC). Twelve of these centers are currently operating. About 1,400 children
 are involved with the centers. UNICEF is working with the National Commission
 for Child Welfare and Development and the Labor Ministry to establish a child
 labor community awareness media program. Soccer ball manufacturers are working
 with major foreign sporting goods companies to eliminate child labor from their
 products. One firm in Sialkot has formed a paitnership with a foreign company to
 make child-labor-free soccer balls at village centers. Another Sialkot firm is building
 a plant in collaboration with a foreign partner with a program of schooling for work-
 ers' families.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-Labor regulations are governed by federal stat-
 utes applicable throughout the country. The minimum wage is approximately $47
 (1,650 rupees) per month. Although this wage provides a meager subsistence living
 for a small family, the minimum wage affects only a small part of the work force,
 and most families are large.
 The law, applicable nationally, provides for a maximum workweek of 54 hours,
 rest periods during the workday, and paid annual holidays. These regulations do not
 apply to agricultural workers, workers in factories with fewer than 10 employees,
 and to the small contract groups, which are subdivisions within factories of 10 or
 fewer workers. Many workers are unaware of the regulations protecting their rights
 because of their lack of education.
 The provinces have been ineffective in enforcing labor regulations, because of lim-
 ited resources, corruption, and inadequate regulatory structures. In general, health
 and safety standards are poor. Although organized labor presses for improvements,
 
 
 1483
 the Government has done little and weakly enforces existing legal protection. Work-
 ers cannot remove themselves from dangerous work conditions without risking loss
 of employment.
