Pakistan
Pakistan had another violent year in 2013. Nawaz Sharif’s Pakistan Muslim
League won parliamentary elections in May and Sharif became prime minister
in June. The elections were marred by a bombing and targeted killing campaign
by the Taliban and their affiliates to sabotage the elections. The new government
replaced the Pakistan People’s Party-led government, in office since
2008. The constitutional transfer of power from one civilian government to
another was the first in Pakistan’s history.
While the military did not hinder the electoral process, it remained unaccountable
for human rights violations and exercised disproportionate political influence,
especially on matters of national security and counter-terrorism. The
deep-rooted security crisis in the country was underscored by the inability or
unwillingness of military and civilian institutions to end attacks on the population
by militant groups. Islamist militant groups continued to target and kill
hundreds of Shia Muslims—particularly from the Hazara community—with
impunity. In September, the Christian community experienced the deadliest
attack on its members in Pakistan’s history when 81 were killed in a bombing
on a church in Peshawar.
There has been a breakdown of law enforcement in the face of politically motivated
attacks particularly throughout the province of Balochistan and targeted
killings in Karachi. The police and other security forces have been responsible
for numerous abuses, including, torture and other ill-treatment of criminal suspects,
extrajudicial killings, and unresolved enforced disappearances of terrorism
suspects.
The country also faces acute economic problems, exemplified in 2013 by growing
electricity shortages and rising food and fuel prices, which hit the country’s
poor disproportionately.
At least 22 polio vaccination workers were killed, and 14 wounded in 2012 and
2013 in attacks for which the Taliban claimed responsibility.
Elections
During the election campaign, at least 130 people were killed and over 500
were injured by the Taliban and its affiliates, who declared elections “un-
Islamic” and warned voters to stay away from ruling coalition political rallies.
The European Union Election Observer Mission noted that “violence by nonstate
actors unbalanced the playing field and distorted the election process
considerably in affected areas,” but the political parties in the outgoing government
accepted the results. In September, President Asif Ali Zardari retired upon
completion of his term after overseeing an orderly democratic transition.
Sectarian Attacks
Sunni militant groups such as the ostensibly banned Lashkar-e Jhangvi (LEJ), an
Al-Qaeda affiliate, operate with virtual impunity across Pakistan, as law
enforcement officials either turn a blind eye or appear helpless to prevent
attacks.
In 2013, over 400 members of the Shia Muslim population were killed in targeted
attacks that took place across Pakistan. In Balochistan province, at least
200 Shias, mostly from the Hazara community, were killed in and around the
provincial capital, Quetta. In January, a suicide bomb killed 96 Hazaras and
injured at least 150. In February, at least 84 were killed and over 160 injured
when a bomb exploded in a vegetable market in Quetta’s Hazara town. The LEJ
claimed responsibility for both attacks. In March, at least 47 Shias were killed
and 135 injured in the port city of Karachi when a Shia-majority neighborhood
was targeted in a bomb attack. Some 50 apartments and 10 shops were
destroyed. Throughout the year, dozens of other Shia across Pakistan were targeted
and killed.
Religious Minorities
Abuses are rife under the country’s abusive blasphemy law, which is used
against religious minorities, often to settle personal disputes. Dozens of people
were charged with the offense in 2013. At least 16 people remained on death
row for blasphemy, while another 20 were serving life sentences at time of writing.
Aasia Bibi, a Christian from Punjab province, who in 2010 became the first woman in the country’s history to be sentenced to death for blasphemy, languished
in prison. Rimsha Masih, a 14-year-old Christian girl accused of blasphemy
and subsequently released in 2012, was granted asylum in Canada in
June. In March, several thousand Christians were forced to flee their homes in
Lahore after allegations of blasphemy against a local resident, Sawan Masih. A
mob of thousands then looted and burned some 150 homes and two churches
as police looked on. Sawan Masih remained in jail at time of writing.
In September, a suicide bombing during Sunday Mass at a church in Peshawar
killed 81 worshippers and wounded more than 130, the deadliest attack in
Pakistan’s history on the beleaguered Christian minority.
Members of the Ahmadiyya religious community continue to be a major target
of blasphemy prosecutions and are subjected to longstanding anti-Ahmadi laws
across Pakistan. In 2013, they faced increasing social discrimination as militant
groups accused them of illegally “posing as Muslims,” barred them from using
their mosques in Lahore, vandalized their graves across Punjab province, and
freely engaged in hate speech, inciting violence against them as authorities
looked the other way or facilitated extremists.
Women and Girls
Violence against women and girls—including rape, “honor” killings, acid
attacks, domestic violence, and forced marriage—remains a serious problem in
Pakistan.
There have been several thousand “honor” killings in Pakistan in the past
decade, with hundreds reported in 2013. Provisions of the Islamic Qisas and
Diyat law that allow the next of kin to “forgive” the murderer in exchange for
monetary compensation remain in force and continue to be used by offenders
to escape punishment.
Despite high levels of domestic violence, parliament failed in 2013 to enact
laws to prevent it and protect women who experience it. Efforts to raise the minimum
age of marriage to 18 remained stalled.
Judicial Activism and Independence
Pakistan’s judiciary remains an independent but controversial actor. Despite
the adoption of a National Judicial Policy in 2009, access to justice remains
poor, as case backlogs mount throughout the country. The courts are rife with
corruption.
Judges often use suo motu proceedings—the court acting on its own motion—to
help people gain access to justice. In other cases, the judiciary has used such
proceedings to interfere with legislative or executive powers, part of a longstanding
power struggle between Chief Justice Iftikhar Chaudhry, the government,
and the army.
The Supreme Court was active in raising enforced disappearances and government
abuses in Balochistan in 2013, yet did not hold any high-level military officials
accountable, demonstrating the limits of judicial independence in a state
in which the military is the most powerful actor.
Judges also continued to muzzle media and other criticism of the judiciary
through threats of contempt of court proceedings. The judiciary’s conduct came
under severe criticism during the election campaign when judges tried to disqualify
political candidates in violation of Pakistan’s international human rights
commitments, using vague and discriminatory laws requiring candidates to be
pious Muslims, and although repealed in 2009, to be university graduates.
Chief Justice Chaudhry, who took a leading role in acting against those critical
of the judiciary, retired from office in December.
Balochistan
The human rights crisis in the mineral-rich province continues unabated. As in
previous years, 2013 saw enforced disappearances and killings of suspected
Baloch militants and opposition activists by the military, intelligence agencies,
and the paramilitary Frontier Corps. Baloch nationalists and other militant
groups stepped up attacks on non-Baloch civilians.
The government of Nawaz Sharif attempted to achieve reconciliation in the
province after the election of Baloch nationalist leader Malik Baloch as chief
minister. However, the military continued to resist government reconciliation
efforts and attempts to locate ethnic Baloch who had been subject to “disappearances.” Successive Pakistani governments have appeared powerless to
rein in abuses by the military and both sectarian and nationalist militant
groups. As a result, many members of the Hazara community and non-Baloch
ethnic minorities under attack by militants fled the province or country, while
Baloch nationalists have continued to allege serious abuses by the military.
Counterterrorism Abuses
Security forces routinely violate basic rights in the course of counterterrorism
operations, with suspects frequently detained without charge or convicted without
a fair trial. Thousands of suspected members of Al-Qaeda, the Taliban, and
other armed groups—who were rounded up in a nationwide crackdown in 2009
in the Swat Valley and the Tribal Areas—remained in illegal military detention at
time of writing; few had been prosecuted or produced before the courts.
The army continues to deny lawyers, relatives, independent monitors, and
humanitarian agency staff access to persons detained during military operations.
In July, Attorney General Munir Malik admitted that more than 500 “disappeared”
persons were in security agency custody.
Aerial drone strikes by the US on suspected members of Al-Qaeda and the
Taliban continued in northern Pakistan in 2013, though less frequently than in
2012. An estimated 25 strikes had been launched through late November.
Hakimullah Mehsud, leader of the Pakistani Taliban, was killed in such a strike
in November. As in previous years, many of the strikes were accompanied by
claims of large numbers of civilian casualties; a 2013 Amnesty International
report documented unlawful civilian casualties in several strikes, but lack of
access to the conflict areas largely prevented independent inquiries into their
scope, scale, and legality under international law.
Freedom of Expression
At least six journalists were killed in Pakistan in 2013 while reporting stories or
as a result of deliberate attacks. Three journalists, Mirza Iqbal Husain, Saif ur
Rehman, and Imran Shaikh, were killed in a suicide bombing targeting the
Hazara community in Quetta on January 10. In April, Aslam Durrani, news editor
of the Urdu-language Daily Pakistan, was killed in a suicide bomb attack during an election rally. In August, the mutilated body of Abdul Razzaq Baloch, a journalist
working for the Urdu-language Baluch nationalist newspaper Daily Tawar,
was found in Karachi. Razzaq had disappeared in March. In November, Salik Ali
Jafri, a producer with Geo TV, a television channel, was killed in a bomb attack
in Karachi that targeted Shia Muslims.
A climate of fear impedes media coverage of both state security forces and militant
groups. Journalists rarely report on human rights abuses by the military in
counterterrorism operations, and the Taliban and other armed groups regularly
threaten media outlets over their coverage. YouTube, banned by the government
since September 2012 for hosting “blasphemous content,” remained
blocked in 2013.
In May, the longtime New York Times Islamabad bureau chief, Declan Walsh,
was expelled from the country at the behest of the military because of his coverage
of Balochistan and militant groups. Pakistani and international journalists
protested his expulsion. The authorities had not allowed Walsh permission
to return at time of writing.
Key International Actors
The US remains the largest donor of development and military assistance to
Pakistan, but relations remained unsteady through 2013 despite a meeting
between US President Barack Obama and Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif in
October. Reasons include increasing public anger in Pakistan over US drone
strikes and US allegations of Pakistani support for the Haqqani network, a militant
group that US officials accuse of attacking US troops in Afghanistan.
Pakistan raised concerns about US drone strikes at the United Nations General
Assembly in September.
Despite a 2012 law authorizing creation of a national human rights commission,
Pakistan failed to constitute the commission in 2013. In March, during its quadrennial
“Universal Periodic Review” appearance before the UN Human Rights
Council, Pakistan accepted recommendations that it take measures against religious
hatred, prevent violence against religious minorities, and hold to account
those responsible for such violence. The government, however, had taken no
action to implement these commitments at time of writing. Despite the serious
problem of enforced disappearances in the country, Pakistan has not ratified the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced
Disappearance.
Historically tense relations between Pakistan and nuclear rival India remained
poor in 2013 despite a meeting between the prime ministers of the two countries
in September. Pakistan and China continued to deepen their already
extensive economic and political ties.