PAKISTAN
While the Report on Pakistan acknowledges escalating violence in the latter half of 1983, where possible it carefully avoids holding the Zia government responsible. Thus in reporting that detainees have been tortured, the Report emphasizes that "no evidence exists that the current regime has ordered, authorized or condoned it."
More generally, the Report seems to suggest at times that abuses under President Zia's rule are simply an extension of an historical tradition or are justified by longstanding problems. The Report begins: "Martial law regimes have ruled Pakistan for most of its 36 years." The Report later suggests that the development of "large military and internal security establishments" is justified by a combination of "internal unrest" and "the threat Pakistan historically has felt from more powerful states in the region."
When the Report turns to particular events in 1983, its discussion becomes indirect and ambigious. In describing demonstrations in the Province of Sind to which the government responded violently, the State Department notes only that "security forces traded fire with protesters who held illegal processions, blocked highways and attacked public property." It goes on to emphasize that, "including police and soldiers, perhaps 300 persons died." By
-35-
discussing casualties in these terms, the Report mask's the responsibility of Pakistan's security forces for killing the vast majority of these people.
The Report also avoids a candid discussion of the number of arrests of political prisoners, a subject of great sensitivity to the Zia government. Commenting on this issue, the State Department notes only that at the end of 1983 "perhaps up to 5600 people" were in detention for political reasons. In explaining its inability to say more, the Report states that "given the absence of reliable statistics, and the difficulty in distinguishing between arrests for actions constituting legitimate political activity and for those threatening national security, the exact number of political detainees is difficult to estimate."
A number of independent observers and political opposition groups have charged that in 1983 more than 20,000 people were arrested nationwide. Whether or not it chose to credit these estimates, the State Department should have explicitly addressed the Pakistani government's policy of mass detention of perceived political opponents, which it has utilized for several years as a means of intimidating and controlling political dissidents. Many of these people are interrogated and held for several days or weeks, but never formally charged. Others are detained for extended periods of time.
-36-
The Report's 'discussion of the system of justice in Pakistan fails to reflect the continued deterioration of Pakistan's once proud civil system of justice. While it acknowledges that military courts now have "authority to try virtually any criminal case in Pakistan," it does not describe the related breakdown in the country's civilian judicial system. Particularly inadequate is its discussion of incursions on judicial independence, which is misleading:
A Provisional Constitutional Order, promulgated in March 1981, restricted the powers of the civilian judiciary to review actions of the martial law authorities and the military courts. A number of justices, including the chief justice and two supreme court judges, refused to accept the validity of the Order, and relinquished their positions.
In fact, Article 17 of the Provisional Constitutional Order (PCO) provides that judges of the Supreme and High Courts cannot continue to hold office unless they swear an oath to abide by the PCO. Judges making such an oath are forbidden from calling into question any provision of the PCO. Thus, judges refusing to uphold the PCO were forced to resign, and did not simply elect to "relinquish their positions." Also, more than "a number" of judges lost their seats for refusing to take this oath. Nineteen Supreme Court and High Court
-37-
judges lost their seats because they refused to take the oath, and twelve other High Court judges with a reputation for independence were not even allowed to take the oath, and thus lost their seats.
These and other incursions on the civilian judiciary have had a profound and debilitating effect on the protection of citizens from arbitrary state action,* and merit greater attention in the Country Reports.
* See the Association of the Bar of the City of New York and the Lawyers Committee for International Human Rights, "Justice in Pakistan: A Report of a Mission of Inquiry," July 1983, 46 pp.
-38-
