PAKISTAN
The State Department's report on Pakistan reflects its lack of attention to human rights there. In recent years the Reagan Administration has given its almost imqualified support to the Zia government because it provides a sanctuary for Afghan guerrilla bases and supports other U.S. foreign poÜQ' interests. The limited public concerns that the Administration has expressed with regard to Pakistan focused on the Zia government's apparent breach of nuclear non-proliferation guidelines.
The 1987 country report on Pakistan has the effect of supporting continuing administration policies. It portrays the human rights situation in Pakistan in overly optimistic, simplistic terms which ignore or downplay ongoing, serious rights violations.
The report notes the formal lifting of martial law in January 1986. Yet it fails to state clearly that many of the features of martial law remain in place, such as the retention of martial law regulations, the continuing detention of martial law prisoners, the indemnity of all governmental actions taken under martial law, and the continuing operation of summary military courts in some prisons. While the report mentions parliamentary efforts to repeal indemnity laws, it omits reference to the many instances in which courts in Pakistan have been unwilling to exercise independent authority in considering these issues. The report acknowledges the continuing debate over the eighth amendment to the revised Constitution, which denies civilian courts the right to review martial law decisions. Yet it fails to state clearly, as it should, that several hundred of those who were sentenced under martial law procedures remain in prison despite the gross denial of due process in those cases. Rather than publicly criticize the lack of judicial independence in these and other cases, the report assumes, without explanation or proof, that the slow judicial process is the result of benign inefficiency.
110
Pakistan
The report also understates problems in the handling of cases by special "terrorist" courts. These courts have been established pursuant to both Bhutto-era security laws and a 1987 ordinance. They are intended to handle cases involving sabotee, bombings, kidnapping and other security matters. The State Department's report conveys the impression that, though more expeditious than Pakistan's regular court system, the procedures utilized by these courts are essentially fair. In fact, little is known about the procedures or practices of these courts, which almost always convict those brought before them. The verdicts in these cases, including a nimiber of death sentences, are regularly publicized in government-sponsored newspaper advertisements. At least one legal challenge to the legality of these proceedings have been ñled in Lahore.
While acknowledging that some abuses continue to occur in the treatment of prisoners, the report places principal responsibility for these violations on provincial and local authorities, thereby deflecting blame from the federal government. Acts of Niolence in the Sind, for example, are attributed to "irregular forces which are used by the government, but remain loyal to local jjoliti-cal powers rather than to official authorities." The report says nothing about what, if anything, the Government of Pakistan is doing to control and discipline these "irregular forces."
The State Department goes to great lengths to absolve the Zia government of any responsibility for acts of torture or cruel, inhumane or degrading treatment or punishment in political cases. While it notes that physical abuse of those charged with "ordinary crimes" is common, it goes on to state that there was "no confirmed evidence that political detainees were tortured in 1987," noting only that some detainees were held in fetters. Frequent charges of ill-treatment voiced by Pakistani human rights groups are not mentioned. The reason the report gives for abuses that do occur is that "[pjolice in Pakistan are ill-trained, poorly paid and rarely held accountable," an explanation that emphasizes lack of resources rather than political will. The report is clear, however, in stating that while police have been accountable "in some cases," the government of Pakistan "has not instituted systematic reforms."
While the report does describe civil discontent in Siod Province, it largely ignores similar xmrest in Baluchistan and the Frontier Province. It fails
111
Critique
to give a clear picture of the civil discontent and strife that continued throughout Pakistan in 1987, and the extent of paramilitary activity in these and other areas.
It devotes inadequate attention to the ongoing harassment of the Ahmadi religious community. The reix)rt refers to the Presidential law ordinance of 1984 as a logical extension of an earlier constitutional amendment concerning the Ahmadis. In fact, the 1984 ordinance made a number of Ahmadi religious practices martial law violations. This ordinance was included in the post-martial law indemnity, which, in effect, upheld the prosecution of members of the Ahmadi community under military law for their religious practices. Other forms of discrimination still continue, including the banning of Ahmadi publications by provincial governments, the proscription of various Ahmadi meetings, and discrimination in government service and the military.
Finally, the State Department understates the level of corruption and government interference in the November 1987 local elections, and the extent to which political participation is still controlled by the central and provisional governments. In 1987 a number of political processions and meetings continued to be restricted or proscribed, not only in Sind Province, as the report mentions, but also throughout the country. The report also fails to state that while local elections in November were required to be conducted without formal party affiliations, the government-sponsored Muslim League Party was highly active and visible throughout the campaign.
112
