 PAKISTAN
 Pakistan'-s'political landscape changed dramatically on August
 6 when*Pakistani President Ghulam Ishaq Khan, pursuant to his
 constitutional powers, dismissedthe elected People's Pakistan
 Party (PPP) Government of Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto and
 dissolved the National Assembly and the provincial-assemblies.
 The President called for elections on October 24 for the
 National Assembly and October 27 for the provincial
 assemblies. Caretaker national and provincial governments
 were formed. A state of emergency was declared to enable the
 President'to act in the absence of the assemblies. Special
 tribunals, as provided for under the-law, were established to
 try politicians accused of corruption or misconduct while in -
 office .during the period since December 1988. Civilian
 administration and the courts continued to function, and the
 basic rights guaranteed under the Constitution were
 untouched. The elections were judged-by foreign observers to
 have been generally free and fair. A new-Government was
 formed in November, led by Prime Minister Mian Nawaz Sharif,
 leader of the Islamic Jamhoori Ittehad (IJI), and the state of
 emergency laws,-hich had not been used, were lifted.
 Responsibility-for internal security rests primarily with the
 police, although the'armyiwas called upon to help restore
 order during civil disturbances numerous-times in 1990.
 Paramilitary forces-are charged with maintaining law and order
 in frontier areas. -Police forces are under provincial
 control'-as are paramilitary, forces when assisting in a law
 and order situation; both forces -ere responsible for human
 rights abuses in 1990. The military, although impatient with
 the problems of Pakistan's emerging democracy and widely seen
 as partly responsible for the dissolution of the Bhutto
 Government, strongly and publicly supported the holding of
 elections on October 24 and 27.
 Private businesses operate freely in most sectors of the
 economy, though public corporations play a leading role in
 heavy manufacturing and finance. The Constitution assures the
 right to private property. An ongoing International Monetary
 Fund structural adjustment program has prompted some unpopular
 austerity measures, such as price increases for electricity
 and gas.
 In 1990 the Bhutto Government made progress in some aspects of
 human rights, but broke little new ground. The review of
 martial law cases and the release of political prisoners was
 completed. Most travel restrictions were lifted, passports
 were endorsed for all countries except Israel and South
 Africa, and Pakistanis travelled abroad without first
 obtaining government permission. Human rights groups
 continued to enjoy access to officials and to the media and
 there continued to be considerable freedom of expression by
 the press and political organizations.
 In other areas, human rights abuses continued. Kidnapings and
 random violence plagued Sindh and the tribal areas, and
 similar incidents were reported in Punjab and the Frontier.
 Provincial government forces used excessive force in
 responding to such incidents. Ethnic tensions, primarily in
 Sindh, exacerbated the problems caused by strong political,
 constitutional, and regional differences;-the result of these
 differences, plus the weakness of central and provincial law
 enforcement agencies and the superabundance .of weapons, was a
 serious deterioration in law and order, with a decidedly
 
 
 1587
 
 PAKISTAN
 negative impact upon human rights. The arbitrary detention,
 arrest, torture, and other abuse of prisoners and detainees by
 the police continued, as did the failure of authorities to
 prosecute and punish those responsible. The caretaker
 Government attempted to use the judicial process against the
 PPP by accusing only its leaders of corruption. Religious
 minorities faced some discrimination and harassment. Social
 and legal constraints kept women in a subordinate position in
 society and limited reporting of violence against them.
 Significant restraints remained on worker rights.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing
 There was no evidence of government or government-instigated
 political killings, but extrajudicial killings, usually
 resulting from physical abuse of prisoners and detainees by
 police, continued largely unchecked and unpunished (see
 Section l.o..   Ethnic tensions also resulted in a form of
 political killing, particularly in Sindh, as rival
 ethnic/political parties and organizations and their student
 wings frequently clashed, leaving scores dead and injured.
 Because of the random and often spontaneous nature of these
 incidents, the political connections of many of the
 perpetrators, and the weak police establishment and the
 similar weakness of lower courts, the authorities have met
 with little success in preventing this type of violence or
 punishing these responsible. This situation in Sindh became a
 major element in political differences between the President
 and the Army, and the central and provincial governments prior
 to the August dismissal of the Bhutto government.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no reports-of government-instigated disappearance.
 Kidnapings by highwaymen for ransom occurred frequently.
 There were also a large number of kidnapings by rival
 ethnic/political parties. Perpetrators were rarely
 apprehended. Most victims were eventually released.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 There continued to be persuasive evidence of misuse of police
 powers. Police and jailers often use force to elicit
 confessions, evidence, and incrimination of others. Beating,
 whipping the soles of the feet with rubber whips, sexual
 assault, and prolonged isolation occur in Pakistani jails.
 When deaths occur, explanations of suicide are used by police
 to cover up evidence of torture. Human rights activists
 reported that at least five prisoners died while in police
 custody between January and August in Karachi. In Punjab, 12
 such cases were reported between January and July. In October
 the Sindh Provincial Government investigated the case of a
 Karachi man, arrested on a counterfeiting charge, who died
 while in police custody. There have been reports that
 prisoners alleged to have been killed in shootouts may have
 been victims of police torture. Oh July 3, the Punjab police
 arrested and allegedly tortured a member of the PPP student
 wing, and later reported that the student was killed in a
 shootout.
 
 
 1588
 PAKISTAN
 The threat of abuse is frequently used to extort money from
 prisoners and their families, and whole families have been
 held to force subjects of arrest warrants to surrender.
 There are instances of abuse of women in police custody at a
 stationhouse or who go to a police station to file a report or
 inquire after a detainee; this abuse is often unreported due
 to societal taboos and family pressure. There are few
 policewomen to perform matron duties. Some women under
 detention are reportedly coerced by police officers to trade
 sexual favors for their release, or the women are simply
 raped. Women in prison faced similar kinds of abuse. In
 October a case was filed against prison officials in
 Sheikhupura accused of raping two female inmates. Upon
 release, women are often ostracized by their family and
 friends and barred from their homes.
 Police accused of abuses dre generally released on bail or
 quietly transferred to another district. In August 1989, the
 Federal Ministry of Interior established anoffice to monitor
 instances of arbitrary arrest, brutality, and extortion within
 the police forces. According to an official, the office
 received 14 complaints in its first year of operation. Twelve
 of these complaints were referred to the provincial
 governments. In Karachi, a citizens-police liaison committee
 also exists. There is no evidence that further action was
 taken by any of the provincial governments regarding
 individual complaints.
 There have been persistent and credible reports that some
 ethnic and political parties have tortured political
 opponents, and, in some cases, used torture to enforce party
 discipline among their own members. In February a round of
 abductions and counterabductions of PPP and Mohajir Qaumi
 Movement (MQM) student activists, primarily in Karachi,
 resulted in incidents of torture and deaths on each side.
 Both sides presented graphic photographs and videos to the
 press. The Pakistan Army Corps Commander arranged for a
 hostage swap between the two sides, freeing about 20
 .abductees. Neither side publicly disavowed or expelled from
 the party those involved, and no criminal cases were filed
 against any of the abductors. There were also credible
 reports of the torture of PPP supporters, while under
 detention, by the Sindh caretaker gbvernment.
 The Hadood Ordinances, promulgated by the central Government
 in 1979, provide harsh punishments for violating the Islamic
 code of behavior. They apply to Muslims and non-Muslims
 alike, but weigh most heavily on women. The Bhutto
 administration, although expressing concern, took no steps to
 introduce legislation to repeal or amend the ordinances. A
 woman who reports a case of rape to the authorities or files
 for a divorce can find herself charged with adultery under
 these ordinances. The predominantly male police force
 reportedly uses the Hadood Ordinances to threaten people on
 the basis of personal and political animosities. The
 Committee for the Repeal of the Hadood Ordinances estimates
 that 3,000 women are in jails in Pakistan awaiting trial under
 this law. In August, 119 women were in trial status in Lahore
 under the Hadood Ordinances. It is estimated that two-thirds
 of the female prisoners in Karachi and Lahore are awaiting
 trial or are imprisoned under these ordinances.
 Although extended imprisonment is the most common punishment
 for those convicted under the Ordinances, there was a report
 
 
 1589
 PAKISTAN
 that a man was administered a flogging of 20 lashes in
 December 1989 in Karachi after being convicted of adultery and
 sentenced by a Shari'a (Islamic law) court. There have been
 reports of other floggings, but no punishments involving
 stoning or amputation are reported to have been carried out
 under the Ordinances.
 Three classes of prison facilities exist. Class "C"
 cells--which generally hold common criminals, suspected
 terrorists, and low-level political workers--are the worst.
 They often have dirt floors, no furnishings, and poor quality
 food, and the use of handcuffs and fetters is common.
 Prisoners in these cells reportedly suffer the most abuse,
 such as beatings and being forced to kneel for long periods.
 After the dissolution of the provincial governments in August,
 former provincial officials were reportedly held in class "C.
 accommodations. Conditions in "B" and "A" cells are markedly
 better, with the latter reserved for "prominent" persons.
 Official attention has focused on improving jail conditions,
 and human rights activists say that conditions in urban
 prisons have improved. In May a Jails Reform Committee,
 formed by the Minister of Interior to improve the living
 conditions of prisoners, made several nonbinding
 recommendations to the provincial governments. It is unclear
 whether the Committee will continue to exist under the new
 Government.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Pakistani law permits detention of persons suspected of
 threatening public order and safety for 30 days under court
 order. Such court orders are renewable for 30 days at a time,
 up to a total of 90 days, if the Government can demonstrate
 that the detainee threatens public safety. Under the law,
 detainees must be informed expeditiously of the reason for
 their detention, but this requirement is not always met-
 There have been repeated allegations of arbitrary arrests
 during attempts to quell communal violence. The majority of
 people detained in such operations are released in a matter of
 hours or 1 or 2 days, but cases have been reported of
 detentions lasting weeks or months. Most detainees are
 released only after the situation that prompted the preventive
 .detention has passed. During 1990 the PPP, caretaker, and the
 IJI provincial governments in Sindh made liberal use of the
 Maintenance of Public Order Ordinance (MPOY, arresting
 hundreds of ethnic and political activists prior to and after
 clashes irr Karachi and Hyderabad. The MPO was also used by
 the Punjab government after similar clashes in Punjab.
 Although many people were undoubtedly arrested because of
 their political activities, others picked up by police were
 criminals who were politically active. There have been
 repeated and sometimes credible allegations that PPP activists
 and candidates were falsely arrested by the provinical
 caretaker government in Sindh prior to the elections. Former
 detainees claim that prisoners under preventive detention
 frequently are held incommunicado.
 In 1989 federal authorities detained former Provincial Chief
 Minister Fazle Haq without charge for 3 months before he was
 released by order of the Supreme Court. G.M. Syed, leader of
 the Jeay Sindh political party (a Sindhi nationalist party),
 was held under house arrest in Karachi after members of his
 political party burned the Pakistani flag in Sukkur. He and
 
 
 1590
 PAKISTAN
 his followers were charged with sedition and desecration of
 the national flag and detained, but not brought to trial. In
 September charges were dropped by the Sindh caretaker
 government and he was released, as were some of his followers.
 Officials of both the PPP and the IJI governments, at both the
 federal and provincial level, continued to harass their
 political opponents by filing criminal charges of dubious
 credibility against them, obliging them to seek bail. The
 police sometimes detain citizens without charge in order to
 extort payment for their release.
 Exile is not used by the Government as a means of political
 control.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The civil judicial system, modeled after the British system,
 provides for an open trial, cross-examination, representation
 by an attorney, and appeal of sentences. Attorneys are
 appointed for indigents in capital cases. There are no
 juries. Owing to the limited number of judges, the heavy
 backlog of cases, and outdated court procedures, cases can
 drag on for years.
 A political impasse between 'he federal and Punjab governments
 has blocked the appointment of judges in that province to
 succeed those who have retired or died. A large number of
 seats on the Lahore High Court remain vacant. Scores of
 positions in the lower magistracy remain unfilled, which
 further delays the judicial process. Karachi human rights
 activists believe there are dozens of people awaiting trial in
 Sindh jails who have been held for periods longer than the
 sentence they would receive if convicted.
 In some cases, although provided for by law, bail was
 arbitrarily denied. Human rights groups complain that bail is
 often set at unreasonably high levels for indigent
 defendants.
 Although the courts were undeniably under some pressure from
 the executive during the Zia period, the judiciary decided a
 number of important cases against the Government. The high
 courts displayed continued independence during the Bhutto
 administration. However, a September decision by the
 President not to extend the limited appointment of a Peshawar
 High Court justice, who ruled that the Peshawar provincial
 assembly should not have been dissolved on August 6, led to
 concern about executive pressure on the judiciary.
 Human rights activists charge that magistrates and police are
 under pressure to achieve a high number and highpercentage of
 convictions and reportedly persuade persons in custody to
 plead guilty without informing them of the consequences.
 Magistrates can be threatened with transfer by politically
 influential persons. Magistrates also perform a variety of
 administrative functions for the provincial government in
 addition to their judicial duties. In July a Lahore police
 superintendent decided to take matters into his own hands and
 "Islamize" trial and punishment; 18 men, accused of viewing a
 pornographic film and remanded without trial to police
 custody, were taken in handcuffs to a local mosque where, with
 the imam's blessing, a public flogging was administered by
 several assistant superintendents of police.
 
 
 1591
 
 PAKISTAN
 The special Shari'a courts operate in a manner similar to
 ordinary civilian courts. They try offenses relating to the
 enforcement of the Hadood Ordinances and also rule on whether
 laws are offensive to Islam. However, human rights monitors
 expressed concern over two court decisions which they perceive
 as eroding the secular legal concepts embodied in the Pakistan
 Penal Code (PPC). In one such decision, the Federal Shari'a
 Court announced on October 30 that death must be the
 punishment for anyone who is convicted of intentionally
 uttering contemptuous remarks or offering insult, in any way,
 to the Prophet Muhammad, or to any of the prophets. The
 unanimous decision was in response to a petition challenging
 the alternate punishment of life imprisonment for the offense,
 as contained in Section 295C of the PPC. The Shari'a Court,
 which has the authority to order the Government to modify any
 law to bring it into conformity to Islam, directed the
 Government to do so in this case. According to the ruling, if
 the Government does not act before April 30, 1991, the words
 '"or imprisonment for life" in Section 295C of the PPC shall
 cease to have effect from that day.
 The Court's ruling requiring the death penalty could be
 applied to Pakistan's Ahmadi community whose members have been
 charged with blaspheming the prophet because they do not
 subscribe to the general tenet of Islam that declares Muhammad
 was the last prophet.
 In a second major modification of the code, in September the
 President promulgated an ordinance, replacing portions of the
 PPC that had been found repugnant to Islam in an earlier
 Shari'a court decision. The ordinance introduced the Islamic
 concepts of Qisas (roughly an "eye for an eye") and Diyat
 ("blood money") into the criminal justice system.
 The Ordinance, which came into effect in October, allows
 compensation to be paid to a victim's family in place of
 punishment and permits the victim's family the- r-ight to
 determine the severity, if any, of punishment. In November
 the country's transporters went on strike to protest the new
 ordinance, which also levied a stiff penalty on any driver
 convicted of manslaughter through negligent driving. Also in
 November, the first case was decided under the ordinance when
 a Lahore court acquitted three men accused of murder after
 they paid compensation to the heirs of their victim. Human
 rights activists have expressed concern that the changes will
 allow wealthy persons accused of a crime to buy their
 freedom.
 Cases referred to the Shari'a courts areheard jointly by
 Islamic scholars and judges from-the civilian court system who
 usually employ ordinary criminal procedures. Both judges and
 attorneys must be Muslim and be familiar with Islamic law.
 Defendants in the Shari'a courts are entitled to bail and
 lawyers of their choice.
 In 1987 the Government established special courts to provide
 speedy trials in cases involving "offenses sensational in
 character or shocking to public morality, creating panic, or
 an atmosphere of fear and anxiety among the public." Cases
 involving bomb blasts, sabotage, highway robberies, banditry,
 or kidnaping may be brought before these courts, and the
 Government may transfer cases from'any other court to a
 special court.
 
 
 1592
 PAKISTAN
 Critics, including many lawyers and human rights activists,
 express-concern about the special courts. First, the accused
 may be hampered from preparing an adequate defense and calling
 witnesses because of the short time allocated before the
 trial. -Second, the decision to refer a case to this system is
 an arbitrary one, made by senior officials in the provincial
 government. The criteria for deciding which cases can be
 tried under these courts is broad enough to enable provincial
 authorities to abuse the system. Government. officials and
 some attorneys argue that, in spite of their disadvantages,
 these courts are.necessary to circumvent the judicial backlog;
 that all requirements of the rules of evidence still apply,
 including the right to counsel; and that the judges must meet.
 the same standard as those appointed to a high court. They
 note that decisions may be appealed to the Supreme Court.
 In September-1989, the Lahore High Court held that "speedy"
 courts were constitutional. However, the Court decided that
 the ordinance issued by President Ghulam Ishaq Khan in
 November 1988 had expired in February 1989 since the National
 Assembly had not moved to ratify it. The "speedy" trial
 courts in Punjab then ceased operations. .In May the Punjab
 government announced that it was establishing "special courts"
 to hear cases involvingparticularly heinous crimes-or
 terrorist activities. The press reported a number of
 convictions in these courts, usually for illegal possession of
 arms. Five special trial courts operate in Sindh, hearing
 terrorist and banditry cases. Persons tried in these courts
 are charged with violent criminal offenses, not nonviolent or
 political offenses.
 After the dissolution of the Bhutto government, President
 Ghulam Ishaq Khan, citing a 1977 law, established special
 tribunals to try members of the previous federal and
 provincial governments on criminal and corruption charges.
 Critics pointed out that only members of the Bhutto
 government, all of whom belong to the PPP, were charged with
 corruption and misconduct, while no members of the other
 -political parties were accused. The actual conduct of the
 special tribunals, headed by judges from the high courts, has
 been seen by lawyers, human rights activists, politicians, and
 journalists as balanced and apparently fair. As of year's
 end, no politician had been convicted of wrongdoing, and
 therefore disqualified by the tribunals. Although the new
 Government has-announced its commitment to continuing the
 process of accountability, how the tribunals will proceed
 remains unclear.
 Appeals of the 1986 death sentences against four Ahmadi
 defendants, whose convictions in 1985 by martial law courts in
 two separate murder -cases raised serious human rights
 questions, are still pending. The death sentences were
 commuted to life imprisonment as part of the Bhutto
 administration's amnesty program.
 Before martial law was lifted in 1985, the Parliament passed
 the Eighth Amendment to the Constitution which withdrew from
 the civilian judiciary the right to review the actions of
 martial law authorities and courts. Three petitions
 challenging the validity of the Eighth Amendment were
 dismissed by the Sindh High Court in October 1989. Under the
 Eighth Amendment, only those sentenced to death by martial law
 courts may petition to have their cases reviewed by the
 President; all others must appeal to a provincial governor.
 In 1988 the Supreme Court allowed limited categories of people
 
 
 1593
 
 PAKISTAN
 convicted of criminal offenses under martial law courts to
 apply for review of their cases.
 According to Amnesty International (AI), by August 1989, 700
 of these cases had been examined by a review board, which
 recommended the release of 69 prisoners. As a result of the
 amnesty program instituted by the Bhutto government in
 December 1988, thousands of prisoners were released, including
 political prisoners convicted by special military courts under
 martial law. The death sentences of 2,029 prisoners were
 commuted, and compensation was announced for some categories
 of martial law prisoners. Some groups criticized the
 Government's review procedures which, they alleged, freed a
 number of hardened criminals and terrorists but left non-PPP
 politicians and members of minority religious groups behind
 bars.
 The estimates of the number of political prisoners believed to
 be in custody vary since human rights groups disagree on the
 definition of a political prisoner. Political activists
 arrested on criminal charges as well as party workers detained
 for political reasons have been called political prisoners by
 some human rights groups. Other groups refer to political
 prisoners as those persons convicted by martial law courts
 during the Zia period, regardless of the offense.
 f. ;Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Although police are required by law to obtain a warrant before
 entering a private home, these legal requirements are often
 ignored, particularly during arrests of bandits and during
 communal disturbances.
 Pakistan maintains several domestic intelligence services
 which monitor politicians, political activists, suspected
 terrorists, and suspected foreign intelligence agents.
 Informed sources maintain that wiretapping is commonplace,
 mail is occasionally intercepted and-opened, and surveillance
 is often used. Civil and military officials are instructed to
 ,report their contacts-with foreign diplomats. During the
 final months of the Shutto administration, the Government
 attempted to restrict access by diplomats to only the most
 senior civil servants.
 g. Use of Excessive Force and Violations of Humanitarian
 Law in Internal Conflicts
 Persistent ethnic divisions continued in the province of Sindh
 between native-born Sindhis, largely associated with the PPP,
 and those who immigrated to Sindh at the time of the partition
 from India in 1947, largely associated with their own
 political party, the Mohajir Qaumi Movement MQM). These
 divisions led to incidents of violence in which persons
 belonging to one ethnic -group were killed in indiscriminate
 attacks by rival groups. There were repeated allegations,
 which are difficult to verify, that law enforcement agencies
 favored the PPP followers and caused the deaths of innocent
 persons while attempting to bring the violence under control
 or by standing by and refusing to intervene. In May a number
 of civilians were killed in Hyderabad by the police or the
 paramilitary Pakistani Rangers. Allegations were made against
 the PPP federal and provincial governments, charging that a
 police "clean-up operation," reportedly intended as a
 crackdown on illegal weapons, was in reality an attack on
 
 
 1594
 PAKXISTA~N
 rival MQM activists. The PPP denied the allegations. As a
 result of this, and previous incidents, the Prime Minister and
 the Sindh Chief Minister and Governor asked the military for
 assistance. The Pakistan Army was deployed in Sindh to help
 civilian authorities restore law and order.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 While Pakistanis -enerally discuss and debate public policy
 issues freely, some laws restrict free speech. Laws against
 bringing Islam or the armed forces into discredit or ridicule.
 remain in force. In February a case was filed in Sessions
 court against jawoman for making "anti-Islamic" remarks. The
 woman allegedly demanded that women, like men, should have the
 right to contract four marriages. Article 6 of the 1985
 Constitution provides for the death penalty for those who
 damage the Constitution by any act, which includes publishing
 statements against the spirit of- the Constitution, Reporters
 and-editors exercise self-censorship in these areas.
 A government-owned press trust controls four of the larger
 newspapers.. Neither the Bhutto administration, the caretaker
 government, nor the Sharif administration moved to disband the
 press trust despite promises to do so. The caretaker
 government dismissed the editors of the government-controlled
 press trust newspapers who were appointed by the PPP
 government and reappointed those who ran the papers under
 President Zia. One of the two wire services is controlled by
 the Ministry of Information. Other newspapers are privately
 owned and their circulation far exceeds that of the
 government-owned press.
 The Government owns and operates the radio and television
 stations and -strictly controls the news they carry. In June
 the Government licensed the first semiprivate-television
 channele-the People's Television Network (PTN), which is a
 subsidiary of a government-controlled corporation. PTN
 broadcasts Cable News Network (CNN) 20 hours daily to
 residents of Islamabad, a. service which was extended to
 Karachi in-August. CNN is shown live, although a few visual
 segments that are considered morally objectionable are blacked
 out to the local audience.
 Since 1985 there has been relatively free discussion of
 government policies and open criticism of the Government,
 especially in the privately owned press. The press routinely
 reports remarks critical of the Government made by opposition
 politicians. The government newspapers and wire services,
 however, are circumspect in their coverage of the news. In
 its early days, the Bhutto government began to loosen its
 control Over radio and television and gave some coverage to
 the opposition. However, this liberal attitude soon gave way
 to the policy-of projecting only the official viewpoint-and
 distorting opposition news. The caretaker government also
 used the government-controlled media to project the official
 line,-and thus far there has been no dramatic change under the
 Sharif administration.
 The Government exploits the newspapers' dependence on
 government advertising, an important source of revenue, as a
 way of influencing editorial policy. The Bhutto Government
 suspended government advertising in Markaz and in The
 Observer, newspapers often critical of the PPP. In July the
 
 
 1595
 PAKISTAN
 federal Government was said to be considering cancelling its
 advertising in the Karachi daily Dawn after publication of a
 supplement sponsored by the government of Balochistan which
 contained articles highlighting the poor economic situation in
 the province. Dawn preempted the move by making the
 government's plan public. On April 24, the Balochistan
 provincial government banned entry of national newspapers into
 the province for 1 day due to the Chief Minister's
 dissatisfaction with coverage of a speech he had delivered.
 After the dissolution of the Bhutto administration, the
 caretaker government reduced advertising in pro-PPP newspapers
 such as Musawaat.
 Government officials no longer call editors- to demand the
 inclusion or exclusion of particular stories, but they still
 give editors "advice" on certain stories, which is usually
 followed. In March Pakistan's radio and television were
 required to use only news and information about the Afghan
 coup supplied by the intelligence services. As a result,
 coverage by Pakistan radio and television, and to a lesser
 extent the Pakistani print media, amounted to a disinformation
 campaign, at odds with actual events. In August the caretaker
 government circulated a letter asking publishers to run a
 story complaining of cultural infiltration by the United
 States through CNN broadcasts. No newspapers complied, and
 one ran an editorial protesting the request. The U.S. Embassy
 protested to the Minister of Information and received an
 apology.
 A print, press, and publications ordinance requires the
 registration of printing-presses and newspapers and allows the
 Government to confiscate newspapers or magazines deemed
 objectionable. The newspapers have the right of appeal to the
 civil courts. In May the Punjab government denied permission
 for the publication of a.Sindhi-language paper in Lahore on
 the grounds that the intended title was "not available."
 In November the President promulgated a new registration of
 printing press and publications ordinance, superseding
 previous ordinances on this subject. 'It appears to make only
 minor changes in the law and is considered by some to be a
 symbol of the new Government's continued support of press
 freedom. However, under the new ordinance, a newspaper must
 have government permission to issue a new publication, taking
 away the newspaper's right to issue new publications without
 approval if the Government fails to act on its application
 within 4 months.
 A 1989 press act allows journalists access to all federal and
 provincial government files except "highly sensitive defense
 files." Under this act, publication permits are still
 required but may be obtained at the local level; however,
 journalists say that they have never been allowed access to
 such files.
 The actions of some political and religious pressure groups
 posed another danger to press freedom. In January young men,
 reportedly from the Islami Jamiat Tuluba (IJT), the student
 wing of the Jamaat Islami Party, disrupted a media-sponsored
 seminar about violence against the press in Lahore. In
 February the office of the pro-PPP Urdu daily Haider in
 Rawalpindi was attacked. Property was destroyed; the police
 stationed in front of the building did not intervene.
 
 
 1596
 
 PAKISTAN
 In March a group of young men, reportedly members of the
 Muslim Student Federation (the student wing of the Muslim
 League), attacked the Lahore office of the Urdu language daily
 newspaper Jang. They burned thousands of copies of the paper,
 fired guns in the air, and threatened employees before
 departing unimpeded by a contingent of police posted at the
 door. They charged the newspaper with favoring the PPP. The
 next day, a demonstration by journalists protesting the attack
 was fired upon from the Muslim League headquarters. Also in
 March, the head of the Pakistan Awami Tehrik (PAT) political
 party demanded greater coverage for PAT in the press and on
 radio and television, and said that otherwise PAT would "take
 direct action" against them. In April several men burst into.
 the Lahore office of the Frontier Post and threatened violence
 if the newspaper did not stop printing investigative stories
 about the Lahore Development Authority.
 Journalists in Karachi have complained of attempts,
 particularly by the MQM, to intimidate the press. In October
 the MQM leader publicly threated the editor of the monthly
 magazine Newsline for publishing an article containing a
 report of the MQM's torture of its dissidents. After she
 implied that the intelligence services could have assisted in
 the formation of the MQM, the editor of the monthly magazine
 Herald was threatened and reportedly received a severed hand
 on her doorstep.
 7
 Other incidents discouraging the exercise of freedom of the
 press include the killing of three newsmen in Sindh in May for
 filing reports inimical to Sindhi nationalism. Also in May, a
 Peshawar newsman was murdered reportedly for filing a report
 critical of an Afghan fundamentalist group.
 Academic freedom is generally recognized by government and
 university authorities, but almost all institutions of higher
 learning are state run, and authorities have extensive power
 to restrict the actions of individuals and groups regarded as
 troublesome. In the classroom, professors tend to exercise
 some self-censorship in areas considered to be sensitive by
 the Government.
 Another threat to academic freedom is the atmosphere of
 violence and intolerance among student organizations, which
 typically are tied to political parties. Student unions were
 legalized in early 1989 by Prime Minister Bhutto and continue
 to operate without interference. However, at many universities
 student union elections have not taken place. On campuses,
 well-armed groups of students of varying political persuasions
 clash frequently and intimidate other students, instructors,
 and administrators on matters of language, syllabus,
 examination policies, doctrine, and dress.
 Literary and creative works are generally free of censorship,
 but authors and publishers tend to avoid controversial and
 political themes. Obscene literature, a category broadly
 defined by the Government, is subject to seizure. Authorities
 have frequently banned or confiscated books and magazines
 dealing with sensitive political topics. The Balochistan
 government banned a book, "Breaking the Curfew," by a British
 author due to objectionable passages referring to Islam. In
 January several books written by adherents of and about the
 Ahmadi religion were banned. Senior officials continued to
 stress the Government's intention to prosecute anyone
 violating the Official Secrets Act. Dramas and documentaries
 on once taboo subjects, such as narcotics, violence against
 
 
 1597
 PAKISTAN
 women, and female inequality, were shown on Pakistani
 television during the Bhutto administration and continue to be
 broadcast.
 Conservative religious and political groups have been active
 in enforcing their own code of morality on Pakistani society.
 In May a group of young men belonging to the Jamaat Islami
 (JI) pdlitical party, broke into a private home in Lahore
 during an art show, destroying paintings and physically
 abusing onlookers. The JI also successfully kept New Year's
 celebrations around the country to a minimum and successfully
 pressured provincial governments in Punjab and Sindh to cancel
 a concert tour to Pakistan by Indian film stars.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 The Government continued to respect the right of peaceful
 assembly in most cases, although district magistrates
 exercised their power under Section 144 of the Criminal
 Procedure Code to ban meetings of more than four people
 whenever violent demonstrations seemed in the offing.
 Political leaders were able to travel freely and address large
 rallies, often emphasizing antigovernment themes. As the
 Kashmir situation heated up in early 1990, capital authorities
 permitted demonstrations in Islamabad by both government and
 opposition political parties concerning a variety of issues.
 Although many political rallies are allowed, regulations
 preventing demonstrations are regularly invoked and curfews
 imposed, particularly in Sindh Province, during times of
 ethnic tension. Opposition groups planning rallies in the
 capital were regularly denied permission by the Government.
 To forestall potential sectarian violence, authorities
 prevented some Muslim religious leaders from traveling to
 certain areas during the religious month of Muharram.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Pakistan is an Islamic republic with a population that is 97
 percent Muslim, and the Constitution requires all laws to be
 consistent with Islamic ideology. Generally, members of
 minority groups may practice their own religion openly,
 maintain links with coreligionists in other countries, and
 travel for religious purposes. Foreign clergy may enter the
 country to serve congregations. Conversions are permitted,
 but the Government prohibits proselytizing among Muslims and
 has refused-to renew the residence permits of some foreign
 missionaries who have ignored this ban. The, case of nine
 Ahmadi doctors charged with proselytizing while providing
 health care services in November 1989 is still pending.
 A 1974 constitutional amendment declared Ahmadis to be a
 non-Muslim minority because they do not accept Muhammad as the
 last prophet. The Ahmadis, however, continue to look on
 themselves as Muslims, for whom many Muslim practices are an
 important feature of the practice of their religion. In 1984
 the Government made it illegal for an Ahmadi to call himself a
 Muslim and banned Ahmadis from using Muslim terminology while
 proselytizing. Violators are subject to prosecution. In 1986
 legislation was passed, apparently aimed at Ahmadis, making
 blaspheming the Prophet Muhammad a capital offense (see
 Section l.e.).
 In 1990 Ahmadis were detained for displaying the Islamic
 profession of faith (Kalima) and other Koranic verses. Most
 
 
 1598
 PAKISTAN
 were released, but several were tried, convicted, and received
 prison sentences. The press reported that during one trial,
 the Punjab Advocate General noted that the death penalty was
 applicable for Ahmadis displaying the Kalima. There have been
 reports of the forced conversion of female members of the
 Ahmadi sect. In December 1989, the entire population of
 Rabwah, the Ahmadis' headquarters city, was charged with
 violating the ordinance that establishes as criminal certain
 acts of the Muslim faith when performed by Ahmadis, including
 the declaration of faith. Police continued to close down
 Ahmadi places of worship, which cannot be called mosques under
 Pakistani law. A numbor of attacks on individual
 congregations were reported.
 In January local religious leaders protested the burial of an
 Ahmadi woman in an Attock graveyard. The Lahore High Court
 ruled that no legal grounds existed for exhuming the woman's
 body. However,-the Ahmadis who presided over -the woman's
 burial were later arrested. Also in January, Ahmadi leaders*
 in Abbottabad were arrested after a prayer meeting in a
 private home. In May, 10 Ahmadi students were attacked and
 evicted from their hostel at a Lahore Medical College. They
 wefe beaten and robbed, their possessions were burned, and
 they were unable to return to school. In November the     -
 Govdrnment of Punjab cancelled two scheduled gatherings of
 20,000 Ahmadis in Rabwah. Also'in November, in Nawabshah a
 prominent Ahmadi was shot to death in his home while sleeping
 by an unknown and unapprebended intruder. Although
 apolitical,'the victim was outspoken about his religious views
 and the murder was attributed to an anti-Ahmadi religious
 fundamentalist.
 Christians have had difficulty obtaining permission from local
 and federal officials to build new churches, and recently
 began working through the courts to regain possession of
 educational institutions that were nationalized during the
 1970's.
 Hindus complain of continued kidnapings and forced conversion
 of young women, confiscation of Hindu shrines and temples,
 disruption of prayer services, and the burning of Hindu texts
 as well as the torture of detained Hindus. However, the Hindu
 community has not been barred from celebrating its festivals.
 In April the Hindu community approached the federal Government
 with a recommendation to show Hindu festivals and cultural
 programs on television. In November several Hindu temples in
 Sindh and the NWFP were damaged; the violence was triggered by
 the reported desecration of the Babri Mosque in India by
 extremist Hindus.
 Among Muslims, sectarian violence broke out between the
 majority Sunnis and minority Shi'a populations in a number of
 cities throughout Pakistan. In March the assassination of a
 Sunni religious leader in Jhang sparked sectarian riots and
 attacks aginst local Shi'a leaders.
 Under pressure from fundamentalist Muslims, who wield
 substantial influence over their coreligionists far beyond
 their numbers, the Government has been reticent in
 investigating and otherwise trying to prevent incidents of
 discrimination against minorities.
 
 
 1599
 PAKISTAN
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Pakistanis generally enjoy freedom of movement within the
 country. Previous governments banned individual political
 leaders from traveling to certain provinces for a specified
 time through use of "externment" notices. Some Shi'a and
 Sunni clergy were barred from entering certain areas during
 the Islamic holy month of Muharram.
 Pakistanis are generally free to travel abroad. However, the
 federal Government issued a statement in April noting that it
 "declined to allow" a National People's Party (NPP) leader to
 go abroad, since his political activities were considered
 prejudicial to the interests of the State. In April the
 Bhutto administration removed restrictions on travel to the
 Soviet Union, India, Taiwan, and Eastern Europe. Travel to
 Israel and South Africa, which are not recognized by the
 Government, is legally prohibited, but Pakistanis nevertheless
 succeed in traveling to Jerusalem for religious reasons.
 Government employees-must obtain "no-objection certificates"
 (NOC's) before traveling abroad. Students are also required
 to have NOC's from their institutions. The exit control list,
 used broadly by previous governments to control foreign
 travel, was reportedly used by the Bhutto government only
 against serious criminals such as drug traffickers. However,
 the list remains a tool available to the Government to limit
 foreign travel and was used in August, after the dissolution
 of the Bhutto government,. against PPP politicians, officials,
 and persons suspected of financial wrongdoing. In August the
 Interior Minister announced that 33 names had been added to
 the 444 names already on the exit control list.
 Over 3 million Afghans fled to Pakistan as a result of the
 1979 Soviet invasion of Afghanistan and the current civil
 war. The Government administers and supports some 340 Afghan
 refugee camps at significant cost. The movement and
 employment of Afghans in Pakistan has generally not been
 restricted, and many Afghans reside outside the refugee
 camps. A voluntary repatriation program, begun in July by the
 Government and U.N. agencies to encourage the refugees to
 return, has enjoyed some limited success.
 The plight of illegal Bangladeshi immigrants detained by
 police came to the public's attention after a U.S. National
 Public Radio broadcast in February. Hundreds of Bangladeshis
 (some accompanied by children) are held in prisons throughout
 Pakistan and charged with immigration violations. Almost all
 of these Bangladeshis are without the documents necessary to
 prove citizenship. Many of the women are alleged to be in
 Pakistan as a result of trafficking in women for purposes of
 prostitution and some are detained under the Hadood
 Ordinances. The Government, with the help of the Bangladesh
 Government, took steps in 1990 to document and repatriate'some
 of these Bangladeshis, but little has been done to solve the
 problem.
 The repatriation to Pakistan of the Bihari community in
 Bangladesh (composed of Biharis from the Indian state of Bihar
 who migrated to East Pakistan at the time of partition)
 continues to be an issue in Pakistani politics. The Biharis
 do riot wish to remain in Bangladesh and have been in refugee
 camps since 1971, waiting to be brought to Pakistan. Their
 repatriation continues to be a partisan political issue tied
 
 
 1600
 PAKISTAN-
 to Pakistan's various ethnic problems. Many in the Mohajir
 community are actively involved in the issue, and a private
 committee is working for the Biharis' repatriation.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 Io Change Their Government
 The citizens of Pakistan have the right and the ability to
 change their government peacefully. All Pakistanis aged 21
 and over have the right to vote by secret ballot in
 elections. Local governments and the provincial and national
 assemblies are directly elected. The Senate is elected by the
 members of the four provincial assemblies. The President is
 also indirectly elected by an electoral-college consisting of
 the members of the national-and provincial assemblies and,the
 Senate. Under the 1973 Constitution as amended in 1985, the
 President has the power to dismiss the National Assembly and
 call for new elections without consulting the Prime Minister
 when a "situation has arisen in which the Government of the
 federation cannot be carried on in accordance with the
 provisions of the Constitution." On August 6, the President,
 citing a long list of charges against the Bhutto
 administration dealing primarily with corruption, dissolved
 the Government and announced a state of emergency. Emergency
 powers, which allow the President to suspend fundamental
 rights, were never used. The President appointed opposition
 leader Ghulam Mustafa Jatoi as caretaker Prime Minister and
 announced that National Assembly elections would be held on
 October 24 and provincial assembly elections on October 27.
 The elections were held as scheduled. Assessed under
 generally accepted international standards and in the context
 of previous elections in Pakistan, the 1990 Pakistani
 elections were relatively-free and fair, with the results
 reflecting the will of the Pakistani people. The election
 proceeded-smoothly in the overwhelming majority of districts,
 although there were irregularities in a limited number of
 electoral districts and some reports of electoral fraud.
 Election fraud that did occur was not of a sufficient
 magnitude to alter the overall-outcome.
 After the election, there were credible reports of
 irregularities on both sides from individual constituencies
 around the country. The election commission, which is headed
 by a sitting Supreme Court justice, is reviewing the
 complaints presented to it by the political parties and
 candidates,-and is taking action as appropriate. At year's
 end, the process of reviewing complaints was far from
 complete. The commission had not overturned the election
 results in any constituency. The President's decision to
 dissolve the National Assembly and the provincial assemblies
 was challenged by the PPP in the high courts. In October both
 the Lahore and Sindh High Courts upheld the President's
 action. In a similar case in 1988, the Supreme Court ruled
 that President Zia's dismissal of the Junejo government had
 been unconstitutional, but ordered that elections go forward
 in the interests of democracy.
 According to the Constitution, members of the national and
 provincial assemblies serve terms of no more than 5 years,
 unless the assembly is dissolved. 'The President is elected
 every 5 years, and Senators are elected for 6-year terms.
 Local by-elections were held for provincial and National
 Assembly seats in several constituencies in 1990. Although
 there were credible reports of vote-rigging in some areas,
 
 
</pre>
<pre>
 1601
 
 PAKISTAN
 most observers believed the elections to have been free of
 major interference.
 Political parties have been allowed to operate freely since
 the lifting of martial law in 1985-1986. In 1988 the Supreme
 Court struck down a law banning unregistered political parties
 from participating in elections and upheld the use of symbols
 by political parties.
 While women are legally entitled to participate in government
 or politics, and Benazir Bhutto was the first female head of
 government of an Islamic country, traditional attitudes toward
 the proper role of women make it difficult for most women to
 succeed, and they are underrepresented in politics at all
 levels. At the federal level, the statute creating 20
 reserved seats for women in the National Assembly lapsed, and
 in 1990 only 6 women were given tickets by the political
 parties to stand as candidates for general seats in the next
 Assembly, and of these 6 only 2 were elected. The new IJI
 Government has pledged to restore the women's reserved seats
 without delay.
 The Constitution requires that the President and Prime
 Minister must be Muslims. Although members of minority
 religious groups--for example, Ahmadis, Christians, and
 Parsis-have held high office and are represented in the
 economic, political, and social life of the country, they are
 not permitted to vote in Muslim constituencies but must seek
 office and cast their ballots in country-wide, at-large
 constituencies reserved for them in the national and
 provincial assemblies, an arrangement widely criticized by
 minority and human rights groups. Ahmadis, disputing their
 minority status and their designation as non-Muslims, have
 refused to exercise these electoral options. Minorities,
 especially Christians and Hindus, complain that they are
 unable to vote for or influence the parties that will be able
 to form the government.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 Domestic human rights organizations operate free of official
 harassment, and their reports receive extensive coverage in
 the press. New human rights and legal aid groups continue to
 form and operate without government restriction. Persons
 affiliated with various international human rights
 organizations have been permitted to visit Pakistan and travel
 freely. In 1989 an AI delegation met with government
 officials, including the President and Prime Minister, and
 issued a special report on the visit in May 1990.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 A strong lobby of Islamic leaders continues to stress a
 conservative interpretation of Islamic injunctions to justify
 discrimination against women. It remains accepted practice to
 assign women subordinate roles in terms of civil, political,
 managerial, and individual rights, although there are women at
 high levels of government. Many Pakistanis interpret the
 Koran's injunctions on modesty to mean that women should
 remain either at home or behind the veil. In rural areas,
 although women of small farmer families generally work
 alongside men in the fields, they remain subordinate to men
 
 
 1602
 PAKISTAN
 and suffer discrimination in education, employment, and legal
 rights. Women are often discouraged from voting in elections
 by family, religious, and social custom in the rural and more
 conservative parts of Pakistan. -In some areas, women are
 discouraged from voting by authorities who do not provide
 separate voting facilities for women who observe purdah
 restrictions; these women are unwilling to unveil themselves
 to male poll officials who seek to confirm their identity. In
 rural Sindh, women are sometimes barred from voting because
 they refuse to divulge their given name in public or to a
 stranger. Despite clear injunctions in the Koran and the
 civil laws that provide for the right of women to inherit, in
 practice women generally do not receive or are pressed to
 surrender their due share in family inheritance. Both civil
 and religious laws protect women's rights in cases of divorce,
 but, as in the case of inheritance laws, many women are
 unaware of them. These attitudes havecontributed to a very
 low adult female literacy rate, estimated, for example, to be
 only 4 percent among rural women. Despite increased attention
 to the rights and status of women resulting from the election
 of a woman prime minister, no legislation was passed
 concerning women's rights.
 A small number of urban women study and teach in the
 universities, but postgraduate employment opportunities remain
 largely limited to teaching, medical services, and the law,
 with a small number of women entering the commercial and
 public sectors. There are. reports that women who apply to
 professional colleges face discrimination, although in January
 the Supreme Court ruled that no ceiling could be placed on the
 percentage of female students admitted to medical school.
 However, in October female students demonstrated against the
 decision of the Punjab government to restrict the number of
 seats for women in medical colleges in Punjab, and yere
 lathi-charged (beaten with a weighted stick) by police. Women
 may now participate in international athletic competition, a
 change that took place with the South Asian Fedezation Games
 in 1989.
 In May the Senate passed new Shari'a legislation, replacing an
 expired 1988 ordinance that had set up committees to ensure
 Islamization in education and the economy. The new act became
 void, however, with the dissolution of the National Assembly
 in August. Opponents of the legislation argued that it would
 replace constitutional government with a religious theocracy,
 with adverse consequences for the rights of women and
 religious minorities.
 Human rights activists continued to express concern over the
 1989 ruling of the Federal Shari'a Court which upheld the
 distinction under the Hadood Ordinances between evidence
 presented in court by a man and that presented by a woman.
 The Court ruled that only men could testify as witnesses in
 certain cases; in other cases only women's evidence would be
 acceptable. In certain cases the testimony of two women is
 required to equal that of one man.
 There is no reliable information on the extent of violence
 against women in Pakistan. Abuse within the family is usually
 treated as a private matter in this traditional society, and
 there are few instances in which redress is sought in the
 courts. However, there has been increased press reporting and
 public concern about the unresponsiveness or even involvement
 of police in incidents of abuse or rape of women. Cases
 involving nurses raped by doctors while on duty in Karachi
 
 
 1603
 PAKISTAN
 hospitals received a great deal of press coverage and are
 currently pending in the courts. A Karachi-based group called
 War Against Rape (WAR) was formed to change attitudes about
 rape and to assist rape victims. The press also focused
 attention on the problem of women being burned to death,
 allegedly in kitchen accidents. Many of these deaths are
 believed to be murders perpetrated by husbands or in-laws.-
 Women have also been killed or mutilated by male relatives who
 suspect them of adultery. Few such cases are seriously
 investigated.
 Women's organizations operate throughout the country, but
 primarily in Pakistan's urban centers. Many concentrate on
 educating women about existing legal rights rather than
 working to overhaul the system. Other groups concentrate on
 providing legal aid to poor women in prison who may not be
 able to afford an attorney. Most argue that women will be
 unable to make real progress until education and basic health
 care are accessible to all.
 Security deteriorated in the Afghan refugee camps in 1990, and
 foreign aid workers, particularly those involved with women's
 programs, were threatened and, in some cases, attacked.
 Afghan women were warned to stay away from training centers.
 A female Afghan nurse working in a medical aid program was
 abducted, raped, and murdered in June. Other Afghans are said
 to be behind attacks which target women or women's programs,
 and the Government of Pakistan, whose day-to-day control of
 the camps is more theoretical than real, has been able to do
 little to solve the problem.
 Reports of discrimination against minority groups in
 employment and education appear well founded. In the early
 years of Pakistan's history, minorities were able to rise to
 the senior ranks of the military and civil service. Today,
 many are unable to rise above midlevel ranks. The perception
 of discrimination on ethnic and linguistic grounds is
 fundamental to the repeated ethnic conflicts in several areas
 over recent years and most notably in the province of Sindh
 during 1990. These were but the latest in a long series of
 conflicts between Sindhis and Mohajirs (Urdu-speaking
 immigrants originally from India). Non-Punjabis resent what
 they see as Punjabi domination of the bureaucracy, the police,
 and the armed forces.
 Officially designated as "non-Muslims," Ahmadis are subject to
 discrimination and occasional harassment and have limited
 chances for advancement in the public sector. Young Ahmadis
 and their parents complain of increasing difficulty in gaining
 admittance to good colleges, forcing many children to go
 overseas for higher education. This problem is not unique to
 Ahmadis, but their resentment is strengthened by their
 conviction that they too are Muslims. Ahmadis complain that
 charges are often filed against them for the purpose of
 harassment--few cases ever come to trial. There are credible
 reports of Ahmadis being denied promotions in the military and
 civil service. The major Ahmadi newspaper was closed down for
 90 days in June by a Jhang District magistrate, who said that
 the paper was "prejudicial to the public safety." Charges
 were filed against the newspaper's publisher and editor. The
 paper resumed publication in August after the order lapsed.
 In August, Ahmadis were permitted by the Punjab government to
 return to their homes in Chak Sikander, where a year earlier
 Ahmadi-Orthodox violence resulted in four deaths and the
 destruction of dozens of homes. Although private
 
 
 1604
 PAKISTAN
 organizations investigated the Chak Sikander incident, no
 official inquiry was made.
 Members of the Christian community complain that barriers keep
 Christians from rising to high positions in public service,
 public corporations, universities, and the military.
 An aggravating element in discrimination cases is the
 continuing social stratification. Socially prominent
 Pakistanis suffer less at the hands of officials than those
 less well-off, partly because of their ability to reciprocate
 favors, and partly because of the general deference still
 accorded social "betters" in Pakistani society. Although
 original caste distinctions common to South Asian societies
 have no legally binding force, clan affiliations and ethnic
 identities, which in some ways parallel the old caste system,
 still help or hinder those seeking education employment,
 justice, public services, and public office. Among
 minorities, there is a belief that the authorities, even if
 they do not persecute them, afford them less protection under
 the law than is afforded Muslim citizens.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 -The right of industrial workers to form trade unions is
 enunciated in the Industrial Relations Ordinance, but is
 subject to major restrictions in some employment areas. In
 practice, labor laws place significant constraints on the
 formation of unions and their ability to function
 effectively.
 The right of unions to strike in Pakistan is severely
 constrained by legally required conciliation proceedings and
 cooling-off periods, and especially by the Government's
 authority to ban any strike found to cause "serious hardship
 to the community" or prejudice to the national interest, or in
 any case after it has continued unresolved for 30 days.
 Strikes continue to be rare; when they do occur, they are
 usually illegal and short. There are also periodic work
 slowdowns on the part of low-ranking government employees.
 Police crackdowns .on worker demonstrations are fairly common.
 At present, union members make up only about 6 percent of the
 industrial labor force and 3 percent of the total estimated
 work force. The PPP came to power in 1988 promising to
 eliminate contract labor. However, union leaders complain
 that the Bhutto government allowed contract labor to flourish,
 undercutting the power of the unions and exploiting workers
 willing to work on temporary contracts. These workers receive
 fewer benefits and have no job security. Trade unions of all
 political.orientations are permitted, and the political
 leanings of labor leaders cover the entire spectrum.
 While many unions remain aloof from party politics, it appears
 that the most powerful are those associated with political
 parties. After the PPP came to power, it successfully
 organized trade unions under the banner of the People's Labor
 Bureau (PLB). The PLB's main competitors are the Jamaat
 Islami's National Labor Federation and the MQM-backed labor
 unions.
 Three centrist labor federations are affiliated to the
 International Confederation of Trade Unions. Since the end of
 
 
 1605
 PAKISTAN
 martial law restrictions in 1985, leftist labor leaders have
 been permitted openly to attend functions of the
 Communist-controlled World Federation of Trade Unions abroad.
 Pakistan has been criticized for years by International Labor
 Organization (ILO) committees for its failure to abide by
 Convention 87 regarding freedom of association and Convention
 98 on the right to organize and collective bargaining, both of
 which it has ratified. The charges, repeatedly raised by
 Pakistani trade unions, have focused on the limitations on
 union formation, strikes, and collective bargaining. No
 Pakistani government has yet made any serious effort to change
 the laws criticized in the ILO reports. ILO criticism in 1990
 focused on continuing problems concerning forced or compulsory
 labor in law and practice.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 The right of workers to form associations and freely elect
 representatives to act as collective bargaining agents is
 established in law. Section 15 of the Industrial Relations
 Ordinance of 1969 specifically prohibits antiunion
 discrimination by employers. Current laws, however, place
 major limitations on the extent and effectiveness of such
 activities. Large sections of the labor force are excluded
 from the right to organize and bargain collectively under the
 Industrial Relations Ordinance, including the 53 percent of
 Pakistan's labor force employed in agriculture. Under the
 Essential Services Maintenance Act of 1952 (ESA), normal union
 activities are severely restricted in sectors associated with
 "the administration of the State," which covers a wide range
 of government services and state enterprises, such as
 education, medical, oil and gas production, transport, etc.
 For each industry found subject to the ESA, a finding that
 must be renewed every 6 months, a specific determination is
 made by the Government as to what constitutes the limits of
 union activity. In cases in which collective bargaining has
 been barred, individual wage boards decide wage levels.
 Disputes are adjudicated before the National Industrial
 Relations Commission. A worker's right to quit may also be
 curtailed under this Act, and a fired worker has no recourse
 to the labor courts. Collective bargaining and even strikes
 are known in some job areas covered by the act, e.g., the
 nationalized banks. The abolition of the ESA continued to be
 a major demand of most unions.
 The ILO has advised the Government that a 1980 ordinance
 permitting it to exempt the export processing zones from the
 provisions of any law is inconsistent with the requirements of
 ILO conventions 87 and 98. An export processing zone, with
 its own labor regulations, is now functioning in Karachi. The
 Government has not yet taken the action requested by the ILO.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 Forced labor is specifically prohibited by law. There is no
 evidence that any form of slavery or bonded labor has received
 official sanction. However, critics argue that the ESA's
 limitation on some employees' right to leave their jobs
 constitutes a form of compulsory labor. The Government
 informed the ILO's Committee on the Application of Standards
 in 1990 that amendments were under consideration to rectify
 the problem and that steps had been taken to address other
 forced labor issues, but the Committee expressed
 
 
 1606
 PAKISTAN
 disappointemnt that legislation inconsistent with ILO
 conventions on forced labor had not yet been repealed.
 Illegal bonded labor appears to be widespread. Bonded labor
 is common in the brick, carpet, glass, and fishing industries
 and extends to agricultural and construction work in rural
 areas.
 In the brick kiln industry, a workers' association succeeded
 in bringing the plight of bonded brickmakers in Punjab before
 the Supreme Court. The Court's 1989 compromise ruling
 reinforced prohibitions on forced labor and forcible
 collection of debts and limited salary advances to 1 week's
 wages,.but upheld the legality of existing debts. Although
 the ruling was seen as an important gain for bonded iorkers,
 little progress has been made since then in the brick kiln and
 other industries employing bonded laborers. Resistance to the
 ruling has been strong, reports of violations continue to
 appear, and the workers' movement has split into competing
 factions over the issue. Moreover, due to the lack of
 alternatives, many workers have returned to bonded labor at
 the kilns.
 In response to the publicity surrounding this issue, the
 Government drafted a bill to abolish bonded labor and sent it
 to the provincial governments for comment, However, no action
 had been taken as of-the end of the year.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 Despite legal limitations, child labor is common in Pakistan.
 Child labor is limited by at least four separate statutes and
 Article 11 of the Constitution. These laws present a
 " confusing picture, variously limiting employment in certain
 fields to those over 14 or 15, and, in one case, permitting
 factory'work by children under'14 (in apparent contradiction
 of the Constitution) if a government doctor issues a
 certificate of fitness. None of these regulations is
 effectively enforced. Regulations requiring school attendance
 are also rarely enforced.
 While much child labor is in the traditional framework of
 family farming or small business, the abusive employment of
 children in larger industries and government businesses is
 widespread. Although there are no reliable official
 statistics, unofficial surveys and occasional press features
 suggest that violations of existing laws are common.
 Unofficial estimates indicate that one-third of Pakistan's
 total labor force is made up of workers under age 18; 45
 percent of Pakistan's population is estimated to be under 15
 years of age. The employment of children is occasionally
 linked with stories of bonded or forced labor and child
 prostitution.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 Labor regulations in Pakistan are governed by federal statutes
 applicable throughout the country. These provide for,'or
 require the provincial governments to provide for, a legal
 minimum wage as well as certain worker protection and welfare
 services. The minimum wage, which varies from province to
 province, for an unskilled worker is roughly $25 per month--
 not enough to support even a small family. In the 1990 budget
 session, the National Assembly voted to set a national minimum
 wage at roughly $50 per month, but no authorizing legislation
 
 
 1607
 PAKISTAN
 was ever implemented. The law provides for a maximum workweek
 of 54 hours, rest periods during the workday, and paid annual
 holidays.   These regulations apply, however, only to a small
 minority of the labor force; they specifically do not apply to
 agricultural workers, to workers in Pakistan's numerous small
 factories with fewer than 10 employees, and to the small
 contract groups of under 10 workers into which factory work
 forces are increasingly divided. Due to a lack of education
 and awareness, many workers qualifying for the benefits do not
 receive them.
 The enforcement of labor regulations is left to the provincial
 governments, all of which are largely ineffective in this
 area. The attention given to enforcement varies among the
 provinces in proportion to the significance of industrial
 labor. In all cases, limited resources, corruption, and
 inadequate regulatory structures hamper the effort. In
 general, worker health and safety standards are- poor, and
 little is being done to improve them. Organized labor is
 occasionally able to press for improvements in this area, and
 some legal protections apply, although they are weakly
 enforced.
 
 
 1608
