 PAKISTAN
 Following the National Assembly elections of November 16 in
 which her Pakistan People's Party (PPP) received a clear
 plurality, Benazir Bhutto was asked by President Ghulam Ishaq
 Khan to form a government on December 1. Thus, for the first
 time in over a decade, Pakistan is governed by a Prime Minister
 who received, in what were judged by all observers to be the
 fairest and most orderly elections in Pakistan's history, a
 clear electoral mandate. Within several days of assuming
 power, Prime Minister Bhutto announced her government's
 intention to address a number of human rights issues, most
 notably by lifting restrictions on labor unions and by
 streamlining the procedures through which those convicted by
 martial law courts before 1985 could seek redress. On
 December 7, the sentences of nearly 17,000 prisoners or people
 convicted in absentia were remitted, and on December 8 Prime
 Minister Bhutto announced an amnesty affecting over 1000
 political prisoners.
 The Bhutto administration was the third to govern Pakistan in
 1988. Following the death of President Mohammad Zia-Ul-Haq in
 a plane crash on August 17, an interim administration was
 headed by President Ishaq, a former finance mininister.
 President Ishaq adhered to the election schedule which had
 been set by President Zia before his death and defended the
 integrity of the electoral process during 3 crucial months in
 the face of challenges from several quarters.
 The Supreme Court also played a critical role in insuring the
 democratic character of the November 16 elections. On June
 20, the Supreme Court struck down a constitutional provision
 which had allowed the Government to reject the applications of
 individual political parties to participate in elections. On
 October 2, the Supreme Court ruled that in the November
 elections, political parties could use any of the specially
 approved party symbols, which are of considerable importance
 in a country with a high rate of illiteracy. Three days later
 the Court reaffirmed the importance of holding the elections
 as scheduled. It also overturned a Lahore High Court decision
 and ordered that all voters in the November 16 elections would
 be required to produce government identification cards. This
 requirement is considered to have substantially reduced the
 level of fraud at polling places.
 Pakistani military forces are the world's l1th largest,
 numbering some 500,000 men. The army is called upon on
 occasion to restore order during civil disturbances. In
 addition, paramilitary forces operate in frontier areas.
 Police forces, which are under provincial control, are often
 poorly trained, undisciplined, lack professionalism, and are
 often accused of misconduct.
 The public sector share in Pakistani industry has diminished
 in recent years. In 1982 industry was divided evenly between
 the public and private sectors. By 1987-88, private sector
 investment accounted for 83 percent of total investment in the
 manufacturing sector. Pakistan continues to make impressive
 economic gains, even though long-term growth may be hampered
 by a poor educational system, widespread illiteracy, limited
 resources, and a continuing bias among many officials against
 an expanded private sector.
 Despite the political upheavals of 1988, human rights
 began improving in some areas before Benazir Bhutto became
 
 
 1462
 PAKISTAN
 Prime Minister. Soon after President Zia's death the
 Government began to review the convictions of limited
 categories of prisoners sentenced by military courts during
 the martial law period and, in some cases, significantly
 reduced sentences. The Press and Publications Ordinance,
 which allowed the Government to suspend newpapers, was
 replaced with a less stringent ordinance. Finally, in a
 decision that demonstrated the independence of the judiciary
 and the growing emphasis on the rule of law, the Supreme Court
 ruled that President Zia's dissolution of the national and
 provincial assemblies and the Junejo government in May was
 unconstitutional.
 In other areas, however, human rights still suffered.
 Kidnapings and random violence continued to plague much of the
 southern province of Sind and the tribal areas in the
 Northwest. Government forces have at times violated individual
 rights and used excessive force in efforts to combat banditry
 and reestablish law and order. There were repeated incidents
 of ethnic violence, especially in Karachi and Hyderabad, while
 ethnic and sectarian political groups expanded both their
 membership and influence. According to official figures, 154
 persons were killed in eight ethnic riots in Karachi alone
 during the first 10 months of 1988. Widespread police abuse
 of prisoners and the failure of authorities to try and punish
 personnel who commit such abuses remained a significant
 problem.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 There was no evidence of government or government-instigated
 political killings.
 Ethnic clashes have brought one kind of political killing to
 Pakistan. A Hyderabad municipal councillor was killed in an
 armed attack in July during which the Hyderabad mayor was
 seriously wounded. Both were members of the Mohajir Quami
 Movement, an organization that seeks to advance the interests
 of Pakistani Muhajirs, or immigrants from India. Those
 accused and arrested for the attack were members of the rival
 Jiye Sind Students' Front, an organization that tries to
 protect the rights and privileges of ethnic Sindhis. In
 September and October, over 200 persons from both ethnic
 groups were killed in armed attacks by unknown assailants in
 Hyderabad and Karachi. In November and December, police
 authorities arrested two suspects believed to be involved in
 the Hyderabad attack.
 Several prominent political figures were assassinated in
 Pakistan during 1988. A prominent Shi'a political leader was
 assassinated by unknown assailants in Peshawar on August 5.
 On February 11, the director of the Afghan Information Center,
 Dr. S.B. Majrooh, was shot to death in Peshawar. It is still
 unclear who was responsible for these killings.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no reports of government-instigated
 disappearances. Kidnapings by highwaymen of prominent persons
 occur regularly in rural Sind, usually for ransom.
 
 
 1463
 PAKISTAN
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 Police beatings and torture of arrestees are common and have
 reportedly led to death in some instances. Beatings, whipping
 of the soles of the feet with rubber whips, sexual assault,
 and prolonged isolation are reportedly common occurrences in
 Pakistani jails. When deaths have occurred, allegations of
 attempted suicide are reportedly used by police to cover up
 evidence of torture. Nine prisoners died in Karachi jails
 during the period from January to August, some under unclear
 circumstances. The Baluchistan Provincial Government ordered
 a magisterial inquiry in February into the death of a prisoner
 allegedly as the result of torture by police. The torture
 reportedly included beatings, cigarette burnings, and exposure
 to cold weather. Since the attack on the Hyderabad mayor
 cited above, there have been repeated allegations in the
 Pakistani press that members of a local Sindhi students
 organization arrested in the case have been tortured.
 Police in Pakistan are ill-trained, poorly paid, and rarely
 held accountable--factors which encourage both corruption and
 abuse of authority. Police and jailers use "third degree"
 methods and frequently employ the threat of abuse to extort
 money from prisoners and their families.
 The Radood Ordinances, promulgated in 1979, carry harsh
 punishments for actions deemed contrary to Islamic law. Two
 defendants were acquitted by a Karachi Distrrct and Sessions
 Court in August on charges of violating the Hadood Ordinances.
 which forbid adultery. The two had been sentenced by a
 sessions court in November 1987 to be stoned to death, the
 Koranic punishment for adultery. So far, no punishments
 involving stoning or amputation have been carried out under
 the Ordinances.
 Three classes of prison facilities exist. Class "C" cells,
 which generally hold common criminals, suspected terrorists,
 and low-level political workers, usually have dirt floors, no
 furnishings, and poor quality food. The use of handcuffs and
 fetters is common in "C" cells. Prisoners in these cells
 reportedly suffer the most abuse, such as beatings and being
 forced to kneel for long periods. Political detainees and
 foreign prisoners are usually held in class "B" cells, which
 provide better treatment and better food. Only prominent
 persons receive class "A" accommodations, which can include
 air conditioning and private servants. Many politicians have
 been permitted to receive party workers while imprisoned.
 Pakistani human rights activists and opposition politicians
 acknowledge that treatment of political detainees and those
 convicted by martial law courts generally has improved since
 the lifting of martial law in 1985.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Pakistani law permits detention under court order for 30 days
 of persons suspected of threatening public order and safety.
 Such court orders are renewable for 30 days at a time, up to a
 total of 90 days, if the Government can demonstrate to the
 court that the detainee does in fact threaten public safety.
 According to the law, detainees must be informed expeditiously
 in the courts of the reason for their detention. Most
 detainees are released fairly soon, but only after the
 situation which prompted the preventive detention has passed.
 Former detainees claim that prisoners under preventive
 
 
 1464
 PAKISTAN
 detention frequently have been held incommunicado. In March
 the Committee for the Repeal of the Hadood Ordinance reported
 that there were over 50 women under detention in Sind province
 alone awaiting trial on charges of adultery.
 There have been repeated allegations of arbitrary arrests
 during antibandit operations in Sind province. Relatives of
 known bandits have been jailed occasionally to force the
 bandits to surrender kidnap victims or themselves to the
 police. This counter-hostage tactic is an outgrowth of
 traditional tribal practices, which still strongly pervade
 much of Sind province.
 With regard .o forced or compulsory labor, see Section 6.c.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The civil judicial system, modeled after the British system,
 provides for an open trial, cross-examination, representation
 by an attorney--with court appointment of an attorney for
 indigents in capital cases--and appeal of sentences. The
 judiciary demonstrated its independence in 1988 by overturning
 several governmental acts, including President Zia's May 29
 dissolution of the assemblies (see Section 3).
 A judicial training academy was established in 1988 for the
 training of new judges. Judges at the trial level are drawn
 from the judicial services. High court judges are appointed
 from among those who have been district judges oi advocates
 before the high court. There have been attempts to improve
 the procedures and the availability of high court benches in
 the provinces. In August, President Ishaq made permanent the
 appointment of several high court and Supreme Court judges who
 had served previously in an acting capacity.
 The pace of justice is slow due to the limited number of
 judicial benches, the heavy backlog of cases, and outdated
 court procedures. In Lahore, for example, four people
 involved in a murder case had been jailed for nearly 2 1/2
 years waiting for the prosecution to submit cases against
 them.
 The special Shari'a (Islamic) courts operate in a manner
 similar to ordinary civilian courts. They try offenses
 relating to the enforcement of the Hadood Ordinances and also
 rule on whether laws are offensive to Islam. Cases referred
 to the Shari'a courts are heard jointly by Islamic scholars
 and judges from the civilian court system who usually employ
 ordinary criminal procedures. Both judges and attorneys must
 be Muslim and be familiar with Islamic law. Defendants in the
 Shari'a courts are entitled to bail and lawyers of their
 choice.
 Before martial law was lifted in 1985, the Parliament passed
 the Eighth Amendment to the Constitution which withdrew from
 the civilian judiciary the right to review the actions of
 martial law authorities and courts. Under the Eighth
 Amendment, only those sentenced to death by martial law courts
 may petition to have their cases reviewed by the President;
 all others must appeal to a provincial governor. In February
 Prime Minister Junejo announced that limited categories of
 people who were convicted under martial law courts could apply
 for a review of their case by a committee in the Prime
 Minister's office. Although the Committee received many
 applications, no prisoners were actually granted relief. This
 
 
 1465
 PAKISTAN
 review mechanism was shut down after Junejo's dismissal by
 President Zia on May 29 but resumed by President Ishaq before
 the elections. Currently, martial law prisoners or their
 representatives have two avenues for review: first, they can
 apply to have their cases considered by the special cell in
 the President's secretariat. As of late November, President
 Ishaq has made use of this cell to partially or totally remit
 the sentences of 45 prisoners and commute the death sentences
 of 8 others to life or shorter terms of imprisonment. The
 second mechanism open to martial law prisoners is to have
 their original cases reviewed by the civil courts. This is
 now possible as a result of the Supreme Court's ruling on
 October 12 which allows the civil courts to review certain
 categories of martial law cases. And in her first public
 statements after being named Prime Minister, Benazir Bhutto
 indicated that her Government would begin a review of all
 martial law convictions in the near future. On December 7,
 the Prime Minister announced a sweeping program of relief for
 prisoners, including the release (through remission of
 remaining sentences> of all civilians convicted by military
 courts of offenses other than serious criminal ones and the
 remission of all in-absentia mflitary court sentences.
 In 1987 the Government-established special courts to provide
 speedy trials in cases involving "offenses sensational in
 character or shocking to public morality, creating panic, or
 an atmosphere of fear and anxiety among the public." Cases
 involving bomb blasts, sabotage, highway robberies, banditry,
 or kidnaping can be expedited through these courts, and the
 Government may transfer cases from any other court to a
 special court.
 Human rights activists in Pakistan have expressed several
 concerns about the special courts. First, the accused is
 hampered from preparing an adequate defense and calling
 witnesses because of the short time allocated before the trial
 (usually a matter of days). Second, there is a general
 impression that the judges in these courts are predisposed to
 find defendants guilty, given the high political profile of
 the proceedings. Third, the decision to refer a case to this
 system is an arbitrary one, made by the senior levels of the
 provincial government. The criteria for deciding which cases
 can be tried under these courts is vague and broad enough to
 enable provincial authorities to abuse the system.
 Government officials defend the courts by stressing that they
 are necessary to circumvent the judicial backlog. They also
 point out that all requirements of the rules of evidence still
 apply, including the right to counsel, and that the judges
 must meet the same standard as those appointed to a high
 court. Decisions may be appealed to the Supreme Court.
 Appeals of the 1986 death sentences against four Ahmadi
 defendants, whose convictions in 1985 by martial law courts in
 two separate murder cases raised serious human rights
 questions, are still pending.
 The Government of President Zia maintained that no political
 prisoners were being held, i.e., no prisoners who have not
 been charged with antistate offenses involving violence,
 damage to public property, or terrorism. The Political
 Prisoners Relief and Human Rights Committee of the Pakistan
 People's Party (PPP), however, claimed that 383 political
 prisoners were being held as of August 1988. They include
 those convicted by military courts prior to the lifting of
 
 
 1466
 PAKISTAN
 martial law as well as Mohajirs and Sindhis arrested in
 connection with recent ethnic disturbances in Sind province.
 There are also persons included in this group who were
 imprisoned because of their association with certain student
 groups. Amnesty International (AI), in its 1988 Report,
 estimated the number of political prisoners to be over 100.
 The relief program announced on December 7, in addition to
 sweeping aside the sentences of nearly 17,000 persons, creates
 a committee under the Attorney General to review all
 remainingmartial law cases within 60 days.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Decisions about occupation, education, place of residence, and
 family size are made without official interference. Although
 police are required by law to obtain a warrant before entering
 a private home, authorities frequently ignore such legal
 requirements. During bandit sweeps and riots, police often
 chase suspects into homes without pausing to ensure the
 presence of a magistrate as required by law. There have been
 repeated incidents involving the use of excessive force during
 antibandit campaigns in Sind. Some of these abuses have been
 committed by irregular forces which are used by the Government,
 but which remain loyal to local political powers rather than
 to official authorities. There are frequent charges that
 women have been harassed and their belongings stolen by
 individual officers. There has been little attempt by the
 Government to respond to or investigate these charges and to
 deal with problems-of police discipline. Extortion and
 robbery by policemen are believed to be common. The Pakistan
 Human Rights Commission has expressed concern over the problem
 of recurrent kidnapings of Hindu girls whom the police have
 not been able to recover.
 Pakistan historically has maintained a domestic intelligence
 service to monitor political activists, suspected terrorists,
 and foreign intelligence agents. Informed sources maintain
 that wiretapping is used against opposition politicians and
 that their mail is occasionally intercepted and opened. On
 occasion, Pakistani citizens, including government officials,
 are questioned about their meetings with foreign diplomats.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 The Government owns and operates the radio and television
 stations and strictly controls the news they carry. A
 government-owned press trust controls four of the larger
 newspapers. In addition, one of the two wire services is
 under the control of the Ministry of Information. The
 government newspapers and wire services are circumspect in
 their coverage of the news, but, in a departure from previous
 practice, now cover the opposition. The other newspapers are
 privately owned, and their circulation far exceeds that of the
 government-owned papers.
 Continuing a trend begun in 1985, there is relatively free
 discussion of government policies and criticism of the
 Government, especially in the privately owned newspapers.
 Besides more or less unfettered reporting of statements made
 by legislators, the private press routinely covers remarks
 critical of the Government made by opposition politicians.
 The opposition's attacks on the provincial chief ministers are
 
 
 1467
 PAKISTAN
 reported and, in many cases, supported by editorial writers
 and commentators. The Government lifted the ban on the
 Pakistan People's Party (PPP) newspaper Musawat in June, and
 publication resumed in October. A report of the Committee to
 Protect Journalists, issued in October, cites no instances of
 governmental harassment of the press in Pakistan.
 The actions of certain political and religious pressure groups
 pose another danger to press freedom in Pakistan. The main
 office of Jang, Pakistan's most widely read newspaper, was
 attacked and partially burned in January in Karachi by members
 of a pro-Iranian Shi'a political party. The Council of
 Pakistan Newspaper Editors condemned the attack as a threat to
 press freedom.
 There was at least one instance of the Government's use of
 indirect pressure to punish a major daily. According to press
 sources, the Frontier Post, an English daily, was forced to
 make changes in its editorial staff after it had printed
 allegations that President Zia's wife had received significant
 sums of foreign exchange for medical treatment in London. The
 country's biggest dailies are sufficiently financially
 independent and obtain enough private advertising to be
 relatively immune from this type of government pressure.
 A restrictive Press and Publication Ordinance, promulgated in
 1963, was repealed in September by the Government. The
 ordinance was widely viewed by the press as being arbitrary
 and giving the Government sweeping powers to control the
 press. It was replaced by a Printing Press and Publications
 Ordinance which requires the registration of printing presses
 and newspapers and also allows the Government to confiscate
 copies of a newspaper or magazine deemed objectionable. In an
 important departure from past practice, the new law allows the
 newspapers to appeal to the civil courts.
 Academic freedom is generally recognized, but the authorities
 have immense powers, in view of the preponderance of state-run
 institutions of learning, to circumscribe the actions 'of
 individuals and groups regarded as troublesome. Another
 threat to academic freedom is the atmosphere of violence and
 intolerance among student bodies. At most large universities,
 well-armed groups of students of varying political persuasions
 clash frequently and are successful in intimidating other
 students and instructors on matters of language, syllabus,
 doctrine, and dress. Student unions were officially banned
 under Presidents Zia and Ishaq but have been legalized again
 by Prime Minister Bhutto. Educational institutions have been
 frequently closed because of student violence, and university
 authorities have had difficulty in restoring order and
 reestablishing their authority. In September some 3,500
 college teachers and principals went on strike in Karachi to
 protest rising lawlessness on campus.
 Literary and creative works remain generally free of
 censorship, but authors and publishers tend to avoid
 controversial and political themes. Obscene literature, a
 category which has been broadly interpreted by government
 authorities, is subject to seizure, and authorities on this
 ground have frequently banned or confiscated indigenous books
 and magazines dealing with sensitive political topics, e.g.,
 provincial separatism and sectarian extremism. Foreign
 publications critical of the Government occasionally are
 seized or banned. No effort was made by the Government in
 
 
 1468
 PAKISTAN
 1988 to restrict foreign journalists' access or to censor
 their reporting.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 In most cases, government authorities respected the right of
 peaceful assembly. Political leaders of all persuasions were
 usually able to travel freely and address large rallies, often
 emphasizing antigovernment themes. Over 100,000 people
 attended an opposition rally in Lahore in July to hear PPP
 leader Benazir Bhutto. However, there were exceptions to this
 policy in connection with the holding of meetings which the
 Government believed might result in violence or serve as an
 incitement to secession. In September, for example, local
 authorities in the North-West Frontier Province,(NWFP) banned
 a religious procession by Shi'as in order to forestall
 potential Shi'a-Sunni violence. When the Shi'as nonetheless
 undertook their procession, police opened fire, killing
 6persons and injuring over 40. There were also cases in which
 Section 144, which prohibits public gatherings, was invoked to
 prevent political rallies which could lead to violence,
 especially in Sind province.
 For a discussion of freedom of association as it applies to
 labor unions, see Section 6.a.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Pakistan is an Islamic Republic. Its 1973 Constitution
 requires all law to be consistent with "Islamic ideology."
 Under the Constitution, the President and Prime Minister must
 be Muslims. However, designated minority religious groups--
 for example, Ahmadis, Christians, and Parsis--have held high
 office and are represented in the economic, political, and
 social life of the country. They do not vote in Muslim
 constituencies, but rather must seek office and cast their
 ballots in at-large constituencies reserved for them in the
 national and provincial assemblies. (Ahmadis, disputing their
 minority status and asserting the right to be recognized as
 Muslims, have refused to exercise these options.) Each
 community is governed by its own codes in family and property
 matters, and members of minority groups may join any political
 party.
 Generally, minorities can practice their own religion openly,
 maintain links with their coreligionists in other countries,
 and travel for religious purposes. Foreign clergy may enter
 the country to serve congregations. Conversions are permitted,
 but the Government prohibits proselytizing among Muslims and
 has refused to renew the residence permits of some foreign
 missionaries who have ignored this ban.
 According to unofficial estimates, several hundred people were
 killed in sectarian clashes in May between Sunnis and Shia's
 in the Gilgit district in north Pakistan.
 The Ahmadi sect, which considers itself Muslim despite
 theological divergences from traditional Islam, has
 historically been the object of popular prejudice and
 discrimination. Anti-Ahmadi riots in 1953 helped spark the
 imposition of Pakistan's first period of martial law. In 1974
 Prime Minister Zulfikar Ali Bhutto, with the support of all
 parties, sponsored a constitutional amendment declaring the
 Ahmadis a non-Muslim minority. In 1984 the Government issued
 a follow-up ordinance which bans the Ahmadis from using Muslim
 
 
 1469
 PAKISTAN
 terminology or proselytizing; violators are subject to
 prosecution. In 1986 Parliament passed legislation, apparently
 aimed at Ahmadis, making blaspheming the Prophet Muhammad a
 capital offense. Thus far, no Ahmadis have been brought to
 trial under this provision.
 Many members of the Ahmadi sect were detained for wearing
 badges bearing the Kalima, the Islamic profession of faith.
 Most were released, but several were tried, convicted, and
 received prison sentences. Police removed the profession of
 faith from Ahmadi places of worship, which cannot be called
 mosques under the law. In April, for example, the police
 entered the Ahmadi Mosque in Islamabad, removed the Kalima,
 and arrested 11 Ahmadis who are now out on bail and awaiting
 trial. In Karachi, authorities closed down two Ahmadi mosques
 in July, ostensibly to "prevent a breach of the peace."
 Ahmadis in Lahore have been able to practice their faith at
 several mosques with little interference. However, the
 Ahmadis were prohibited from holding their annual meeting in
 December 1987 in Rabwah, and there are credible reports of
 discrimination against Ahmadis in the military and civil
 service.
 d. Freedbm of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Pakistanis generally have freedom of movement within the
 country, but the Government has occasionally banned individual
 political leaders from traveling to certain provinces for a
 specified time through use of an "externment" notice. Such
 orders were used to prevent some Shi'a and Sunni clergy from
 entering certain areas during the Islamic holy month of
 Muharram. A 20-month old ban on travel into Sind province by
 Abdul Wali khan, a leftist political figure, was lifted in
 August.
 Pakistanis are generally free to travel abroad. Travel to
 Israel, which is not recognized by the Pakistan Government,
 is prohibited, but many Pakistanis travel to Jerusalem for
 religious reasons with the cooperation of Israeli authorities
 in other countries. Travel to the Soviet Union, India, South
 Africa, Taiwan, and Eastern Europe is restricted.
 Pakistanis must obtain a "no-objection" certificate--usually a
 check covering payment of taxes or other obligations--prior to
 departing the country. Issuance is normally routine, but
 occasionally opposition politicians have complained of undue
 delays. The exit control list, which the Government used in
 past years to control foreign travel, was invoked sparingly in
 1988. Many prominent opposition politicians traveled abroad,
 including Benazir Bhutto and Wali Khan. The right of citizens
 to return to Pakistan is recognized. The Political Prisoners
 Committee reported that some Pakistanis who returned after
 exile during the martial law period were subjected to
 arbitrary treatment and harassment. There were several
 reported cases of imprisonment of returning exiles in 1988,
 all of which involved persons associated with the PPP.
 Nearly 3 million Afghans have fled to Pakistan as a result of
 the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan. The Government
 administers and supports some 340 Afghan refugee camps,
 incurring significant current and longer-term costs above the
 sizable amounts of relief supplies provided by various
 donors. The movement and employment of Afghans in Pakistan
 has generally not been restricted, and many Afghans have
 
 
 1470
 PAKISTAN
 resided outside the refugee camps. Efforts in 1987 to
 encourage refugees in urban areas to return to the camps, in
 response to public fears over increased sabotage incidents
 inspired by the Kabul regime, were not repeated in 1988. With
 the signing of the Geneva Accords in April and the commencement
 of Soviet troop withdrawal in mid-May, the Government and U.N.
 agencies have begun preparing for the refugees' return. The
 Government, however, has maintained its policy of not pressing
 refugees to go home before conditions in Afghanistan are
 secure.
 There was noticeably less government and public concern evident
 in 1988 than there was in 1987 over illegal immigrants from
 such countries as Iran, Bangladesh, and Sri Lanka.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 From March 1985 to May 1988, Pakistan was governed by Prime
 Minister Mohammad Khan Junejo and a cabinet drawn from the
 elected members of Parliament. With the end of martial law in
 1985, restrictions on the formation of political parties were
 lifted. A majority of members in the National Assembly joined
 together to create the Pakistan Muslim League as the ruling
 party. Under this system, President Zia still exercised many
 powers--he was still head of the army and retained, at the
 time, the constitutional prerogative of dismissing the
 government. Under the Constitution of 1985, President Ghulam
 Ishaq Khan continues to hold the power to dismiss the
 Parliament and to act as commander in chief, although he is
 not a military officer.
 On May 29, President Zia, citing corruption and law and order
 problems, dismissed the Junejo Government and dissolved the
 national and provincial assemblies (on October 5, the Supreme
 Court ruled that his dissolution of the assemblies was
 unconstitutional). He appointed caretaker federal and
 provincial cabinets and, in July, announced that new
 parliamentary elections would be held on November 16 and 19.
 After President Zia's death on August 17, Ghulam Ishaq Khan,
 Chairman of the Senate, assumed the presidency in accordance
 with constitutional provisions and adhered to the previously
 announced election schedule. The November round of elections,
 which by all accounts were the fairest and most orderly in
 Pakistan's history, resulted in neither the PPP nor the
 Islamic Democratic Alliance attaining an absolute majority of
 seats in the National Assembly. The PPP did appear, however,
 after the election to have sufficient strength in the National
 Assembly to form a government and President Khan formally
 asked PPP leader Benazir Bhutto to do so on December 1.
 All Pakistanis age 21 and over have the right to vote by
 secret ballot in elections. Local governments and the
 provincial and national assemblies are directly elected. The
 Senate, however, is elected by the four provincial assemblies.
 The President is also indirectly elected by an electoral
 college consisting of the national and provincial assemblies
 and the Senate.
 According to the Constitution, the national and provincial
 assemblies serve terms of no more than 5 years. The President
 is to be elected every 5 years, while Senators are elected for
 6-year terms. Elections for local governments (town, city,
 district) are held roughly every 4 years. The last round of
 local elections was held in November 1987. While there were
 
 
 1471
 PAKISTAN
 some irregularities in the elections (such as manipulation of
 voter registration lists and last minute movement of polling
 spots), the elections were judged to be generally fair and in
 Punjab produced about a 50 percent turnover in the membership
 of local bodies.
 Political parties have been allowed to operate since the
 lifting of martial law in 1985. In June the Supreme Court
 struck down a law which had allowed the Government to ban
 individual parties from participating in elections. In
 October it also ruled that political parties could use any of
 the 82 party symbols. President Zia had earlier declared that
 such symbols could not be used by political parties.
 Women in Pakistan are guaranteed by the Constitution the right
 to vote and hold office. Twenty seats in the National
 Assembly are reserved for women, and two women were elected to
 nonreserved seats in 1985 in their own right. Seats in the
 provincial assemblies and local bodies are likewise set aside
 for women.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 Domestic human rights organizations, including those affiliated
 with opposition parties, operate free of official harassment,
 and their reports receive extensive coverage in the privately
 owned press. Pakistan has allowed visits by persons affiliated
 with Amnesty International (AI), the Lawyers Committee for
 Human Rights, Freedom House, the International Commission of
 Jurists, and other international human rights organizations.
 The Government, for example, permitted an American team from
 the National Democratic Institute to observe the local
 elections in November 1987 and the National Assembly elections
 in 1988. Government officials also cooperated fully with the
 Afghan Human Rights Reporter from Helsinki Watch and with the
 United Nations Human Rights Commission's Special Rapporteur
 for Human Rights in Afghanistan. Appropriate government
 officials, including the President, Prime Minister, and chief
 ministers, have met with the delegations, whose meetings and
 reports have been reported widely in the press. The
 Government has, however, not reacted to criticisms in the
 reports the organizations have issued. In its 1988 Report, AI
 noted that it had written to the Government in 1987 about a
 parliamentary committee's findings on convictions by military
 courts under martial law and about the outcome of official
 investigations of the alleged torture of two individuals, but
 that the Government had not responded.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 Islamic traditionalists exert a powerful influence on Pakistani
 social norms. It is accepted practice to assign women a
 subordinate role in terms of civil, political, and individual
 rights. Many Pakistanis interpret the Koran's injunctions on
 modesty to mean that women should remain either at home or
 behind the veil.
 These attitudes have contributed to an officially reported
 adult female literacy rate of only 16 percent, compared to 36
 percent for males. (These are 1985 estimates, which are
 generally regarded as too high by informed observers.) The
 primary school enrollment ratio was only 33 percent for girls
 
 
 1472
 PAKISTAN
 as compared to 64 percent for boys. The ratio of men to women
 in secondary educational institutions, according to 1983
 Pakistan statistics, was better than five to one. Eight times
 as many men as women work outside the home for a wage.
 Urban women are represented in the universities, but
 postgraduate employment opportunities remain largely limited
 to teaching, medical services, and the law, with a small
 number of women entering the commercial and public sectors.
 Women may not participate in international athletic
 competition.
 The Government's policy of Islamization has reversed some of
 the social and legal gains women had made in past years.
 President Zia promulgated the Shari'a Ordinance in June which
 makes Islamic law the supreme source of law in Pakistan. On
 October 15, President Ishaq promulgated a revised Shari'a
 Ordinance, the full details of which have yet to be made
 public. The new National Assembly will have to approve the
 ordinance within 4 months or it will expire.
 Womens' interest groups opposed the Shari'a Ordinance because
 it could encourage legal challenges to the 1961 Muslim Family
 Law Ordinance. The Family Law Ordinance codifies the
 procedures for divorce and enables a woman to obtain a divorce
 and remarry without being guilty of adultery. A case was
 brought before the Sind High Court in June which charged that
 the divorce provisions of the Family Law Ordinance were not in
 accordance with Islam.
 While several members of minorities are prominent in public
 life, reports of discrimination against minority groups in
 employment and education appear well founded. The perception
 of discrimination on ethnic and linguistic grounds is
 fundamental to the repeated ethnic upheavals witnessed in
 Karachi and Hyderabad during 1988. These were but the latest
 in a long series of conflicts between Sindhis and Mohajirs.
 In addition, both groups resent domination of the bureaucracy,
 the police, and armed forces by the majority Punjabis. In
 Baluchistan, the rapid growth of the Pathan population,
 reinforced by the influx of Afghan refugees, has heightened
 ethnic tensions and led to increased economic competition
 between Pathans and Baluch. The Baluch fear that Pathans will
 soon become the majority in the province and that this will
 continue to fuel tension and lead to violence. Officially
 designated as "non-Muslims," Ahmadis are subject to
 discrimination and occasional harassment and have limited
 chances for advancement in the public sector. Ahmadi youth
 complain of increasing difficulty in gaining admittance to
 good colleges. This problem is not unique to Ahmadis, but
 they appear to suffer greater discrimination than other
 minorities. Appeals of the 1986 death sentences against four
 Ahmadi defendants, whose convictions in 1985 by martial law
 courts in two separate murder cases raised serious human
 rights questions, are still pending.
 An element in all cases of discrimination is the fact that
 socially prominent Pakistanis suffer less at the hands of
 officialdom than those less well-off, partly because of their
 ability to return favors or offer inducements to the
 appropriate civil servants, and partly because of the general
 deference still accorded social "betters" in Pakistani society.
 Although the original caste distinctions common to South Asian
 societies have no legally binding force, clan affiliations and
 ethnic identities, which in some ways parallel the old caste
 
 
 1473
 PAKISTAN
 system, still help or hinder those seeking education,
 employment, justice, and public office.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 The right of industrial workers to form trade unions is
 protected by the Industrial Relations Ordinance, but subject
 to major restrictions in some employment areas. Workers'
 associations of other types are unrestricted and exist in
 large numbers. There are no restrictions on employers' rights
 to establish their own associations, and many exist, along
 with the semiofficial but independent-minded chambers of
 commerce and industry. All of these organizations are free
 from government interference in their determination of their
 own rules, their election of their own representatives, and
 their formulation of policies and views.
 In practice, however, Pakistan's labor laws place severe
 constraints on the formation of unions and their ability to
 function effectively. In her first public statements after
 being named Prime Minister on December 1, Benazir Bhutto
 indicated that her Government would seek to remove as yet
 unidentified limitations on trade union activities. But at
 the present time, only about 3 percent of Pakistani workers
 belong to unions (about 6 percent of the nonagricultural work
 force).
 The right of unions to strike in Pakistan is severely
 constrained by lengthy arbitration requirements and cooling-
 off periods, and most especially by the Government's authority
 to ban any strike found to cause "serious hardship to the
 community" or prejudice to the national interest, or in any
 case after it has continued unresolved for 30 days. Strikes
 are rare; when they do occur, they are usually illegal and
 short. Police crackdowns on worker demonstrations are fairly
 common.
 Strikes are banned by law in Export Promotion Zones (EPZ),
 although this has had little impact, since EPZ development has
 been almost entirely on paper to date.
 Despite these restrictions, associations have been formed
 among workers in sectors where union activity is theoretically
 banned (e.g., medical workers), and strikes do occur in these
 areas.
 Trade unions covering the entire political spectrum are
 permitted. Workers do not seem to be subject to any official
 sanctions based on their political leanings. While most
 unions remain aloof from party politics, several have
 associated themselves with political parties, and the
 political leanings of labor leaders span nearly the entire
 spectrum from far left to right.
 There are no official constraints on Pakistani labor
 federations' affiliations with international labor
 organizations, notably the International Confederation of Free
 Trade Unions (ICFTU) and its Communist-controlled rival, the
 World Federation of Trade Unions (WFTU). An International
 Labor Organization (ILO) mission functions freely and has long
 been active in assisting the Government and worker and employer
 organizations in a variety of training and development
 programs. The composition of ILO delegations was approved by
 
 
 1474
 PAKISTAN
 the federal Government in 1988, but there were no indications
 that the independence of the worker or employer delegates was
 inhibited.
 The Government has been criticized for years by ILO committees
 for failure to abide by Convention 87 (Freedom of Association
 and Protection of the Right to Organize, 1948), and Convention
 98 (Right to Organize and Collective Bargaining, 1949), which
 Pakistan has ratified. The charges, repeatedly raised by
 Pakistani trade unions, have focused on the limitations on
 union formation, strikes, and collective bargaining. The
 Government has responded to the charges but has made no
 serious movement yet towards changing any of the laws
 criticized in the ILO reports.
 In the report of the 1988 meeting of the ILO Committee on the
 Application of Conventions and Recommendations, Pakistan was
 cited for violations of Convention 87 as well as for
 Convention 105 (Abolition of Forced Labor, 1957) and
 Convention 29 (Forced Labor, 1930)--see also Section 6.c.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 Free formation of workers' associations and free election of
 representatives to act as collective bargaining agents are
 guaranteed by law. While it is not clear that the Government
 has taken deliberate official action to prevent such
 activities, current laws place major limitations on their
 extent and effectiveness.
 Large sections of Pakistan's labor force are excluded from the
 right to organize and bargain collectively under the Industrial
 Relations Ordinance. Union activity is prohibited for the 53
 percent of Pakistan's labor force employed in agriculture.
 Under the Essential Services (Maintenance) Act of 1952, normal
 union activities are severely restricted in sectors associated
 with "the administration of the state," such as education;
 public utilities; oil and gas production (including some
 private sector employees); the nationalized banks; medical,
 security and transport workers; and all employees of the
 national airline.
 For each industry declared subject to the Essential Services
 (Maintenance) Act (a finding which must be renewed every 6
 months), a specific determination is made by the Government of
 exactly what the limits of union activity shall be. In cases
 where collective bargaining has been barred, individual wage
 boards are established to decide wage levels. Disputes can be
 brought for adjudication before the National Industrial
 Relations Commission. A worker's right to quit can also be
 curtailed under this Act, and a fired worker does not have
 recourse to the labor courts. Here again, however, collective
 bargaining and even strikes are known in some job areas
 covered by the Act (e.g., the nationalized banks). The
 abolition of the Essential Services Act is a major demand of
 most unions.
 Union leaders argue that the Government has given its blessing
 to the rapid spread of contract hiring, which acts to undercut
 the power of the unions. Unions' potential membership can be
 severely limited in branches where contract labor is
 widespread, and the power of the collective bargaining agents
 can be seriously undermined. Employers argue that contract
 labor is necessary because of legal restraints on their
 ability to fire nonproductive, troublesome, or unneeded
 
 
 1475
 PAKISTAN
 workers. Legislation has been proposed to limit contract labor
 or to extend certain rights to contract workers, but no such
 laws have yet been passed. EPZ's are not yet functioning, and
 it is difficult to judge how labor laws will be applied in
 them.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 Forced labor is specifically prohibited by Pakistani law.-
 There is no evidence that any form of slavery or bonded labor
 has received official sanction. However, critics have argued
 that the Essential Services (Maintenance) Act's authority to
 limit some employees' rights to leave their jobs constitutes
 compulsory labor. While it is not clear that this provision
 has been invoked, it has raised another issue which is pending
 before the LO.
 As noted in Section 6.a., the 1988 report of the Committee on
 the Application of Conventions and Recommendations cited
 Pakistan for violations of Convention 105 (Abolition of Forced
 Labor, 1957) and Convention 29 (Forced Labor, 1930), based on
 this aspect of the Essential Services Act and other laws which
 allow punishment for violations of collective bargaining
 agreements and violations of certain restrictions on the
 press, and laws which restrict merchant seamen's freedom to
 quit, and imply official approval of discrimination against
 Ahmadis.
 Illegal cases of bonded labor are said to be widespread.
 Several specific cases were reported in 1988. In August
 authorities freed 36 families in the NWFP who had been driven
 into forced labor by creditors; a new organization, the Free
 Farmers Movement, has come into being with the objective of
 countering  uch practices. In July authorities freed 11
 children in Lahore from forced labor in a glass factory--
 press accounts stated that they had been kidnaped. In
 September the case of 20 bonded brick kiln workers-in Punjab
 came to national prominence through the intervention of the
 Supreme Court (see below).
 There are no reliable statistics on bonded or forced labor--
 the worst cases tend to come to light only through sensational
 treatment in the press. Many observers claim, however, that
 such violations are common in some fields of work: the brick,
 carpet, glass, and fishing industries have specifically been
 mentioned. The problem is also said to extend to agricultural
 laborers and rural construction workers in some areas.
 A Supreme Court decision in September could prove to be a
 first step towards dismantling the bonded labor system. In an
 interim ruling, the court ordered the cessation of all pay
 advances beyond a week's wages to brick kiln workers in Punjab
 province. It further ruled that existing debts could not be
 recovered through coercion or with police assistance. The 20
 kiln workers, allegedly kidnaped by their employer after
 having been freed by the Provincial High Court, were again
 ordered freed. A major investigation by the Punjab police
 into the brick kiln business was initiated. A final decision
 (which should include a ruling on whether advanced-pay debts
 in such extreme cases are legally valid) is expected in March
 1989.
 
 
 1476
 PAKISTAN
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 Child labor is limited by at least four separate statutes and
 Article 11 of the Constitution. These laws present a confusing
 picture, variously limiting employment in certain fields to
 those over 14 or 15, and, in one case, permitting factory work
 by children under 14 (in apparent contradiction of the
 Constitution) if a government doctor issues a certificate of
 fitness. None of these regulations is effectively enforced.
 Child labor is widespread in Pakistan, despite the legal
 limitations. While much of it is in the traditional framework
 of family farming or small business, widespread abusive
 employment of children in nonfamily businesses exists.
 Although there are no reliable official statistics, unofficial
 surveys and occasional press features suggest that violations
 of existing laws are common. The employment of children is
 occasionally referred to in stories of bonded or forced labor
 and child prostitution.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 Labor regulations in Pakistan are governed by federal statutes
 applicable throughout the country. These provide for, or
 require the provincial governments to provide for. a legal
 minimum wage as well as certain worker protection and welfare
 provisions. The minimum wage, which for an unskilled worker
 is roughly $25 per month, does not suffice to support even a
 small family. A limit to the number of hours in the workweek,
 paid annual holiday and rest periods during the workday are
 all provided for under Pakistani law. Most of these
 regulations apply, however, only to a small minority of
 Pakistan's labor force: they specifically do not apply to
 agricultural workers (roughly one-half of Pakistan's work
 force), to workers in Pakistan's countless small manufacturing
 establishments with fewer than 10 employees, or to the small
 contract groups of under 10 workers into which factory work
 forces are increasingly divided.
 The enforcement of labor regulations is left up to the
 provincial governments, none of which are particularly
 effective in this role. The degree of attention given to
 enforcement varies amoung the provinces in proportion to the
 significance of industrial labor. In general, however,
 resources are very limited, openings for corruption are many
 and the regulatory structure, while it does function, is
 inadequate.
 In general, worker health and safety conditions are very poor
 by international standards, and little is being done to
 improve them. Organized labor is occasionally able to press
 for improvements in this area, and some legal protections
 apply, although they are weakly enforced.
 
 
 1477
