 PAKISTAN
 The political landscape in Pakistan changed drastically in
 1988 with the death of President Zia and the orderly
 transition 'to representative government under Prime Minister
 Benazir Bhutto, whose Pakistan Peoples Party (PPP) won a
 plurality in the 1988 National Assembly elections, considered
 by many Observers the fairest and most orderly in the nation's
 history. 'Pakistan's efforts to develop democratic
 institutions have been hampered by differing interpretations
 of constitutional authority and responsibility, both within
 the Federal Government and between the federal and provincial
 governments, as well as by intense competition between the
 government party and a strong opposition alliance. During
 1989 the crucial constitutional question under debate on the
 federfal-level involved a disagreement over the powers of the
 President and Prime 14inisfer, caused in part by the previous
 government's changes in the Constitution. The military has
 continued to speak out in support of Pakistan's emerging
 democracy.
 The telationship between the Federal Government and the
 provincial governments of Punjab and Ba\1ochistan, whose
 provincial assemblies are controlled by opposition parties,
 adds a further complication. Political acrimony has brought
 to-a virtual halt progress on implementing needed social
 welfare and economic reform programs in these provinces. It
 has also encouraged ethnic tensions and weakened both law and
 order and orderly administration, with a negative impact on
 the human rights situation.
 Responsibility foi internal-security rests primarily with the
 police, although the army is called upon on occasion to
 restore order during civil disturbances. Paramilitary forces
 also operate in frontier areas and help maintain law and
 order. Police forces are7under provincial control.
 The public sector share in Pakistani industry has diminished
 in iecent years, and by 1988 private sector investment
 accounted fbr 83 percent of total- investment in the
 manufhcturing sector. In December 1988, Pakistan adopted a
 3-year structural adjustment program with the International
 Monetary Fund (IMF) which may help Pakistan reduce its deficit
 and commit more resources for social development programs,
 although'it also imposes rigorous austerity measures, such as
 price rises for electricity and gas.
 The Bhutto Government has made progress in some aspects of
 human rights, although problem ardas remain. The review of.
 martial law cases and the release of political prisoners has
 been largely completed. Most'travel restrictions have been
 lifted, and Pakistanis no longer need government permission to
 travel abroad. The appointment of a substantial number of
 former human rights activists to high-level government
 positions has invigorated debate and focused attention on some
 human rights issues and human rights groups report they have
 greater access to officials and to the media than before.
 In other areas, however, human rights abuses continued.
 Kidnapings and random violence continued in the southern
 province of Sindh and the tribal areas in the northwest.
 Government forces at times violated individual rights and used
 excessive force in efforts to combat banditry and reestablish
 law and order. There were repeated incidents of ethnic
 violence, especially in Karachi and Hyderabad. Widespread
 
 
 1527
 PAKIS5TAN
 police abuse of prisoners and the failure of authorities to
 bring to trial and punish personnel who commit such abuses
 remained a significant problem. Arbitrary arrest and
 detention of prisoners were also issues of concern. Religious
 minorities such as Ahmadis, Christians, and Hindus still faced
 discrimination and were the objects of harassment, and both
 social and legal constraints continued to place women in a
 subordinate position in society. Significant restraints also
 remained on worker rights.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing
 There was no evidence of government or government-instigated
 political killings, but extrajudicial killings, usually from
 physical abuse of prisoners and detainees by police, continued
 largely unchecked and unpunished (see Section l.c.).
 Ethnic clashes have continued to result in one form of
 political killing. ,Violence between rival ethnic political
 parties and organizations, especially in Sindh province, was a
 growing concern as frequent outbreaks of violence between
 Sindhi, Mohajir, Punjabi, and Pakhtun groups left scores
 dead. Armed clashes between the student wings of rival
 political and ethnic groups led to deaths on several
 occasions. Because of the random and often spontaneous nature
 of these incidents, and the-political connections of many of
 the perpetrators, authorities have had little success-in
 preventing this type of violence, and the perpetrators have
 largely gone unpunished.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no reports of government-instigated disappearances.
 Kidnapings by highwaymen of prominent persons occur regularly
 in rural Sindh, usually for ransom. Incidents of kidnaping
 for ransom have also occurred in urban Sindh, and recently
 increased in the city of Karachi. Most of the victims were
 eventually released unharmed.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 Police beatings and torture of arrestees are common; in its
 1989 Report, covering 1988, Amnesty International (AI) noted
 that at least 19 prisoners were reported to have died in
 custody as a result of torture. Beating, whipping the soles
 of the feet with rubber whips, sexual assaults and prolonged
 isolation are said to. be common occurrences in Pakistani
 jails. When deaths have occurred, allegations of suicide are
 used by police to cover up evidence of torture. There
 havebeen persistent and credible allegations in the press and
 -from other observers that'some ethnic and political parties
 have tortured political opponents,-and, in some cases, used
 torture to enforce party discipline among their own members.
 The groups alleged to have used torture have publicly denied
 such allegations, and have'claimed that -the charges are
 politically motivated.
 The Government (whether Federal or provincial) rarely holds
 police accountable for abuses. Police and jailers use "third
 
 
 1528
 pAKISTAN
 degree"  methQds to obtain information and confessions and
 frequently employ the threat of abuse to extort money from
 prisoners and their families. In August a young man in Lahore
 died in detention, allegedly after being tortured by police.
 The press has also reported several instances of the deaths of
 prisoners, under police detention in Karachi. A recent survey
 alleged that 43 percent of the women imprisoned in the Mujltan
 jail reported being.sexually abused by prison authorities.
 The federal Ministry of Interior in 1989 established an office
 to monitor instances of arbitrary arrest, brutality, and
 extortion within the police forces; by year's end, the office
 had been established, and, according to the Ministry of
 Interior, had accepted and begun to investigate dozens of
 cases.
 The Hadood Ordinances, promulgated in 1979, apply to Muslims
 and non-Muslims alike but appear to weigh most heavily on
 women and carry harsh punishment foractions deemed contrary
 to Islamic law. Extended imprisonment is the most common
 punishment. Two-thirds of the 99 women held in Karachi
 central jail in August 1989 were imprisoned under these
 ordinances. Some 60 poor women, many with minor children,
 were held in Lahore's Kot Lakhpat prison for alleged violation
 of the Ordinances. In June the Sindh high court stayed the
 executions-by atoning of six people convicted under the
 Ordinances. The federal Shari'-a (Islamic) Court accepted an
 appeal ,by ,two teachers convicted of adultery and sentenced to
 death by stoning. No punishments involving stoning, flogging,
 or amputation have been carried out under the Ordinances, but
 these laws remain in effect. Frequently; under the Ordinances,
 women who, complain of rape find themselves arrested on charges
 of adultery.  .
 Among the three classes of prison facilities that exist, Class
 "C" cells, which generally hold common criminals, suspected
 terrorists, and low-level political workers, are the worst.
 They usually have dirt floors, no furnishings, and poor
 quality food, andthe use~of handcuffs and fetters is common.
 Prisoners in these-cells repQrtedly suffer the most abuse,
 such as.beatingsand being forced to kneel for long periods.
 Conditions,- in,B" and."A" cells are markedly better, with the
 latter reserved for "prominent" persons. Although increased
 attention is being focused on improving the worst jail
 conditions, there has been little real progress.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Pakistani law permits detention of persons suspected of
 threatening public order and safety for 30 days under court
 order. Such court orders are renewable for 30 days at a time,
 up to-.a total of 90 days, if the Government can demonstrate
 thitthe detainee does in fact threaten public safety. .
 According:to the law, detainees must be informed expeditiously
 of-the reason for their detention. Most detainees are
 released fairly quickly, but only after the situation which
 promptdd the preventive detention has passed. In September
 the Government.promlgated an ordinance which denies bail to
 those arrested for terrorist activities if sufficient grounds
 exist-to believe the accused is guiityof the crime.
 Former detainees claim that prisoners under preventive
 detention frequently are held incommunicado. In July federal
 authorities detained former provincial chief minister and
 opposition figure Fazle Haq without charge. His continued
 detention has ledoto charges of official harassment.of
 
 
 1529
 PAKISTAN
 political opponents. At the same time, Punjab authorities
 arrested a pro-PPP activist for allegedly having delivered an
 inflammatory speech in January. He has been released on
 bail. The federal and particularly the Punjab authorities
 have harassed their political opponents by filing criminal
 charges of dubious credibility against them, obliging them to
 seek bail.
 There have been repeated allegations of arbitrary arrests
 during attempts to quell communal violence. The majority of
 persons detained in such operations are released in a matter
 of hours or 1 or 2 days.
 With regard to forced or compulsory labor, see Section 6.c.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trail
 The civil judicial system, modeled after the British system,
 provides for an open trial, cross-examination, representation
 by an attorney, and appeal of sentences. The court will
 appoint an attorney for indigents in capital cases.
 The pace of justice is slow due to the limited number of
 judges, the heavy backlog of cases, and outdated court
 procedures. The political impasse between the Federal and
 Punjab Governments has blocked appointment of judges in that
 province to succeed those who have retired or died. Over a
 quarter of the seats on the Lahore High Court are vacant,
 while scores of positions in the lower magistracy remain
 unfilled. These vacancies inevitably further delay the
 judicial process. Karachi human rights activists believe
 there are dozens of people awaiting prosecution in Sindh jails
 who have been held for periods longer than the sentence they
 would receive if convicted. Prison authorities allowed
 greater access to legal counsel to see prisoners and clients
 during 1989.
 The special Sharila (Islamic) courts operate in a manner
 similar to ordinary civilian courts. They try offenses
 relating to the enforcement of the Hadood Ordinances and also
 rule on whether laws are offensive to Islam. Cases referred
 to the Sharila courts are heard jointly by Islamic scholars
 and judges from the civilian court system who usually employ
 ordinary criminal procedures. Both judges and attorneys must
 be Muslim and be familiar with Islamic law, although
 non-Muslims have been brought before the Sharila courts.
 Defendants in the Sharila courts are entitled to bail and
 lawyers of their choice.
 Before martial law was lifted in 1985, the Parliament passed
 the Eighth Amendment to the Constitution which withdrew from
 the civilian judiciary the right to review the actions of
 martial law authorities and courts. Under the Eighth
 Amendment, only those sentenced to death by martial law courts
 may petition to have their cases reviewed by the President;
 all others must appeal to a provincial governor, In 1988 the
 Supreme Court allowed limited categories of people convicted
 under martial law courts to apply for review of their cases.
 Estimates of martial law prisoners still in detention vary
 from 15 to 200. Currently, martial law prisoners or their
 representatives have two avenues for review. The first avenue
 is to apply to have their cases considered by a special office
 in the President's Secretariat. The second avenue is to have
 their original cases reviewed by the ordinary civilian
 courts. The constitutionality of the procedures under which
 
 
 1530
 PAKISTAN
 the Eighth Amendment was passed is currently being adjudicated
 before the Sindh and Balochistan High Courts.
 In 1987 the Government established special courts to provide
 speedy trials in cases involving "offenses sensational in
 charapter or shocking to public morality, creating panic, or
 an atmosphere of fear and anxiety among the public." Cases
 involving bomb blasts, sabotage, highway robberies, banditry,
 or kidnaping can-be expedited through these courts, and the
 Government may transfer cases from any other court to a
 specialcourt.
 Critics, including many lawyers, have expressed several
 concerns aboututhe-special courts. First, the accused is
 hampered from preparing an adequate defense and calling
 witnesses because of the short time allocated before the trial
 (usually a matter of a few days). Second, they believe that
 the .judges in these-courts are predisposed to find defendants
 guilty, a.lven the high political profile of the proceedings.
 Third, the-decision to refer a case to this system is an
 arbitrary one,-.made by the senior levels of the provincial
 government. The criteria for deciding which cases can be
 tried under these courts is broad enough to enable provincial
 authorities to abuse the system. GovernMent officials argue
 that the courts are necessary to circumvent the judicial
 backlog;. that-all requirements of the-rules of evidenceostill
 apply,-including the right to counsel; and thatthe judges
 must meet-the same standard as those appointed to a high
 court. -,hey note-that decisions may be appealed to the
 Supreme Covrt.7
 In September the Lahore-High Court ruled that the speedy trial
 courts'wereillegal'and closed them in Punjab-province on-the
 grounds thatitheoriginal 1987 act had expired in early 1989
 and that the provincial:government had failed to extend it. -
 Speedy trial courts continue to exist and operate in the Sindh.
 Appeals of the 1986 death sentences.against four Ahmadi
 defendants, whose convictions in 1985 by martial law courts in
 two separate murder cases raised serious human rights
 questions, are still pending. The death sentences themselves,
 however, have been commuted to life imprisonment as a result
 of the amnesty measures-takenby.theBhutto Government in
 Decemberv 988.
 In December 1988 and January 1989, the-new Government
 announced almajor prisoner release program for martial law and
 political prisoners. Although thousands benefited from the
 program, some groups criticized the Government's review
 procedures which allegedly freed a number of hardened
 criminals but left members of opposition parties and members
 of minority religious groups behind bars. Estimates vary on
 the number of political prisoners who remain in custody.
 .f, Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family., Home, or
 -    ; -Correspondence
 Decisions about occupation; education, place of residence, and
 family size are made without official interference., Although
 police are required by law to obtain a warrant before entering
 a -private home, authorities frequently ignore such legal
 requirements. During bandit sweeps and riots, police often
 chasesuspects into homes without pausing to ensure the
 presence of a magistrate as required by law. There have been
 repeated allegations of incidents involving the use of
 
 
 1531
 PAKISTAN
 excessive force in Sindh during attempts to quell ethnic
 violence. There are frequent charges that women throughout
 the country have been harassed and raped and their belongings
 stolen by individual officers. Although press and public
 attention to such incidents has increased, the Government has
 been slow to respond to or investigate such charges and to
 deal with problems of police indiscipline. Extortion and
 robbery by policemen are believed to be common.
 Pakistan maintains several domestic intelligence services
 which monitor political activists, suspected terrorists, and
 suspected foreign intelligence agents. Informed sources
 maintain that wiretapping is used against opposition
 politicians and that their mail is occasionally intercepted
 and opened, and they are frequently under surveillance. Civil
 and military officials are instructed to report their contacts
 with foreign diplomats.
 g. Use of Excessive Force and Violations of Humanitarian
 Law in Internal Conflicts
 Persistent ethnic divisions in the province of Sindh have led
 to incidents of communal violence in which persons belonging
 to one ethnic group have been killed in indiscriminate attacks
 by rival groups. There have been repeated allegations, which
 are difficult to verify, that law enforcement agencies have
 caused the deaths of innocent persons while attempting to
 bring communal violence under control or while standing by and
 refusing to intervene.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 The Government owns and operates the radio and television
 stations and strictly controls the news they carry. A
 government-owned press trust controls four of the larger
 newspapers. The Government has yet to act on its campaign
 promise to disband the press trust, but has announced the
 establishment of separate management boards to run each of its
 publications. In addition, one of the two wire services is
 under the control of the Ministry of Information. Other
 newspapers are privately owned and their circulation far
 exceeds that of the government-owned papers.
 The government newspapers and wire services are circumspect in
 their coverage of the news. Early in the year, there was an
 increase in coverage of the opposition in the official media,
 but that trend has fallen off in recent months, and the
 government-controlled media have again been restricting and
 distorting opposition news. Laws against bringing Islam or-
 the armed forces into discredit or ridicule remain in force;
 reporters and editors exercise self-censorship in these
 areas. Continuing a trend begun in 1985, there is relatively
 free discussion of government policies and criticism of the
 Government, especially in the privately owned newspapers.
 .Besides more or less unfettered reporting of. statements made
 by legislators, the private press routinely reports remarks
 critical of the Government made by opposition politicians.
 The Government has suspended advertisements, an important
 source of revenue, in Markaz and in the Observer, newspapers
 often critical of the PPP. The Observer's editor was charged
 in July with violating the Official Secrets Act (a law left
 over from the British-colonial era) in his book on Pakistan's
 nuclear program. Although the Government has denied that the
 
 
 1532
 PAKISTAN
 arrest wes related to the newspaper's policies, most papers
 carried, editorials condemning the action as giving the
 appea.rance of restricting freedom of the press. Members of
 the Council of Pakistan Newspaper Editors believe the action
 was ajresult of the Observer's constant criticism of
 govekinment policies. Although government officials are no
 longercalling editors to demand the inclusion or exclusion of
 particular stories, they are still giving editors "advice" on
 certain stories, which is generally followed.
 The Government was also criticized in August for advising the
 press that any reporting on cabinet meetings other than the
 official report provided by the Government would be evaluated.
 in the light of the Official Secrets Act. At the same time,
 the Prime Minister r.eminded the media of Article 6 of the 1973
 Constitution which provides for the death penalty for those
 who damage the Constitution by any act, including publication
 of statements against the spirit of the Constitution. This
 apparently has stopped the publication of statements against
 the Constitution.
 The aotions of some political and religious pressure groups
 pose another danger to press freedom in Pakistan. In early
 1989, the office of-'the daily Markaz.was burned, allegedly by
 poli;t-ical party workers. Also, a political party in Sindh
 called A l-dAy boycott of the largest- circulation daily
 newspaper in Karachi. During the boycott, people were
 forcibly prevented from purchasing tha paper, and its
 journalists and editors were threatened.
 A restrictive Press and Publication ordinance, promulgated in
 1963, was repealed in September 1988. Although the ordinance
 had not been used in the past few years, it was widely viewed
 by the press as being arbitrary and giving the Government
 sweeping powers over the press. It was replaced by a Printing
 Press and Publications ordinance which requires the -
 registration of printing presses and newspapers and which also
 allows t he-Government to confIscate newspapers or magazines
 deemed objectionable. In a departure from pastpractice, the
 new law allows newspapers to .appeal to the civil courts and
 allows jndiv-iduals to start issuing new publications without
 approval if the Government fails-to act on their application
 within 4 months.-
 The National Assembly enacted a new press act in 1989 which
 allqws.jburnalists access to all federal and provincial ,
 governiqent tiles, expept "highly sensitive defense files."
 Under bhis act publication permits are still required but can
 be obtained at the local level.
 Academic freedom is generally recognized by government and
 universi'tyauthQrities, but almost all institutions of higher
 learning are state run, and authorities have extensive powers
 to, restrict the actions of individuals and groups regarded as
 troublesome. Another threat to academic freedom is the
 atmosphere of violence and intolerance among student
 organizations, frequently with connections to-the major
 political parties. At Inany uniyersities, well-armed groups of
 students of varying political, pertsuasions clash frequently and
 are suqcessful in intimidating other students, instructors,  -
 and administrators on matters of language, syllabus,
 exarpination policies, doctrine, and dress.
 Student unions were legalized again, in early 1989 by Prime
 Minister Bhutto and held elections in the-Punjab in the
 
 
 1533
 PAKISTAN
 spring; student groups in other provinces are planning
 elections.
 Literary and creative works remain generally free of
 censorship, but authors and publishers tend to avoid
 controversial and political themes. Obscene literature, a
 category which is broadly interpreted by the Government, is
 subject to seizure. Authorities have frequently banned or
 confiscated books and magazines dealing with sensitive
 political topics. The Government in 1988 banned "The Satanic
 Verses" by Salman Rushdie, a book which raised the ire of
 Muslims worldwide. In August the Government arrested, and
 later released, the author of a book on the development of
 Pakistan's nuclear program, and the book has been banned in
 two provinces. In speeches throughout the country, senior
 officials reiterated the Government's intention to prosecute
 anyone violating the Official Secrets Act. Dramas and
 documentaries on once taboo subjects, such as narcotics and
 female inequality, are now shown frequently on Pakistani
 television.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 The Government continued to respect the right of peaceful
 assembly in most cases, although district magistrates
 exercised their power to ban meetings of more than four people
 whenever violent demonstrations seemed in the offing.
 Political leaders of all persuasions were usually able to
 travel freely and address large rallies, often emphasizing
 antigovernment themes. In February a demonstration in
 Islamabad against "The Satanic Verses," sponsored by a
 coalition of religious parties, turned violent. -Seven people
 were killed and the American Center was attacked. The
 opposition coalition of parties, Islami Jamhuri Ittihad (IJI),
 held large rallies in Islamabad and Peshawar in August.
 Despite these examples, regulations preventing demonstrations
 are regularly invoked in Sindh Province during times of ethnic
 tension. The Sindh National Allrance was prohibited from
 holding a rally at the Provincial Assembly and the Mohajir
 Qaumi Movement (MQM) was prevented from demonstrating at the
 Chief Minister's house. To forestall potential violence
 between religious groups, the authorities prevented clergymen
 from traveling to certain areas during the religious month of
 Muharram. Afghan refugees were prevented from attending a
 large memorial service held in Islamabad on the anniversary of
 President Zia's death.
 For a discussion of freedom of association as it applies to
 labor unions, see Section 6.a.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Pakistan is an Islamic republic with a population that is 97
 percent Muslim. Its 1973 Constitution requires all law to be
 consistent with Islamic ideology. Under the.Constitution, the
 President and Prime Minister must be Muslims. However,
 designated minority religious groups--for example, Ahmadis,
 Christians, and Parsis--have held high office- and are
 represented in the economic, political, and social life of the
 country. The PPP Government has appointed several Ahmadis to.
 high government posts. These minorities are not permitted to
 vote in Muslim constituencies, but rather must seek office and
 cast their ballots in at-large constituencies reserved for
 them in the national-and provincial assemblieS, an arrangement
 widely criticized by minority and human rights groups.
 
 
 1534
 PAKXSTAN
 (Ahmadis, disputing their minority status and their
 designation as non-Muslims, have refused to exercise these
 electoral options.) Although by law Hadood Ordinances are
 applicable only to Muslims, minorities, especially Christians
 and Hindus, complain that the Hadood Ordinances are also
 applied to non-Muslims, making family matters, such as
 divorce, more difficult.
 Generally, minorities can practice their own religion openly,
 maintain links with their coreligionists in other countries,
 and travel for religious purposes. Foreign clergy may enter
 the country to serve congregations. Conversions are
 permitted, but. the Government prohibits proselytizing among
 Muslims and has refused to rerew the residence permits of some
 foreign missionaries who have ignored this ban. In November
 nine Ahmadi doctors were arrested and charged, with
 proselytizing while providing health care services.
 The Ahmadi sect, which-considers itself Muslim despite
 theological divergences from mainstream-Islam, has
 historically been the object of popular prejudice and
 discrimination. Anti-Ahmadi riots in 1953 helped spark the
 imposition of Pakistan's first period of martial law.
 Following another outbreak of violence, in 1974 Prime Minister
 Zulfikar Ali, Bhutto,.with the support of all political  �
 parties, sponsored-.a-constitutional amendment declaring the
 Ahmadis a non-Muslim minority. In 1984 the Government issued
 an ordinance which restricts the practice of the Ahmadi
 religion and bans the Ahmadis from using Muslim terminology or
 proselytizing..-Violators are subject to prosecution. In 1986
 Parliament passed legislation, apparently aimed at Ahmadis. -
 makinT-blaspheming the Prophet Muhammad as capital offense.
 Many members- of the.Ahmadi sect were detained for displaying
 the Kalima, the Islamic profession of faith, and other Koranic
 verses.- Most were released, but several were tried,      -
 convicted, and received prison sentehces. Police removed the
 profession 'of faith from Ahmadi places-bf worship, which -
 cannot be'calledfbosques under Pakistani law. Several places
 of worship have been closed down. In March the Government
 forbade public celebration of theAhmadis' 100th anniversary.
 Ahmadis charge that fundamentalist'Muslim leaders have been
 effective inikeeping Ahmadisin 'a- position-of second-class
 citizens. In April, ,duringanti-Ahmadi riots in Nankana Sahib
 in Punjab, 15 Ahmadis were injured, and 50 houses and 3 places
 of worship were burned. In July Ahmadi-Orthodox tenbion
 turned violent in Chak Sikander in Punjab, leaving 4 dead,
 including 3:Ahmadis, and dozens of homes destroyed. Police
 occupied the village to maintain order, and some Ahmadis have
 been prevented from returning to their residences since the
 initial incident. A Pakistani human rights group investigated
 both incidents and concluded that local authorities failed to
 protect-Ahmadi citizens and that the Punjab provincial
 government failed to investigate or take action against those
 authorities. To date-, there still have beef no official
 inquirids -into.tha-incidents. The Ahmadis were prohibited
 froffi,,holding thei n-.centenary celebration in April, in Punjab
 Province, and ther e are credible reports of discrimination
 which limits the promotion possibilities for Ahmadis in the
 militaty and 'civil service. There have been repbrts of the
 forcerd conversion of female members of the Ahmadi sect. -The
 major.Ahnfadi newspaper, banned for 3 years, resumed  -
 publication in March. In December the entire population of
 Rabwah, the Ahmadis' headquarters city,-.was charged in a.
 complaint lodged with police With having violated Ordinance 20.
 
 
 1535
 PAKISTAN
 This law establishes as criminal certain acts of the Muslim
 faith when performed by Ahmadis, including the declaration of
 faith. By the end of the year, 16 prominent Ahmadis had been
 arrested and incarcerated on such charges.
 Christians have had difficulty in getting permission to build
 new churches, although the Government reached a compromise in
 August with a congregation in Islamabad whose church
 construction had been halted for several years. Members of
 the Christian community complain that there are barriers to
 Christians rising to high positions in public service, public
 corporations, universities, and the military. Many Christians
 fill low-level jobs, such as in sanitation work and in similar
 municipal services. Some Christians work as bonded laborers
 in the brick kiln industry.
 Hindus complain of continued kidnapings and forced conversions
 of young women, confiscation of Hindu shrines and temples,
 disruption of prayer services, and the burning of Hindu texts,
 as well as the torture of detained Hindus. In June a Hindu
 doctor was killed in Larkana, and four Hindus were murdered in
 rural Sindh while worshiping at a Hindu temple. No arrest has
 been made in the dase of the killing of the doctor. One
 person was arrested and detained for 1 month before being
 released on bail in the case of the temple murders. At year's
 end the case had not yet come to trial.
 Some observers believe the Government's reticence in looking
 into incidents involving discrimination against minorities is
 a reflection of its fear of offending fundamentalist Muslims
 who wield substantial influence over their coreligionists.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Pakistanis generally have freedom of movement-within the
 country. Previous governments banned individual political
 leaders from traveling to certain provinces for a specified
 time through use of an "externment" notice. The only
 externment notice issued in 1989 by a provincial government
 prevented some Shi'a and Sunni clergy from entering certain
 areas during the Islamic holy month of Muharram; it was
 quickly rescinded.
 Pakistanis are generally free to travel abroad. Travel to
 Israel, which is not recognized by the Pakistan Government, is
 legally prohibited, but Pakistanis nevertheless succeed in
 traveling to Jerusalem for religious reasons. There are
 various restrictions on travel to the Soviet Union, India,
 South Africa, Taiwan, and Eastern Europe.
 All government employees are required to have "no-objection"
 certificates before traveling abroad. Students are also
 required to have "na-objection" certificates from their
 institutions. The Government announced that'the exit control
 list, previously used to control foreign travel more broadly,
 now contains only the names of serious criminals, such as drug
 traffickers. However, the list remains a tool available to
 the Government to limit foreign travel.
 Over 3 million Afghans have fled to Pakistan as a result of
 the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan and the current civil war.
 The Government administers and supports some 340 Afghan
 refugee camps at significant cost, The movement and
 employment of Afghans in Pakistan has generally not been
 
 
 1536
 PAKISTA;1
 restricted, and many Afghans reside outside the refugee-
 camps. With the -igning of the Geneva accords in April 1988
 and the Soviet troop, withdrawal in February 1989, the,
 Government and U.N. agencies have begun preparing for the
 refugees' return. The Government, however, has maintained its
 1,policy of not pressing refugees to go home before conditions
 in'Afqhani !tan are secure.
 Section 3 Rpspect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 The elections~in November 1988 resulted in neither the PPP nor
 the Islamicdimpcratic Allianceoattaining an Absolute majority
 ofeats in the National Assembly. President.Ghulam Ishag
 Khan on'December'l, 1988 asked PPP leader Benazir Bhutto, as
 leader of the party most likely to receive a vote of
 confiqnce, to. form a government. Under the Constitution. of
 :985; _.he President continues to hold the power, in
 consditiion withthe Prime Minister, to dismiss the
 Parligmqnt  nd to act as Commander in Chief.
 All Pakistanis aged 21 and over have the right to vote by
 secret ballot in elections. LQqal governments and the
 provincial and national assemblies are directly elected. The
 Senate, 1owever, is elected_.Py the four provincial
 assemblies. The President,is also indirectly elected by an
 electoral college consisting of the national and provincial
 assembl.ies and the Senate.
 Acqordin9 to the'Constitution,. the national and provincial
 assemblies ierve terms of no more than 5 years, unless-earlier
 dissolved.- the President is to be elected every 5 years,
 while senators are elected for 6-year terms. Local
 by-elections were held foroprovincial and National Assembly
 seats in several constituencies throughout 1989. Although
 there were credible'reports.of vote-rigging in some areas,
 most,obseivers report.the-elections.-proeeded without major
 interterenqe.                          -
 Political parties have been allowed to operate since the
 lifting of martial law in 1985-1986. In 1988 the Supreme
 Court struck down a law banning unregistered political parties
 from participating in elections and upheld the use of symbols
 by political parties.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 - .Nongovernmental-Investigatioo of Alleged Violations
 of Human.Jlights
 Domestic human rights organizations operate free of official
 harassment and their reports receive extensive coverage in the
 presp. .-Pakistan has allowed visits by persons affiliated-with
 various, human -rights.organizations. In 1989 an AI delegation
 met with governMent-officials,, including the President and
 Prime plinister. -In 1989 _seera1. new human rights and legal
 aid groups were formed-and operate, without government
 restriction.         -
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 With a female Prime Minister as head of government, increased
 attention has been given to the rights-and status of women. A
 strong lobby of Islamic leaders, however, refuses to.accept a
 woman leader and continues to stress a.conservative
 
 
 1537
 PAKISTAN
 interpretation of Islamic injunctions to justify
 discrimination against women. It is accepted practice to
 assign women a subordinate role in terms of civil, political,'
 and individual rights.
 Many Pakistanis interpret the Koran's injunctions on modesty
 to mean that women should remain either at home or behind the
 veil. In rural areas, although women of small farimer families
 generally work alongside men in the fields, their status
 remains subordinate to men, and they suffer discrimination in
 education, employment, and legal rights. Women are often
 discouraged from voting in elections by family, religious, or
 social custom in the rural and more conservative parts of
 Pakistan. In some of these areas, women are discouraged from
 voting byr authorities who do not provide separate voting
 facilities for women who observe purdah restrictions; these
 women are unwilling to unveil themselves to male poll
 officials who seek to confirm their identity. Despite clear
 injunctions in the Koran and the civil laws that guarantee the
 right of women to inherit, in practice, for a number of
 reasons, women generally do not receive their due share in
 family inheritance.
 These attitudes have contributed to a very low adult female
 literacy rate, estimated, for example, to be only 4 percent
 among rural women. The primary school enrollment ratio in
 1983 was only 33 percent for girls as compared to 64 percent
 for boys, although the figure for each is rising.
 A small number of urban women study and teach in the
 universities, but postgraduate employment opportunities remain
 largely limited to teaching, medical services, and the law,
 with a small number of women entering the commercial and
 public sectors. Women may now participate in international
 athletic competition, a change which took place only in 1989.
 In February the National Assembly allowed the 1988 Shari'a
 Ordinance, which set up committees to ensure Islamization in
 education and the economy, to lapse, but a new Sharila bill
 was introduced in the Senate. In July the federal Shari'a
 Court upheld the distinction under the Hadood Ordinances
 between evidence presented in court by a man and that
 presented by a woman. The court ruled that only men can
 testify as witnesses in certain cases; in other cases only
 women's evidence is acceptable.  In certain cases the
 testimony of two women is required to equal that of one man.
 There has been an upsurge in press reporting and public
 concern about the unresponsiveness or involvement of police in
 continuing incidents of abuse of women and rape. Therethas
 also been a disturbing increase in the number of reports of
 newly wed-wives being burned to death in kitchen accidents.
 Many of these deaths are believed to be murders perpetrated by
 husbands dissatisfied with the size of their wives, dowries.
 Many women are also mutilated or killed by male relatives who
 suspect them of adultery. Few such cases are seriously
 investigated, and, owing to the value attached to privacy in
 this conservative society, the great majority of cases
 involving abuse within the family are never reported. There
 are no official statistics on the subject.
 The courts have begun to address some of the more extreme
 violations of women's rights. In July the Lahore High Court,
 acknowledging offenses committed against women by provincial
 police, ordered registration of cases against police
 
 
 1538
 PAKISTAN
 responsible for abusing:a 10-year-old girl in a local police
 station. - The case has been-xegistered but has not yet come to
 triql. rhe court also established procedures to protect the
 rights of female suspects who are in police custody.
 While-oeveral members of minorities are prominent in public
 lire, .reports pf.discrimination against minority groups in
 empllpymentand education appear well founded. In the early
 years of Pakistan's history, minorities. were able to rise to
 the senior ranks of the military and civil service. Today,
 most complain they are nnable to rise above midlevel ranks.
 Thqperception of discrimination on.ethnic and linguistic
 grounds is fundamentalto the repeated ethnic conflicts in
 several 'axeAs over recent years and most notably in the
 province of-Sindh during 1989. These were but the -latest in a
 long series of conf- lcts between Sindhis and Mohajirs
 (Urdu-speaking immigrants fromIndia). -Non-Punjabis also
 resent what they see as domination of the bureaucracy, the
 police,-and armed forces by the majority Punjabis.- Officially
 designated as  non-Muslims," Ahmadis are subject to-
 discrimination and occasional harassment and -have limited
 chances for advancement in the public sector- Young Ahmadis
 and their parents complain of increasing difficulty in gaining
 admittance to good colleges. This problem is not unique to
 Ahmadisk. bt their resentment is strengthened by their
 convictign that they too bre-Muslims.
 An aggravating element in all cases of discrimination is the
 continuing social stratification; socially prominent
 Pakistanis suffer leesat the hands  of officials thtn those
 lesg-,woll-off, partly because of their ability to reciprocate
 favors, and~partly because of the general deference still
 accordelsopial "bettexs" in Pakistani society. Although the
 orignal-~aste distinctions common to South Asian societies
 havegno legally binding force, clan affiliatibns and ethnic
 identities, which in some ways parallel the old caste system,
 still-help or hinder those seeking.education; employment,'
 justice, public services, and public office. :Among most -, -
 minorities,-there is a conviction that the authorities, even
 if they donot, persecute them, afford them less protection
 under the l.awtban Muslim citizens.                -
 Section _6 Workr,-Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 The right of industrial workers to form trade unions is
 protecte- by,.the Industrial Relations Ordinance but is subject
 to major:reStrictions in some-employment areasz In practice,
 labor laws place significant constraints on the formation of
 unions and their ability to function effectively. In her
 first public statements after being named Prime Minister, "
 Benasir.Bhutto promised to remove all general bans on labor
 actiyity. However, little progress has been made in
 fulfilling this commitment.
 The right of unions to-strike in Pakistan is severely
 constrained by legally required conciliation proceedings and
 cooling-off periods,,and especially by the:Government's
 authority to ban any strike found to cause "serious hardship
 to the community" or prejudice to the national interest, or in
 any case after it has. continued unresolved for 30 days.
 Strikes are rare; when they do occur; they are usually illegal
 and short. -There are also periodic work slowdowns on. the part
 of low-ranking government employees., There has been an
 
 
 1539
 PAKISTAN
 upsurge in the number of small-scale strikes on the part of
 doctors, nurses, and police inspectors. Police crackdowns on
 worker demonstrations are fairly common.
 Strikes are banned by law in export promotion zones (EPZ),
 although this has had little impact, since EPZ development has
 been largely on paper to date.
 At present, union members make up only about 6 percent of the
 industrial labor force and 3 percent of the total estimated
 work force. Trade unions of all political orientations are
 permitted, and the political leanings of labor leaders cover
 the entire qpectrum from far left to right.
 While most unions remain aloof from party politics, several
 have associated themselves with political parties. Since the
 PPP came to power in 1988, it has made a concerted effort
 through its labor wing, the People's Labor Bureau, to organize
 trade unions under its banner.
 There are no official constraints on Pakistani labor
 federations, affiliations with international labor
 organizations, notably the International Confederation of Free
 Trade Unions and its Communist-controlled rival, the World
 Federation of Trade Unions.
 Pakistan has been criticized for years by International Labor
 Organization (ILO) committees for its failure to abide by
 Convention 87 regarding freedom of association and Convention
 98 on the Right to Organize and Collective Bargaining, both of
 which it has ratified. The charges, repeatedly raised by
 Pakistani trade unions, have focused on the limitations on
 union formation, strikes, and collective bargaining. No
 Pakistani government'has yet made any serious movement towards
 changing any of the laws criticized in the ILO reports.
 These issues were again reviewed by the ILO's Committee of
 Experts (COE) in 1989, along with the question of exqessive
 government supervision of trade union funds, and the question
 of worker rights in the export promotion zones. See also
 Section 6.c.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 Free formation of workers' associations and free election of
 representatives to act as collective bargaining agents are
 provided for by law. Current laws, however, place major
 limitations on the extent and effectiveness of such activities.
 Large sections of the labor force are excluded from the right
 to orgpnize and bargain collectively under the Industrial
 Relations Ordinance. Union activity is prohibited for the 53
 percent of Pakistan's labor force employed in agriculture.
 Under the Essential Services (Maintenance) Act of 1952 (ESA),
 normal union activities are severely restricted in sectors
 associated with "the administration of the State," covering a
 wide range of government services (e,g., education, medical)
 and state enterprises (e.g., oil and gas production,
 transport).
 For each industry declared subject to the ESA (a finding which
 must be renewed every 6 months), a specific determination is
 made by the Government as to what constitutes the limits of
 union activity. In cases where collective bargaining has been
 barred, individual wage boards are established to decide wage
 levels. Disputes are adjudicated before the National
 
 
 1540
 PAKISTAN
 IndustriarRelatons Commission. A worker's right to quit can
 also b -curtailed under this Act, and a fired worker has no
 recourse to the labor courts. However, collective bargaining
 and even strikes are known in s6me job areas covered by the
 act (e. :' ,the nationalized banks). The abolition of the ESA
 is a majbkdeia;Ynd of most unions.
 The ILO's COE has advised the Government that a 1980 ordinance
 permitting it to exempt the export processing zones from the
 provisions of any law is inconsistent with the requirements of
 ILO Convftions 87'and"98. Export processing zones are not
 yet functioning, and-it is dificult to judge how labor laws
 will be applied there.
 'c..'Prohibition-of Forced or Compulsor  Labor
 Forced ltbor Is specifically prohibited by Pakistani law.
 There' is no evidenbe that any form of'slavery Or bonded labor
 has received official sanction. However, critics argue that
 the ESA's limitation on some employees' right to leave their
 jobs constitutbs a form of dmpulsory labor.
 Cases of illegal'bonded labor appear to be widespread, with a
 numbe'of'soecifib cases and the'discovery of several forced
 labor camps reported in 1989. The worst cases tend to come to
 light only through sensational treatment in the press. Bonded
 laboz-.s said tb be'particflarly common in the brick, carpet,
 glass, and fishing industries and extends:to agricultural and
 constiuction work in rural areas."..
 In the'brjck kiln fustry,.howevbr, a workers' association in
 1988 �gccbd~ai  bringiig thepliqht of bonded brickmakers in
 the Punjab befoie"Ehe Supreme CourL  In March 1989, the court-
 issued a c6fttomise'rulingwhich rqinforced  rofiibitions 91 .
 forced labor-arid forcible collection Qf debts'and limited pay
 advances to 1 week's wages, whi~e upholding the legality of
 existixigde6lf'  The *ruling sqs'sthe first impotaht gin'for
 bonddw6rkfs-nd laid the groundwork for' challen@es.po
 bond'd:li66rrIn 6thei industries.:-Resistance to' te ruling is
 likely   b    r   '          "and reports of ViOltions
 continue to appear. Moreover, due to the lack of
 alternatives, many workers have returned to bonded labor.
 In response to the publicity surrounding this case the
 Governibent'alnourided its'intenti6n.toin'roduce a'Lill 'in the'
 current'session of Ehe Ntifal Assembly td abolish bonded',
 labor with'&rop6sed     hty'of 3peirs in jail di a $75Q.'
 fine fdr  ff~ndirs. Citics charge'hat the prop6sed   A
 legislatibr 4ili be ?ineffedtive due to the inadequate
 penalties kid the inability of authorities to enforce the iaw
 in the rura'l areas, where'such'practices are prevalent.
 While'it is riot clear that the provisifon of the ESA limiting
 the rights of'some employees to leave their jobs has been
 invoked this and other questioriable Pakistani legtslation
 have 5eeniVndet the scrutiny of the ILO's COE for a number of
 years. A government?'represeftafive informed the ItO's
 Committee on the Application of Conventions and
 Recommendations (CACR) in June 191,9 that various provisions of
 Paistani 'legislation deemed incodsistent with the
 requirements of ILO Convention's 29 and 105 on forced labor
 (both of which have-'b6n ratified by Pakistan) have been, or
 will be ' kbded. ' The repfesentatve denied the existence of
 illegal bonded labor-'in Pakistan. The CACR welcomed the
 progress being made with'respect to legislation, but requested
 
 
 1541
 PAKITAN
 more information and expressed "great concern" regarding the
 Security of Pakistan Act, which permits courts of law to
 impose sentences of prison labor for the expression of
 political views.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 Child labor is limited by at least four separate statutes and
 Article 11 of the Constitution. These laws present a
 confusing picture, variously limiting employment in certain
 fields to those over 14 or 15, and, in one case, permitting
 factory work by children under 14 (in apparent contradiction
 of the Constitution) if a-government doctor issues a
 certificate of fitness. None of these regulations is
 effeftively enforced.
 Despite legal limitations, child labor is common in Pakistan.
 While much of it is in the traditional framework of family
 farming or small business, the abusive employment of children
 in larger industries and government businesses is widespread.
 Although there are no reliable official statistics, unofficial
 surveys and occasional press features suggest that violations
 of existing laws-are common. Unofficial estimates indicate
 that one-third of Pakistan's total labor force is made up of
 workers under age 18. The employment of children is
 occasionally linked with stories of bonded or forced labor and
 child prostitution.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 Labor regulations in Pakistan are governed by federal statutes
 applicable throughout the country. These provide for, or
 require the provincial governments to provide for, a legal
 minimum wage as well as certain worker protection and welfare
 services. The minimum wage, which for an unskilled worker is
 roughly $25 per month, is not'enough to support even a small
 family. The law provides for a maximum workweek of 54 hours
 and paid annual holiday and rest periods during the workday.
 These regulations apply, however, only to a small minority of
 the labor force; they specifically do not apply to
 agricultural workers (roughly one-half of Pakistan's work
 force), to workers in Pakistan's numerous small factories with
 fewer than 10 employees, and to the small contract groups of
 under 10 workers into which factory work forces are
 increasingly divided.
 The enforcement of labor regulations is left to the provincial
 governments, all of which are largely ineffective in this
 area. The attention given to enforcement varies among the
 provinces in proportion to the significance of industrial
 labor. In all cases, limited resources, corruption, and
 inadequate regulatory structures hamper the effort.
 In general, worker health and safety standards are poor and
 little is being done to improve them. Organized labor is
 occasionally able to press for improvements in this area, and
 .some legal protections apply, although they are weakly
 enforced.
 
 
  1542
