 PAKISTAN
 Pakistan'is -governed by a civilian, administration headed by
 Prime Minister Junejo and a cabinet of National Assembly
 members and senators, chosen after nonparty elections in
 February 1985. Parallel provincial assemblies were also
 elected in 1985, and Pakistan ended 7 years of martial law and
 a 20-rear-old state of emergency on December 30, 1985.
 President Zia ul-Haq, who came to power in a 1977 coup, won a
 5-year term as President in a controversial referendum held in
 December .1984. In addition to the powers of the Presidency,
 Zia retains the position of Chief of Atmy Staff and wields
 substantial residual powers under, the Constitution.
 Legislation-passed in December.1985 authorized Junejo to
 revivehe.Pakistan Mpslim League (PML) under his own
 leadership. Progoyep ment PML groups quickly formed in the
 National Assembly and in provincial assemblies, giving the PML
 comfortable majorities in all houses.
 As it has in the past, the extraparliamentary opposition,
 especially the coalition known as the Movement for the
 Restoration of 'pejocracy (MRD), which boycotted the 1985
 elections, continued to challenge the legalityof the present,
 -Government throughout 1987. MRD-sponsored rallies and meetings
 were held in all the provinces, including protests on the 10th
 anniversary of the 1977 coup. An all-parties conference
 convened by opposition groups in August was held without
 government interference.
 Pakistani military forces are the world's seventh largest,
 -numbering some 482,000 men. The army is called upon on
 occasion to restore order during civil disturbances.
 -Paramilitary forces operate in frontier areas. Police forces,
 which are under provincial control, are often poorly trained,
 undisciplined, and lack professionalism.
 The public sector share i-n Pakistani industry has diminished
 in recent years. In 1982 industry was divided evenly between
 the public and private-sectors. By 1986 the public sector
 accounted for under 20 percent of total fixed capital
 formation. Private entrepreneurship is now flourishing in the
 small industrial sector. Pakistan continues to make impressive
 economic gains, even though long-term growth may be hampered
 by a poor educational system, widespread illiteracy, limited
 resources, and a continuing bias among many officials against
 an expanded private sector.
 The war in Afghanistan, caused by the Soviet occupation of
 that country, continues to have a major impact on Pakistan.
 Pakistan provides refuge to some 3 million Afghans and is the
 target of an intense Kabul regime-directed campaign of
 disinformation, sabotage, and subversion. In 1986 and the
 first 8 months of 1987, more than 450 people were killed in
 over 700 separate bombing incidents. The most serious was in
 Karachi in July. Soviet and Afghan regime forces frequently
 shelled and bombed Pakistan border areas, killing almost 400
 Pakistanis and refugees in the period January-August 1987.
 Kidnapings and random violence continued to plague much of the
 southern province of Sind. Government forces have at times
 violated individual rights and used excessive force in efforts
 to combat banditry and reestablish law and order. There were
 repeated incidents of ethnic violence, especially in Karachi,
 and ethnic and sectarian political groups expanded their
 membership and influence.
 
 
 1271
 PAKISTAN
 Democracy continued to advance in Pakistan in 1987. Political
 institutions demonstrated continued growth and development
 during the year. The National Assembly and Senate, each
 including a government bloc and a parliamentary opposition
 group, maintained a lively political dialogue.
 Extraparliamentary parties were active, and political debate
 --curtailed under martial law and during the previous civilian
 government--was more open than at any time in the last 15
 years. Political gatherings and rallies were held throughout
 Pakistan, although on occasion meetings were banned in Sind.
 In November local elections, both the progovernment and major
 opposition parties supported lists of candidates in officially
 nonpartisan contests. Voter turnout was high. Although tnere
 were instances of irregularities and the Government used the
 powers of incumbency to its advantage, the electoral outcome
 has been widely accepted in Pakistan. American observers
 concluded that the overall results appeared valid, and this
 view has been shared by most of the Pakistani press.
 Opposition leaders have protested instances of alleged
 irregularities-but have not challenged the overall validity of
 the results. Opposition activities and commentary, including
 criticism of President Zia and Prime Minister Junejo, are
 .widely reported in both the government and private press.
 Members of religious minorities, particularly the Ahmadis,
 continue to face discrimination and are the targets of police
 and public harassment. Women have reserved positions in
 political life, but both social and legal constraints inhibit
 full equality with men.  A major unresolved issue is the
 review of martial law court decisions which have been critized
 for lack of due process.  Despite statements from the Prime
 Minister that his party favored establishment of a review
 mechanism and appointment of a parliamentary committee to
 study the issue, no decision has yet been made. Police abuse
 of prisoners remains a significant problem. In its 1987
 Report, covering 1986, Amnesty International (AI) noted
 reports of police torture of criminal suspects throughout the
 country.
 'RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 There was no evidence of government or government-instigated
 political killings. However, the-war 1n Afghanistan and
 internal political feuding in Iran have-brought another kind
 of political killing to Pakistan. According to government
 figures, during the period from January 19a6 to July 1987,
 more than 459people died as a result of awave of terrorist
 bombings in all' four provinces, which are believed to be the
 work of Kabul regime and Soviet agents. Three people were
 killed when houses in Karachi and Quetta used by members of
 the Iranian Mujahidin-l-Khalq organization were reduced to
 rubble with rocket propelled grenades in a coordinated attack
 by a pro-Khomeini group.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no reports of government-instigated disappearances.
 Kidnapings by highwaymen, usually for ransom, and particularly
 in rural Sind and in the semiautonomous tribal regions,
 cQntinued to be a problem.
 
 
 1272
 PAKISTAN
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 Physical abuse of those charged with ordinary crimes is common.
 There was no confirmed evidence that political detainees were
 tortured in 1987, although there were credible reports that
 some detainees were held in fetters. Police in Pakistan are
 ill-trained, poorly paid, and rarely-held accountable--factors
 which..encourage both corruption and abuse of authority.
 Police and jailers use "third degree"- methods and frequently
 employ the threat.of abuse to extort money from prisoners and
 their families. In October the Chief Minister of Sind
 reportedito the Provincial Assembly that there had been four
 deaths of, prisoners in the province as the result of
 maltreatment or torture. In a fifth case, a detainee's feet
 had to be amputated following torture by his jailers. Charges
 have been filed in four of these five cases; in the fifth, the
 official responsible has been suspended, and further
 investigations are being conducted. While the Government has
 become  more responsive-to highly publicized allegations of -
 mistreatment and has held police accountable in some cases, it
 has not instituted systematic reforms.
 In its 1987 Report, AI noted that the torture of criminal
 suspects in police custody was reported throughout the
 country. and that some political prisoners were-allegedly
 tortured, apparently to intimidate them. It cited the case of
 Alla, Dj.nd who reportedly was arrested in August 1986 by police
 after hebad filed a petition to-a local court complaining that
 his brother had-been unlawfully killed during a dem6nstration
 held by, the, Pakistan People's Party,. He stated he was kept in
 police custody for 15 days, beatenton the soles of his feet
 and his back, and hung upside down.
 Three classes of prison facilities exist. Class "C" cells;
 which genetally hold common criminals, suspected terrorists,
 and low-level political workers, usually have dirt floors, no
 furnishings, and poor quality food. The use of handcuffs and
 fetters is common in "C" cells. Prisoners in these cells
 reportedly suffer the most abuse, such as beatings and being
 forced to kneel for long periods. Political detainees and
 foreign prisoners usually are held in class."B" cells, which
 provide better treatment and better food. Only prominent
 persons receive class "A" accommodations, which can include
 air conditioning and private servants. Many of them have been
 permitted to receive party workers while imprisoned. There
 have been cases reported of some persons being committed-to
 mental institutions through inadequate judicial oversight.
 Thesecases reflect inefficiency rather than a government
 program to use psychiatric institutions as a form of
 punishment. Pakistani human rights activists and opposition
 politicians acknowledge that treatment of political detainees
 and those convicted by martial law courts generally has
 improved since the lifting of martial law.
 The Gove'nment's 1979 Hadood Ordinances prescribe-traditional
 Islamic punishments for theft, adultery, and consumition of
 alcohol and drugs. Penalties include flogging, stoning, and
 amputation, but before a court may order stoning or amputation,
 strict rules of evidence must be satisfied. Stoning or
 amputation sentences by lower courts have not been upheld on
 review. In November a couple found guilty of adultery was
 sentenced to death by a sessions court in Karachi. The
 decision will be appealed. To date, no punishments involving
 stoning or amputation have been carried out under the Hadood
 
 
 1273
 PAKISTAN
 Ordinances. Floggings were reported during 1987 for alcohol
 consumption, narcotics offenses, and adultery.
 Pakistani law does not apply in the tribal areas adjoining the
 Northwest Frontier Province (NWFP) where the law is a
 combination of Shari'a Islamic injunctions and tribal customs.
 In August the press widely reported the stoning of an accused
 murderer, who had been sentenced to death by a Mohmand Agency
 local council under tribal law.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, Exile, or Forced Labor
 Pakistan law permits detention under court order for 30 days
 of persons suspected of threatening public order and safety.
 Pakistani governments have frequently resorted to this
 provision to forestall perceived threats by taking opposition
 political leaders out of circulation. Such court orders are
 renewable for 30 days at a time, up to a total of 90 days, if
 the Government can demonstrate to the court that the detainee
 does in fact threaten public safety. According to the law,
 detainees must be informed expeditiously in the courts of the
 reason for their detention. Detention orders are often drawn
 up hastily and incorrectly, however, and frequently cannot
 stand up to judicial scrutiny. Most detainees are released
 fairly soon, but only after the situation which prompted the
 preventive detention has passed. Particularly in the Sind,
 there have been cases of political activists, who have been
 released from preventive detention, being charged with
 additional, nonrelated crimes which have resulted in their
 return to prison.
 Large numbers of arrests, primarily in Sind, including those
 of prominent political leaders, were also made in 1987 for
 violations of administrative orders forbidding public meetings
 under Section 144 of the Pakistan penal code. Section 144 can
 be invoked by local administrators on their own authority.
 The Sind Government used the provisions of Section 144
 liberally to suppress ethnic rioting and to combat banditry as
 well as to discourage political dissent. As of September 3,
 when official reports of arrests in connection with the most
 recent ethnic riots were stopped, 236 people had been arrested
 under provisions of the Maintenance of Public Order Act in
 connection with ethnic rioting. Most were released within
 several months.
 Relatives of known bandits have been jailed occasionally to
 force the bandits to surrender kidnap victims or give
 themselves up to the police. This counter-hostage tactic is
 an outgrowth of traditional tribal practice, which still
 strongly'pervades much of Sind province.
 Former detainees claim that prisoners under preventive
 detention frequently have been held incommunicado.
 There is no reliable evidence that the Government uses forced
 labor, which is prohibited by law.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Martial law courts were abolished with the lifting of martial
 law in 1985. Since martial law was lifted, no clear-cut cases
 of direct official pressure on the judiciary have been
 reported. However, there is evidenfce of indirect pressure
 through the executive's power to transfer judges. In addition,
 
 
 1274
 PAKISTAN
 judges can'be removed for malfeasance. The pace of justice is
 slow due to the limited nuniber of judicial benches, the heavy
 backlog of cases, and outdated court procedures.
 The civil judicial system, modeled after the British system,
 provides for an open trial, cross-examination, representation
 by an attorney--with court appointment of an attorney for
 indigents in capital cases--and appeal of sentences. Judges
 at the trial level are drawn from the judicial services. High
 court judges are appointed from among those who have been
 district judges or advocates before the high court. There
 have been attempts to improve the procedures and the
 availability of high court benches in the provinces.
 The 9pecial Sharl'a (Islamic) courts operate similarly to
 ordinarycivilian rdurts., They try offenses relating to the
 enforcement of the Hadood Ordinances. Cases referred to the
 Shar-i'a'courts are heard jointly by Islamic scholars and
 judges from the civilian court system who usually employ
 ordinary criminal procedures. Both judges and attorneys must
 be Muslim and be familiar with Islamic law. Defendants in the
 Shari'a courts are entitled to bail and lawyers of their
 choice.
 Prior to the'i ifting of martial law in 1985, the martial law
 courts, iastily tried large numbers of cases in an effort to
 clear the d0.kets, creating doubts about strict adherence even
 to martial law standards of judicial procedure and conduct.
 Also berfrore martial law was lifted, the Parfiament passed the
 Eighth Amendment to the Constitution which withdrew from the
 civilian judiciary the right to review the actions of martial
 law aCuthdrities and courts. Under the Eighth.Amendment, only
 those sbntqncd to death by martial law courts may petition to
 have their cases reviewed by' the President; all others must
 appeal to a proyvincial., veroor. Only one appeal, in a case
 involving smuggling, has been granted.
 The Prime Milnister has stated his party's,.support for- some
 form of veyxew of martial law cases, and he appoitnted the
 parliamentary b6mmittee which studied the issue of civilian
 review of te martial law court decisions. In October, during
 debate of the issue in the National Assembly the Prime
 Minister indicated that the parliamentary committee's report
 was under ieview and that a decision would be announced
 shortly. Atto.neys for persons sentenced by martial law
 courts have challenged the Eighth Amendment, arguing that it
 conflicts with other constitutional provisions on fundamental
 rights. On.,November 18, the Lahore high court agreed to.
 review sev'en cases of persons tried in martial law courts.
 The court' held that cases in which there was malicious intent
 within the law, violation of a constitutional provision, lack
 of proper jurisdiction, or an improperly constituted review
 should be subject to its review. The Government has appealed,
 arguing that a full bench of the Lahore high court was
 unconstitutional and.that it misinterpreted constitutional
 provisidns ratifying martial law verdicts.
 Effective July 23, in response to a wave of terrorist
 bombings, the President promulgated an ordinance establishing
 special courts to provide speedy trials in cases involving
 "offenses sensational in character or shocking to public
 morality, creating panic or an atmosphere of fear and anxiety
 among the public." The measure was subsequently amended and
 approved by the National Assembly and Senate. Cases involving
 bomb blasts, sabotage, highway robberies, banditry, or
 
 
 1275
 PAKISTAN
 kidnaping can be expedited, and the Government may transfer
 cases from any court to a special court. Police investigations
 must be completed in 14 days and hearings can be conducted on
 a day-by-day basis. All requirements of the rules of evidence
 must be observed, including the right to counsel, and judges
 must meet the same standards as those appointed to a high
 court. Decisions may be appealed to the-Supreme Court.
 Appeals of the 1986 death sentences against four Ahmadi
 defendants, who were convicted in 1985 by martial law courts
 in two separate murder cases, are still pending. In the
 first, which took place in October 1984 in Sahiwal, Punjab
 province, the defense has argued that one defendant acted in
 self-defense against a mob and that the other was not present
 at the scene of the crime. The Lahore High Court is reviewing
 the sentences. Although no formal stay of execution has been
 issued while the appeal is being heard, the defense attorneys
 have received informal assurances that the defendants will not
 be executed before a decision is rendered.
 In the second case, concerning a mosque bombing in Sukkur,
 Sind province,.in May 1985, the defense has claimed that there
 is no conclusive connection between the defendants and the
 deaths of the bombing victims. This case is now before the
 Supreme Court of Pakistan, which has agreed to review it on
 narrow technical grounds.
 The Government maintains that no political prisoners are being
 held in the country, i.e., no prisoners are being held who have
 not been charged with antistate offenses involving violence,
 damage to public property, or terrorism. The nonpartisan
 Political Prisoners Relief and Release Committee, however, in
 conjunction with the Human Rights Commission of Karachi and
 the Punjab-based National Council for Civil Liberties, claimed
 in an April 25 press conference that 269 political prisoners
 were being detained in Pakistani jails. These include 139 in
 Sind, 76 in Punjab, 29 in Baluchistan, and 25 in the NWFP.
 They include those convicted by military courts prior to the
 lifting of martial law as well as those convicted in
 connection with the Al-Zulfikar terrorist organization and
 former army officers charged with attempts to overthrow the
 martial law Government. They do not include those who were
 held under Maintenance of Public Order or Section 144 in
 connection with ethnic/sectarian violence or political rallies.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Decisions about occupation, education, place of residence, and
 family size are made without official interference. Although
 police are required by law to obtain a warrant before entering
 a private home, authorities frequently ignore such legal
 requirements. During bandit sweeps and riots, police often
 chase suspects into homes without concern about the presence
 of a magistrate as required by law. There have been repeated
 incidents involving the use of excessive force during
 antibandit campaigns in Sind. Some of these abuses have been
 committed by irregular forces which are used by the Government,
 but remain loyal to local political powers rather than to
 official'authorities. There are frequent charges that women
 have been harassed and belongings stolen by individual
 officers. There has been little attempt by the Government to
 respond to or investigate these charges, and police reform,
 
 
 1276
 PAKISTAN
 although much discussed during the past year, has not been
 advanced significantly. Extortion and robbery by policemen
 are believed to be common.
 Pakistan historically has maintained a domestic intelligence
 service to monitor political activists, suspected terrorists,
 and foreign intelligence agents. Informed sources maintain
 that wiretapping is used against opposition politicians and
 that their mail is occasionally intercepted and opened.  On
 some occasions,.Pakistani citizens,-including government
 officials, are questionled about their meetings with foreign
 diplomats.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 The Government owns and oparates the radio and television
 station and strictly cohtrols the news they carry. A
 Government-owned press trust controls four of the larger
 newspapers and one of the two national wire services. All are
 circumtpect-in their coverage of the news, but now cover the
 opposition. The other newspapers are privately ow4ned, arid
 their, circulation far exceeds that of the governmdnt-owned
 papers.     -
 Continuing a trend begun in 1985, there is relatively free
 discussion of government policies and criticism of the
 Government, especially in the privately owned newspapers.
 Increasingly, the press is critical ofWthe Government's
 control of radio and television coverage. In 6ddition to more
 or less unfettered reporting of statements made by legislators,
 the private press coverstremarks critical of the'dovernment "
 made by opposition politicians. The greater degree of freedom
 enjoyed by the press was well illustrated during the debate on
 the budget of 1987-88. Similarly, the oppositi6n's attacks on
 President,-Zia and Prime Minister Junejo are reported and, in
 many cases, supported by'the editorial writers and
 commentators. However, the Government continues to ban the
 Pakistan People's Party (PPP) newspaper-Musawat.
 The Government can use its large advertising budget as a means
 to control the press. It claims that its advertising policy
 is determined by the circulation figures of a newspaper; by
 whether the paper is local, regional, or national; and by its
 reputation among readers. However, there was at least one
 instance in 1987 of indirect pressure exerted to punish a major
 daily, The Muslim, by cutting off advertising as a result of
 the editor's attempt to publicize views on Pakistan's nuclear
 status which conflicted with the bfficial position. The
 country's biggest dailies are financially independent enough
 and obtain enough private advertising to be relatively immune
 to government pressure.
 A restrictive "press and publication ordinahce," originally
 promulgated in 1963, remains on the books, although the Junejo
 Government is committed to its repeal, and it was not applied
 in 1987.. Under the ordinance, official permission for
 establishing and operating a printing business may be denied
 or withdrawn if the authorities conclude that the publisher is
 likely to prejudice the glory of Islam, national integrity or
 security, public order,, decency, or morality. The ordinance
 is so broad that the Government could theoretically stop
 publication of almost anything it deemed objectionable.
 
 
 1277
 PAKISTAN
 Academic freedom is not explicitly denied, but the authorities
 have immense powers, in view of the preponderance of state-run
 institutions of learning, to circumscribe the actions of those
 regarded as troublesome. A serious threat to academic freedom
 is the atmosphere of violence and intolerance among the student
 body. At most large universities, well-armed groups of
 students of varying political persuasions clash frequently and
 are successful in intimidating other students and instructors
 on matters of language, syllabus, doctrine, and dress. Even
 though student unions are officially banned, "student
 organizations," which -strongly resemble unions, are not.
 Educational institutions have been frequently closed because
 of student violence, but university authorities have recently
 begun taking measures to restore order and reestablish their
 authority.
 Literary and creative works remain generally free of
 censorship, but authors and publishers tend to avoid
 controversial and political themes. Obscene literature, a
 category -which has been broadly interpreted by government
 authorities, -is subject to seizure, and authorities on this
 ground frequently ban or confiscate indigenous books and
 magazines dealing with sensitive political topics, e.g.,
 provincial separatism and sectarian extremism. Foreign
 publications critical of the Government occasionally are
 seized, and some have been banned. No effort was made by the
 Government in 1987 to restrict foreign journalists' access.
 The National Assembly approved legislation providing for the
 arrest of non-Muslims who translate, interpret, or comment on
 the Koran. Ahmadis fear that they will be the targets of this
 legislation. The Punjab Home Department objected to the
 February and April issues of the monthly Urdu Ahmadiya
 magazine, although the magazines remained in circulation.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 In most cases, government authorities respected the right of
 peaceful assembly in 1987. Political leaders of all
 persuasions were usually able to travel freely and address
 large rallies, often emphasizing antigovernment themes.
 However, there were exceptions to this policy in connection
 with the holding of meetings which the Government believed
 might result in violence or serve as an incitement to
 secession. In addition, there were cases in which Section 144
 was invoked to.ban public meetings, primarily to forestall
 public demonstrations critical of the provincial governments,
 particularly in the Sind. Opposition political parties charge
 that the Government has broadly interpreted the law to inhibit
 political activity by its opponents.
 Unions covering the entire political spectrum are permitted to
 exist. Under laws going back to the premartial law period of
 the early 1970's, workers in individual factories remain
 legally free to form labor unions, negotiate wage and working
 conditions in most areas of the economy, and elect collective
 bargaining agents--although the law precludes industry-wide
 bargaining. Most unions are small, and labor organizers
 assert that Pakistan labor law encourages the fragmentation of
 organized labor. Only about 7 percent of the labor force is
 unionized; most Pakistanis work in agriculture or in small,
 nonunion shops. Recent statistics, although not totally
 reliable, indicate that union membership shrank at the end of
 the Bhutto period in 1977, but has remained stable since 1980.
 
 
 1278
 PAKISTAN
 Under Pakistani labor law, nonunion workers can be signed to
 short-term contracts in plants where the work force is
 unionized. Many labor law welfare provisions covering social
 security, retirement, other benefits, and particularly job
 secirity, do ,not apply to such employees. Pakistani unions
 complain that. the widespread use of contract employees
 circumvyentsfreedom of association by allowing employers to
 fire-unionized labor im favor of easily intimidated
 nonunionized "contractemployees." Pakistani employers argue
 that contract hiring is necessary, since the rigidity of  "
 Pakistan's laws does not allow them sufficient flexibility in
 hiring-and firing to respond to economic (including seasonal
 market  fluctuations. The issue has been referred to the
 International Labor Organization (ILO). The Government has
 not responded to repeated ILO requests for information. The
 governing Muslim League has declared its intention to amend
 labor laws to end or restrain the practice of bontract hiring,
 but no legislation has~yet been introduced.
 The right to. strike was restored with the end of martial law.
 In 1987 there were occasional strikeS, and little evidence of
 government interference with them. By law, a strike cannot be
 called until attempts to-resolve-a labor dispute through
 arbitration and the labor courts have failed. An "intent to
 strike" notici must then be filed with the Labor Ministry.
 This isfollowed~by a mandatory cooling-off period of several
 months.Labor leaders claim these requirements infringe upon
 the ,right to strike, but there is little indication that
 unions initiating strikes without following this-procedure
 havebeen ttegted Arshly. "Government'employees and laborers,
 in designated essential services (utilities; hospitals,
 firefighting, sanitation, and the police) are forbidden to
 organize and to strike. In 1983 the Essential:Services Act
 was extended to cover Pakistan International Airways (PIA),
 the nationalized airline, which has had a history of militant
 and highly politicized antigovernment unionism.
 No mediation or arbitration prbcedure exists to cover'workers
 excluded-from unionization under the Essential Services Act.
 The Government proposed to remedy-this by amending it to
 empower the-head of the National Industrial Relatibns Board to
 arbitrate-disputes. -In,1987 provincial government.-clerks, who
 are covered by the Act, again engaged in a wildcat strike
 'which resulted in government recognition of some of the
 strikers' demands. Some unions in Pakistan historically have,
 had strong links to political parties; the independence
 movement spawned parallel labor structures which successive
 political parties have sought to adopt or maintain. The PPP
 has a labor bureau and has expressed its-intent to form-a
 "Peoples Labor Federation." The Nationalist Labor Federation
 is associated with the rightist/fundamentalist Islamic
 Jamaat-e-ifslami, and there are indications that the ruling
 Pakistan Mudlim League also may be forming a labor federation.
 Pakistan's moderate labor federations are permitted to
 associate with the ILO, the- International Confederation of
 Free -Trade Unions, and counterparts in other countries. In
 the past, extrene left-wing unions generally had their
 contacts with'outside bodies curtailed. However, recently
 they- have been permitted.to-associate with the World
 Federation of Trade Unions:(WFTU), and.-restrictions on foreign
 travel for their members;have been lifted.
 
 
 1279
 PAKISTAN
 c. Freedom of.Religion
 Pakistan is an Islamic republic. Its 1973 Constitution
 requires all law to be consistent with "Islamic ideology."
 Under the Constitution, the President and Prime Minister must
 be Muslims. However, designated minority religious groups--
 Ahmadis, Christians, and Parsis (Zoroastrians)--have held high
 office and are represented in the economic, political, and
 social life of the country. They do not vote in Muslim
 constituencies, but rather must seek office and cast their
 ballots in at-large constituencies reserved for them in the
 national and provincial assemblies. (Ahmadis, disputing their
 minority status and asserting the right to be recognized as
 Muslims, have refused to exercise these options.) Each
 community is govexned by its own codes in family and property
 matters, and members of minority groups may join any political
 party.
 Generally, minorities can practice their own religion openly,
 maintain links with their coreligionists in other countries,
 and travel for religious purposes. Foreign clergy may enter
 the country to serve congregations. Conversions are permitted,
 but the Government prohibits proselytizing among Muslims and
 has refused to renew the residence permits of some foreign
 missionaries who have ignored this ban. Following reports of
 anti-Muslim violence in India, there were scattered acts of
 violence against Hindus and Christians, but these were
 immediately condemned by the responsible provincial government.
 Conservative government estimates list more than 130 killed in
 sectarian clashes in July between Sunnis and Shi'as in the
 Kurram Tribal Agency. As a result of careful planning by the
 Government and a sincere ef-fort by both Shi'a and Sunni
 religious leaders, Muharram in 1987 was not marked by the
 violence of the previous year in which more than 10 people
 died in Punjab alone. However, for the first time in several
 years, fighting between two Sunni sects during Muharram led to
 two deaths in the Jhang district of Punjab.
 The Ahmadi sect, which considers Utself Muslim despite
 theological divergences from traditional Islam, has
 historically been the object of popular prejudice and
 discriminmation. Anti-Ahmadi riots in 1953, in fact, helped
 .spark the imposition of Pakistan's first period of martial
 law. In 1974 Prime Minister Zulfikar Ali Bhutto, with the
 support of all parties, sponsored a constitutional amendment
 declaring the Ahmadis a non-Muslim minority. In April 1984,
 the Government issued a follow-up ordinance which bans the
 Ahmadis from using Muslim terminology or proselytizing;
 violators are subject to prosecution. In 1986 Parliament
 passed legislation, apparently aimed at Ahmadis, making
 blaspheming the Prophet Muhammad a capital offense. Thus far,
 no Ahmadis have been brought to trial under this provision.
 Ahmadis assert that they are indeed Muslims, and many members'
 of the sect were detained in 1987 for wearing badges bearing
 the Islamic profession of faith. Most were released, but
 several were tried, convicted, and received prison sentences.
 Police removed the-profession of faith from Ahmadi places of
 worship, which cannot be called mosques under the law. During
 1987 mobs attacked the Ahmadi mosque in Khushab and raided
 Ahmadi shops in Rabwah and Bahawalnagar. In Peshawar the
 police intervened to prevent mob action against a place of
 worship. Ahmadis in Lahore have been able to practice their
 faith at 11 mosques with little interference. However, the
 Ahmadis were prohibited from holding their annual meeting in
 
 
 1280
 PAKISTAN
 December 1986 in Rabwah, and there are credible reports of
 discrimination against Ahmadis in the military and civil
 service. (The case-.of four Ahmadis under sentence of death is
 discussed in Section l.e.)
 d.. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Pakistanis generally have freedom of movement within the
 country,-but the.Government occasionallybans individual
 polit4cl leaders from traveling to certain provinces for a
 specified tiMethrough use of an "externment" notice,
 preventing eiqry. Such orders were used to prevent Awami,
 National Party leader Wali Khan end his wife from going to
 Karachi shortly after. Mohajir/Pathan riots early this year and
 again to prevent him from visiting.Baluchistan after a series
 of Baluch nationalist riots in the Makran area. He was
 permitted, however, to enter Karachi briefly to attend a
 wedding, in December 19,87.. Simila orders are also commonly -
 used aqg nst reliqious leafts who it is believed will,
 exacerbate sectarian tensions.
 Pakis taniAi are generally free .jtorawel abroad. However,
 travel to Iprael is prohibited,.trveL to- the Soviet Union-,
 India, Sbth Africa, Taiwan,. and Eastern Europe i&-restricted,
 and the'pasports of, oppositijn party ,eadersoccasionally
 limit travel to one-pr-a fewcountries..:i
 Pakistan s nust obtain   "no,-obection",certificate--usually a
 check c@jyering-paynent.9f taxes or other. obligations--prior to
 depaV4ingthe, cjq!ntry. .These are .issued routinely, but-
 occasionally,oppostion-politicianA have complained of undue
 delays. The exit ppntrol list, which the Government used
 during 1986 to control foreign-travel, was invoked sparingly
 in i987. 'Ma~y prqminent opposition politicians traveled
 abroad in 1987,.including Bepazir Bhutto, Wali Khan.; and Jaye
 Sind leader G.M. Syed. The PPP leader. Salman 'Taseer
 successfully challenged a ban on his travel. The courts
 upheld orders banning the travel to India of Urdu poet Habib.
 Jalib, and in September theGovexnnent refused--to.petmit Dr.
 Hamida Khuro..,a Jaye Sind pctiviqt,. to leave .Pakistan.: The
 right of cigizens tQ return to Pakistan is recognized.
 Nearly 3 milliqn Afghans have fled to Pakistan, as a result of
 the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan. The Government administers
 and supprts over 300 Afghan refugee camps, incurring
 significant curent pncl lnger-term costs above the sizable
 amounts oftrelief supplie* provided by various donors. The
 movement an#i$mployment of Afghans in Pakistan generally is
 not restricted, and many-Afghans reside outside the refugee,
 camp*,., Rpsponding to public resentment and fears,.the
 Government made extra efforts in 1987 to encourage refugees in
 urban areas to return to the camps. These measures were
 generally, taken after consultation with representatives of the
 Uniteg*Nations.iigb ommissionqr for Refugees.-
 Following the July fighting between Iranian groups in Karachi
 and Quetta, the Government has given clo.er scrutiny to its
 growing popultiop:of illegal immigrants from countries such
 as Bangladesh, Iran, andSri Lanka. It has publicly vowed to
 shut off1'illegal immigration andfreturn illegal immigrants to
 their places of origin.
 
 
 1281
 PAKISTAN
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 A martial law regime led by General Zia ul-Haq governed
 Pakistan from July 1977 to December 30, 1985. Zia interpreted
 the results of a referendum held in December 1984 as an
 endorsement of his rule and in March 1985 was sworn in for a
 5-year term as President. In February 1985, the Government
 held nonparty elections for a national and four provincial
 assemblies. Protesting the prohibition on party participation,
 most of the opposition parties called for a boycott of the
 polls. Individuals ran for election on a nonparty basis,
 however, and a majority of the voters ignored the boycott
 call. Although opposition political parties continue to
 question the legitimacy of the Government formed as a result
 of these elections, several opposition parties, including the
 Pakistan People's Party, actively supported slates of
 candidates in nonparty local elections in November. The
 elections were marked by a high turnout of voters.
 In March 1985, Mohammad Khan Junejo was nominated as Prime
 Minister by President Zia and confirmed by a vote of
 confidence in the National Assembly. He heads a Westminster-
 style government composed of a cabinet drawn from the elected
 members of Parliament. With the end of martial law,
 restrictions on the formation of parties were lifted. A
 majority of members in the National Assembly joined together
 to create the Pakistan Muslim League, based on the already
 established Muslim League. They elected Prime Minister Junejo
 as party chairman. Several religious parties have small
 representations in Parliament. The remaining members are
 independents. Pakistan is a member of the International
 Parliamentary Union.
 The four provincial governments are headed by chief ministers,
 also now members of the Pakistan Muslim League, which has
 majorities in each of the elected assemblies. Provincial
 cabinets are composed of provincial legislators.
 Members of the legislative assemblies have immunity for
 actions and speech 'in those chambers but no general immunity.
 Several sitting members of the Sind Provincial Assembly were
 arrested briefly for assisting women demonstrators in
 violation of a Section 144 bgn.
 The mayor of Karachi and several municipal councillors were
 arrested in February and the Karachi Municipal Council
 dissolved for leading a public protest against what they said
 was unfair encroachment by the provincial government on the
 local government's power to tax. Under sweeping powers
 granted by the Sind Local Government Ordinance of 1979, the
 provincial government replaced the council, which represented
 more than 7 million people, with an appointed administrator
 and council, giving the ruling Pakistan Muslim League greater
 representation than it held in the dissolved elected body.
 -Under the Political Parties Act, as amended by Parliament in
 1986, members of the national and provincial assemblies who
 have designated a party affiliation cannot switch to another
 party without resigning their seat. This provision, although
 criticized as unconstitutional, was upheld by the courts.
 Political parties may operate without registering with the
 Government, but they must register with the Election
 Commission in order to participate in elections. This
 
 
 1282
 PAKISTAN
 includes'making financial records available for scrutiny and
 holding internal party elections. Although they have
 submitted their accounts, the PPP and a number of the other
 extraparliamentary opposition parties have declined to
 register, Isserting that those provisions dealing with
 organizational structure,-personnel, and finances could be
 manipulated to suppress or impair their parties.' The PPP has,
 however, complied with those portions of the party registration
 law which were operative before the martial law period.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 Domestic human rights organizations, including those
 affiliated with opposition parties, operate free of official
 harassment, and their reports receive extensive coverage in
 the privately owned press. Pakistan has allowed visits by
 persons affiliated.With Annesty International, the Lawyers
 Committee for Human Rights, Freedom House, the International
 Commission of Jurists, and other international human rights
 organizations. Appropriate government officials, including
 the President, Prime Minister; and chief ministers, have met
 with 'the-delegations, whoae meetings-and reports have been
 reported widely in the press. The Government has not,
 however,-responded to criticisms in the reports the
 organizations have issued.
 Section 5 Discrimination'Based on Race,'Sex, Religion;
 -Language, or Social Status
 Twenty seat's -in the National Assembly are reserved for women,
 and two women were elected to nonreserved seats in 1985 in
 their own right. Seats in the provincial assemblies and local
 bodies-are likewise reserved for women. Islamic
 traditionalists, however, still exert a powerful influence on
 Pakistani souial norms. It is accepted practice to assign
 women a subordinatu role in terms of civil, political, 'and
 individual rights. Many Pakistanis interpret the Koran's
 injunctions on modesty to mean that women should remain either
 at home-or behind the'veil.
 These attitudes have contributed to an officially reported
 adult female literacy rate of only 16 percent, compared 1o 36
 percent for males (1985 estimates, which are generally regarded
 as high by informed observers). The primary school enrollment
 ratio was only 33'percent for girls as compared to 64 percent
 for boys. The ratio of men to women in secondary educational
 institutions, according to 1983 'Pakistan statistics, was
 better than five to one. Eight times as many men as women.
 work outside the home for a-wage.
 Urban women are represented in the universities, but
 postgraduate employment opportunities remain largely limited
 to teaching, medical services, and the law, with a small
 number of women entering the commercial and public sector.
 The Government's policy of Islamization has reversed some of
 the social and legal gains made by women in past years. The
 establishment of a women's university has been hotly debated,
 and no-decision has been made. Fundamentalists would require
 all women students to attend this institution; others argue
 that it would permit the women to study without harassment
 from male students, but they would not ban women from the
 other schools. Women may hot participate in international
 athletic competition, and, as part of a drive to promote
 
 
 1283
 PAKISTAN
 wearing traditional attire by both men and women, the
 Government determines appropriate dress for women employees
 appearing in public on television, in the print media, and as
 airline stewardesses. Women members of the National Assembly
 have held up passage of a Shari'a bill, arguing that, if
 adopted and implemented strictly, it could roll back present
 economic, political, and social rights for women.
 While several members of minorities are prominent in the
 National Assembly or in public life, reports of discrimination
 against minority groups in the areas of employment and
 education appear well founded. The perception of
 discrimination on ethnic and linguistic grounds is fundamental
 to the repeated ethnic upheavals witnessed in Karachi during
 1987. Sindhis and Mohajirs (refugees from India and their
 descendants) resent domination of the bureaucracy, the police,
 and armed forces by the majority Punjabis. In Baluchistan,
 the rapid growth of the Pathan population, reinforced by the
 influx of Afghan refugees, has led to armed clashes, based on
 the fear that Pathans will soon become the majority in the
 Baluch home province. Officially designated as "non-Muslims,"
 Ahmadis are subject to discrimination and occasional
 harassment and have limited chances for advancement in the
 public sector. The Sind Department of Education distributed
 circulars requesting the names of Ahmadi teachers, some of
 whom were later transferred to undesirable assignments.'
 Ahmadi youth complain of increasing difficulty in gaining
 admittance to good colleges. This problem is not unique to
 Ahmadis, but they appear to suffer greater discrimination--see
 also Section 2.c.
 An element in all cases of discrimination is the fact that
 socially prominent Pakistanis suffer less at the hands of
 officialdom than those less well-off, partly because of their
 ability to return favors or offer inducements to appropriate
 civil servants, and partly because of the general deference
 still accorded social "betters" in Pakistan society. Although
 the original caste distinctions common to South Asian societies
 have no legally binding force, clan affiliations and ethnic
 identities, which in some ways parallel the old caste system,
 still help or hinder those seeking education, employment,
 justice, and public office.
 CONDITIONS OF LABOR
 Pakistan law sets minimum wages for skilled and unskilled
 labor. Comprehensive health and safety legislation provides
 for inspection of the workplace to ensure compliance with
 health, safety, and workmen's compensation regulations. The
 law requires that no adult shall work more than 9 hours per
 day without payment of overtime, and that no worker shall work
 more than 10 hours overtime per week. (The normal workweek in
 Pakistan is 6 days). The enforcement of all of this
 legislation is poor.
 Child labor is widespread in Pakistan, despite laws stating
 that the employment of children under the age of 15 is illegal,
 and that those between 15 and 17 .maynot work more than 5 hours
 per -ay. The Government has had institutions in place to
 administer-these J"abor regulations since independence.
 Nevertheless, lack of -resources, -indifference, corruption, and
 illiteracy hamper the pplication.of labor legislation.
 Noncompliance is widespread, and punishments for infractions
 are Tarely meted out.
 
 
 1284
 PAKISTAN
 Agricultural workers do not have the right to organize and are
 largely uncovered by labor legislation. Workers in small
 industries (less than 50 employees) are also frequently not
 extended the full coverage of labor laws.
 
 
 1285
