 PAKISTAN
 Martial law regimes have ruled Pakistan for most of its 36
 years of independence. The current and longest experience with
 martial law began on July 5, 1977, when General Mohammed Zia
 ul-Haq headed a coup against Prima Minister zulfikar Ali
 Bhutto, who was later tried, convicted and executed for
 murder. The coup ended months of disturbances sparked by
 charges that the Bhutto regime had rigged the March elections.
 Zia declared his Martial Law Administration a caretaker regime
 pending new elections within ninety days. General elections,
 however, did not take place, and the regime expanded its stated
 goal to that of transforming Pakistan into an Islamic society.
 The Government suspended the 1973 Constitution, and with it
 many civil and political rights. In September 1978, Zia became
 President, in addition to Chief Martial Law Administrator. In
 October 1979, citing security considerations, Zia called off
 new elections set for November, ordered political parties
 dissolved, political activities banned, and press censorship
 imposed. In March 1981, President Zia promulgated a
 Provisional Constitutional Order which formally suspended the
 exercise of certain civil and political rights--already
 suspended in practice--and curtailed the responsibilities and
 independence of the judiciary. Military courts have the
 authority to try virtually any crime, and anyone accused of
 terrorism or subversion must prove his innocence. In 1981, the
 regime appointed a Federal Advisory Council with no real powers.
 Despite restrictions, a political debate exists and receives
 press attention. The Government has had some policies openly
 criticized by members of the Federal Advisory Council and the
 press. Zia and other senior officials have held publicized
 discussions with opposition leaders on a variety of issues.
 On August 12, 1983, President Zia announced his plan to hold
 nationa elections and lift martial law by March 23, 1985. The
 plan, however, implied the continued exclusion of political
 parties and called for the establishment of a strong
 presidential form of government. On August 14, the Movement
 for the Restoration of Democracy, an alliance of several
 opposition parties, launched a long-planned civil disobedience
 campaign calling for an immediate end to martial law and the
 restoration of the 1973 Constitution. Movement members
 'courted arrest" by holding rallies and delivering speeches
 deemed illegal. Violence in rural areas of Sind resulted in
 the death of some 300 protestors and security officials, and
 the arrest of over eight thousand persons. Military courts
 tried and sentenced many of those arrested.
 From August 31 to October 2, the four provinces held non-party
 elections to fill seats on local, municipal, and district
 councils. These *local bodies' constitute a four-year-old
 experiment in elected local government. Punjab, Northwest
 Frontier, and Baluchistan provinces held generally peaceful and
 orderly polling; in Sind, an opposition boycott and
 anti-government agitation produced low voter turnout and
 violent confrontations between security forces and
 demonstrators.
 The lifting of prepublication censorship in January 1982 gave
 editors the responsibility for ensuring compliance with
 censorship guidelines. During the last half of 1983, however,
 the Government sought to assert greater control of the press by
 
 (1385)
 
 
 1386
 warning offending editors and denying Government advertising to
 their publications. Authorities temporarily reimposed
 prepublication censorship on three papers in Sind, accused of
 encouraging anti-government violence, and, for the first time
 in several years, arrested four newspaper editors for defying
 censorship guidelines.
 The Soviet occupation of Afghanistan poses a serious security
 threat to Pakistan, which does not exercise full control over
 some of its large and sometimes unruly tribal areas on the
 Afghan border. This threat has taken several forms: "warnings,
 by Moscow's representatives and propaganda organs, bombardment
 of Pakistani border towns by aircraft and artillery from
 Afghanistan, infiltration of pro-Kabul agents, and Soviet
 support for terrorists who have killed conservative
 politicians, hijacked a Pakistani aircraft to Kabul, smuggled
 arms, and conducted minor acts of sabotage in Pakistan. The Al
 Zulfikar terrorist group, at times operating from Kabul and
 headed by two sons of former Prime Minister Bhutto, has claimed
 credit for some of these activities. Other Afghanistan-based
 terrorist groups also may be involved.
 Since 1978, Pakistan has offered sanctuary to refugees fleeing
 communism and war in Afghanistan. After the December 1979
 Soviet invasion of that country, the trickle of refugees
 entering Pakistan turned into a torrent. In 1983, despite
 suffering heavy economic burdens, social tensions, and Soviet
 threats and armed incursions, Pakistan continued to provide
 safehaven for two to three million refugees--the world's
 largest registered refugee population. The Government has
 allowed the Afghans freedom of movement and employment, and
 with international assistance, has provided them asylum and
 generous humanitarian aid. Responding to criticism of their
 human rights record, Pakistanis often cite the treatment of the
 refugees as an important part of the human rights picture.
 Though the past six years have seen an impressive economic
 performance, Pakistan-remains underdeveloped, largely
 illiterate, rural, agricultural, and poor. Social, political,
 economic, and regional differences have caused frequent turmoil
 in Pakistan since its creation in 1947. This internal unrest
 and the threat Pakistan historically has felt from more
 powerful states in the region have contributed to the
 development of large military and internal security
 establishments.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom From:
 a. Unlawful or Arbitrary Deprivation of Life
 No politically motivated executions occured in 1983. During
 the year, however, at least eight persons died while in police
 custody. One, noted political figure Yusuf Lacewala, allegedly
 suffered a heart attack while jailed in Karachi. According to
 the local press, the others apparently died from mistreatment
 during arrest and interrogation. Islamabad jailers killed a
 sanitation worker in July, and another in September. After a
 strike by sanitation workers, police agreed to investigate the
 deaths and suspend the jailers.
 During the last third of 1983, the disobedience campaign set
 off serious violence in parts of rural Sind, Bhutto's home
 
 
 1387
 province and historical hotbed of resentment against Punjabi
 predominance in the Government, military, and economy.
 Security forces traded fire with protestors who held illegal
 processions, blocked highways, and attacked public property.
 Including police and soldiers, perhaps 300 persons died.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no credible accounts of disappearances resulting
 from official actions. While not always publicized, arrests of
 individuals not politically or socially prominent are usually
 acknowledged to family members. Reports indicate, however,
 that many persons have suffered incommunicado detention. The
 crime of kidnapping, often for ransom, remains common,
 particularly in the semi-autonomous tribal areas.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 The suspended 1973 Constitution bans torture, and no evidence
 exists that the current regime has ordered, authorized, or
 condoned it. In 1983, nevertheless, credible allegations were
 made of torture of detainees. Officers of Larkana central
 jail, for example, reportedly administered a severe beating to
 Imdad Chandio, an activist arrested in September for organizing
 a protest march.
 As under previous regimes, policemen and jailers use brutal
 arrest and interrogation methods. Prominent persons usually
 suffer less than others. The Government investigates nearly
 all publicized allegations of torture but has not made public
 the results, nor dealt effectively with the problem of police
 brutality. A report in November indicated, however, that three
 Multan police officers had been convicted by a special military
 court and executed for having tortured and murdered a prisoner
 in January 1979.
 Three classes of facilities for prisoners exist in Pakistan.
 Designated for ordinary criminals and frequently overcrowded,
 Class 'C' cells usually have dirt floors and no furnishings.
 The amount and quality of food provided in "C" cells is poor.
 Foreign and political prisoners generally reside in "B" class
 cells, in which a prisoner receives improved treatment, a
 less-crowded cell and better food. Most of those arrested
 during the civil disobedience campaign, however, went to "C"
 class cells and suffered harsh conditions of detention. Only a
 few prominent individuals receive "A' class accommodations,
 which may include air conditioning and private servants.
 During the civil disobedience campaign, military courts
 sentenced hundreds of political leaders and workers to
 imprisonment, flogging, and fines. Apparently, some of the
 flogging sentences were carried out. Observers regarded these
 sentences as a form of intimidation, and out of proportion to
 the nature of the offenses. The regime used flogging to bring
 sectarian rioting in Karachi under control in April 1983.
 Perhaps as many as 300 detainees received this treatment.
 In 1979, President Zia promulgated the Hudood Ordinances
 prescribing traditional Islamic punishments for theft,
 adultery, and consumption of alcohol. The penalties include
 fines, imprisonment, flogging, stoning, and amputation. In
 1983, there were reports of public floggings of persons
 convicted of sexual assault, drinking, possession of narcotics,
 and robbery. In June, the Federal Shariat Court sustained a
 
 
 1388
 sentence of amputation handed down by a lower court, but by the
 end of 1983 the punishment had not been carried out. Stoning
 and amputation sentences, very rare due to Islamic law's strict
 rules of evidence, have not been executed.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Martial law regulations authorize detention of up to 90 days
 for persons who may act in a manner "prejudicial" to the
 regime. Martial law authorities may extend detention
 indefinitely without civilian judicial review. Under this
 authority, numerous detentions of political figures have taken
 place. Habeas corpus petitions have no effect since civilian
 courts cannot review decisions of the Martial Law
 Administration.
 Given the absence of reliable statistics, and the difficulty in
 distinguishing between arrests for actions constituting
 legitimate political activity and for those threatening
 national security, the exact number of political detainees is
 difficult to estimate. By the end of 1983, perhaps up to 5,600
 persons remained in detention for political reasons. Some of
 those detained, however, had engaged in acts of violence
 against security officials and public property during the civil
 disobedience campaign. They joined prominent long-time
 detainees G.M. Syed, head of the Jiay Sind Party (confined to
 his home village for about twenty years), Air Marshall (ret.)
 Asghar Khan, President of the Tehrik-e-Istiqlal Party (under
 house arrest since October 1979), Benazir Bhutto, daughter of
 the former prime minister (under house arrest from March 1981
 until January 1984, when she left for medical treatment in
 Europe), and Pakistan Democratic Party President Nawabzada
 Nasrullah Khan (confined to his home since October 1981).
 Among those released were Meraj Mohammad Khan, President of the
 Qaumi Mohaz-e-Azadi (rearrested in August 1983 in connection
 with the agitations), and the ailing Irshad Rao, former editor
 of the Pakistan Peoples Party weekly Al Fateh.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Three judicial systems operate in Pakistan: a civilian
 judiciary based on Anglo-Saxon law, Sharila benches operating
 under Islamic law, and military tribunals. A Provisional
 Constitutional Order, promulgated in March 1981, restricted the
 powers of the civilian judiciary to review actions of the
 martial law authorities and the military courts. A number of
 justices, including the chief justice and two supreme court
 judges, refused to accept the validity of the Order, and
 relinquished their positions.
 The Martial Law Administration has broad discretionary power in
 choosing to assign cases to civilian or military courts.
 Military courts have authority to try virtually any criminal
 case in Pakistan. The Government has increasingly relied upon
 military courts. Summary military courts acquired prominence
 during disturbances in the Sind. These courts do not grant the
 right of counsel to defendants, and frequently dispose of cases
 in minutes. While special military courts do not prohibit
 defense counsel, military judges and prosecutors, often
 untrained in the law, frequently treat defense attorneys with
 contempt. In cases of subversion, the defendant must prove his
 innocence, and judges may impose secrecy on the proceedings and
 expel witnesses and defendants accused of acting in a
 disruptive or dilatory manner. If given the death sentence, a
 *subversive" may appeal only to the Chief Martial Law
 
 
 1389
 Administrator. Trials involving charges of subversion may be
 lengthy. The trial of Jam Saqi and five co-defendants, held in
 camera in Karachi since 1979, on charges of printing and
 distributing subversive literature, dragged on in special
 military court until May 1983. By the end of the year, no
 verdict had been innounced. After 16 months of detention,
 three Islamabad professors were tried in the spring of 1983.
 The trial took less than three months, but the court did not
 hand down a verdict until November: guilty, with sentences
 ranging from two to seven years (one professor was reportedly
 released in January 1984, and the others had time served in
 detention deducted from their sentences).
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 As a rule, authorities do not interfere with family and home
 life. Decisions about education, occupation, place of
 residence, and family size are made in the home. Police must
 obtain a warrant before entering a private residence. After
 the civil disobedience campaign began in August, however,
 authorities tended to ignore these formalities during
 operations in rural Sind to seize arms and stem what they
 described as banditry. The police, in a practice infrequently
 reported in the press, may detain persons in order to force
 relatives accused of crimes into surrendering to authorities.
 The socially and politically less prominent suffer more
 frequently from this abuse. Some Pakistanis regard the
 Government's policy of 'Islamization' as unwarranted
 interference in their private affairs (see section 2 c).
 No credible reports were noted of extensive wire-tapping, use
 of informants, or official interference with correspondence.
 The Government traditionally has maintained a domestic
 intelligence service to monitor the activities of certain
 political activists, in addition to tracking terrorists and
 foreign intelligence operatives.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Restrictions exist on freedom of expression. The press may not
 print statements by leaders of 'defunct* political parties,
 although these in one form or another, often find their way
 into the press. It may not "defame* Islam, the Martial Law
 Administration, the army or the President, or run items
 inciting "religious or regional tensions.' The regime allows
 criticism of the bureaucracy, police brutality, official
 corruption, and Government policies on a variety of issues.
 The civil disobedience campaign launched on August 14, 1983,
 highlighted some of the limits placed on expression. Political
 activists "courted arrest" by appearing at announced times and
 locations to deliver speeches very critical of the Government.
 Authorities arrested the speakers, and charged them with
 violating the ban on political activities. By the end of 1983,
 as many as 8,200 persons had gone to jail for participating in
 the disobedience campaign, or in other political activities.
 Some had engaged in violence against public officials and
 property. Approximately, 2,600 of the detainees were released.
 Zia announced the end of prepublication censorship in 1982, but
 declared that censorship guidelines would remain. In 1983, the
 Government exercised indirect control over the press by
 
 
 1390
 limiting the availability of newsprint and withdrawing
 government advertising from newspapers deemed too critical of
 the Martial Law Administration. During the disobedience
 campaign, the Press Information Department of the Ministry of
 Information called some editors to advise them not to print
 certain stories and to place others on inside pages. Three
 regional newspapers in Sind Province temporarily came under
 precensorship following the appearance of "inciteful" reports
 on the domestic situation. Three editors of Sindhi-language
 newspapers and the editor of an Urdu daily were arrested for
 defying censorship guidelines--the first arrests of editors in
 several years.
 Confiscation of Pakistani books and magazines occurred
 frequently, though literary and creative works remained
 generally exempt from censorship. Foreign publications, even
 those critical'of the Government, entered the country with
 relative freedom. A large percentage of Pakistanis had access
 to foreign broadcasts, at times critical of Zia.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 President Zia banned political activities in October 1979. As
 a result, the only major gatherings permitted during 1983 were
 in connection with religious or patriotic festivities. The
 Government also tolerated observances of death anniversaries,
 although it sought to prevent these from turning into major
 political gatherings or security problems. Authorities limited
 participation in the April 4 observances near Larkana of
 Bhutto's death anniversary to about 5,000 persons.
 Pakistani workers may form labor unions, appoint collective
 bargaining agents, and negotiate on wages and working
 conditions with their employers. In 1981, however, the regime
 introduced and continues to enforce regulations prohibiting
 union activites within the state-run Pakistan International
 Airlines. Strikes by industrial workers and employer lockouts,
 although prohibited, have continued to occur, albeit at a low
 rate in 1983. Worker organizations have demanded that the
 Government enunciate a labor policy affirming the right to
 strike and bargain collectively, and enforcing present
 restrictions on the ability of employers to hire and fire.
 Although the Government has had the issue under review since
 1979, it took no action in 1983.
 Traditionally, Pakistan's bar councils and associations have
 been the most active professional groups on the national
 political scene. Lawyers have led the criticism of the March
 1981 Provisional Constitutional Order which limited the powers
 and independence of Pakistan's civil judiciary. A July 1982
 amendment of the 1979 Bar Councils and Legal Practitioners Act,
 denied laywers the right to engage in collective political
 activities. Lawyers were prevented from holding a national
 convention in Mirpur (Kashmir) in January 1983, but succeeded
 in holding a meeting on a bridge leading to the town. The
 Government permitted lawyers from throughout the country to
 meet in Lahore in October, but over 50 of the 2,000 lawyers who
 concluded the convention with a peaceful protest march in the
 city center were arrested. Other lawyer-led demonstrations
 also have occured. When the lawyers attempted to march again
 two weeks later violence erupted; in a stone-throwing exchange
 with police, 14 lawyers received injuries. During the
 political unrest in Sind Province, lawyers figured prominently
 among those who 'courted arrest', or suffered preventive
 detention.
 
 
 1391
 c. Preedom of Religion
 Starting with the Bhutto regime and continuing with a much
 greater intensity under the Zia regime, the Government has
 promoted the process of "Islamization", which calls for
 extensive changes in political, economic and judicial
 institutions and procedures to make them consistent with the
 teachings of the Koran and Islamic tradition. Islamization has
 thus far led to the creation of: *interest-free* banking
 schemes (profit and loss sharing accounts); a 2.5 percent
 welfare tax (Zakat) on savings, the proceeds of which go the
 needy; Hadood Ordinances prescribing Islamic punishments for
 crimes such as theft, adultery and consumption of alcohol; and
 Shari'a courts empowered not only to try cases involving
 violation of Islamic law but to review and revise the existing
 legal code to remove features 'repugnant" to Islam. The
 Government enforces bans on alcohol and the breaking of
 religious fasts, seeks to control the media and entertainment
 to eliminate 'lewdness', and encourages the strict observance
 of Islamic precepts, such as the injunction to pray five times
 daily. This process has not met with universal approval even
 among Muslims, especially those belonging to minority sects
 such as the large Shila sect, who resent the allegedly Sunni
 cast given official Islamization policies.
 Minority religious groups such as Christians, Parsis, and
 Hindus do not enjoy all the rights of the majority Muslims. The
 Ahmadi sect, which considers itself Muslim despite its belief
 that Mohammad was not the final prophet, historically has felt
 oppressed by more traditional Muslims. In 1974, the Bhutto
 government, responding to pressure and violence from
 conservative Muslims, who rejected the Ahmadis as fellow
 Muslims and may have resented their relative wealth and
 high-level of achievement, amended the Constitution to declare
 the Ahmadis a non-Muslim minority. The current regime has
 continued to adhere to this position. Under the 1973
 Constitution, members of religious minorities cannot become
 President or Prime Minister. In the 1983 local bodies
 elections, certain seats were reserved for the minorities. In
 general, minority religious groups may practice their religion
 openly, but proselytizing activities remain very restricted.
 Reports of discrimination against minority religious groups in
 the areas of employment and education appear well-founded.
 In the spring of 1983, violent clashes occurred between Muslims
 of the majority Sunni and minority Shila sects in Karadhi. The
 immediate cause of the disturbances was the unauthorized
 construction by Shi'as of a mosque on land belonging to the
 city. Authorities seeking to quell the violence had to call
 upon the army to intervene, and imposed press censorship and a
 curfew. This violence caused hundreds of injuries, extensive
 property damaged and over 20 deaths. Credible accounts have
 been received of official Iranian involvement in Sunni - Shi'a
 clashes. In June 1983, Sunni - Shi'a violence in the Kurram
 Tribal Agency, aggravated by the presence of a large and
 predominantly Sunni refugee population and possible agitation
 by agents of the Kabul regime, left some 40 persons dead before
 authorities managed to restore order.
 
 
 1392
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel,
 Emigration, and Repatriation
 In general, Pakistani citizens have freedom of movement, though
 some prominent opposition leaders were barred from entering
 certain provinces. The Government has denied passports to some
 politicians, and in other cases has refused them the foreign
 exchange needed to finance their children's study abroad.
 Pakistanis emigrate freely for work abroad. The Government
 encourages and facilitates this economically advantageous
 practice, and assists emigrants upon their return to Pakistan.
 According to official registration figures, between two and
 three million Afghan refugees have fled the Soviet invasion of
 their country to Pakistan, constituting the world's largest
 refugee population. The Government administers over 300
 refugee camps, and bears much of the cost of inland
 transportation of relief goods provided by the United Nations
 High Commissioner for Refugees, the World Food Program,
 bilateral donors and several voluntary agencies. The
 Government tries to make regular payments to the refugees to
 supplement international donations of food, clothing, and
 shelter. Pakistan has placed few restrictions on travel or
 employment by refugees, although only residents of official
 refugee villages may draw relief articles. Given the number of
 refugees and the strains placed on resources, violence between
 refugees and local residents has remained remarkably rare.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to
 Change Their Government
 Since July 1977, a martial law regime, headed by an active-duty
 general, has governed Pakistan. Four active military officers
 and seventeen civilians hold Federal cabinet portfolios. They
 preside over a professional civil service still largely devoid
 of active-duty military personnel, although some officers serve
 in the upper levels of the bureaucracy. A lieutenant general
 holding the titles of Governor and Martial Law Administrator
 governs each of the four provinces. The Martial Law
 Administration disbanded the National Assembly in July 1977,
 and since then Pakistan has not had elected legislative
 representatives.
 In October 1979, the regime declared political parties
 *defunct". Their administrative structures remain intact,
 however, and party leadership gatherings take place in private
 homes. Press reports keep the public informed of these
 activities. Not all parties receive the same treatment. The
 more conservative ones have considerable leeway in their
 activities, and their leaders travel throughout the country;
 those of the left and center face a variety of restrictions on
 assembly and travel.
 In response to demands for a broadening of the national
 policy-making process, the regime created the 287-member
 Majlis-i-Shoora, or Federal Advisory Council, selected by the
 Martial Law Administration to represent the former National
 Assembly Districts, the professions, labor, women, and
 minorities. The Council has met eight times since first
 convened in January 1982, and some members have openly
 expressed criticism of certain government actions. Few
 indications exist, however, that decisions of the Council had
 any effect on subsequent policies. On August 12, 1983,
 President Zia announced his intention to hold elections for
 provincial and national assemblies by March 23, 1985. Perhaps
 
 
 1393
 partly because the announcement gave neither-specific dates nor
 details of the format for holding the elections, it evoked
 considerable controversy, and ignited an opposition campaign of
 civil disobedience calling for an immediate end to military
 rule and the holding of elections.
 The regime has permitted some popular participation in local
 government and has conducted non-party elections through
 universal suffrage to fill seats for four-year terms in "local
 bodies" (local, district, and municipal councils) throughout
 the country. When brought into being in 1979, the local bodies
 represented the first experiment in elected local
 self-government in 15 years. These bodies have an uneasy
 relationship with the provincial civil services, which have
 traditionally provided most local services. In three of
 Pakistan's four provinces, the 1983 elections apparently drew a
 substantial number of voters and took place in an orderly and
 peaceful fashion. In some rural areas of Sind, the
 opposition's boycott of the elections kept participation down
 to only five percent of the eligible voters. Elsewhere in the
 Sind, voter participation rarely exceeded 25 percent, with the
 exception of the two major urban centers of Karachi and
 Hyderabad, where perhaps 40 percent of the electorate cast
 ballots. According to official figures, clashes between
 protestors and security forces caused more than 20 deaths
 during the elections.
 Section 4   Government Attitude Regarding International and
 Non-governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 Investigation of human rights abuses in Pakistan is somewhat
 difficult. The Government does not publish relevant
 information and the press has a limited ability to criticize
 and investigate. Domestic human rights organizations,
 nevertheless, operate largely free of government harassment.
 The Human Rights Society of Pakistan, though generally
 inactive, issued a report in May 1983, which concluded that
 since 1980 nine prisoners had died due to torture while in
 police custody and that, at the time, there were 375 political
 prisoners in the country.
 The 1983 report of Amnesty International noted the arrest and
 imprisonment of political dissidents, the trial of civilians by
 military courts, erosion of the standards for a fair trial,
 persistent reports of torture, ill-treatment of prisoners, and
 abuse of the death sentence. Citing many of the same concerns
 as Amnesty International, Freedom House rated Pakistan "not
 free*.
 A representative of the Lawyers Committee for International
 Human Rights very briefly visited Pakistan in 1983 and issued a
 report claiming that thousands of political prisoners were held
 in Pakistan, many of them under inhumane conditions. The
 report alleged that the current martial law regime had
 devastated the civilian judicial system, and sharply curtailed
 civil and political rights. The Government has issued no
 official response to these reports.
 
 
 1394
 ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND CULTURAL SITUATION
 Pakistan's largely traditional society assigns a "special"
 status to women which places them in a subordinate role in
 terms of civil, political and individual rights. Many
 Pakistani Muslims interpret the Koranic injunction on modesty
 to mean that women should observe "purdah", i.e. remain within
 the home or behind a veil. Such attitudes have contributed to
 an adult female literacy rate one-third that for males. Three
 times as many men are enrolled in secondary education as women,
 and eight times as many men as women work outside the home.
 Women who study and work usually do so in separate facilities.
 Although urban women are represented in Pakistan's
 universities, post-graduation employment opportunities remain
 limited largely to teaching, medical services, and the law,
 with a small number entering the c9mmercial and public
 sectors. The policy of "Islamization' has reversed some of the
 social gains made by women over the previous years. Women may
 not participate in international athletic competition abroad,
 for example, and the Government has restricted the appearance
 of women in broadcast and print media. In February 1983, the
 Federal Advisory Council debated a draft Islamic Law of
 Evidence based upon the Islamic precept that in legal cases the
 testimony of two women equals that of one man. Rights
 activists contend that this draft law represents a step
 backward. The Government did not pass the law in 1983.
 For three decades the All Pakistan Women's Association, under
 Begum Rana Liaquat Ali Khan, widow of Pakistan's first prime
 minister, has worked to improve social conditions for women and
 was a force behind the drafting of the 1971 Muslim Family Law
 Ordinances, which provided some legal protections to women.
 The Women's Action Forum, a two-year old nationwide coalition
 of women's groups, has challenged the Government's policy of
 'Islamization'. The Forum gained international attention in
 February 1983, when police injured several women participating
 in a march in Lahore to protest the draft Islamic Law of
 Evidence. The Forum has also protested what it termed
 discriminatory judgments handed down by civil courts and
 Shari'a benches. In one such case, the father of a blind girl,
 acting for his daughter, filed a charge of rape against a young
 man, subsequently acquitted. The girl gave birth to a child,
 was found guility of a sexual offense and sentenced to three
 years imprisonment, flogging, and a fine. When the case
 reached the Federal Shariat Court on appeal in August 1983, the
 protest and local press publicity apparently helped induce the
 court to suspend the sentence pending a complete review of the
 case. The girl has been exonerated.
 Many in Pakistan believe that corruption has become more
 pervasive over the past decade as official power has become
 more centralized and bureaucratized, and large sums of money
 from Pakistanis working abroad have entered the country. As
 noted previously, socially prominent Pakistanis suffer less at
 the hands of the police than do the less well-off--partly due
 to their ability to return favors or bribe appropriate
 officials, and partly to the general deference still shown
 social "bettersw. Although most caste distinctions have
 disappeared from Pakistani society, clan (Baradari)
 affiliations can help, or hurt, in seeking education,
 employment, or justice.
 Due to six years of relative economic prosperity the percentage
 of population living below the absolute poverty level has
 fallen to 32 percent in cities and 29 percent in rural areas
 
 
 1395
 Social and economic upward mobility, fueled largely by
 repatriated funds, is increasingly possible in Pakistan.
 Pakistan's population of nearly 90 million, nevertheless, faces
 many problems common to the developing world: an adult literacy
 rate of 21 percent, an infant mortality rate of 126.5 per 1,000
 live births, a population growth rate of approximately 3.0
 percent and a relatively low per capita gross national product
 of $349.00 (1983 estimate). Programs for improving living
 conditions have had mixed results; Pakistan's traditional and
 largely rural society resists change. Substantial disparities
 between urban and rural life exist. For example, some 60
 percent of urban dwellers have access to safe drinking water,
 compared to 17 percent of the rural population.
 In July 1983, the Government inaugurated the Sixth Five-Year
 Plan. A key element of the plan is the increased level of
 allocations for neglected social sectors, such as education and
 health. Projected outlays on these sectors rise from 6.7
 percent of the total under the previous plan to 10.8 percent.
 Most of the proposed education allocation goes to primary
 education, while the health program emphasizes funding of basic
 health units and rural health centers.
 
 
 1396
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: PAKISTAN
 
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL...
 LOANS  ..............
 GRANTS .............
 A .AID  .................
 LOANS  ..............
 GRANTS .............
 (SEC.SUPP.ASSIST.)...
 B.FOOD  FOR  PEACE .......
 LOANS  ..............
 GRANTS..............
 REPAY.  IN  S-LOANS .....
 PAY.  IN  FOR.  CURR .....
 TITLE  Il-TOTAL .........
 E.RELIEF.EC.DEV & WFP.
 VOL.RELIEF  AGENCY .....
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST...
 LOANS  ..............
 GRANTS .............
 PEACE  CORPS ......
 NARCOTICS ........
 OTHER .............
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL...
 LCAtIS ..............
 GRANTS  .............
 A.MAP  GRANTS ..........
 BCREDIT FINANCING ....
 C.INrL  MIL.ED.TRNG ....
 D.TRAN-ExCESS STOCK...
 E.OTHER  GRANTS ........
 III.TOTAL  ECON. &  MIL...
 LOANS  ..............
 GRANTS .............
 OTHER  US  LOANS ..........
 EX-IM  BANK  LOANS .......
 ALL  OTHER ..............
 
 1981     1982
 . . . . - - --. . . . . - -. -
 
 76.8
 47.5
 29.3
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 76.3
 47.5
 28.8
 47.5
 0.0
 28.8
 28.8
 0.0
 0.5
 0.0
 0.5
 0.0
 0.5
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 
 200.2
 81 .5
 118.7
 100.0
 34.0
 66.0
 100.0
 97.5
 47.5
 50.0
 4f:�
 47.5
 0.0
 50.0
 50.0
 0.0
 2.7
 0.0
 2.7
 0.0
 2.7
 0.0
 0.6
 0.0
 0.6
 0.0
 0.0
 0.6
 0.0
 0.0
 
 76.8   200.8
 47.5    81 .5
 29.3   119.3
 0.0     0.0
 0.0     0.0
 0.0     0.0
 
 1983
 278.7
 114.5
 164.2
 200.0
 67.0
 133.0
 200.0
 75.8
 47.5
 28.3
 0:5
 47.5
 0.0
 28.3
 28.3
 0.0
 2.9
 0.0
 2.9
 0.0
 2.9
 0.0
 260.8
 260.0
 0.8
 0.0
 260.0
 0.8
 0.0
 0.0
 539.5
 374.5
 165.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1981     1982     1983
 ........................................
 
 TOTAL ........
 IBRD
 IFC
 IDA
 IDB
 AUB
 AFDB
 UNDP
 OTHER-UN
 EEC
 
 479.3
 0.0
 3.4
 202.0
 0.0
 193.3
 0.0
 15.3
 65.3
 0.0
 
 555.6
 138.5
 19.8
 171 .0
 0.0
 213.0
 0.0
 13.3
 0.0
 0.0
 
 574.:
 75.:
 90.:
 228.
 0.1
 180.
 0.4
 0.1
 0.i
 0.C
 
 1946-83
 3   4711.2
 2   1005.8
 2    176 2
 a   180310
 0      0.0
 1   1458.5
 0      0.0
 0    122.6
 0    145.1
 0      0.0
 
 
