PAKISTAN
This year's report on Pakistan acknowledges abuses of human rights during the rule of General Mohammed Zia ul Haq that previous reports seriously imderstated. Even so, this year's account is misleading in that it paints a favorable picture of General ^a's last year in office and suggests a natural progression from the Zia regime to the democratically elected government that emerged in November 1988. The serious abuses of the past underscore the need for caution in analyzing Pakistan's human rights conditions, not hasty conclusions that all human rights problems are now solved.
The report is summary in its judgments when it should be tentative, and tentative when it should be summary. For example, the State Department declares that the issuance of identity cards prevented fraud in the November 1988 elections, despite widespread allegations of fraudulently issued cards, refusals to issue cards, and vote rig^g. The resurgent judicial independence is treated as a settled issue, even though the important judgments condemning General Záb^s dissolution of elected national and provincial assemblies were not handed down until after his death. The State Department also cites the inadequate number of judges as a major problem facing the judiciary, while neglecting to mention that judges appointed during General Zia's tenure under a fundamentally corrupt system remain on the bench.
In the section on political killings, the State Department appears to let its political preferences dictate its presentation. The report states that "it is still unclear who was responsible" for the February 1988 murder of Professor Sayd Bahauddin Majrooh, Director of the Afghan Information Center. However, the report should have commented on the failure of the Pakistani government to conduct a serious investigation into the killing, and to follow up on evidence implicating Afghan guerrilla leader Gulbuddin Hekmatyar of the Hezb-e Islami in the murder.
129
Critique
As in the past, the State Department fails to assign responsibility for serious human rights abuses to the government, treating them instead as incidents beyond the government's control. The section on arbitrary arrests does not mention that until the 1988 elections, preventive detention had been used to silence members of the political opposition. Arbitrary arrests in Sind have not been limited to suspected bandits, as the report suggests, but in 1988 included political activists, among them students. Some poUtical prisoners incarcerated during General Ziia's rule are still held in jails throughout the country. Most human rights monitors report that prison conditions for poUtical detainees have improved since General Zia's death and the November 1988 elections, not since 1985, as the State Department claims.
This year, as in past years, the State Department blames poUce brutality on poor training. This conclusion ignores the substantial responsibiUty of both the federal and provincial governments for such behavior. Moreover, while focusing attention on the poUce, which the report treats inaccurately as a body independent of the federal government, the report ignores the consistent role of the military in perpetrating abuses and hindering investigations of poUce brutaUty.
The report's treatment of women's rights is misleading. It mentions one case of acquittal under the repressive Hadood Ordinances ~ for the capital crime of adultery — but nothii^ of the massive numbers of convictions imder these laws or the mistreatment of women incarcerated under them. Because these laws were promulgated as presidential ordinances during martial law, the State Department's reference to them as punishing "actions deemed contrary to Islamic law" is misleading — it is "Islamic" only in the idiosyncratic terms of General Z^a. Generally, as in the past, the report does not distinguish between laws passed by elected le^latures and orders of military authorities.
As in past reports, the State Department raises no concerns of its own and presents the government and opposition viewpoints on human rights issues as if they were equally vaUd. An example is the report's treatment of the special "speedy trial" courts ~ for offenses that, among other things, are "sensational" or "shocking to pubUc moraUty" - which are not appropriately criticized. Moreover, not only the "human rights activists" mentioned by the report but also
130
Pakistan
many lawyers consider that the speedy trial courts, whidi rarely hand down acquittals, violate internationally recognized standards of due process.
The section on freedom of speech understates the extent to the government has been able to restrain the Pakistani press. By retaining contr(J of the distribution of newsprint, the government can impose financial hardship on opposition papers, an action taken in 1988 as ia the past. Provindal governments have the authority to censor and ban publications. The Punjab government, in particular, regularly bans publications of the Ahmadiya reli^ous community, whose headquarters are in Punjab.
The section of freedom of religion notes that designated minority reli^ous groups must seek political office and cast their votes in separate electorates for minorities. Except for the Ahmadiyas, the report does not mention widespread opposition to this arrangement by minority religious groups and human rights organizations. The reference to violent sectarian clashes in Gil^ in May 1988 does not note that human rights organizations, includili the nongovernmental Pakistan Human Rights Commission, were extremely critical of the role played by the security forces in the incident and the inaccurate reporting of the event by the government.
As in past reports, the State Department treats the 1984 martial law ordinance restricting the reli^ous practices of the Ahmadiya commimity as a logical result of the 1974 constitutional amendment, labeling the Ahmadiyas a non-Muslim minority. But however violative of civil rights the 1974 amendment was, it was the 1984 Ordinance No. 20 that made the independent practice of the reli^on a crime punishable in military courts. Members of the Ahmadiya community continue to be arrested and tried under the 1984 ordinances.
The section on the right of citizens to change their government contains important inaccuracies. Martial law did not effectively end in 1985; parts of it were formally lifted at the beginning of 1986 while some regulations and ordinances were retained in the current constitution. While bans on party formation were not enforced after the formal liftmg of martial law, restrictions still continued on the books until June 1988, when the Supreme Court ruled them imconstitutional.
131
Critique
Finally, we have a general comment on statistics cited in the report. The State Department often dtes without caveat notoriously inaccurate government statistics, such as those on deaths in detention or deaths during ethnic riots. The documentation of non-partisan, non-governmental monitoring groups suggests that the credence given to government vie^ is unwarranted. We have noted this problem in earlier reports on Pakistan, and underscore it {^ain now, with the hope that the State Department will strive for greater statistical accural in its reporting on Pakistan's new, democratically elected government.
132
