PAKISTAN
The State Department's human rights report on Pakistan for 1994 presents a comprehensive assessment of the current political situation in that country. This remained relatively stable in contrast to the previous year, when the country experienced four changes of government. The report provides a good account of Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto's dominant role in policymaking and her government's attempts at economic reform. It also gives a generally accurate account of human rights problems in Pakistan, especially with regard to the Pakistani legal system, the prevalence of torture and the widespread abuse of women. To its credit, the report draws attention to the continued use of arbitrary arrest, detention and torture by government forces in their dealings with prisoners and detainees. However, it makes little mention of the government's failure to address the problem of widespread human rights abuses, beyond noting the complicity of the government in the sectarian violence that has plagued the country, marked by a routine failure to denounce, prosecute or punish those involved. Instead, the report states that while the government made a strong public commitment to address human rights concerns, "most human rights abuses are rooted deeply in the sodial fabric." This remark appears excessively indulgent of culturally relative views of human rights abuses, rather than taking a forthright position on the universality of human rights norms.
The report indicates that extrajudicial killings continue to be a serious problem in Pakistan, with the highest number of such killings occurring in Sindh province. According to the Human Rights Commission of Pakistan (HRCP), 43 people were killed in "encounters" with the police and other law-enforcement agencies in Sindh. Another 31 people were alleged to have died of torture while in custody — 19 in police stations, 11 in jails and one in a hospital. In Punjab, 102 people were gunned down in "encounters" and 11 more died in police custody.
The report fails to elaborate on the nature of these "encounter killings," which as mentioned in last year's Critique, are deaths that may be explained by police as stemming from an attack on a law-enforcement
177
CRITIQUE 1994
official, occurring during the "escape" of a detainee or as a result of a "disagreement" on the street with law-enforcement officials. Police credibility is diminished by the frequency with which these explanations are offered and the lack of police casuahies resulting from such "encounters," which are a common occurrence in a number of South Asian countries.
The report's assertion that no law-enforcement personnel were tried or charged for participating in such killings in 1994 is not strictly accurate. Although in the great majority of cases no effort was made to ascertain the truth, law-enforcement officials were arrested in connection with two incidences of "encounter killings" and charges were brought against four individuals in one case involving the torture and subsequent death of a detainee at the hands of the Federal Investigation Agency (FIA) personnel. (The FIA is a body created to investigate cases that fall outside the purview of the police.) The accused managed to escape from the courtroom immediately after sentencing and none of them have begun to serve the five-year prison term handed down by the court.
The report clearly describes the numerous ways in which torture is practiced in Pakistan, as well as the climate of impunity associated with all forms of police and military abuse. Three appeals were submitted to the government by the UN Special Rapporteur on Torture in 1994. The Special Rapporteur expressed fear for the life and physical integrity of Bashir Qureshi, whose health was reportedly in jeopardy after his arrest and torture by members of the military in January. The Special Rapporteur also expressed concern over the alleged killings in March of Rana Riaz Ahmad and Ahmad Nasrullah by members of an armed Islamic group, and the failure of the police to provide protection to the Ahmadiyya community or adequately investigate the attacks.
In its discussion of the abuse of women in custody, the report fails to mention that 60% of women who have been placed in jails have been charged under the so-called Hudood Ordinances. In general, the report refrains from critical comment on the religiously based ordinances, which despite widespread support are also vigorously opposed by many
178
PAKISTAN
Pakistanis. The report states that the standards of evidence for imposing punishments under the Hudood Ordinances are extremely high and that punishments such as death by stoning for unlawful sexual relations and amputation for some other crimes have not to date been carried out. However, the above statistic indicates that women are more frequently being charged under the ordinances, whether or not this actually results in punishment. The report might usefully have illustrated the inherently discriminatory character of the Hudood Ordinances by citing the fact that, if a woman attempts to secure a conviction for rape, she must present four male, Muslim witnesses to testify on her behalf. This is especially discriminatory towards non-Muslim women, who are less likely to be able to find four Muslim witnesses. If the victim is thought to have accepted the forced intercourse passively, she may be charged and convicted for adultery.
Although the report may be correct in saying that the government has brought fewer charges against women under the Hudood Ordinances than in the past, it must also be noted that women are less willing to report incidences of rape since they run the risk of being charged with adultery. One such example, which the report mentions, is that of the five women in Lakama who were gang-raped in January, but revoked their allegations when they were threatened with prosecution under the Hudood Ordinances. The report also neglects to address the issue of the mistreatment of minority women in police custody.
The report mentions the existence of private jails run by wealthy landlords or by political parties. However, it fails to note that a number of these jails operate with the knowledge of police or other law-enforcement officials.
The report presents a fairly detailed discussion of Pakistan's system of separate electorates and the violence that erupted between government forces and tribes in the Malakand Division of the Northwest Frontier province. However, it does not mention the constitutional petition submitted on behalf of the more than 20 million agricultural, industrial and
179
CRITIQUE 1994
domestic bonded laborers and 1.5 million nomads who do not have even the selective right to vote and could not be included in the electoral rolls because of their lack of a permanent address. The constitutional petition was made on their behalf to the Supreme Court, which ruled that redress could only be sought on an individual basis through the normal legal process.
The report should also have mentioned the ruling party's failure to follow up on its pre-election commitment to repeal the country's system of separate electorates. Following a private petition against the system early in 1994, the attorney general of Pakistan said that although the government itself wanted to abolish the existence of separate electorates, it was bound to defend the system while it remained part of the Constitution. The present system of separate voting limits members of minority communities to vote only for certain reserved seats in elections. Under this arrangement, the whole country constitutes the minority constituency for the national assembly and the whole of a province for a provincial assembly. This means that a minority community anywhere in the country has to vote on the same slate of candidates. This system does not provide adequate representation for the varying concerns of minority communities in different parts of Pakistan.
The report's discussion of the Blasphemy Law (Section 295-C of the Penal Code) is detailed and comprehensive. It does not, however, mention the government's decision in June to modify the procedure for reporting cases that may fall under the jurisdiction of this law. The government decided that cases should not be registered automatically on complaint, but only after the complaint had been examined by a magistrate and some basis for it established. In order to deter the filing of frivolous or malicious complaints, the individual making the accusation should be liable to a fine in the event that the complaint proves to be without foundation. Conservative religious groups declared that they would accept no changes to the law, and after an episode in which the law minister's comments to an Irish newspaper were misrepresented to suggest that the Blasphemy Law would be repealed altogether, the government backed down in the face of pressure and the law remained unchanged. Amid the
180
PAKISTAN
controversy, militant religious groups called upon "those who love Islam" to kill Asma Jahangir, general secretary of the Human Rights Commission of Pakistan. These demands for her death arose as a result of her position as defense lawyer for Rehmat and Salamat Masih, two Christians charged with blasphemy.
The 1994 report provides a far more in-depth discussion than its immediate predecessor of the persecution of religious minorities. The Zikris' freedom of worship came under pressure when a campaign was mounted against their annual congregation at Koh-i-Murad in Malakand. (The Zikris, who are predominantly found in Southern Balochistan and Sindh, consider themselves Muslims but follow only the oral tradition of Islam, rather than the written, which is followed and accepted by the majority of Pakistan's Muslims.) Demonstrations were held throughout the year urging the destruction of the Zikri Baitullah (house of God) at the site and demanding that the Zikris be declared a minority. Eight people were injured when a hand grenade was thrown into a religious gathering near Koh-i-Murad.
Mian Iqbal Ahmed, Amir of the Rajanpur branch of the Ahmadi community, was arrested for preaching his faith and charged under Section 295-C of the Penal Code. He remained in prison at the end of 1994. The charge of blasphemy, as the report says, carries the death penalty. Mohammad Hussain Ghazanfar, also of Rajanpur, was arrested under Section 298-C of the Penal Code for preaching his faith and reportedly subjected to torture to induce a "confession." He also remains in prison. In Karachi, an Ahmadi place of worship was the target of sniper fire, resulting in the wounding of one worshipper. Ahmadis were also barred from public celebration of their centenary in March. Two Ahmadis, Abdul Hafeez and Waseem Ahmad, were killed and another two, Mohammad Ameen and Akhtar, seriously injured during an armed attack organized by neighbors in Faisalabad on August 30. No one has been arrested in connection with the attack.
Meanwhile, the Council of Justice and Peace, a national
181
CRITIQUE 1994
organization of Christians, has expressed concern at the recurrent pattern of the kidnapping of Christian girls and their forced conversion and marriage to Muslim men. This pattern of kidnapping and conversion was even more frequent in the case of Hindus in Sindh. Seven unmarried girls were kidnapped from their towns in January, and another two in February. In the first month of 1994, 31 Hindu doctors, engineers and businessmen were robbed, nine others kidnapped and three places of worship set on fire.
The report presents an accurate description of the increasing influence — with government involvement — of religious and political groups on the press in Pakistan. Although the Constitution provides for the enjoyment of freedom of speech and the press, as the report correctly notes it also prohibits the ridiculing of Islam, the armed forces and the judiciary. This has resulted in widespread self-censorship by Pakistani journalists.
In its discussion of freedom of speech and the press, the report mentions only three of the numerous attacks on journalists or newspaper editors that took place in 1994. The office of Musawat was ransacked in January by armed members of the People's Students Federation (PSF). This attack occurred as a protest against the paper's decision not to print a PSF statement criticizing the Chief Minister of Punjab and his adviser for allegedly harassing their workers and arresting the Lahore PSF president, Tanwir Khakwani. In June the office of Gujranwala News was attacked by a dozen armed men. The staff were beaten and editor Mohammad Irfan was kidnapped. He was later released following payment of a ransom. In August, three well-known Lahore journalists were locked up and tortured while on assignment. Also in August, a reporter named Amir Matin was harassed on the road in Islamabad. In the same month, intruders broke into the house of journalist Ghani Jafar. The report mentions the December 6 killing by unidentified assailants of Mohammed Samdani Warsi, business manager of Parcham, an Urdu-language daily sympathetic to the Sindh-based Mohajir Qaumi Movement (MQM). However, it should also have noted that it was the paper's editor, and not Samdani, who was the intended target of the attack, which is believed to have been carried out in retaliation for the December 4 assassination of Mohammed Salahuddin, editor of Takbeer and an outspoken critic of the MQM.
182
PAKISTAN
Pressure against Ahmadi publications and journalists increased considerably in 1994. The report mentions the case in early 1994 ofNoor Muhammad Saifi, Agha Saifullah, Qazi Munir Ahmed, Mirza Muhammad Din Naz and Mohammad Ibrahim, five joumalists connected with the daily Al Fazal, who were arrested under Section 298-C for "misrepresenting" themselves as Muslims and propagating Ahmadi beliefs in their articles. It does not say, however, that the charge of blasphemy was later added for having "injured the religious feelings of Muslims," or that the judge in the case at first refused to grant bail. The five were later released on bail on March 7 but the charges, which could carry the death penalty, remained pending, with no trial date set by the end of the year.
In discussing freedom of speech, the report comments that "[t]he government and universities generally respect academic freedom." This may be something of an overstatement, given the extreme caution exercised by university authorities and faculty fearful of offending the sensibilities of conservative religious militants.
The government of Pakistan continued to be negligent toward the status of women. The State Department report provides a detailed discussion of the use of conservative interpretations of Islamic injunctions to justify discrimination against women, as well as the prevalence of domestic violence, rape and public humiliation of women. A government proposal to raise the minimum age of marriage for a girl from 16 to 18 was heavily criticized by conservative Muslim religious groups as being contrary to Islamic law. Almost all reported victims of rapes this year belonged to the working class, and the majority lived in towns or cities. Incidents that occurred in villages rarely reached the press and were not recorded by local police. The reported cases of rape do not include crimes against women in bonded labor, who are routinely raped by their masters. The HRCP estimates that the actual incidence of rape in 1994 is two-and-a-half to three times higher than the officially reported rate, with a woman being raped every three hours. The highest number of reported rapes occurred in Punjab, followed by Sindh. Gang-rapes occurred as frequently as rapes by a single attacker. According to the HRCP, for every case of
183
CRITIQUE 1994
rape, there were two of kidnapping. In these situations, the victims were raped repeatedly over extended periods.
Children remained the most vulnerable section of the Pakistani population in 1994. The rate of kidnappings, while lower than in 1993, remained at over 10 cases a day. The use of physical violence in schools was widespread. According to the annual report of the HRCP, "In one instance in Toba Tek Singh chastisement caused the child to have a stroke of paralysis." A seven-year-old domestic servant in Islamabad was routinely scorched by her employer with a hot iron as a form of punishment. The employer was arrested but soon freed and absolved of blame. The HRCP investigated a religious seminary (or deeni madrassah), in which children made to leam the Qur'an by heart were kept permanently in chains — a common practice to encourage discipline in schools. There are currently a number of these deeni madrassahs in existence in Pakistan.
It is estimated that there were over ten million child laborers in Pakistan in 1994. The government promised new legislation to prevent child labor, but rejected an opposition move in parliament to raise the minimum working age from 14 to 16. Minors are exempted from capital punishment and life imprisonment but such distinctions are not made by the Hudood Ordinances, which apply uniformly to all ages. A number of children remain in jails with their mothers after having been bom there or arriving there as infants.
The report mentions the issue of bonded labor, but should have discussed this in much greater detail. The number of bonded laborers in Pakistan in 1994 was estimated at 20 million, including 7.5 million children. Forced labor was most commonly found in certain industries, such as carpet-weaving, agriculture, brick-making, fisheries, mining and domestic service. The government has created vigilance committees to discourage the use of forced labor, but a number of their members were either shown to be personally involved in the use of bonded labor or were subject to political influence by employers of such labor, resulting in many associated cases of kidnapping, torture and rape going unreported.
184
PAKISTAN
In summary, while the 1994 State Department report is generally comprehensive, it could have taken a more forthright position on issues such as bonded labor, the use of the blasphemy laws, this year's widesread urban violence in Karachi and the failure of police to protect minorities. It could also have paid greater attention to the government's aggressive promotion of foreign investment at the expense of worker rights.
185
CRITIQUE 1994
186
