 PAKISTAN
 Throughout its three and a half decades of independence,
 Pakistan has been preoccupied with a search for its national
 identity. The social, political, economic, and regional
 differences which characterize Pakistan's diverse society have
 led frequently to political turmoil. As a result, Pakistan has
 been governed by martial law or other non-elected regimes for
 more than half of its thirty-five years.
 The third and longest experience with martial law began with
 the ouster of former Prime Minister Zulfikar Ali Bhutto by the
 army, led by Chief of Staff General Mohammad Zia-ul-Haq, in
 July 1977. The Martial Law Administration -- with General Zia
 initially serving as Chief Martial Law Administrator -- was
 originally proclaimed as a ninety-day caretaker regime pending
 the holding of elections and the restoration of the 1973
 Constitution. In the intervening five and a half years,
 however, general elections have not been held and President Zia
 has increasingly shifted emphasis to reforming Pakistani
 society by seeking to make its laws and customs consistent with
 Islamic precepts, with the incompletely defined objective of
 establishing an 'Islamic democracy.' The effective result,
 however, has been a further entrenchment of martial law in the
 life of the country.
 Pakistani society is predominantly Islamic and traditional,
 largely rural and poor. Agriculture, the largest sector of the
 economy, remains strongly influenced by its feudal past while
 the smaller industrial sector is made up of a mix of publicly-
 and privately-owned enterprises. The present Government has a
 proclaimed policy of encouraging the private sector but has had
 little success in finding ways to divest itself of key
 industries, many of them rendered inefficient when they were
 nationalized under former Prime Minister Bhutto.
 Civil and political rights remained basically in the situation
 of earlier years:  (1) in 1977 martial law was declared, the
 National Assembly was dissolved and the Constitution was 'held
 in abeyance;" (2) in October 1979 elections, set for November,
 were called off and General Zia, citing security
 considerations, dissolved all political parties, banned
 political activities, and imposed press censorship; and (3) in
 March 1981 President Zia promulgated a Provisional
 Constitutional Order which negated more than half of the 1973
 Constitution, formally suspended certain civil and political
 rights which had already been suspended in practice, and
 significantly curtailed the jurisdiction and independence of
 the judiciary.
 The Martial Law Administration has continued not to honor many
 generally recognized human rights precepts. Military courts
 are authorized to try virtually any criminal case and in 1982
 the Government increasingly relied on summary military courts
 to relieve the backlog of cases in the civil courts. Persons
 charged with terrorist or subversive offenses can be tried in
 special military courts and are presumed guilty until they
 establish their innocence.
 During 1982 there were no known instances of disappearances,
 torture, or killings sanctioned by the Government, although
 mistreatment of detainees, particularly in the interrogation
 process, resulted in at least 11 deaths in 1982. Law
 enforcement and adjudication as practiced by the Government
 
 
 1243
 have tended to create an atmosphere of intimidation that tends
 to curtail political activity and expression. In spite of
 this, a great deal of political discussion and organization
 opposed to the Government is allowed to take place privately.
 The lifting of precensorship announced by President Zia in
 January 1982 shifted to newspaper editors the responsibility
 for ensuring compliance with unchanged censorship guidelines.
 Criticism of the Government, veiled or otherwise, was more
 common during 1982 than at any time since October 1979 when
 censorship was first imposed, but the Government frequently
 expressed its displeasure through official warnings and by
 withholding government advertising from offending publications.
 Ordinary citizens continued to be unable to participate in the
 political process. at the provincial and national levels in
 1982. The Federal Advisory Council, a hand-picked group of
 individuals from all parts of the country and many walks of
 life, was first convened in January 1982. Although its members
 showed they could articulate the views of the public on some
 issues, such as law and order, their function is only advisory
 and there were only sporadic indications of government
 responsiveness to their concerns. Pakistan's local bodies,*
 popularly elected on a.non-party basis in 1979, held a national
 convention in May at which President Zia promised to look into
 increasing their revenue-base and authority. He appointed a
 high level commission-and instructed it to make recommendations
 in this regard by November 1982, but by the end of the year the
 commission had still not submitted its report.
 Since 1978 Pakistan has offered refuge to Afghans fleeing civil
 war and, after December 1979, the Soviet occupation of their
 homeland. Despite serious economic burdens and social tensions
 caused by the presence of about 2.8 million registered
 refugees, Pakistan continued during 1982 to provide generous
 humanitarian assistance, approximating half of the total
 assistance received by the refugees. In October 1982 Pakistan
 received for resettlement from Bangladesh 4,500 Biharis
 (non-Bengali Muslims) who had family or employment ties to West
 Pakistan before Bangladeshi independence.
 The Government made little real movement during 1982 toward
 restoring basic civil and political rights. President Zia has
 recently stated on several occasions, however, that he expects
 the process of designing the new Islamic system of government
 to be completed by August 1983. According to press reports,
 President Zia has said that the plan would provide for the
 holding of elections and the orderly transfer of power to the
 elected representatives. Zia said that he wanted the country
 to have the kind of political structure which would rule out
 the possibility of a fourth martial law.
 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Killing
 During 1982 there were at least 11 cases in which prisoners
 died while in police custody. The deaths, which were reported
 in the press, occurred at various stages in the arrest-
 interrogation-detention cycle, but particularly in the
 interrogation process. None of the victims could be termed
 political prisoners, and the deaths did not appear to have been
 politically motivated. Eight of the deaths were or still are
 being investigated and in seven cases charges of murder were
 brought against policemen or prison guards, six of whom were
 
 
 1244
 
 suspended from duty. No subsequent press reports appeared on
 the outcome of the investigations. In none of the 11 cases was
 there any independent evidence that the Government approved the
 actions of the individual police officers.
 Several prominent Pakistanis were murdered during 1982,
 including a former governor of the Northwest Frontier Province,
 two Federal Advisory Council members and a political agent in
 the tribal areas. Another political agent who was shot and
 critically wounded remains paralyzed. Political parties of the
 left and right exchanged accusations concerning responsibility
 for several of the murders, but official investigations thus
 far have failed to establish political motives in any of the
 cases. A car bomb exploded at Lahore Airport on August 2
 injuring eight persons. The British Broadcasting Corporation
 reported that Murtaza Bhutto, Chairman of the Kabul-based "Al
 Zulfikar" underground political organization and son of former
 Prime Minister Bhutto, claimed his group was responsible for
 the blast.
 b. Disappearance
 There are no known reports during 1982 that individuals have
 "disappeared" as a result of actions taken by security
 authorities. There are reports that individuals are sometimes
 held incommunicado or in an unknown location while detained.
 Arrests, particularly if they involve individuals who are not
 politically or socially well-known, are frequently not
 publicized, but are acknowledged to family members.
 The crime of kidnapping, often for ransom, is common and even
 traditional, especially in the remote tribal areas, and there
 .are reports of some Afghans having been kidnapped and even
 tortured by Afghan political rivals. An American journalist
 was kidnapped in the tribal territory in June 1982, but the
 Northwest Frontier Provincial Government put pressure on tribal
 leaders which led to his release within 24 hours.
 c. Torture
 The 1973 Constitution bans torture. During 1982, however,
 allegations continued to be made of torture of political
 workers under detention. It appears that, as under previous
 regimes, abusive forms of interrogation have been routinely
 used by the police under the present Martial Law
 Administration. As a reflection of class structure in
 Pakistan, socially or politically prominent individuals suffer
 less at the hands of the authorities than do the less well-off.
 Allegations of more generalized police brutality also continued
 to be made during 1982 and included reports of beatings,
 extortion and, in at least one case, rape. There is no
 evidence that ties these attacks to any political motivation.
 Rather, they appear to be for the personal gain of the
 individual policemen. As is the case with killings, there is
 no evidence to demonstrate that the Government condones such
 actions by individual police officers. While nearly all
 publicized allegations of torture are investigated, however,
 neither the current regime nor its predecessors have dealt with
 the problem of police brutality in general, and results of
 investigations are rarely made public.
 d. Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment
 President Zia and the Pakistan Government have endorsed the
 establishment of punishments as codified under the Sharia, the
 
 
 1245
 traditional Islamic legal code. Shariat benches, charged with
 reviewing all laws to insure that they conform to Islamic
 codes, have been created for each of the High Courts and an
 Appelate Shariat bench has been created at the Supreme Court.
 Moreover, the Hudood Ordinances have removed four crimes --
 theft, drinking, adultery, and false accusation of adultery --
 from the penal code and applied to them Islamic punishments.
 The penalties include traditional Western punishments such as
 fines or imprisonment but also call for Islamic punishments
 such as flogging, stoning, or amputation.
 Floggings of offenders have been ordered. Most flogging is
 carried out in jail away from public view although there was an
 increase in public flogginys in late 1982. During 1982 the
 press carried at least eight reports of floggings in public in
 cases involving one or more persons charged with sexual
 assault, consumption of alcohol, narcotics possession, or
 robbery. Although during 1982 two sentences of amputation were
 announced, neither is known to have been-carried out, nor have
 any such sentences been carried out in previous years. On June
 29, 1982 a federal Shariat court decision for the first time
 sustained a lower court sentence of amputation in a case
 involving the theft of a clock from a mosque. By the end of
 1982, authorities had still not carried out the amputation.
 In September 1981 a school bus driver was sentenced to death by
 stoning for adultery. This was the first sentence of its kind
 imposed in Pakistan. However, in March 1982 the federal
 Snariat court refused to hear the case on appeal and instead
 referred the case back to district court with instructions that
 leniency be shown. Convictions for which amputation or stoning
 to death are the prescribed punishments will probably continue
 to be rare owing to the strict rules of evidence under Islamic
 law.
 There are three classes of facilities for prisoners: A, B, and
 C. Class "C" cells are designated for ordinary criminals.
 These cells usually have dirt floors, are unfurnished, and are
 frequently overcrowded. The amount and quality of food
 provided inmates is poor. Depending on means and
 social/political status, a prisoner may be given improved
 treatment, less crowded cells, and better food. In Karachi
 Central Prison, foreigners, and political prisoners are placed
 in class "' confinement. Only a few prominent individuals
 receive 'A" class accommodations.
 e. Arbitrary Arrest and Imprisonment
 Pakistan has always had legislation authorizing preventive
 detention. Martial law regulations authorize limited (90 day)
 detention of persons who might act in a manner "prejudicial" to
 the regime. While detention is "limited," it may be, and
 occasionally is, extended indefinitely without judicial
 review. Under this authority there have been a substantial
 number of detentions without charge or trial of various
 political figures. The grounds for arrest include expressing
 anti-regime sentiments in.speeches or literature and
 participating in public demonstrations. Such arrests usually
 occur en masse: In February and March 1982, martial law
 authorities throughout the country detained an estimated 4,400
 individuals in an effort to be responsive to demands made in
 the Federal Advisory Council for law and order. Most of those
 arrested were reported to be habitual offenders; about one
 fourth of those arrested were political party workers. The
 assassination of Zahoor Bhopali, a pro-Zia political leader,
 and a perceived upturn in violent crime in September, again
 
 
 1246
 focused public attention on the law and order situation. The
 Government responded by arresting over 1,000 suspects and
 initiating a nationwide anti-terrorism campaign.
 The number of political detainees in Pakistan is very hard to
 estimate, given the absence of official statistics, the
 practice of detaining individuals without charge, and the
 difficulty in distinguishing between arrests for actions which
 constitute legitimate political opposition and those for
 actions which actually threaten national security. Taking
 these factors into account, it can be estimated that there were
 auout 400 persons detained in Pakistan for political reasons at
 the end of 1982. Allegations continue to be voiced that many
 others who remain under detention for alleged involvement in
 terrorism or ordinary crime had in fact been jailed for
 political reasons. Four prolainent political leaders remain in
 custody: Air Marshal (retired) Asghar Khan, the
 Tehrik-e-Istiqlal party leader, has been under house arrest in
 Abbottabad since November 1979; Benazir Bhutto, daughter of
 the former Prime Minister, has been under detention since March
 1981, and is presently under house arrest in Karachi having
 been moved there from Larkana in mid-November 1982; Pakistan
 Democratic Party President Nawabzada Nasrullah Khan has been
 confined to his home in rural Punjab since October 1981; and
 Maulana Fazlur Rehman of the Jamiat-ul-Ulema-e-Islam remained
 in a class 'C' jail cell for the last half of 1982. Other
 political leaders arrested in late November 1982 had been
 released by the end of the year.
 Another form of-arbitrary arrest occasionally practiced in
 Pakistan involves the kidnapping by police of relatives of
 persons being sought for crimes. This is done in an effort to
 pressure the accused to surrender to the authorities.
 According to a July 1 news report from Karachi, the parents and
 brother of a university student sought by police for allegedly
 fomenting campus unrest were still in jail five months after
 being detained because of their relationship to the accused.
 f. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Three judicial systems currently operate in Pakistan: a
 civilian judiciary based on Anglo-Saxon law, Shariat benches
 operating under Islamic law, and military tribunals. The
 Shariat benches are attached to the civilian judiciary and
 operate under the same rules of evidence, right to counsel, and
 other procedures applied in the civilian courts, although in
 some instances rules of evidence are even more restrictive in
 the Shariat courts. A Provisional Constitutional Order
 promulgated in March 1981 significantly restricted the powers
 of the civilian judiciary to review actions and decisions of
 the martial law authorities and the military courts, removing
 from their jurisdiction most cases of political or security
 significance. The Order also required Supreme and High Court
 justices to swear what to some justices seemed to be an
 unconstitutional oath of allegiance. A number of justices,
 including the Chief Justice and two Supreme Court judges
 refused to take it, thus relinquishing their positions.
 The Government has been given broad discretionary power in
 choosing to assign cases to either civilian or military
 courts. Military courts are authorized to try virtually every
 criminal case in Pakistan and the Government has increasingly
 relied upon summary military courts to relieve the backlog of
 cases in the civil courts. The right of counsel is not
 expressly prohibited at special courts martial, but there are
 reports that judges and prosecutors, many of them untrained in
 
 
 1247
 the law, treat defense attorneys with contempt. In summary
 military courts, defense attorneys do not have the right to
 speak on behalf of their clients. The March 1982 Criminal Law
 Amendment Order further amended the Constitution to broaden
 even more the powers of the special military courts. In cases
 of subversion, the amendment shifts the burden of proof to the
 defendant, who is regarded as guilty until proven innocent;
 imposes strict secrecy on the proceedings; empowers the court
 to expel both witnesses and defendant if they are determined to
 be acting in a disruptive or dilatory manner; and provides for
 appeal to the Chief Martial Law Administrator only when the
 death sentence is imposed. A martial law regulation of
 September 27, 1982 repeated the provisions of the Criminal Law
 Amendment Order and made them apply retroactively to July 5,
 1977 -- the day the Martial Law Administration came to power.
 Trials involving subversion are typically lengthy. The trial
 of Jam Saqi and five co-defendants who have been held since
 September 1980 on charges of printing and distributing
 subversive literature was heard in a special military court
 throughout 1982. Delays before trial are also lengthy.
 Several persons arrested in December 1981 on various charges of
 subversion are still awaiting trial.
 g.  Invasion of the Home
 Police are required to obtain a warrant before entering a
 residence, and they generally respect the inviolability of the
 home. There have been a few press reports in which individuals
 have charged the police with entering their domiciles without a
 warrant.
 2. Respect for Civil and Political Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Since October 1979 the Martial Law Administration'has
 maintained restrictions on freedom of expression. While
 criticism of the bureaucracy is permitted, including criticism
 of police brutality and official corruption, articles and
 speeches which "defame' the Martial Law Administration, the
 army or the President, or those which criticize Islam, are
 prohibited, as are reports and speeches which might "incite
 religious or regional tensions.' Owing to the ban on political
 activities, the press is officially forbidden to print
 statements by leaders of the "defunct" political parties,
 although these, in one form or another, often find their way
 into the press.
 President Zia announced the lifting of pre-censorship in
 January 1982 but declared that censorship guidelines would
 remain in force. During 1982 some self-censored newspapers
 provided expanded and at times lively coverage of the
 maneuverings of political leaders, only to discontinue the
 practice, albeit temporarily, in response to either public
 warnings from President Zia and the Minister of Information, or
 telephoned warnings from the Information Ministry's press
 information department. The Government exercised indirect
 control over what appeared in print by limiting the
 availability of newsprint and withdrawing government
 advertising, notably from newspapers which carried editorial
 views critical of the Martial Law Administration. The press
 also came under attack from right wing students protesting
 unfavorable coverage of their activities. On April 23 students
 of the Islami Jamiat-e-Tulaba, the student arm of the Islamic
 fundamentalist Jamaat-e-Islami party, sacked the offices of the
 
 
 1248
 two leading independent newspapers in Lahore. The police, who
 generally have been reluctant to restrain right wing
 organizations, were criticized for their failure to intervene
 in this case.
 A number of Pakistani journalists and politicians have been
 convicted of printing and distributing *anti-state
 literature.' Former editor of the banned Pakistan People's
 Party weekly 'Al Fateh," Irshad Rao, was arrested in January
 1981 on a charge of printing and disseminating subversive
 literature. Ten months later, he was convicted by a summary
 military court and sentenced to one year rigorous imprisonment
 and ten lashes. After serving one year during which he was
 twice admitted to a hospital for a nervous disorder, Rao's
 confinement was extended by means of a 90-day detention order.
 In September 1982, eight political workers were convicted by a
 special military court in Lahore of holding a secret meeting
 and deciding to print and distribute anti-government
 literature. They were each sentenced to eight years rigorous
 imprisonment. The following month, seven Pakistan People's
 Party workers were convicted by a Lahore special military court
 on a  charge of distributing pamphlets containing objectionable
 material. Four were sentenced to seven years imprisonment and
 twenty lashes, two were sentenced to seventeen years and twenty
 lashes, and the seventh man, former Member of the Punjab
 Provincial Assembly Qayum Nizami, was sentenced in absentia to
 fourteen years rigorous imprisonment.
 Confiscation and banning of domestic books and periodicals
 occurred frequently, but literary and creative works were
 exempt from censorship. Imported books and periodicals enter
 the country more or less freely. Foreign radio broadcasts were
 accessible to a large portion of the public and frequently
 covered critically domestic developments not reported in the
 Pakistan press. According to one survey, the BBC Urdu language
 service attracted up to thirty percent of the radio audience.
 Freedom of private speech is generally not restricted in
 Pakistan. There is no evidence of individuals being persecuted
 or arrested for comments made in private. Nor is there
 widespread concern over the use of wiretaps or mail openings,
 although the Government is known to employ both practices
 selectively.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 President Zia banned political activities in October 1979 and,
 as a result, the only major gatherings permitted during 1982
 were in connection with religious or patriotic festivities.
 Events which might particularly lead to demonstrations (such as
 the April anniversary of Bhutto's execution) were preceded by
 detentions which, although short in duration, were intended to
 prevent mass assemblies. During the spring and summer,
 authorities prevented several planned demonstrations protesting
 events in the Middle East.
 Pakistani workers are free to form labor unions, appoint
 collective bargaining agents, and negotiate in a limited sense
 on wages and working conditions with their employers. Strikes
 by industrial workers and employer lockouts, although
 prohibited, have continued to occur. From March until May a
 series of strikes was organized throughout the country by
 teachers seeking higner wages and more benefits and by young
 doctors demanding internships for all medical graduates. These
 came to an end after negotiations with provincial and federal
 ministers led to some concessions in the 1982-83 federal
 
 
 1249
 budget. Some officers of the Pakistan International Airlines
 union have been incarcerated since their August 1981 opposition
 to efforts by the authorities to reduce inefficiency in the
 state airline.
 Workers' organizations in general have insisted that the
 Government enunciate a new labor policy, one which affirms
 their right to strike and bargain collectively and which would
 enforce present restrictions on the ability of employers to
 hire and fire. Although the Government has had the issue under
 review since 1979 no action was taken during 1982. The job
 security of government workers was affected in August 1982 by
 an amendment to the Provisional Constitutional Order which
 states that certain civil servants dismissed from government
 service have no right to appeal their dismissal before civil
 service tribunals or civil courts.
 The Government's policy of 'Islamization' has directly affected
 the position of women. In March 1982, for the first time in
 Pakistan's history, women were denied permission to participate
 in the Pakistan national games in Peshawar. President Zia also
 directed that women could not participate in athletic events
 outside Pakistan. In October 1982 the Lahore chapter of the
 Women's Action Forum , a nationwide coalition of women's
 groups, met to celebrate its first anniversary and express
 opposition to a proposed new federal law of evidence which they
 claimed would impose on women and men equal obligations without
 affording women equal rights.
 Traditionally, the most active professional groups on the
 national political scene have been Pakistan's bar associations
 and councils. Lawyers, for example, were the foremost critics
 of the March 1981 Provisional Constitutional Order which
 significantly eroded the powers and independence of Pakistan's
 civil judiciary. This activist tradition was directly
 challenged in July 1982 when the Government amended the 1973
 Bar Council and Legal Practitioners Act to deny bar councils
 and associations the freedom to engage in political
 activities. The proximate cause of the Government's action
 appears to have been the expulsion from bar councils, and hence
 from legal practice, of some lawyers who had accepted
 membership in the Federal Advisory Council. However, the
 amendments were viewed, even by many lawyers not involved in
 politics, as another unacceptable infringement on their
 activities. Four lawyers of the Lahore and Karachi High Court
 bar associations were arrested for organizing meetings which
 were addressed by prominent politicians and on November 22 a
 nationwide one-day strike caused nearly all civil courts in
 Pakistan to close for the day.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Minority religious groups and their adherents are denied
 certain rights enjoyed by the majority Muslims, but were
 allowed to participate in the 1979 local elections in which
 certain seats were reserved for them. Christians, Parsis,
 Hindus, and others, including the followers of the Ahmadi sect,
 are considered to be minorities and their members cannot be
 elected president or prime minister. Although the Ahmadis
 consider themselves Muslims, the Government does not accept
 them as such because they do not accept Mohammad as the final
 prophet. Minority religious groups are generally free to
 practice their religions openly, although some groups have
 complained that their proselytizing activities, especially if
 they involve foreign missionaries, have been restricted. There
 are also reports of harassment and discrimination toward the
 
 
 1250
 minority religious groups, especially in the fields of
 employment and educational opportunities.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Within the country there is general freedom of movement for
 citizens, but a number of prominent opposition leaders were
 restricted from entering certain provinces during 1982.
 "Externment orders' served on some politicians to prevent them
 from entering Sind Province were cited as a factor contributing
 to the failure of a round table conference of politicians which
 was to be held in Karachi on November 11.
 Some opposition figures have been denied passports for foreign
 travel, and in other cases have been refused the foreign
 exchange needed to finance their children's study abroad. In
 August 1982 Begum Nusrat Bhutto, widow of the former Prime
 Minister, applied for permission to travel abroad for medical
 treatment. After a delay of 83 days, and a government-imposed
 requirement that she appear before a medical board of examiners
 to determine whether treatment-abroad was necessary, permission
 to leave the country was granted on November 12.
 Pakistani workers are free to emigrate in order to work
 abroad. The Government frequently assists this economically
 advantageous practice and accepts workers upon their return.
 About 2.8 million registered Afghan refugees have fled the
 Soviet occupation of their homeland to Pakistan. The
 Government of Pakistan provides the personnel to administer
 over three hundred refugee camps and bears the cost of inland
 transportation of international relief commodities channeled
 through the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
 (UNHCR), the World Food Program, and several voluntary
 agencies. The Government has committed itself to making cash
 payments to registered refugees as a supplement to
 international donations of food, clothing, and shelter, but due
 to administrative problems payments are sporadic. On UNHCR and
 Pakistani Government insistence, only camp residents are
 eligible for the relief distribution program. No restrictions
 have been placed on travel within the country by refugees.
 Violent incidents resulting from friction with local
 inhabitants have occurred on occasion, but have been remarkably
 few and easily controlled considering the magnitude of the
 refugee population and the strains they place on the local
 environment.
 e. Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 Pakistan is governed by a martial law regime with an active
 duty general, Zia-ul-Haq, serving as President and Chief
 Martial Law Administrator. Federal cabinet portfolios are held
 by five active military officers and sixteen civilians. They
 preside over a professional federal civil service which is
 still largely devoid of active duty military personnel,
 although there are some officers serving in the upper levels of
 the bureaucracy. Since July 1977 the federal cabinet has
 assumed the legislative authority of Pakistan's national
 assembly. There is an identical arrangement at the provincial
 level where each of the four provinces is governed by a
 lieutenant general with the titles of Governor and Martial Law
 Administrator. The ordinary Pakistani citizen is unable to
 participate in the political process at the national and
 provincial levels, although limited participation in local
 government, on a non-party basis, has been permitted since 1979.
 
 
 1251
 Political parties were declared "defunct" in October 1979. In
 fact, their administrative structures remain intact,
 inter-party leadership gatherings are held frequently in
 private homes, coalitions are formed and disbanded, and the
 public is kept informed of these activities through press
 reports. Not all parties are treated equally, however. The
 more conservative groupings are permitted considerable leeway
 in their activities, and their leaders travel freely throughout
 the country. Leaders of the Movement for the Restoration of
 Democracy, the only major coalition of political parties on the
 center and the left, are subject to various restrictions on
 travel and assembly, although this coalition, too, is able to
 continue limited political activity.
 President Zia's main response so far to demands for a
 broadening of the national policy making process has been the
 formation of the Federal Advisory Council (Majlis-e-Shoora).
 The Council was first convened in January 1982 when 287
 members, selected by the Martial Law Administration to
 represent all former National Assembly districts, gathered in
 Islamabad for the first of four sessions held during 1982. A
 limited number of seats were allocated to women and
 minorities. Council members were given immunity from
 prosecution for any statements made while in council. A few
 members took advantage of this to criticize the Government for
 its failure to hold elections and restore democracy, while many
 more criticized Government policies and the bureaucracy for
 failures in such areas as law and order and public utilities.
 But the powers of the Council are strictly advisory. During
 1982 the only example of government policy based on
 recommendations made by the Council was the February-March
 large-scale arrests of "anti-social elements.'
 President Zia has permitted participation in government at the
 local level by conducting non-party elections through universal
 suffrage to fill seats for four year terms in "local bodies"
 (at the county or city level) throughout the country in 1979.
 The elections were conducted vigorously, with a number of
 political parties, including the Pakistan People's Party,
 surreptitously encouraging their followers to run for office.
 The local bodies were the first elected in fifteen years. They
 have an uneasy partnership with the Pakistani civil service
 (which traditionally has made most decisions), but seem to be
 establishing themselves as functioning institutions albeit with
 mixed results.
 At the second all-Pakistan local bodies convention in May 1982
 President Zia announced he would push for an expansion of their
 revenue base and authority. A special commission under
 Minister of Local Government and Rural Development Fakhar Imam
 was appointed to study the matter. By the end of 1982, its
 recommendations, which were to be completed by November, had
 still not been submitted to the President.
 3. Government Attitude Regarding International and Non-
 governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations of
 Human Rights
 Investigation of human rights abuses in Pakistan is difficult
 because the Government does not publish relevant information
 and the press is subject to censorship. Nevertheless, domestic
 human rights organizations operate largely free of government
 harassment, perhaps because they do not challenge current
 violations in Pakistan. The Human Rights Society of Pakistan
 is basically a ceremonial organization which makes no apparent
 effort to evaluate the situation in the country.
 
 
 1252
 Amnesty International has a resident Pakistani representative
 and has conducted investigations in Pakistan of alleged human
 rights abuses. In its 1981 report, issued in January 1982,
 entitled "Pakistan: Human Rights Violations and the Decline of
 the Rule of Law,* Amnesty International stated that there had
 been a steady deterioration in respect for human rights in
 Pakistan, especially since the beginning of 1981. It cited in
 particular the deprivation of civil rights as a result of the
 March 1981 Provisional Constitutional Order. In addition, the
 report asserted that as many as 6,000 political prisoners were
 being held incommunicado, and that its investigations had
 revealed a systematic pattern of torture in Pakistan. The
 Government of Pakistan has issued no official response to the
 report. A few days after its release, however, Interior
 Minister Mahmood Haroon answered two of its allegations without
 specifically naming Amnesty International. He told delegates
 to the first session of the Federal Advisory Council on January
 17, 1982 that only 62 persons were being detained on political
 grounds and he challenged those who allege that Pakistan
 engages in human rights abuses to prove even one case of
 torture of a prisoner.
 4. Economic, Social, and Cultural Situation
 Pakistan faces many problems common to the developing world,
 including an adult literacy rate of only 24 percent (1976-1979
 statistics), a high population growth rate of 3.1 percent
 (1970-1978), and a relatively low per capita GNP of $336 (1981
 estimate). Moreover, Pakistan's traditional society--largely
 rural--resists change, and government efforts to improve rural
 living conditions produce improvements only slowly. There are
 substantial disparities in living conditions experienced in
 urban areas, as compared to those in the countryside, where
 over two-thirds of Pakistan's 84 million people live. Whereas
 60 percent of all city dwellers have access to safe water, only
 17 percent of the rural population does. On the other hand,
 32.8 percent of the population in urban areas live below the
 absolute poverty level, compared to 29 percent in rural areas
 (1976-1979 statistics). A deficit of over one million housing
 units exists in urban areas and the shortage in rural areas is
 reportedly several times as great.
 Pakistani society traditionally assigns a subordinate role to
 women. For example, 70 percent of all six-to-eleven-year-old
 boys attend school, compared with only 25 percent of all
 girls. This disparity increases in public secondary
 education. While women are well represented in Pakistani
 universities, post-graduation professional opportunities are
 limited largely to teaching, medical services, and the law. As
 part of its "Islamization" program, the Government has placed
 restrictions on the appearance of women in broadcast and print
 media. Despite the 'Islamization' program, however, women have
 continued to play a growing role in the commercial and
 governmental sectors of the society. As such, they have been
 well-positioned to defend the Muslim Family Laws, which
 generally protect the rights of women in the society, against
 charges that the Family Laws are "un-Islamic." A small number
 of women have been active in provincial and national politics
 and the Pakistan Peoples' Party is currently led by the widow
 of former Prime Minister Bhutto.
 In 1982, the Government increased its overall expenditures for
 social services by five percent; a net decrease in real terms.
 At the same time it instituted new programs in the areas of
 education and health which will be funded outside the federal
 
 
 1253
 budget. In addition, various foreign-supported projects for
 housing, electrification, education, and health in rural areas
 are underway. Special emphasis has been put on development in
 the relatively Undeveloped province of Baluchistan and in parts
 of the Northwest Frontier Province.
 There has been an upturn in the economy in the last five years
 and workers' renittances have increased the real disposable
 income of consumers. Several good crops have resulted in more
 abundant food supplies.
 
 
 1254
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS ANO GRANTS- O3LIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS CF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: PAKISTAN
 1930     1911     1982
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL...         5S.6      76.1    200.4
 LOANS .....   .....     ... 47.5     47.5     81.5
 GRANTS ................   11.1      29.3    118.9
 A.AIC  ....... ............     0.0      0.0    100.0
 LOANS ..............         0.0      0.0     34.0
 GRANTS .............       0.0      0.0     66.0
 (SEC.SUPPASSIST.) ..         0.0      0.0     100.0
 b.FCO0 FOR PEACE ......        55.1     76.3     97.5
 L)AN  ..............       47.5      47.5     47.5
 GRANTS ................    10.6     28.9     50.0
 TITLE  I-TOTAL ..........       47.5     47.5     47.5
 REPAY. IN .-LCANS .....        47.5     47.5     47.5
 PAY. IN FUR. CURR .....        0.0       0.0      0.0
 TITLE I-TOTAL ..........       10.6     2P.8     50.0
 E.RELIEI.tC.OEV l WFP,        10.6      ZS.8     50.0
 VOL.AELIEF ASENCY .....         0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.3THER ECON. ASSIST...          0.5      0.5      2.9
 LOANS .................    0.0       0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................    0.5      0.5      2.9
 PEACE CORPS ......        0.0       0.0      0.0
 NARCOTICS ........        0.5       0.5      2.9
 OTHER .............      0.0       0.0      0.0
 Ii.tIiL. AbSIST.-TOTA.            0.0      0.0      0.6
 LOANS ..................   0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ...............      0.0      0.0      0.6
 A.MAP GRANTS..........         0.0       0.0      0.0
 &.CREOIT SALES-PS ....         0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.INTL hIL.E.TRNG....          0.0      0.0      0.6
 D.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK...         0.0       0.0      0.0
 .GTriER 5KANTS ........       0.0       0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL ICON. 'a NIL...        5S.6     76.8    201.0
 LOANS ..............    ... 47.5     47.5     81.5
 GRANTS .................   11.1     29.3    119.5
 OTHER US LOANS .........          0.0      0.0      0.0
 EX-IM 3ANK LOANS .......         0.0      0.0      0.0
 ALL OTHER ..............    ... .0.0      0.0      0.0
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1930     191     1982     1946-82
 TOTAL..........  149.3    Z77.3     371.3   3777.1
 IbRO               0.0      0.0     138.5    904.3
 IFC                6.6      3.4      19.3     86.0
 IDA              165.0      0.0       0.0   1254.0
 108                0.0      0.0       0.9      0.0
 ADS              169.9    193.3     213.0   1278.4
 AFOB               0.0       0.0      0.0      0.0
 UNOP               7.8      15.3      0.0    109.3
 OTHER-UN           0.0      65.3      0.0    145.1
 EEC                0.0      O.U       0.0      0.0
 
 
 1255
