 PAKISTAN
 During most of 1985, Pakistan was ruled by a Martial Law
 Administration headed by President Mohammed Zia-ul-Haq. On
 December 30, however, constitutional government was restored
 with the repeal of martial law and the reimposition of a
 modified version of the 1973 constitution, most of the
 provisions of which had been in suspense since the Martial Law
 government of General Mohammad Zia-ul-Haq seized power in July
 1977. Historically, periods of constitutional rule in
 Pakistan have been interspersed with periods in which the
 government has ruled through emergency powers or martial law
 (or both). The most recent of these periods of martial
 law--Zia's Martial Law Administration--had in fact carried
 over a state of emergency it inherited from the civilian
 government it replaced 8 years before. In the new
 constitutional setup, Pakistan has both an executive president
 and a prime minister. Zia has stayed on as President and key
 policymaker, retaining also--at least for now--his post as
 Chief of Army Staff. However, he now shares power with Prime
 Minister Mohammad Khan Junejo, head of the Pakistan Muslim
 League and leader of a comfortable majority in the Parliament
 which was elected in February 1985 and which, with Junejo,
 managed the transitional period through the end of martial law.
 The coup which brought Zia to power in July 1977 was sparked
 by a breakdown in constitutional order and nationwide
 disturbances, following a highly controversial election in
 which the ruling party was alleged to have perpetrated massive
 election fraud. During the ensuing 8 years of martial law,
 Zia promised but subsequently postponed national elections on
 two occasions before finally delivering on a third promise of
 elections with national and provincial elections in February
 1985. During his 8 years of martial law rule, his regime
 sharply restricted individual rights and severely limited the
 traditional independence and responsibilities of the
 judiciary. Immediately prior to lifting martial law at the
 end of 1985, however, the Government canceled most martial law
 orders in effect and obtained parliamentary approval for the
 few which remain on the books. The articles of the
 Constitution guaranteeing the fundamental rights of Pakistanis
 and the powers of the judiciary have been fully restored.
 Although Pakistan continues to make impressive economic
 progress, the country remains underdeveloped and the people
 largely illiterate and poor. Social, political, economic, and
 religious turmoil throughout its 37-year history has hindered
 the full development of a national identity and the evolution
 of democratic institutions.
 The Soviet invasion of Afghanistan in 1979 has had a major
 impact on Pakistan. A leader of international opposition to
 that invasion, Pakistan provides refuge for well over 2
 million Afghans, and is the target of an intense campaign of
 Soviet-inspired propaganda and disinformation. The fighting
 in Afghanistan has frequently spilled over the border with
 attacks on Pakistani border areas, resulting in over 130
 deaths during 1985. Despite this constant pressure, and
 increasing economic and social dislocation in the border areas
 deriving directly or indirectly from the presence of the
 refugees, Pakistan has allowed the refugees freedom of
 movement and employment. Pakistan has also provided up to
 half the cost of supporting the refugees, supplementing
 extensive international support.
 
 
 1352
 PAKISTAN
 Human rights abuses have been common under both civilian and
 military rule during Pakistan's 37 years and, although the
 trend was generally toward improvement, abuses continued in
 1985. On the positive side, the Government, in addition to
 lifting martial law, held elections on a nonparty basis in
 February and March for a national assembly and four provincial
 assemblies. The opposition alliance, the Movement for the
 Restoration of Democracy (MRD), boycotted the elections, but
 two major parties actively encouraged their members to
 participate as individual candidates in the elections, which
 were characterized by a substantial voter turnout and by an
 absence of government interference. Press freedom also
 increased markedly in 1985, with newspapers frequently
 printing statements by opposition leaders harshly critical of
 the Government. During the year, Freedom House upgraded
 Pakistan's rating from "not free" to "partly free"; it
 observed that Pakistan had moved toward a more democratic and
 open system, although it noted that there was still a long way
 to go.
 On the negative side, the authorities in 1985 on several
 occasions used preventive detention (usually for a relatively
 brief period) and more frequently used externment orders
 (banning individuals from a particular province) to curtail
 the activities of opposition leaders. In August, the
 Government placed the Pakistan People's Party (PPP) leader,
 Ms. Benazir Bhutto, under house arrest for martial law
 violations shortly after her return from overseas; she was
 later allowed to leave the country again. The Government also
 announced in August that all mail would be subject to seizure
 and search by the authorities for a period of 6 months.
 During the year, there were continuing allegations of torture
 and traditionally harsh and abusive treatment of prisoners.
 Military courts, which operated with scant regard for due
 process, concluded several major treason and subversion
 trials, resulting in the execution of those convicted.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 There have been no allegations of government-inspired
 political killings. Cross-border air raids and artillery
 attacks by Communist forces based in Afghanistan, and several
 terrorist bombings directed against Afghan refugees in
 Pakistan, resulted in over 130 casualties.
 b. Disappearance
 No known disappearances resulted from official actions in
 1985. Kidnaping, particularly for ransom, remains common,
 particularly in the semiautonomous tribal areas and more
 remote areas of Sind where banditry is reported on the rise.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 There are credible allegations that police, paramilitary, and
 military torture of detainees took place in 1985. Allegations
 of torture have been heard in connection with all the major
 security-related trials completed during the year, including
 
 
 1353
 PAKISTAN
 the "Libyan conspiracy trial" in Rawalpindi, the "Al Zulfiqar"
 treason trial in Lahore, and the military conspiracy trial in
 Attock.
 Abuse of prisoners in common criminal cases also appears
 widespread. As under previous regimes, policemen and jailers
 use third degree interrogation methods. The local press
 regularly reports incidents of death in police custody.
 Although the Government investigates most publicized
 allegations of mistreatment, it has failed to institute
 systematic reforms aimed at eliminating them.
 Three classes of prison facilities exist. Class "C" cells,
 which generally hold common criminals, suspected terrorists,
 and low-level political workers, usually have dirt floors, no
 furnishings, and poor quality food. The use of handcuffs and
 fetters is common in "C" cells. Political leaders and foreign
 prisoners usually are held in class "B" cells, which provide
 better treatment, less crowded conditions, and better food.
 Only prominent persons receive class "A" accomodations, which
 can include air conditioning and private servants. House
 arrest is a fourth category of imprisonment and the least
 onerous to the detainee.
 The Government's 1979 Hadood Ordinances prescribe traditional
 Islamic punishments for theft, adultery, and consumption of
 alcohol; penalties include flogging, stoning, and amputation.
 There were occasional public floggings of persons convicted of
 sexual assault, adultery, drinking alcohol, possession of
 narcotics, and robbery in 1985. However, because of the
 strict Islamic rules of evidence in the ordinance (and the
 reluctance of officials to carry them out), no stoning or
 amputation sentences were carried out. According to published
 reports, a tribal council in a semiautonomous region may have
 imposed a stoning sentence in accordance with tribal custom.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Martial law regulations authorized detention up to 90 days for
 persons who act in a manner prejudicial to the regime.
 Although legally these detentions could only be extended for
 up to 2 years, in practice they were occasionally extended
 beyond that period. Detainees under martial law did not have
 access to a lawyer; nor could they apply for bail. With the
 termination of martial law, however, writs challenging
 detention orders filed under martial law ordinances and
 regulations, almost all of which have been ended, are
 permitted.
 The number of political detainees fluctuated widely during the
 course of the year. In the period before the February
 elections, the Government detained perhaps 1,000 activists of
 political parties opposing the polls, most of whom were
 released within a month after the election. The authorities
 also on several occasions detained, generally for a few days,
 varying numbers of political activists to prevent the
 opposition political alliance from holding rallies and
 "summit" meetings. The Government also detained, usually for
 short periods of time, religious leaders and workers it
 suspected of attempting to incite sectarian hatreds.
 During the year, several prominent political leaders who had
 been under detention for comparatively long periods were
 released, including the Vice Chairman of the Sind branch of
 
 
 1354
 PAKISTAN
 the Pakistan Peoples Party (PPP) and the President of the
 National Liberation Front. PPP Chairman Benazir Bhutto was
 kept under house arrest in September and October but was freed
 when she petitioned to leave the country in November.
 Although no official statistics exist, it is estimated that in
 1985 there were as many as 60 political detainees in
 Pakistan. Former detainees claimed that prisoners under
 preventive detention are frequently held incommunicado and
 allowed little contact with families, lawyers, or doctors.
 Preparatory to lifting martial law, all cases before martial
 law courts were transferred to civilian courts. Many, but not
 all, detainees under martial law were released in the process.
 No one has been sentenced to exile. There have been some
 press reports of forced labor camps located in remote areas of
 Baluchistan and run by the tribes. The inmates are usually
 kidnaped from their families as children by hostile tribes.
 The Government does not condone this practice.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Until the December 30 lifting of martial law, there were three
 judicial systems: a civilian judiciary based on Anglo-Saxon
 law, Shariat Benches operating under Islamic law, and military
 courts functioning under various martial law regulations.
 According to the 1981 provisional constitutional order, the
 civilian judiciary could not review the actions of the martial
 law authorities and the military courts. Among the steps
 taken to pave the way for the lifting of martial law, the
 regime took action which transferred to civilian courts all
 cases being tried in military courts under certain martial law
 orders.
 The Shariat Benches try offenses under the Hadood Ordinances
 but otherwise operate similarly to ordinary civilian courts.
 Cases referred to the Shariat Benches are heard by judges from
 the civilian court system who, in practice, apply ordinary
 criminal procedures in most cases. Defendants in the Shariat
 courts can obtain bail and lawyers of their choice; judges and
 attorneys must be familiar with Islamic law. The appellate
 benches are also staffed with ordinary judges from the
 provincial higher courts.
 Under martial law, summary military courts customarily did not
 grant defendants the right of counsel and could dispose of
 cases in minutes. Although special military courts did not
 prohibit defense counsel, judges could impose secrecy on the
 proceedings and expel witnesses and defendants accused of
 acting in a "subversive" or "dilatory" manner. Normally, at
 least two of the three judges of a special military court were
 military men with little training in law or familiarity with
 legal procedures and safeguards. Military court sentences
 could be appealed only to the Deputy Martial Law
 Administrators (i.e., the provincial governors) if the
 sentence was for less than 14 years' imprisonment or to the
 Chief Martial Law Administrator if the sentence was either
 death or more than 14 years.
 During the year, special military courts handed down decisions
 in three major security-related trials. In March, a court in
 Lahore sentenced to life imprisonment all 54 defendants being
 held at the Kot Lakhpat jail on charges of high treason.
 Later that month, a court in Rawalpindi sentenced 5 defendants
 
 
 1355
 PAKISTAN
 to life imprisonment for conspiring with a foreign power to
 overthrow the Government; 13 defendants were acquitted. In
 July, a special military court in Attock sentenced 7 military
 officers to long prison terms for plotting to assassinate
 leading government figures and to blow up strategic
 installations, acquitting 12 codefendants, including the
 Lahore lawyer Raza Kazim. All three trials were held in
 camera, and sources familiar with them allege that scant
 regard was paid by the presiding judges to normal legal
 procedures and safeguards in the Kot Lakhpat and Rawalpindi
 trials. Some sources believe better attention to legal
 procedure was paid at Attock.
 Special military courts convicted Nasir Baluch of complicity
 in the 1981 hijacking of a Pakistan International Airways'
 aircraft, which resulted in the death of a Pakistani diplomat,
 and Ayaz Samoo for the assassination of a Karachi politician.
 Both men, who were also opponents of the regime, were tried in
 camera and both were executed. Some observers doubt that the
 I ccused were accorded normal procedural and substantive
 sfeguards in mounting their defense.
 Various estimates exist regarding the number of political
 prisoners. In August, the Lahore-based Political Prisoners
 Release and Relief Committee (PPRRC) claimed that there were
 366 prisoners of conscience in the country, and the Karachi
 Bar Association identified 122 alleged political prisoners in
 the Province of Sind (the PPRRC had claimed that there were
 192 in Sind). Some opposition figures have claimed there were
 as many as 400 political prisoners in Sind, while the Lawyers'
 Committee for International Human Rights in a recently
 published report estimated that there were perhaps 1,000
 political prisoners in all Pakistan as of April 1985. All of
 these figures apparently include a number of detainees, as
 well as a large number of persons convicted of specific acts
 of terrorism or violence, often of a political or dissident
 nature. It is believed that the number of persons serving
 sentences primarily for political beliefs or acts is
 relatively small. In August, the Interior Minister admitted
 to a total of six political prisoners in Pakistan.
 In a special report on Pakistan, the Lawyers' Committee for
 International Human Rights outlined the alleged deterioration
 of Pakistan's legal system under martial law.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Decisions about occupation, education, place of residence, and
 family size are made without official interference. While
 police must obtain a warrant before entering a private home,
 authorities have occasionally ignored these formalities in
 dealing with political opponents of the regime and with
 suspected bandits.
 Pakistan traditionally has maintained a domestic intelligence
 service to monitor political activists, terrorists, and
 foreign intelligence agents. Informed sources maintain that
 wiretapping is used against opposition politicians.
 In August, the Government announced that, in order to
 intercept materials aimed at undermining the ideology of
 Pakistan, all foreign and domestic mail would be subject to
 interception and check by the authorities for a period of 6
 months.
 
 
 1356
 PAKISTAN
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 The Government owns and operates the radio and television
 stations and strictly controls the news they carry. A
 government press trust controls four of the larger newspapers
 and one of the two national wire services, which are also
 circumspect in their coverage of the news. The other
 newspapers and magazines are privately owned and relatively
 free.
 Since the February elections, there has been increasingly free
 discussion of government policies and criticism of the
 Government in the privately owned press. During the spring
 1985 election campaign, the press was barred from reporting
 any statements advocating a boycott of the polls. In addition
 to providing relatively unfettered reporting of statements
 made by the newly elected legislators, the press has also
 extensively covered hostile remarks by the leadership of the
 extraparlimentary opposition. In July, the Information
 Minister informed the National Assembly that the Government
 had ended the system of press advisories, through which the
 Government instructed the media how to report on certain
 topics. According to press sources, only a few subjects--such
 as sectarian conflict and relations with India--are now
 subject to press advisories.
 The Information Minister also told the House that the
 Government would no longer use the placement of advertisements
 to influence the editorial policies of newspapers. In the
 past, the Government, by far the single largest advertiser in
 the country, pressured recalcitrant newspapers by withdrawing
 advertising. Given the increasingly critical coverage
 featured in many newspapers, the Government generally appears
 to be upholding this commitment, However, it reportedly cut
 in half the advertising revenue for one regional newspaper
 which prominently reported the return of Benazir Bhutto.
 Academic freedom appears circumscribed. The Government has
 tried to abolish the faculty senate and student council at
 Quaid-E-Azam university, a move which many faculty members
 regard as an attempt to curtail academic freedom. A more
 serious threat to academic freedom, however, is the atmosphere
 of violence and intolerance among the student body.
 Well-armed groups of Islamic fundamentalist,
 secularist/leftist, and ethnic nationalist students clash
 periodically and attempt to force their views on their
 classmates and the faculty. Institutions are frequently
 closed as a result of such violence.
 Although literary and creative works remained generally free
 of censorship in 1985, Pakistani books and magazines dealing
 with politics were frequently banned. The authorities
 sporadically confiscated such literature. Foreign
 publications critical of the regime were occasionally seized.
 No effort was made to restrict access to foreign broadcasts,
 although one Pakistani stringer for a foreign broadcasting
 service was briefly detained during the February election
 campaign.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Under martial law the right to free assembly was closely
 controlled. Permits had to be obtained for open meetings, and
 
 
 1357
 PAKISTAN
 permission to hold political meetings was infrequent and
 selective. During 1985, opposition groups used the tactic of
 meeting at Friday prayers in a designated mosque. On several
 occasions, clashes occurred with police when the opposition
 activists attempted to move from the mosque into the streets
 for demonstrations. Weddings and ceremonies ending fasts have
 also been the venue of political gatherings.
 Authorities occasionally permitted or tolerated smaller
 opposition meetings or impromptu street demonstrations, and
 the Movement for the Restoration of Democracy held a large
 rally in Lahore on August 14. Although still active, student
 unions remain officially banned.
 Workers in most jobs may form labor unions, elect collective
 bargaining agents, and negotiate on wages and working
 conditions. Most Pakistanis work in either small, unorganized
 shops or in the agricultural sector; hence only about 7
 percent of the work force is unionized, and long-standing
 labor law precludes industry-wide collective bargaining.
 Government measures instituted in 1981 to ban union activities
 in the state-run Pakistan International Airways (PIA) have not
 been enforced; the main PIA unions are associated with the
 banned Pakistan People's Party. Strikes were prohibited under
 martial law, but there were a number of "go slows" and other
 labor disputes during the year, including a major walkout by
 workers at the government-owned Wah ordnance factory.
 Under martial law, formal affiliation of labor unions with the
 officially "defunct" political parties was banned, although
 informal links were strong in some cases. Pakistani labor
 unions, professional associations, and employers' associations
 have the right to federate and to maintain relations with
 international bodies such as the International Labor
 Organization and the International Confederation of Free Trade
 Unions.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Pakistan is an Islamic Republic. Minority religious groups
 are protected, but Hindus, Christians, and Parsis do not enjoy
 the same legal rights as Muslims. Reports of discrimination
 against minority groups in the areas of employment and
 education appear well-founded. Seats in the national and
 provincial assemblies are reserved for members of minority
 religious groups, and under the reinstated 1973 Constitution
 the president and prime minister must be Muslims.
 In general, minority groups can practice their religion
 openly. Members of minority religious groups can maintain
 links with their coreligionists in other countries and
 undertake travel for religious purposes. Foreign clergy may
 enter the country to serve congregations. Although
 conversions are permitted, the Government prohibits
 proselytizing among Muslims and has refused to renew the
 residence permits of some foreign missionaries who have
 ignored this ban.
 The Ahmadi sect, which considers itself Muslim despite
 theological differences with traditional Islam, has
 historically been repressed. In 1974, the Bhutto regime
 amended the Constitution to declare the Ahmadis a non-Muslim
 minority. In April 1984, the Zia Government banned the use of
 Muslim terminology and proselytizing by the Ahmadis. Citing
 
 
 1358
 PAKISTAN
 their belief that they are Muslims, the Ahmadis refused to run
 for any of the minority seats reserved for them in the 1985
 elections. Sporadic clashes between the Ahmadis and
 anti-Ahmadi groups continued throughout the year. A number of
 prominent Ahmadis were murdered in the Sind Province,
 presumably by anti-Ahmadi fanatics. In what appeared to be
 deliberate efforts to court arrest, a number of Ahmadis were
 detained at various locations throughout the country for
 wearing badges bearing the Islamic profession of faith. Most
 were quickly released, but some complained of brutal treatment
 by the authorities. In October, the Government denied the
 Ahmadis permission to hold two large meetings at their
 headquarters in Rabwah, while at the same time allowing
 anti-Ahmadi groups to hold demonstrations in the same area.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Pakistanis generally have freedom of movement within the
 country. However, prior to lifting martial law, the
 Government frequently placed restrictions on opposition
 political leaders, banning them from travel to certain
 provinces for a specific period of time (usually 90 days).
 For most Pakistanis, foreign travel is unrestricted; over 2
 million work abroad. Under martial law the authorities
 occasionally restricted the foreign travel of some political
 figures and women's rights activists. The right of citizens
 to return to the country is, with infrequent exception,
 recognized.
 Over 2 million Afghans have fled to Pakistan as a result of
 the Soviet invasion. The Government administers over 300
 refugee camps and bears much of the cost of inland
 transportation of relief supplies provided by various donors.
 Pakistan has placed few restrictions on travel by, or
 employment of, the Afghans.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 A martial law regime led by General Zia-ul--Haq governed
 Pakistan from 1977 to December 30, 1985, during which period a
 lieutenant general holding the titles of governor and martial
 law administrator governed each of the four provinces. Zia
 interpreted the results of a referendum held in December 1984
 as an endorsement of his rule, and was sworn in in late March
 1985 for a 5-year term as President.
 Mohammad Khan Junejo serves as head of the newly elected
 civilian Government, i.e., Prime Minister. He is part of the
 National Assembly and responsible to that body. He is
 assisted by a Cabinet composed of members of Parliament.
 Similarly, the provincial governments are headed by chief
 ministers, who are also assisted by cabinets comprised of
 civilian provincial legislators.
 In February and March 1985, elections were held for national
 and provincial assemblies. Although the Government declared
 its intention to allow most members of the MRD to stand as
 individuals, the opposition alliance boycotted the elections,
 calling for immediate restoration of the 1973 Constitution.
 However, two of the four most prominent parties in the country
 chose to participate actively in the elections. A large
 number of candidates--including many former members of the
 
 
 1359
 PAKISTAN
 boycotting parties--ran, and the election turnout was high by
 Pakistani standards. (Most observers felt that the
 Government's figures of 53 percent for the national elections
 and 57 percent for the provincial elections were consistent
 with earlier voter turnout.) Outside observers, including
 Western journalists, generally believe that there was little
 government interference in the elections. Five of the nine
 serving cabinet ministers who ran in the elections were
 defeated. At the end of the year the regime, in steps
 culminating in the lifting of martial law, took action which
 restored the articles of the Constitution guaranteeing the
 fundamental human rights of Pakistanis.
 Political parties, officially banned in Pakistan since 1979,
 remained proscribed throughout most of 1985. The political
 parties now can operate legally after they register with the
 Government under a new act passed just before the lifting of
 martial law. The newly elected assemblies have on many issues
 divided into pro- and antigovernment blocs with little
 reference to party lines. The Government has been careful to
 build a consensus for its programs of gradual transition to
 constitutional government; parliamentary pressure appears to
 have played an important role in holding the Government to its
 promise to lift martial law, and Parliament has participated
 actively in drafting the legislation establishing the
 postmartial law political structure. The relative balance of
 power between the President and Prime Minister has been
 shifted in favor of the latter, but the Presidency still
 retains sweeping powers.
 Pakistan's acceptance into membership in the International
 Parliamentary Union was announced in September.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 Domestic human rights organizations operate largely free of
 official harassment, and their reports receive extensive
 coverage in the privately owned press. Police brutality has
 even been satirized on Pakistan television. In 1985, the
 Government did not retaliate against bar associations and
 other groups which criticized human rights abuses.
 Pakistan has allowed visits by international human rights
 organizations, but has neither cooperated with them nor
 responded to critical reports by Amnesty International,
 Freedom House, the Lawyers' Committee for International Human
 Rights, and others. However, in some specific cases (e.g.,
 the Raza Kazim case and the Attock trial), the Government
 appears to have responded positively to international concern.
 In its 1985 Report, Amnesty International expressed concern
 over the continuing detention of prisoners of conscience; the
 fact that hundreds of other political prisoners were tried
 before military courts whose procedures fell short of
 internationally accepted standards for a fair trial;
 incommunicado detention; reports of torture and deaths of
 criminal suspects in police custody, allegedly due to torture;
 the detention of prisoners in bar fetters and shackles; and
 the frequent imposition of death sentences and flogging.
 During 1985 Freedom House upgraded Pakistan's rating from "not
 free" to "partly free."
 
 
 1360
 PAKISTAN
 ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND CULTURAL SITUATION
 Pakistan's population of some 99 million is growing at an
 annual rate of 2.6 percent. Per capita gross national product
 was $390 in 1983, and the average annual growth rate for the
 gross domestic product of better than 6 percent a year since
 1977 has led to a gradual but sustained rise in living
 standards. The percentage of the population living below the
 absolute poverty line had fallen, as of 1979, to 32 percent in
 the cities and 29 percent in the rural areas. According to
 official 1984 estimates, the poorest 20 percent of households
 earn 7.5 percent of the total income.
 Social and economic upward mobility is increasingly possible,
 particularly as a result of repatriated funds from family
 members working abroad. Pakistan faces many problems common
 to the developing world: an overall adult literacy rate of
 26.2 percent; an infant mortality rate of 124.6 per 1,000 live
 births; and a life expectancy at birth of 51 years for males
 and 49 years for females. In spite of increased government
 attention to rural development, programs for improving living
 conditions have had mixed results and substantial disparities
 between urban and rural life still exist. For example, in
 1981, 72 percent of urban dwellers had access to potable
 water, compared to only 20 percent of those in rural areas;
 urban areas had a literacy rate of 47 percent, the
 countryside, 13.7 percent.
 A key element of the sixth 5-year (1983-88) plan, as amended,
 is a higher level of allocations for what have been woefully
 underfunded social sectors. Priorities for these sectors are
 reflected in the current year's federal budget, where
 projected outlays for education, with emphasis on primary
 education in rural areas, are to grow from 6 percent of the
 total budget expenditures in 1985 to 10 percent in 1986.
 Expenditures in support of health services are to increase by
 22 percent, with major outlays to fund the establishment of
 basic health centers at the village level. A wage indexation
 program to reduce the effects of inflation on the poorest
 segments of society was implemented for the first time in
 1985, and the current budget also places emphasis on housing
 construction and upgrading of existing slum dwellings in
 Karachi and other major cities. Changes in both tax brackets
 and rates will also benefit lower-income families.
 Corruption has apparently become more widespread over the past
 decade as large sums of money have entered the country from
 overseas workers and narcotics trafficking. Socially
 prominent Pakistanis suffer less at the hands of officialdom
 than those less well-off, partly because of their ability to
 return favors or offer inducements to appropriate civil
 servants and partly because of the general deference still
 accorded social "betters."
 Pakistan law sets minimum wages for both skilled and unskilled
 labor. Comprehensive health and safety legislation provides
 for inspection of the workplace by government inspectors to
 insure compliance with health, safety, and workmen's
 compensation regulations. Although observed mainly in the
 breach, the law requires that no adult shall work more than 9
 hours without payment of overtime, no worker shall work more
 than 10 hours of overtime per week, and no child under the age
 of'15 is to be employed. Children between the ages of 15 and
 17 are not to work more than 5 hours a day.
 
 
 1361
 PAKISTAN
 The Government has had institutions in place to administer
 these labor regulations since independence. Nevertheless,
 lack of resources, corruption, and illiteracy hamper the
 application of labor legislation. Noncompliance is widespread
 and punishments for infractions are rarely meted out.
 Pakistani society is traditional and Islamic. It assigns
 women a subordinate role in terms .of civil, political, and
 individual rights. Many Pakistani Muslims interpret the
 Koran's injunction on modesty to mean that women should remain
 in "purdah," either at home or behind the veil. These
 attitudes have contributed to an adult female literacy rate of
 only 15.2 percent, compared to 36 percent for males (1981
 estimates). As of 1980, the primary school enrollment ratio
 was only 27.7 percent for girls as compared to 69.3 percent
 for boys. The ratio of men to women in secondary educational
 institutions, according to 1983 Pakistani statistics, was
 better than five to one. Eight times as many men as women
 work outside the home, and those women who work or attend
 school usually do so in separate facilities.
 Urban women are represented in the universities, but
 postgraduate employment opportunities remain largely limited
 to teaching, medical services, and the law, with a small
 number of women entering the commercial and public sectors.
 The Government's policy of "Islamization" has reversed some of
 the social and legal gains made by women in past years. Women
 may not participate in international athletic competition
 abroad, and, as part of a drive to push for the wearing of
 traditional garb by both men and women, the Government
 determines appropriate dress for women employees appearing in
 public on television, in the print media, and as airline
 stewardesses.
 Although the original caste distinctions common to South Asian
 societies are disappearing in Pakistan, clan affiliations,
 which in some ways parallel the old caste system, can still
 help or hinder those seeking education, employment, or justice.
 
 
 1362
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 CU.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: PAKISTAN
 1983     1984     1985
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL,.        278.7     307.4    339.2
 LOANS ................... 114.5     122.5    139.1
 GRANTS ................. 164.2     184.9     200.1
 A.AIO ......................  200.0    225.0    250.0
 LOANS ..............    ... 67.0     75.0     83.0
 GRANTS ................. 133.0      150.0    167.0
 (SEC.SUPP.ASSST.),..       200.0    225.0    200.0
 B.FOOO FOR PEACE .......       75.8     79.0      86.2
 LOANS ..............    ... 47.5     47.5     56.1
 GRANTS .................. 28.3      31.5      30.1
 TITLE I-TOTAL ..........       47.5      47.5     56.1
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS .....       47.5     47.5      56.1
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR .....        0.0       0.0      0.0
 TITLE II-TOTAL .........       28.3     31.5      30.1
 E.RELIEF.EC.DEV & WFP.        28.3     31.5      30.1
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY .....        0.0       0.0      0.0
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST...         2.9       3.4      3.0
 LOANS .................     0.0       0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ...............     2.9      3.4       3.0
 PEACE CORPS ......        0.0      0.0      0.0
 NARCOTICS ........        2.9      3.4       3.0
 OTHER ..............   0.0      0.0       0.0
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL,..       260.8    300.8     326.0
 LOANS ..............  .... 260.0    300.0    325.0
 GRANTS ................     0.8      0.8      1.0
 A.MAP GRANTS ..........        0.0      0.0       0.0
 B.CREDIT FINANCING ....      260.0    300.0     325.0
 C.INTL IL.EDTRNG,.           0.8       0.8      1.0
 D.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK...         0.0       0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS .......         0.0       0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. & IL,.,       539.5    608.2     665.2
 LOANS ..............  .... 374o5   422.5     464.1
 GRANTS ................. 165.0     185.7     201.1
 OTHER US LOANS                    0.0     66.9      0.0
 EX-IM BANK LOANS.......         0.0      66.9      0.0
 ALL OTHER .................    0.0       0.0      0.0
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1983     1984     1985     1946-85
 TOTAL ........   581.1    656.0   1093.2    6467.2
 IBRO              75.2    131.5    433.0    1570.3
 IFC               90.2     25.3     39.9     241.5
 IDA              228.8    174.5     245.3   2222.8
 1o8                0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 ADB              180.1    312.1    375.0    2145.6
 AFOB               0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 UNDP               6.8      12.6      0.0    141.9
 OTHER-UN           0.0      0.0       0.0    145.1
 EEC                0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 
 
 1363
