 PAKISTAN
 Pakistan is an Islamic republic with a democratic political system. A popularly-
 elected parliament and a government headed by a Prime Minister have wide con-
 stitutional power, shared to a limited extent with the President and, informally, the
 Chief of the Ar-my Staff who wields considerable influence on many major policy de-
 cisions. The Pakistan Muslim League government of Prime Minister Mian Nawaz
 Sharif, which came to power in February with a massive parliamentaryr majority,
 passed a constitutional amendment in April that removed the President's power to
 dismiss the Government and dissolve parliament "in his discretion." As a result, the
 popularly-elected government has greater power than any of its predecessors since
 the return of formal democracy in 1988. The Govenent's power was further en-
 hanced by the constitutional confrontation between the Prime Minister and the
 Chief Justice over the selection of five new justices for the Supreme Court. As a re-
 sult of this struggle over judicial versus executive authority, President Leghari re-
 signed in early December, and the Prime Minister's own candidate was elected to
 the presidency on December 31. Also in December, a ten-judge Supreme Court panel
 deprived the Chief Justice of his position and a new Chief Justice was sworn in.
 Some observers fear tha tthis onfrontation damaged the prestige and independence
 of the judiciary. The Constitution provides for an independent judiciary; however,
 it is subject to executive branch influence.
 Responsibility for internal security rests primarily with the police, although para-
 military forces, such as the Rangers and Frontier Constabulary, are called in to pro-
 vide additional support in areas where law and order problems are especially acute,
 such as Karachi and the frontier areas. Provincial governments control the police
 and paramilitary forces when they are assisting in law and order operations. The
 army is also occasionally deployed to assist in maintaining public order in sensitive
 areas during certain religious holidays. Members of the security forces committed
 numerous serious human rights abuses.
 Pakistan is a poor country, with great extremes in the distribution of wealth be-
 tween social classes. Its per capita annual income is $470, and its rate of illiteracy
 is extremely high, especially among women. The economy includes both state-run
 and private industries and financial institutions. The Constitution provides for the
 right of private businesses to operate freely in most sectors of the economy. The
 Government has taken some steps in pursuit of economic reforms, emphasizing the
 privatization of government-owned fiancial institutions, industrial units, and utili-
 ties. Cotton, textiles and apparel, rice, and leather products are the principal ex-
 ports.
 The Government's human rights record remained poor, with serious problems re-
 garding police abuse, religious discrimination, and child labor. Police committed nu-
 merus extrajudicial killings and tortured, abused, and raped citizens and in many
 cases were not brought to nustice. Prison conditions remained poor, and police arbi-
 
 
 1673
 
 trarily arrested and detained citizens. Since the dismissal of the Pakistan People's
 Party (PPP) government of Benazir Bhutto by President Leghari in November 1996,
 both the caretaker government and later the elected Nawaz Sharif government took
 some steps to end human rights abuses by police and paramilitary forces. However,
 in general, police continued to commit serious abuses with impunity. In Karachi, for
 example, there have been few verified reports of extrajudicial killing by security
 forces though representatives of the Muttahida Quami Movement (MQM) charge
 that their party continues to be targeted by the security forces. The Government has
 sometimes used the "accountablity" process-by which the present Government
 hopes to expose previous wrongdoing, recoup ill-gotten gains, and restore public con-
 fidene in government institutions--for political purposes by arresting a number of
 prominent politicians and bureaucrats connected with the main opposition party.
 Few ofthose arrested and questioned have been put on trial. Case backlogs lead
 to long delays in trials, and engthy pretrial detention is common. The judiciary is
 subject to executive influence, and suffers from inadequate resources, inefficiency,
 and corruption. Sectarian strife in Punjab province and politically-motivated vio-
 lence in Karachi prompted the Government in August to pass a law creating a sys-
 tem of Special Courts to try persons accused of terrorism and other "heinous
 crimes." Human rights advocates, opposition leaders, and others criticized the law,
 charging that it violates the Constitution by settingsup a parallel judicial system
 charged with deciding cases in truncated time periods (7 days) and by granting the
 police extraordinary powers that threaten individual liberties. The Government in-
 ringed on citizens' privacy rights. Although the press largely publishes freely, jour-
 nalists practice self-censorship and the broadcast media remain a closely-controlled
 government monopoly. The Government imposes limits on the freedom of assembly,
 movement, and-or the Ahmadis in particular-religion.
 Political groups, including rival Sunni and Shi'a sectarian extremists and the
 MQM and their opponents, were responsible for killings, while religious zealots con-
 tinued to discriminate against and persecute religious minorities, particularly
 Ahmadis and Christians, basing their activities in part on legislation that discrimi-
 nates against non-Muslims. Government-imposed procedural changes have made the
 registration of blasphemy charges more difficult. Nonetheless, three Ahmadis were
 convicted under the blasphemyiaw during the year and a number of people are still
 facing trial. Religious and ethnic-based rivalries resulted in numerous murders and
 civil disturbances. Traditional social and legal constraints kept women in a subordi-
 nat position in society. They continued to be subjected to violence, abuse, rape,
 traffic ing, and other forms of degradation by their spouses and members of society
 at large. Violence against children, as well as child abuse and prostitution, remained
 problems. Female children still lag far behind boys in education, health care, and
 other social benefits. The Government and employers continued to restrict worker
 rights significantly. Bonded labor by both adults and children remained a problem.
 The use of child labor remained widespread, although it is now generally recognized
 as a serious problem and industrial exporters have adopted a number of measures
 to eliminate child labor from specific sectors.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-Police professionalism is low. The
 extrajudicial killing of criminal suspects, often in the form of deaths in police cus-
 tody or staged encounters in which the police shoot and kill the suspects, is com-
 mon. In September the Prime Minister took note of the number of individuals killed
 while in police custody and called on the Punjab chief minister-who is the Prime
 Minister's brother-to crack down on police torture. Rival political groups use police
 to kill each other's activists in such fake encounters and criminal organizations use
 police to kill members of rival organizations, in a similar fashion. Suspected crimi-
 nals are murdered by the plice to prevent them from implicating police in crimes
 during court proceedings. Police officials maintain in private that due to the lack
 of concrete evidence, witness intimidation, corruption in the judiciary, and some-
 times political pressure, courts often fail to punish criminals involved in serious
 crimes. The police view the killings of criminal suspects as appropriate in light of
 the lack of action by the judiciary against criminals. The judiciary, on the other
 hand, faults the police for presenting weak cases that do not stand up in court.
 Police officers are occasionally transferred or briefly suspended for their involve-
 ment in extrajudicial killings. However, court-ordered inquiries into these murders
 have failed to result in any police officer receiving criminal punishment, though sev-
 eral have recently been charged with criminal offenses in such cases. In May and
 June, Lahore police killed several notorious alleged criminals, including Shahid
 
 
 1674
 Butt, wanted in a number of murders, robberies and kidnapings. The police claimed
 that Shahid was killed in a shootout after running a roadblock on May 31. Shahid's
 family claims that he was in police custody for 4 days before he was shot. The police
 who took part in the alleged encounter were rewarded with cash prizes and pro-
 motions.
 In one of many examples of police murders, Mohammad All, age 27, was tortured
 and killed by Punjab police in the early morning hours of July 27, according to the
 Human Rights Commission of Pakistan. His legs had been crushed, evidently by
 some sort of roller, and his torso was marked by numerous wounds. After a day and
 a half of torture, police dumped his body at Sahiwal hospital where an alert staff
 member challenged the police. Although seven officers were arrested for the murder,
 actual criminal punishment of the officers is considered unlikely, according to
 human rights advocates. Police torture was common and resulted in other deaths
 (see Section 1.c.).
 The death while in police custody of an alleged goat thief, Muhammed Islam,
 sparked a series of violentprotests against police cruelty in Lahore in September.
 According to press reports, Islam's family alleged that police tortured Islam to death
 during interrogation, while the police maintained that Islam had committed suicide
 by hanging himself. A post-mortem report found evidence of torture on Islam's body,
 but did not mention the cause of death. In the wake of protests by residents of the
 area and activists of the Islamist political party Jamaat-I-Islami's youth wing, the
 police arrested a police sub-inspector and a constable on charges of murder.
 PPP p arty members demonstrated in Karachi in September to protest the killing
 of a PPP activist who was shot by police. The victim, Abdul Karim Khaskali, report-
 edly was picked up by police while on his way to donate blood. The police initially
 claimed that Khaskali was shot while trying to escape from custody, but they later
 arrested a head constable on murder charges.
 At times police used excessive force against demonstrators. For instance, two peo-
 ple were shot and killed by police at the Prime Minister's appearance at 50th anni-
 versary celebrations in Karachi at the mausoleum of Pakistan's founder, Muham-
 mad Ali Jinnah, when crowds pressed against the Prime Minister's entourage.
 Karachi remained    a  hotbed   of politically-motivated  violence, although
 extrajuicial killings by security forces there diminished, after the MQM became a
 coalition partner in the state government. Tensions between the federal and provin-
 cial governments and the MQM continued, despite the fact that the MQM became
 a coalition partner with the Pakistan Muslim League (PML) both in the Sindh Gov-
 ernment and the federal Government, and now holds half the cabinet positions in
 Sindh and one minister in the federal government. The MQM was formed in 1984
 as a response to a set of real and perceived political grievances on the part of the
 Mohajirs, Urdu-speaking Muslims who migrated from India to Pakistan following
 partition in 1947, and their descendants. The MQM, in part because of its successful
 organizational structure and its willingness to use violence and intimidation to fur-
 ther its ends, grew to become the dominant political party in urban Sindh, sweeping
 to power in November 1987 local elections in Karachi and Hyderabad. Relations be-
 tween the MQM and the Government have been contentious and often violent ever
 since.
 After the formation of the new Sindh government in February, MQM hopes that
 the paramilitary Rangers would return to their barracks were thwarted, and a
 build-up of Ranger forces was ordered, despite criticism from the MQM, which be-
 lieved itself to be the Rangers' chief target. The .Government has constituted a com-
 mittee of PML and MQM leaders to investigate extrajudicial killings and missing
 MQM workers, but there has been little progress in the investigations. Impunity of
 security forces and police personnel remains a problem.
 On November 12, four U.S. citizen employees of Union Texas Pacific, along with
 their Pakistani driver, were shot and killed while traveling to the company's head-
 quarters in Karachi. No one has claimed responsibility for the killings, and exten-
 sive investigations have failed to establish any motives or suspects. On September
 17, five Iranian air force personnel and their Pakistani driver were killed at a busy
 intersection in Rawalpindi. The radical Sunni organization Lashkar-I-Jhangvi
 claimed responsibility for the killings. A number of arrests have been made in con-
 nection with the case, but it is not yet clear whether those who have been arrested
 will be charged with carrying out the murders.
 Asif Ali Zardari, husband of former Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto, is on trial for
 the murder of Benazir Bhutto's brother, Murtaza Bhutto. The trial is taking place
 in closed session at the Karachi jail. In March Zardari was elected to the Senate
 on the PPP ticket but was not allowed to take the oath of office until December,
 when the Sindh High Court decided that he should be allowed to take his seat in
 
 
 1675
 the Senate. He is to attend future Senate sessions under guard and is to be housed
 in a jail in Rawalpindi during the sessions.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no confirmed cases of politically motivated dis-
 appearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 Although expressly forbidden by the Constitution and the Penal Code, torture and
 other cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment by police remained common practice.
 Police routinely use force to elicit confessions. Authorities suggest that because of
 the widespread use of physical torture by the police, suspected criminals usually
 confess to the crimes with which they are charged regardless of their guilt or inno-
 cence; subsequently, many such confessions are thrown out by the courts.
 Common torture methods include: beating, burning with cigarettes, whip ing the
 soles of the feet, sexual assault, prolonged isolation, electric shock, denialofrfood
 or sleep, hanging upside down, forced spreading of the legs, and public humiliation.
 Some magistrates help cover up the abuse by issuing investigation reports stating
 that the victims died of natural causes. According to press reports, in August two
 men died while in police custody in Hyderabad. Doctors' reports stated that the
 deaths were due to torture. Police torture resulted in other deaths (see Section 1.a.).
 In September the Rawalpindi bench of the Lahore High Court directed the police
 to file charges against nine policemen who allegedly detained and tortured a man
 charged with theft. According to the first incident report (FIR)-an official document
 that initiates a criminal investigation-the man was held for 6 days, during which
 time he was hung upside down and repeatedly tortured by constables.
 On April 28, Mohammad Ayyaz Baluch was arrested at his Islamabad home by
 Pakistani authorities. There is evidence that he was tortured in custody prior to his
 trial and conviction by a military court.
 The overall failure of successive governments to prosecute and punish abusers is
 the single greatest obstacle to ending or even reducing the incidence of abuse by
 the police. The authorities sometimes transferred, suspended  or arrested offending
 officers, but seldom prosecuted or punished them. Investigating officers generally
 shield their colleagues. Amnesty International (AI) estimates that up to 100 people
 die from police torture each year.
 The Anti-Terrorism Law passed in August allows confessions obtained while in
 police custody to be used to convict defendants in the new "special courts." Human
 rights organizations and the press have criticized this provision of the law, as it is
 commonly believed that the police regulariy torture suspects. However, the law stip-
 ulates that the confession must be taken by a police officer not below the rank of
 deputy superintendent and that the court may require a videotape of the confession.
 In general, due to greater scrutiny by nongovernmental organizations (NGO's) and
 media attention, as well as more frequent and thorough prison inspections, torture
 and abuse is less common in prisons than it is in police stations.
 Police and prison officials frequently use the threat of abuse to extort money from
 prisoners and their families. Police accept money for registration of cases on false
 charges and may torture innocent citizens. People pay police to humiliate their op-
 ponents and to avenge their personal grievances.
 In the past, successive governments recruited police officers in violation of consid-
 erations of merit and the department's regulations. In some instances, recruits had
 criminal records. In July Punjab province chief minister Shahbaz Sharif declared his
 own police were "corrupt and inefficient." He appointed new senior officers to im-
 prove effectiveness, while resisting pressure to appoint those recommended by influ-
 ential supporters to police positions.
 It is commonly accepted, and President Leghari has publicly stated, that police
 stations are sold-meaning that police officials pay bribes to politicians and senior
 officials in the department in order to get posted to the police stations of their
 choice. They then recoup their investments by extorting money from the citizenry.
 Special women's police stations were established in 1994 in response to growing
 numbers of complaints of custodial abuse of women, including rape. These police
 stations, staffed by female personnel, are provided with even more inadequate mate-
 rial and human resources than regular police stations, according to human rights
 advocates. According to the Government's own Commission of Inquiry for Women,
 the stations do not function independently or fulfill their purpose. Despite court or-
 ders and regulations requiring that female suspects be interrogated only by female
 police officers, women continued to be detained overnight at regular police stations
 and abused by male officers. In a study of Lahore newspapers from January to July,
 the Commission of Inquiry for Women found 52 cases of violence or torture of
 women while in police custody. A particularly brutal example of such abuse involved
 a 16-year-old girl who was suspected of helping a woman run away from home. Two
 reliable human rights organizations report that the girl was gang-raped by police
 
 
 1676
 and relatives of the missing woman, after which hot chilies were forced inside her
 vagina. In another incident involving police misconduct with women, the Prime Min-
 ister ordered an inquiry into a report that the Secretariat police station had kept
 a woman, Shamim Akhtar, in custody for 3 days in July, allegedly for helping her
 husband in a car theft. Akhtar was reportedly tortured and paraded naked around
 the police station before being presented in court, which subsequently released her
 on bail. Instances of abuse of women in prisons are less frequent than in police sta-
 tions (see Section 5).
 The Hudood Ordinances, pImulgated by the central martial law government in
 1979, were an attempt to make therenal Code more Islamic. These ordinances pro-
 vide for harsh punishments for violations of Islamic law, or Shari'a, including death
 by stoning for unlawful sexual relations and amputation for some other crimes.
 These Koranic penalties-known as Hadd punishments-require a high standard of
 evidence. In effect, four adult Muslim men of good character must witness an act
 for a Hadd punishment to apply. In 18 years, not a single Hadd punishment has
 been carried out. However, on the basis of lesser evidence, ordinary punishments
 such as jail terms or fines may be imposed. From 1979 to 1995, over 1 million
 Hudood cases were filed with the police, and 300,000 have been heard by the courts.
 The laws are applied to Muslims and non-Muslims alike.
 Women are frequently charged under the Hudood laws on sexual misconduct, such
 as adultery. Approximately one-third of the women in Lahore central jail are await-
 ing trial for adultery. Most women tried under the ordinance are acquitted, but the
 stigma of having been jailed for adultery is severe. A Hudood law meant to deter
 false accusations is weakly enforced and one human rights monitor claimed that 80
 percent of all adultery- related Hudood cases are filed without any supporting evi-
 dence. According to Amnesty International, men accused of rape are sometimes ac-
 quitted and released while their victims are held on adultery charges. The Commis-
 sion of Inquiry for Women has recommended that the Hudood laws be repealed, as
 they are based on an erroneous interpretation of Shari'a (see Section 5).
 Prison conditions are poor. Overcrowding is a major problem, and the Law Com-
 mission estimates that almost every jail in the country has three times morepris-
 oners than its nominal capacity. For example, according to the Pakistan Law Com-
 mission's report on jail reform, issued in August, Pakistan's jails have a capacity
 of 34,014 prisoners, but, as of mid-1996, they held 74,483 convicted and "under
 trial" prisoners. In addition, according to a report issued by the Punjab Prisons De-
 partment in June, 52,826 prisoners (including 928 women) were being held in 28
 filities with a capacity of 17,271. The Karachi central jail houses 4,700 prisoners,
 though its capacity is only 1,000. According to press reports, only 391 of these pris-
 oners have been convicted, while the rest are either awaiting trial or pursuing ap-
 peals.
 There are three classes (A, B, and C) of prison facilities. Class "C" cells generally
 hold common criminals and those in pretrial detention. Such cells often have dirt
 floors, no furnishings, and poor food. The use of handcuffs and fetters is common.
 Prisoners in these cells reportedly suffer the most abuse, such as beatings and being
 forced to kneel for long periods. Conditions in "B" and "A" cells are markedly better
 with prisoners in "A" cells permitted to have servants, special food, and televisions.
 The authorities reserve "A cells for prominent persons. Especially prominent indi-
 viduals-including some political figures-are sometimes held under house arrest
 and permitted to receive visitors. The Government announced in September that im-
 prisoned women who are not facing criminal charges have been transferred to "B"
 cells.
 The Government permits prison visits by human rights monitors.
 There were reports that wealthy landlords or political parties operated private
 jails. Many such jails are believed to exist in tribal and feudal areas and one press
 report stated that as many as 50 private jails were being maintained by landlords
 in lower Sindh. Some of the prisoners reportedly have been held in them for many
 years. An investigation by an English-language daily in September uncovered a pri-
 vate torture cell, allegedly run by an assistant sub-inspector (ASI) of police, in which
 victims, none of whom were charged with crimes, were held and tortured in order
 to extort money from them and their families. The ASI and one of his constables
 subsequently were suspended by the Punjab inspector general of police.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The law regulates arrest and detention
 procedures; however, the authorities do not always comply with the law. The law
 permits a Deputy Commissioner (DC) of a local district to order detention without
 charge for 30 days of persons suspected of threatening public order and safety. The
 DC may renew detention in 30-day increments, up to a total of 90 days. Human
 rights monitors report that there have been instances in which prisoners jailed
 under the Maintenance of Public Order Act have been imprisoned for up to 6
 
 
 1677
 months without charge. For other criminal offenses, the police may hold a suspect
 for 24 hours without charge. After the prisoner is produced before a magistrate, the
 court can grant'permission for continued detention for a maximum period of 14 days
 if the police provide material proof that this is necessary for an investigation.
 Police-may arrest individuals on the basis of a FIR filed b a complainant. The
 olice have been known to file FIR's without supporting evidence. FIR's are thus
 frequently used to harass or intimidate individuals. Charges against an individual
 may also be based on a "blind" FIR, which lists the perpetrators as "person or per-
 sons unknown." If the case is not solved, the FIR is placed in the inactive file. When
 needed, a- FIR is reactivated and taken to a magistrate by the police, who then
 name a suspect and ask that the suspect be remanded for 14 days while they inves-
 tigate further. After 14 days, the case is dropped for lack of evidence, but another
 FIR is then activated and brought against the accused. In this manner, rolling
 charges can be used to hold a suspect in continuous custody.
 If the police can provide material proof that detention (physical remand or police
 custody for the purpose of interrogation) is necessary for an investigation, a court
 may extend detention for a total of 14'days. Such proof, however, may be little more
 than unsubstantiated assertions by the police. In practice, the authorities do not
 fully observe the limits on detention. Police are not required to notify anyone when
 an arrest is made and often hold detainees without charge until they are challenged
 by a court. The police s6metimes detain individuals arbitrarily without charge, or
 on false charges, in order to extort payment for-their release. Human rights mon-
 itors report that a number-of police stations have secret detention cells in which in-
 dividuals are kept while the police bargain for a higher price for their release. There
 are also reports that the police move prisoners from one police station to another
 if they suspect a surprise visit by higher authorities. Some women continue to be
 arbitrarily detained and sexually abused (see Section 1.c.). Police also detain rel-
 atives of wanted criminals in order to compel suspects to surrender (see Section
 1.f.). The law stipulates that detainees must be-brought to trial within 30 days of
 their arrest. However, in many cases trials do not start until about 6 months after
 the filing of charges.
 The Government permits visits by human rights monitors and family members
 and lawyers. However, in some cases, authorities refuse family visits and in some
 police stations people are expected to pay bribes in order to visit a prisoner.
 The Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA) have a separate legal system,
 the Frontier Crimes Regulation (FCR), which recognizes the doctrine of collective re-
 sponsibility. Authorities are empowered to detain the fellow members of a fugitive's
 tribe, or to blockade the fugitive's village, pending his surrender or punishment by
 his own tribe in accordance with local tradition. The Government continued to exer-
 cise such authority, repeatedly, during the year. For example, in July in an effort
 to resolve a kidnapping, government authorities in Bajaur Agency detained a 17-
 year-old boy who had no connection to the alleged crime. The boy's father a ppealed
 to the Prime Minister in an effort to obtain the release of his son. In other in-
 stances, in July and August, the Government used this authority in Khyber Agency
 to find "proclaimed offenders" who had sought refuge in this tribal agency. The Gov-
 ernment demolished the houses of several alleged criminals.
 However, in April the Government issued an amendment to the FCR that allows
 residents of the FATA to appeal decrees, sentences, and other acts of the political
 agent. As of September 10, hundreds of appeals of political agents' decisions had
 been lodged.
 The Government sometimes uses mass arrests to quell civil unrest. Sectarian vio-
 lence in the Punjab caused the Government on several occasions to round up hun-
 dreds of members of extremist groups and students at religious schools believed to
 be terrorist recruiting centers and training grounds. Police also arrested demonstra-
 tors, including members of religious minorities and political parties (see Section
 2.b.).
 The Accountability Commission established by the caretaker government and
 headed by a retired judge has been overshadowed by an "accountability cell" headed
 by a close associate of the Prime Minister. This cell has been accused of conducting
 politically-motivated investigations of politicians, senior civil servants, and business
 figures, designed to extract evidence and in some cases, televised confessions of al-
 leged wrongdoers. Some examples of televised confessions included Salman Farooqi,
 Secretary of Commerce under Benazir Bhutto; Ahmed Sadiq, Benazir Bhutto's prin-
 cipal secretary; and Zafar Iqbal, chairman of the Capital Development Authority.
 Most politicians and bureaucrats who have been charged with corruption or other
 crimes are out on bail (in addition to murder, Benazir Bhutto's husband, Asif
 Zardari, has also been charged with corruption). The MQM contends that several
 thousand of its members are still in jail on politically-motivated charges which date
 
 
 1678
 from the 1992-96 period. The Government is supposed to be reviewing the cases of
 these imprisoned individuals (most of whom are awaiting trial) to see if they can
 be released. To date, few of them have been released.
 The Government does not use forced exile.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The Constitution provides for an independent judi-
 ciary, however, in practice, the judiciary is subject to political influence. Nonethe-
 less, during the course of 1996-1997 the judiciary vigorously asserted its authority
 in a number of disputes with the executive branch. The Government's power was
 further enhanced by the constitutional confrontation between the Prime Minister
 and the Chief Justice over the selection of five new justices for the Supreme Court.
 As a result of this struggle over judicial versus executive authority, President
 Leghari resigned in early December, and the Prime Minister's own candidate was
 elected to the presidency on December 31. Also in December, a ten-judge Supreme
 Court panel deprived the Chief Justice of his position and a new Chief Justice was
 sworn in. Some observers fear that this confrontation damaged the prestige and
 independence of the judiciary. Low salaries, inadequate resources, heavy workloads,
 and corruption contribute to judicial inefficiency, particularly in the lower courts.
 The judicial system involves several different court systems with overlapping and
 sometimes competing jurisdictions. There are civil and criminal systems with special
 courts for high-profle cases, as well as the federal Shari'a appeals courts for certain
 Hudood offenses. The appeals process in the civil system is: civil court, district
 court, High Court, and the Supreme Court. In the criminal system, the progression
 is magistrate, sessions court, High Court, and the Supreme Court.
 Special terrorist courts began operation in Punjab in August. These courts, de-
 signed for speedy punishment of terrorist suspects, have special streamlined proce-
 dures. The new Anti-Terrorism Law, under which the courts were established, sanc-
 tions the death penalty for "terrorist acts", which are defined very broadly, that
 cause the death of any person, and jail sentences of 7 years to life for other terrorist
 acts. Acts, including speech, intended to stir up religious hatred are punishable by
 up to 7 years' rigorous imprisonment. Cases are supposed to be decided within 7
 working days, and trials in absentia are permitted. Appeals to an appellate tribunal
 are also required to take no more than 7 days. Bail is not to be granted if the court
 has reasonable grounds to believe the accused is guilty. Those charged with offenses
 committed prior to the date of the act are subject to the special courts, but can only
 receive punishments that were stipulated by laws in force at the time the crime was
 committed. Leading members of the judiciary, human rights groups, the press, and
 politicians from a number of parties expressed strong reservations about the new
 courts, charging that they constitute a parallel judicial system and could be used
 as tools of political repression.
 The anti-terrorist courts are also empowered to try people accused of particularly
 "heinous" crimes, such as gang rape and murders that are not terrorist-related. In
 September, for example, an anti-terrorist court in Faislabad sentenced a man to
 death for killing seven members of his own family. In addition, the Punjab Advocate
 General on September 9 told the Lahore High Court bench that all cases filed under
 Section 295 of the Penal Code (the so-called blasphemy law) would be transferred
 to the special courts. Human rights advocates fear that if this occurs, alleged blas-
 phemers who in the past were normally granted bail or released for lack of evidence
 are likely to be onvicted, given the less stringent rules of evidence required under
 the Anti-Terrorism Act. In Punjab province-where the bulk of the anti-terrorist
 courts are located and where the vast majority of sectarian-related cases are being
 tried-146 sectarian-related cases were referred to the courts, but only 13 have been
 decided. In those 13 cases, two death sentences were handed down, three sentences
 of life imprisonment were given, and there were eight acquittals. A total of 1311
 non-sectarian cases were turned over to the anti-terrorist courts in Punjab, but only
 146 had been decided by year's end. No death sentences have been carried out by
 year's end.
 Following the historic March 1996 judgment of the Supreme Court curtailing pow-
 ers of the executive to appoint and transfer judges of the superior courts, the judici-
 ary has been asserting its authority more aggressively. However, the confrontation
 between the Prime Minister and the Chief Justice which resulted in the removal
 of Sajiad Ali Shah as Chief Justice is widely viewed as a setback to the cause of
 judicial independence.
 In August a commission chaired by Supreme Court Chief Justice Sajiad Ali Shah
 opposed the establishment of "a parallel system" of special anti-terrorist courts. Also
 in August, taking note of ongoing sectarian violence and the Government's failure
 to control it, the Chief Justice summoned administrators and leaders of various Is-
 lamic sects to discuss ways to quell the violence. The judiciary has argued that it
 
 
 1679
 has not been able to try and convict terrorist suspects speedily because of poor po-
 lice casework, prosecutorial negligence, and the resulting lack of evidence.
 The civil judicial system provides for an open trial, presumption of innocence
 cross-examination by an attorney, and appeal of sentences. Attorneys are appointed
 for indigents only in capital cases. There are no jury trials. Due to the limited num-
 ber of judges, the heavy backlog of cases, and lengthy court procedures, cases rou-
 tinely take years although defendants are required to make frequent court appear-
 ances. Under both the H-udood and standard criminal codes, there are bailable and
 nonbailable offenses. According to the Criminal Procedures Code, the accused in
 bailable offenses must be granted bail. The Code also stipulates that those accused
 in nonbailable offenses should be granted bail if the crime of which they are accused
 carries a sentence of less than 10 years.
 The federal Shari'a Court and the Shari'a bench of the Supreme Court serve as
 appeals courts for certain convictions in criminal court under the Hudod Ordi-
 nances. The Federal Shari'a Court also may overturn any legislation judged to be
 inconsistent with the tenets of Islam. However, these cases may be appealed to the
 Shari'a bench of the Supreme Court.
 The judicial process continued to be impeded by bureaucratic infighting, inac-
 tivity, and the overlapping jurisdictions of the different court systems. &ores ofp-
 sitions in both the higher and lower courts remained unfilled. For example, the La-
 hore High Court operates with only 43 judges, though it is entitled to have 50. This
 shortage is partly due to a lack of money: a High Court judge costs the Government
 roughly $2,500 (approximately 100,000 rupees) per month, which includes funds for
 salary, travel allowances, housing, and servants. The politicized appointment proc-
 ess also holds up the promotion of many lower court judges to the higher courts.
 Although the higher level judiciary is considered competent and generally honest,
 there are widespread reports of corruption among lower level magistrates.
 Persons in jail awaiting trial are sometimes held for periods Ionger than the sen-
 tence they would receive if convicted. For example, thelarge backlog in the Rawal-
 pindi bench of the Lahore High Court delays justice for citizens. As of September,
 there were 10,000 cases pending, with only a handful of judges to review them.
 Court officials report that each judge reviews between 70 and 80 cases per day, but
 action is taken on only 3 or 4 each week. The Law Ministry, in reply to a question
 in the National Assembly in late September, reported that there are over 150,000
 cases pending with the superior judiciary, which includes the Supreme Court and
 the four provincial high courts. Clogged lower courts exacerbate the situation; the
 majority of cases in the high courts consist of appeals of lower court rulings. Once
 an appeal reaches the High Court, there are further opportunities for delay because
 decisions of individual judges are frequently referred to panels composed of two or
 three High Court judges.
 The Penal Code incorporates the doctrines of Qisas (roughly, an eye for an eye)
 and Diyat (blood money), with the result that compensation is sometimes paid to
 the family of a victim in place of punishment of the wrongdoer. The right to seek
 pardon or commutation is not available to defendants under these ordinances. The
 Hudood, Qisas, and Diyat ordinances apply to both ordinary criminal courts and
 Shari'a courts. According to Christian activists, if a Muslim murders a non-Muslim,
 he can compensate for the crime by paying the victim's family Diyat; however, if
 a non-Muslim murders a Muslim, he does not have the option of paying Diyat and
 must serve a jail sentence or face the death penalty for his crime. Though not com-
 monly used, these doctrines are occasionally applied, particularly in the NWFP. For
 example, in July a convicted murderer waiting to be hanged in the Mardan district
 jail was freed hours before his scheduled execution. The family of the killer reached
 a compromise with the family of the victim. Besides agreeing to other terms and
 conditions, the murderer's family paid Diyat. However, another person in the same
 case was hanged, as no compromise was reached with the victim's famil es
 Appeals of certain Hudood convictions involving penalties in excess or2 years' im-
 prisonment are referred exclusively to the Shari'a courts and are heard jointly by
 Islamic scholars and High Court judges using ordinary criminal procedures. Judges
 and attorneys must be Muslim and be familiar with Islamic law. Within these lim-
 its, defendants in a Shari'a court are entitled to the lawyer of their choice. There
 is a system of bail.
 The Hudood Ordinances criminalize nonmarital rape, extramarital sex (including
 adultery and fornication), and various gambling, alcohol, and property offenses. Of-
 fenses are distinguished according to punishment, with some offenses iable to Hadd
 (Koranic punishment) and others to Tazir (secular punishment) (see Section 1.c.).
 Although both types of cases are tried in ordinary criminal courts, special rules of
 evidence apply in Hadd cases. For example, a non-Muslim may not testify against
 a Muslim, but may testify against another non-Muslim. Likewise, the testimony of
 
 
 1680
 a woman is not admissible in cases involving Hadd punishments. No Hadd punish-
 ment has ever been applied in the 18 years that the Hudood Ordinances have been
 in force. A woman's testimony regarding financial matters is not admissible unless
 corroborated by another woman (see Section 5).
 There continued to be charges that magistrates and police, under pressure to
 achieve high conviction rates, persuade detainees to plead guilty without informing
 them of the consequences. Politically powerful persons also attempt to influence
 magistrate decisions and have used various forms of pressure on magistrates, in-
 cluding the threat to transfer them to other assignments.
 Administration of justice in the FATA is normally the responsibility of tribal el-
 ders and maliks, or leaders. They may conduct hearings according to Islamic law
 and tribal custom. In such proceedings the accused have no right to legal represen-
 tation, bail, or appeal. The usual penalties consist of fines, even for murder. How-
 ever, the Government's political agents, who are federal civil servants assigned to
 local governments, oversee such proceedings and may impose prison terms of up to
 14 years. Paramilitary forces under the direction of the political agents frequently
 perform punitive actions during enforcement operations. For example, in raids on
 criminal activities, the authorities have been known to damage surrounding homes
 as extrajudicial punishment of residents for having tolerated nearby criminal activ-
 ity.
 On October 30, following the Supreme Court's decision to suspend the 14th Con-
 stitutional Amendment (which prohibits individual members of parliament from "de-
 fecting" to rival political parties after their election), Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif
 accused the Court and, in particular, the Chief Justice of encouraging political
 "horse trading" by removing the ban on changing political allegiances. The Chief
 Justice took the view that this constituted "contempt of court" and Nawaz Sharif
 and others have been on trial since then on this charge. The 14th Amendment re-
 mains suspended pending a Supreme Court decision on the constitutionality of pro-
 visions that may infringe on a parliamentarian's freedom of speech.
 In remote areas outside the jurisdiction of federal political agents, tribal councils
 occasionally levy harsher, unsanctioned punishments, including flogging or death by
 shooting or stoning. In July tribal elders of Mohmand agency banished an individual
 from the agency and razed his dwellings for firing on a tribal lashkar (armed levy).
 In May a politico-religious organization called the Tanzeem Ittihad-I Ulema-I
 Qaba'il (Organization of the Union of the Ulema of the Tribes) (TIUQ), which is
 striving for the implementation of stricter Islamic law in the FATA, publicly flogged
 a man and a teenager for their alleged involvement in homosexua behavior-the
 first Islamic punishment that the TIUQ has carried out since it was banned in 1995.
 On December 2, a couple was publicly executed in the Khyber tribal agency after
 a court set up by the TIUQ found them guilty of incest. The court stated that a
 mother-in-law cannot marry her son-in-law even if she is divorced. The family of the
 convicted couple carried out the sentence by shooting them to death. Since the re-
 vival of the group during the year it also has carried out other punishments, such
 as destroying the homes of alleged thieves.
 Another related form of rough justice operating in the NWFP, particularly in the
 tribal areas, is the concept of Pakhtunwali, or the Pakhtun Tribal Code, in which
 revenge is an important element. Under this Code, a man, his family, and his tribe
 are obligated to take revenge for wrongs-either real or perceived-in order to re-
 deem their honor. More often than not, these disputes arise over women and land,
 and frequently result in violence. For example, in June several jewelers from Pesha-
 war who were suspected of kidnaping tribeswomen from the Khyber agency and set-
 ting them up in a prostitution racket were killed by the women's relatives.
 Most politicians and bureaucrats who have been charged with corruption or other
 crimes are out on bail (in addition to murder, Benazir Bhutto's husband, Asif
 Zardari, has also been charged with corruption). The MQM contends that several
 thousand of its members are still in jail on politically-motivated charges which date
 from the 1992-96 period.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 new Anti-Terrorism Law allows police, or military personnel acting as police, to
 enter and search homes and offices without search warrants, and confiscate prop-
 erty or arms likely to be used in a terrorist act (which is defined very broadly). This
 provision has yet to be tested in the courts. Prior to this, by law the police had to
 obtain a warrant to search a house, but they did not need a warrant to search a
 person. However, even before passage of the Anti-Terrorism Law, the police entered
 homes without a warrant and have been known to steal valuables during searches.
 In the absence of a warrant, a policeman is subject to charges of criminal trespass.
 However, policemen are seldom punished for illegal entry.
 
 
 1681
 The Government maintains several domestic intelligence services that monitor
 politicians, political activists, suspected terrorists, and suspected foreign intelligence
 agents. Credible reports indicate that the authorities commonly resort to wire-
 tapping and occasionally intercept and open mail. In his order dismissing former
 prime minister Bhutto in 1996, President Leghari accused the Government of mas-
 sive illegal wiretapping, including eavesdropping on the telephone conversations of
 judges, political party eaders, and military and civilian officials. In the Supreme
 Court's judgment on the legality of Leghari's dismissal of the Bhutto government,
 which was issued in September, the Supreme Court directed the federal Govern-
 ment to seek the Court's permission before carrying out any future wiretapping or
 eavesdropping operations. Nonetheless, in December a lawyer for a former director
 of the Intelligence Bureau, charged with illegal wiretapping during Benazir Bhutto's
 second term in office, presented the Supreme Court with a list of 12 Government
 agencies which are still tapping and monitoring telephone calls of citizens. The case
 is still pending in the Supreme Court.
 Police sometimes arrest and detain relatives of wanted criminals in an attempt
 to compel suspects to surrender. In some cases, the authorities have detained whole
 families to force a relative who was the subject of an arrest warrant to surrender
 (see Section 1.d.).
 The Frontier Crimes Regulation, the separate legal system in the FATA, permits
 collective responsibility, and empowers the authorities to detain innocent members
 of the suspect's tribe, or blockade an entire village (see Section 1.d.). The Govern-
 ment demolished the houses of several alleged criminals, as well as the homes of
 who allegedly tolerated nearby criminal activity (see Sections 1.d. and i.e.).
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of speech
 and of the press, and citizens are broadly free to discuss public issues. However,
 journalists practice a degree of self-censorship, conforming to prevailing journalistic
 practice and local mores. True investigative journalism is rare; instead the press
 acts freely to publish charges and countercharges by named and unnamed parties
 and individuals representing competing class, political and social interests.
 The Constitution also stipulates the death penalty for anyone who damages the
 Constitution by any act, including the publication of statements against the spirit
 of the Constitution. However, prosecutions under this provision have been rare. The
 Constitution also prohibits the ridicule of Islam, the armed forces, or the judiciary.
 This provision served as grounds in late December for legal charges against the can-
 didacy of Rafiq Tarar, the current President, based on press statements made sev-
 eral years ago that were critical of the judiciary.
 The competitive nature of politics helps to ensure press freedom, since the media
 often serve as a forum for political parties, commercial, religious, and various other
 interests, as well as influential individuals, to compete with and criticize each other
 publicly. Although the press does not criticize Islam as such, leaders of religious
 parties and movements are not exempt from the public scrutiny and criticism rou-
 tinely experienced by their secular counterparts. The press has traditionally avoided
 negative coverage of the armed forces, and the Office of Inter-Services Public Rela-
 tions (ISPR) has served to hold press coverage of military matters under close re-
 straint.
 Officially, the ISPR closely controls and coordinates release of military news and
 access to military sources. Leaks, while not uncommon, are carefully managed: it
 is common knowledge that journalists, routinely underpaid, are on the unofficial
 payrolls of many competing interests, and the military (or elements within it) is pre-
 sumed to be no exception. Rumors of intimidation, heavy-handed surveillance, and
 even legal action to quiet the unduly curious or nondeferential reporter are common.
 During the year this pattern of control and restraint loosened somewhat: early in
 the year-after an election in which corruption in high places was the principal
 issue-the press published charges of corruption and misuse of office against senior
 navy and air force officers and the navy chief was forced to resign. In the summer,
 the deaths of several air force cadets while undergoing training prompted news-
 paper reports of brutal training officers and procedures, and those found responsible
 were held to public account.
 In a case followed closely by the press and human rights groups, journalist
 Humayun Fur, bureau chief of the Urdu daily Mashriq, was arrested by intelligence
 agency operatives on June 28 and imprisoned on charges of "anti-State activities."
 Fur was found guilty by a military court in September and sentenced to 5 years'
 imprisonment. A handout issued by the Defense Ministry stated that the court con-
 victed Fur of espionage for passing sensitive state secrets to personnel from a "for-
 eign diplomatic mission" in Islamabad (two Indian High Commission staff members
 
 
 1682
 
 were expelled in connection with the case in September). Human rights groups ex-
 pressed concern that Fur was tried by a military court and urged that he be retried
 in an open court under civil law. The press reported that Fur was only the second
 journalist in the country's history to be tried by court martial. Fur was released in
 October after the chief of army staff remitted the unserved portion of his sentence
 on humanitarian grounds because of Fur's ill-health.
 Detailed public discussion of the military as an institution is severely hampered
 since any published discussion, let alone criticism, of the defense budget is pro-
 scribed by law. However, late in the year this code of silence was undermined when
 a National Assembly committee, by discussing defense appropriations and corrup-
 tion in defense contracts in an open session, made possible (and legal) newspaper
 coverage of the same issues.
 The Penal Code mandates the death sentence for anyone defiling the name of the
 Prophet Mohammad, life imprisonment for desecrating the Koran, and up to 10
 years in prison for insulting another's religious beliefs (i.e., any religion, not just
 Islam) with intent to outrage religious feelings (see section 2.c.). The new Anti-Ter-
 rorist Act stipulates imprisonment with labor for up to 7 years for using abusive
 or insulting words, or possessing or distributing written or recorded material, with
 intent to stir up sectarian hatred. No warrant is required to seize such material.
 The State no longer publishes daily newspapers; the former Press Trust sold or
 liquidated its string of newspapers and magazines in the early 1990's. The Ministry
 of Information controls and manages the countrs primary wire service-APP, the
 Associated Press of Pakistan. APP is both the Government's own news agency and
 the official carrier of international wire service stories to the local media. The few
 small, privately-owned wire services operating in Pakistan are usually circumspect
 in their coverage of sensitive domestic news and tend to follow a government line.
 A Print, Press, and Publications Ordinance, requiring the registration of printing
 presses and newspapers, was allowed to lapse in 1997 after several years of waning
 application. In practice, registering a new publication is a simple administrative act,
 and is not subject to political or governmental scrutiny.
 Foreign books must pass government censors before being reprinted. Books and
 magazines may be imported freely, but are likewise subject to censorship for objec-
 tionable sexual or religious content.
 Privately-owned newspapers freely discuss public policy and criticize the Govern-
 ment. They report remarks made by opposition politicians, and their editorials re-
 flect a wide spectrum of views. The effort to ensure that newspapers carry their
 statements or press releases sometimes leads to undue pressure by political parties,
 ethnic, sectarian, and religious groups, militant student organizations, and occasion-
 ally commercial interests. Such pressure is a common feature of journalism, and,
 when the group is extreme in its views, can include physical violence, the sacking
 of offices, intimidation or beating of journalists, and interference with the distribu-
 tion of newspapers. For example, the Sindhi daily Awami Awaz has charged a
 Sindhi nationalist party with intercepting deliveries of its publication and two other
 Sindhi dailies in central Sindh province. Journalists working in small provincial
 towns and villages generally can expect more difficulties from arbitrary local au-
 thorities and influential individuals than their big-city counterparts.
 In September journalists protesting against violence directed at the press were
 beaten by police in Karachi, according to newspaper accounts. The police maintained
 that the demonstration was illegal because it violated the ordinance prohibiting
 gatherings of five or more people.
 Zafaryab Abroad, a free-lance Lahore-based journalist, was arrested in 1995 and
 charged with sedition after he reported on child labor. He was accused of working
 with Indian intelligence to damage Pakistan's carpet industry exports through false
 reporting. His case is still pending in the courts. During the year, reporting and
 published debate on child labor became much more common in the print media.
 The broadcast media are government monopolies. The Government owns and op-
 erates the bulk of radio and television stations through its two official broadcast bu-
 reaucracies, the Pakistan Broadcasting Corporation (PBC) and Pakistan Television
 (PTV). Domestic news coverage and public affairs programming on these broadcast
 media is closely controlled by the Government and has traditionally reflected strong-
 ly the views of the party in power. One private radio station, one television broad-
 caster, and a semi-private cable television operation have been licensed under spe-
 cial contractual arrangements with the Government (and these are currently under
 investigation for possible corruption in the form of sweetheart deal-making.) None
 of these stations is permitted to produce news and public affairs programming; the
 V rivate television station rebroadcasts or simulcasts the regular PTV evening news.
 owever, the private Shalimar Television Network (STN) fills the bulk of non-prime
 broadcasting hours with rebroadcasts of Cable News Network or British Broadcast-
 
 
 1683
 ing Corporation feeds. While STN routinely censors those segments considered to be
 socially or sexually offensive, rarely, if ever, are foreign news stories censored for
 content. The Ministry of Information monitors advertising on all broadcast media,
 editing or removing those deemed morally objectionable. Satellite dishes are readily
 available on the local market and are priced within reach of almost everyone with
 a television set-well into the lower-middle classes. South Asian satellite channels
 (usually India-based) have become very important sources of news and information,
 as well as popular entertainment.
 Literary and creative works remain generally free of censorship. Obscene lit-
 erature, a category broadly defined by the Government, is subject to seizure. Dram-
 as and documentaries on previously taboo subjects, including corruption, social
 privilege, narcotics, violence against women, and female inequality, are frequently
 broadcast on television.
 The Government and universities generally respect academic freedom. However,
 the atmosphere of violence and intolerance fostered by student organizations, typi-
 cally tied to political parties, continued to threaten academic freedom, despite the
 fact that a 1992 Supreme Court ruling prohibits student political organizations on
 campuses. On some campuses, well-armed groups of students, primarily from radi-
 cal religious organizations, clash with and intimidate other students, instructors,
 and administrators on matters of language, syllabus, examination policies, grades,
 doctrine, and dress. These groups facilitate cheating on examinations, inter ere in
 the hiring of staff at the campuses, control new admissions, and sometimes control
 the funds of their institutions. At Punjab University, the largest university in the
 province, Islami Jamiat-E-Tulaba (IJT-the student wing of the religious political
 party Jamaat-I-Islami) imposes its self-defined code of conduct on teachers and
 other students.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution provides for
 freedom "to assemble peacefully and without arms subject to any reasonable restric-
 tions imposed by law in the interest of public order." Although the Government gen-
 erally permits peaceful assembly, it occasionally interferes with large rallies, which
 are held by all political parties.
 District magistrates occasionally exercised their power under the Criminal Proce-
 dures Code to ban meetings of more than four people when demonstrations seemed
 likely to result in violence. This provision was invoked frequently in May during the
 Islamic month of Muharram, when tensions between Sunni and Shi'a Muslims tra-
 ditionally peak.
 Christian activists charged that police overreacted in handling marches staged in
 Karachi in February by Christian groups protesting the attack on the village of
 Shantinagar (see Section 2.c.). They maintain that the marchers were peaceful, but
 that police attacked them with batons, resulting in scores of injuries. Over 700 peo-
 ple were arrested, all of whom were released within a few days except for two indi-
 viduals charged with murder, who were released from custody a month later. In
 January, nurses demonstrating against a superintendent at a teaching hospital in
 Peshawar were allegedly beaten by plainclothes policemen. The nurses claimed that
 five of their colleagues were seriously wounded in the attack.
 In September journalists protesting against violence directed at the press were
 beaten by police in Karachi, according to newspaper accounts. The police maintained
 that the demonstration was illegal because it violated the ordinance prohibiting
 gatherings of five or more people.
 The Government did not usually interfere with large political rallies. However,
 the authorities sometimes prevented leaders of politico-religious parties from travel-
 ing to certain areas if they-elieved that the presence of such leaders would increase
 sectarian tensions or cause public violence. In August the Government detained
 Jamaat-I-Islami (JI) chief Qazi Hussain Ahmed to prevent an announced public
 rally of his party in Khyber tribal agency, where there is a government ban on polit-
 ical party rallies and activities. JI activists in Peshawar demonstrated to protest
 their chiefs arrest and police wielding batons charged the rally, arresting 45 party
 workers.
 The Constitution provides for freedom of association subject to restriction by gov-
 ernment ordinance and law. There are no banned groups or parties.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-Pakistan is an Islamic republic in which 96 percent of
 the population are Muslims. The Constitution requires that laws be consistent with
 Islam and imposes some elements of Koranic law on both Muslims and religious mi-
 norities. While there is no law establishing the Koranic death penalty for apostates
 (those who convert from Islam), social pressure against such an action is so powerful
 that most such conversions take place in secret. Reprisals against suspected con-
 verts are common. For example, in July a young woman from Sheikhupura was
 murdered by her brother after allegedly undergoing a Christian baptism.
 
 
 1684
 "Islamiyyat" (Islamic studies) is compulsory for all Muslim students in state-run
 schools. Students of other faiths are not required to study Islam but are not pro-
 vided with parallel studies in their own religion. In practice, many non-Muslim stu-
 dents are compelled by teachers to complete the Islamiyyat studies.
 Minority religious groups fear that Shari'a and its goal of Islamizing the Govern-
 ment and society may further restrict the freedom to practice non-Islamic religions.
 Discriminatory religious legislation has encouraged an atmosphere of religious intol-
 erance, which has led to acts of violence directed against minority Muslim sects, as
 well as against Christians, Hindus, and members of Muslim offshoot sects such as
 Ahmadis and Zikris (see Section 5). However, Prime Minister Sharif has spken out
 in support of the rights of religious minorities, and hosted a Christmas dinner for
 1,200 persons.
 On February 6 and 7, a mob looted and burned the Christian village of
 Shantinagar in Punjab. Local police participated in the attack and are suspected of
 having instigated the riot by inventing a spurious charge that a Christian man had
 desecrated a copy of the Koran. Approximately 20,000 persons were rendered home-
 less. The Central Government took immediate relief action, deploying troops briefly
 to restore order, and the Prime Minister visitthe he village. The Government has
 made serious efforts to rebuild damaged and destroyed homes, but has not provided
 compensation for personal property lost in the incident. The villagers remain fearful
 of further attacks, and the police officers believed to be responsible for the riot,
 though transferred and briefly suspended, have not faced crimnal sanctions. Mean-
 while, the 86 people who were charged with offenses related to the attack were all
 released on bail and there was no indication that authorities planned to bring them
 to trial.
 A 1974 constitutional amendment declared Ahmadis to be a non-Muslim minority
 because they do not accept Mohammed as the last prophet of Islam. However,
 Ahmadis regard themselves as Muslims and observe many Islamic practices. In
 1984 the Government inserted Section 298(c) into the Penal Code, prohibiting an
 Ahmadi from calling himself a Muslim and banning Ahmadis from using Islamic
 terminology. The punishment is up to 3 years' imprisonment and a fine. Since that
 time, the Government and some religious groups have used this provision to harass
 Ahmadis (see Section 5).
 Section 295(a), the blasphemy provision of the Penal Code, originally stipulated
 a maximum 2-year sentence for insulting the religion of any class of citizens. This
 senence was increased to 10 years in 1991. In 1982 Section 295(b) was added,
 which stipulated a sentence of life imprisonment for whever willfully defies, dam-
 ages, or desecrates a copy of the holy Koran." In 1986 another amendment, 295(c),
 established the death penalty or life imprisonment for directly or indirectly defiling
 "the sacred name of t       s Hoy Pro phet Mohammad." In 1991 a court struck down
 the option of life imprisonment. These laws, especially Section 295(c), have been
 used by rivals and authorities to threaten, punish, or intimidate Ahmadis, Chris-
 tians, and even orthodox Muslims. Since 1996 magistrates are now required to in-
 vestigate allegations of blasphemy to see whether they are credible before filing for-
 mal charges.
 Three Ahmadis were convicted of blasphemy in December. Abdul Qadeer, Muham-
 mad Shahbaz, and Ishfaq Ahmoad were found guilty of violating Section 295(c) and
 sentenced to life imprisonment and a 50,000 rupee fines. Lawyers for the men are
 appealing their cases at beth the High and Supreme Court levels; in the meantime,
 the men are serving their sentences in the Sheikhupura jail. Meanwhile, a number
 of persons are in jails awaiting trial on charges of violating them. Among the blas-
 phemy cases opened through August was one brought against a Muslim religious
 scholar, Muhammad Yusuf Al, who was charged under Section 295(c) He has en
 jaled in a class C cell since March. Due to threats, hs wife had to resign her job
 as a professor and go into hiding with their children. In January five Christians
 were detained by   ice or  weeks because they supposedly signed a letter that
 blasphemed the Prophet Mohammed and threatened to blow up a mosque. The five,
 all poor and reportedly illiterate, were eventually found innocent and released. The
 cases of Christia ns Anwar Masih (jailed for the past 4 years) and Ayub Masih (de-
 tained since October 1996), both of whom are charged under Section 295(c), remain
 pending in the courts. Christian activists allege that on November 6, someone fired
 a shot at Ayub outside the court. The police allege that the sound of gunfire was
 caused by a firecracker and have closed the investigation of the incident. According
 to Ahmadi activists, during the year 32 Ahmadis were charged with violating the
 blasphemy laws and sections of the Pakistan Penal Code that were Ahmadi-specific.
 Asmadi leaders state that of 156 Ahmadis awaiting trial on various charges related
 to their religious beliefs, as of December 151 were free on bail. Four of the five who
 were in prison as of December-Riaz Ahmed, Bashir Ahmed, Qamar Ahmed, and
 
 
 1685
 Mushtaq Ahmed-were released from prison after their application for bail was ap-
 proved by the Supreme Court.
 Ahmadis continue to suffer from a variety of problems, including violation of their
 places of worship, being barred from burial in Muslim graveyards, denial of freedom
 of faith, speech, and assembly, restrictions on their press, a social boycott, and al-
 leged official supprt of extremist elements who act against the Ahmadi community
 (see Section 5). Several Ahmadi mosques remained closed. In January extremist re-
 ligious agtation forced the caretaker Government to hack down from a decision to
 replace the term "non-Muslim" with "Ahmadi" under the category of religion on
 passports.
 In the Punjab, a deadly pattern of Sunni-Shi'a violence has emerged in which ter-
 rorists murder people who are targeted because of their membership in rival sects.
 Attacks on places of worship occur frequently and have created a climate of fear
 among those who attend public prayer services (see Section 5).
 When religious cases are brought to court, extremists often pack the courtroom
 and make public threats about the consequences of an acquittal. As a result, judges
 and magistrates, seeking to avoid a confrontation with the extremists, often con-
 tinue trials indefinitely, and the accused is burdened with further legal costs and
 repeated court appearances. Prior to his murder in October, Lahore High Court jus-
 tice Arif Iqbal Hussain Bhatti, one of the two judges who in 1995 ruled to acquit
 accused Christian blasphemers Salamat and Rehmat Masih, received several death
 threats from Islamic extremist groups. Bhatti's killer had not been arrested by
 year's end.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-Most citizens enjoy freedom of movement within the country and to
 travel abroad. However, the authorities at times prevented political party leaders
 from traveling to certain areas of the country (see Section 2.b.). Travel to Israel is
 legally prohibited. Government employees must obtain "no objection certificates" be-
 fore traveling abroad. Students are also required to have these certificates from
 their institutions, though this requirement is rarely enforced. Citizens regularly ex-
 ercise the right to emigrate. However, an exit control list (ECL), which is constantly
 being revise, is used to prevent the departure of wanted criminals and individuals
 under investigation for defaulting on lqans, corruption, or other offenses. An esti-
 mated 3,000 to 4,000 individuals are on the ECL. No judicial action is required to
 ,add a name to the ECL, and there is no, judicial recourse or formal appeal mecha-
 nism if one's name is added. However, in some cases courts have directed the Gov-
 ernment to lift restrictions on some ECL-listed politicians' travel abroad.
 While use of the ECL authority to harass political opponents has abated, opposi-
 tion members charge that they are still singled out. PPP leader Benazir Bhutto was
 briefly detained at Karachi airport on her way to London in July. In August another
 PPP leader, Munir Ahmed Khan, was removed from a New York-bound flight at the
 Lahore airport. Khan claimed that the Government wanted to prevent him from
 traveling for fear that he was planning to arrange antigovernment demonstrations
 during the Prime Minister's travel abroad. After filing a petition at the Lahore High
 Court, justice Faqir Muhammad Khokhar ordered that the petitioner be allowed to
 leave the country after depositing a 500,000 rupee bond.
 The Government cooperates with the office of the United Nations High Commis-
 sioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and other humanitarian organizations in assisting ref-
 ugees. First asylum has been provided to refugees from Afghanistan since 1979,
 when several million Afghans fleeing Soviet occupation poured across the border
 into Pakistan. There are still believed to be more than 1 million Afghan refugees
 in Pakistan who have been granted first asylum.
 The Government has not legally granted permanent resettlement to Afghan refu-
 gees but allows them to live and work in Pakistan. Many are self-supporting and
 live outside of refugee camps, which has resulted in some hostility among local com-
 munities, whose residents believe that Afghans take job opportunities from them.
 According to the UNHCR, there were no reports of forced return of persons to a
 count   where they feared persecution. The Government is cooperating with the
 UNHR in an effort to encourage repatriation of Afghans to rural areas of Afghan-
 stan considered to be safe. Surveys have been conducted in the camps and over
 15,000 families have registered for repatriation. Since January 85,000 persons have
 returned to Afghanistan. Since 1988, over 2.5 million Afghans have been repatri-
 ated.
 Afghan refugees have limited access to legal protection and depend on the ability
 of the UNHCR and leaders of their groups to resolve disputes among themselves
 and with elements of Pakistani society. Police also frequently prevent Afghan na-
 tionals from entering the cities. Most able-bodied male refugees have found at least
 intermittent employment but are not covered by labor laws. Women and girls ob-
 
 
 1686
 tained increasingly better education and health care than is available in Afghani-
 stan, as NGO's provided increased services. However, Afghan women working for
 NGO's have occasionally been targets for harassment anviolence by conservative
 elements in the camps.
 The resettlement of Biharis continued to be a contentious issue. The Biharis are
 Urdu-speaking people from the Indian state of Bihar who went to East Pakistan-
 now Bangladesh-at the time of partition in 1947. When Bangladesh became inde-
 pendent from Pakistan in 1971, the Biharis indicated a preference for resettlement
 in Pakistan. Since that time, ap roximately 250,000 Biharis have been in refugee
 camps in Bangladesh. While the Mohajir community-descendants of Muslims who
 emigrated to present-day Pakistan from India during partition-supports resettle-
 ment, the Sindhi community opposes the move. In 1993 the Government flew 342
 Biharis to Pakistan and placed them in temporary housing in central Punjab. No
 further resettlement has occurred.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens have the right and the ability to change their government peacefully.
 With certain exceptions, citizens 21 years of age and over have the right to vote.
 However, several million bonded laborers and nomads may not vote because the na-
 tional election commission has ruled that they do not "ordinarily reside in an elec-
 toral area, nor do they own or possess a dwelling or immovable property in that
 area." Political parties have been allowed to operate freely since the full lifting of
 martial law in 1988. Unregistered political parties are permitted to participate in
 elections. members of the national and provincial assemblies are directly elected.
 The Constitution requires that the President and Prime Minister be Muslims.
 Under the electoral system, minorities vote for reserved at-large seats, not for
 non-minority candidates who represent actual constituencies. Because of this, local
 parliamentary representatives have little incentive to promote their minority con-
 stituents' interests. In the National Assembly (NA), Christians hold four reserved
 seats, Hindus and members of scheduled castes another four, Ahmadis one, Sikhs,
 Buddhists, Parsis, and other non-Muslims one. Each of the four categories is main-
 tained on a separate electoral roll, and minorities cannot cast votes for the Muslim
 constituency seats. Also, under article 106 of the Constitution, seats in the provin-
 cial assemblies are reserved for minorities. Population estimates are out-of-date be-
 cause there has not been a census since 1981, but the election commission of the
 1997 general election report states that each Christian NA member represents
 327,606 people; each Hindu and scheduled castes NA member, 319,029; the Sikh,
 Buddhist, Parsi and other non-Muslim member, 112,801; and the Ahmadi member
 104,244. These figures significantly understate the population of most of the minor-
 ity groups.
 National elections for national and provincial assemblies were held on February
 3. Election observers, including teams from the Human Rights Commission of Paki-
 stan (HRCP), and groups representing the European Union, the Commonwealth of
 Nations, and the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation, concluded that
 the elections were generally "free and fair" with no evidence of systemic or wide-
 spread abuse of the electoral process.
 Elections for local government bodies have not been held since 1993, when these
 bodies were dissolved by the caretaker government because of charges of corruption.
 The Government intends to hold elections for local government bodies subsequent
 to a national census, which is scheduled to take place in March 1998. Meanwhile,
 appointed bureaucrats continue to administer local government.
 Due to a December 1996 decision by President Leghari and the caretaker govern-
 ment, the February 3 elections for the eight national assembly members from the
 FATA were for the first time conducted on the basis of universal adult franchise.
 Prior to 1997, in keeping with local traditions, tribal leaders, or maliks, appointed
 in the governor's name by the central Government's political agents in each agency,
 elected the FATA National Assembly members. In accordance with the Govern-
 ment's general ban on political party activities in the FATA, candidates were not
 allowed to register by political party and political party rallies were not allowed in
 this first universal franchise election in the tribal areas. However, several political
 parties did covertly campaign for their candidates. Tribal people, including large
 numbers of women in some of the tribal agencies, registered to vote, despite cam-
 paigns by some tribes against female participation in the elections. However, on
 election day, far fewer registered women in proportion to registered men actually
 voted, as tribal traditions against public roles for women reasserted themselves.
 Because of a longstanding territorial dispute with India, the political status of the
 northern areas-Iunza, Gilgit, and Baltistan-is not resolved. As a result, more
 
 
 1687
 
 than 1 million inhabitants of the northern areas are not covered under any constitu-
 tion and have no representation in the federal legislature. The area is administered
 by an appointed civil servant. While there is an elected Northern Areas Council, this
 body serves in an advisory capacity to the federal Government and has no authority
 to change laws or raise and spend revenue.
 Although women participate in government, they are underrepresented in political
 life at all levels. Six women hold seats in the 217-member National Assembly, up
 from 4 seats in the previous parliament. Thirty-five women, more than ever before,
 contested seats in the February national elections. The Parliamentary Commission
 on the Status of Women in Pakistan recommended reserving one-third of seats in
 all elected bodies for women. While women participate in large numbers in elections
 some women are dissuaded from voting in elections by family, religious, and social
 customs in rural areas. According to the Parliamentary Commission, women in some
 tribal areas were intimidated into not voting during the February elections. An-
 nouncements were made on mosque loudspeakers that voting by women was un-Is-
 lamic and women going to polling stations risked having their houses burned down.
 As a result no more than 37 women out of 6,600 registered to vote actually cast
 ballots in Jamrud, in the Khyber Agency. A national census has not been held since
 1981, despite the requirement that one be conducted every 10 years. A census has
 been repeatedly postponed due to pressure from ethnic groups and provincial rival-
 ries. Everyone agrees that the country's population has grown considerably in the
 past 17 years, and that millions of people have moved from the countryside into the
 cities. The new census figures would presumably reflect these shifts and serve as
 the basis for determining political representation and also for allocating funds to the
 various provinces from the federal treasury. Thus, those favored by the status quo
 have resisted holding a new census.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 There are several domestic human rights organizations, and new human rights
 and legal aid groups continue to form. These gups are generally free to operate
 without government restriction. The Government has provided protection to human
 rights lawyers defending accused blasphemers following threats and attacks on the
 lawyers by religious activists.
 International human rights organizations have been permitted to visit Pakistan
 and travel freely.
 The Ministry of Human Rights, established in November 1995, is now a cell with-
 in the Ministry of Law, Justice, Human Rights, and Parliamentary Affairs. The cell
 is staffed by roughly 100 employees, most of whom are based at the cell's head-
 quarters in Islamabad. To date, the cell has set up a "women in distress" fund and
 put together a jail reform package, in addition to dealing with individual human
 rights cases, particularly those involving rape and bonded labor. Because of limited
 budget and staff, the cell operates primarily on a case-by-case basis. It is not viewed
 as very effective by human right observers.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution provides for equality before the law for all citizens and broadly
 prohibits discrimination based on race, religion, caste, residence, or place of birth.
 In practice, however, there is significant discrimination based on these factors.
 Women.-Domestic violence is a widespread and serious problem. Human rights
 groups estimate that anywhere from 80 to 90 percent of women are victims of do-
 mestic violence. The Parliamentary Commission of Inquiry for Women reported that
 violence against women "has been described as the most pervasive violation of
 human rights" in Pakistan, and it called for legislation clearly stating that domestic
 violence against women is a criminal offense. While abusive spouses may be charged
 with assault, cases are rarely filed. Police usually return battered wives to their
 abusive husbands. Women are reluctant to file charges because of societal mores
 that stigmatize divorce and make women economically and psychologically depend-
 ent on their husbands and male relatives. Relatives are also reluctant to report
 cases of abuse in order to protect the reputation of the family.
 In 1997 there were hundreds of incidents involving violence against women re-
 ported in the press. For example, almost 300 cases of wife-beating were reported as
 of September in Islamabad and Rawalpindi alone, and human rights groups say
 that these figures are derived primarily from cases reported by middle- and upper-
 class women. The press continued to draw attention to murders of married women
 by relatives over dowry or other family-related disputes. Most of the victims are
 burned to death, allegedly in kitchen stove accidents. A study of 145 "stove deaths"
 
 
 1688
 covering the period from January to July found that almost all the fires were delib-
 erately set. According to the Commission of Inquiry for Women, newspapers from
 Lahore reported an average of 15 cases a month during a 6-month period in 1997;
 most of the victims were young married women. The Commission noted that many
 cases are not reported by hospitals and, even when they are, the police are reluctant
 to investigate or file charges.Xuman rights monitors agree that most "stove deaths"
 are in fact murders based upn a suspicion of illicit sexual relationship or on dowry
 demands. Increased media coverage of cases of wife burnings, spousal abuse, spous-
 al murder, and rape has helped to raise awareness about violence against women.
 -Several daily newspapers in Islamabad and Rawalpindi ran frontpage stories on
 September 27- on the case of a woman from a village near the town of Gujar Khan
 who was mutilated by her husband because he suspected her of adultery. Nusrat
 Perveen told the press that her husband was actually enraged over the- fact that
 she complained to her mother-in-law over his mistreatment of her, and that he cut
 off her nose and hair in retaliation. The victim stated that her relatives refused to
 help her after the incident, and local police pressured her into signing a statement
 absolving her husband of the crime.
 A crisis center for women in distress was opened in late October in Islamabad.
 The center, the first of its kind in Pakistan, is an initiative of the Ministry of Wom-
 en's Development with the assistance of local NGO's. The center offers legal and
 medical referrals from volunteer doctors and lawyers, counseling from trained psy-
 chologists, and a hotline for women in distress. The center was opened before fund-
 ing had been allocated and staff hired. For its first 21/2 months of business the cen-
 ter relied on volunteer staff and received only 15 walk-in cases. A second shelter
 was opened in late in the year in Vehari, a town in southern Punjab.
 Rape is a widespread problem. In April the National Assembly in April passed
 a law providing for the death penalty or persons convicted of gang rape. The first
 conviction under this new law took place in July in Mardan, where two defendants
 were sentenced to death. Nevertheless, it is estimated that less than one-third of
 all rapes are reported to the police. The-police themselves are frequently charged
 with raping women. In July, a woman in Rawalpindi was alleged rapedby three
 policemen, while her companion was beaten and robbed (see Section Lc.). According
 to a police official, in a majority of rape cases the victims are pressured to drop rape
 charges because of the threat of Hudood adultery charges being brought against
 them. All consensual extramarital sexual relations are considered violations of the
 Hudood ordinances. However, according to an HRCP lawyer, the Government has
 brought fewer charges against women under the Hudood ordinances than in the
 past, and the courts have shown greater leniency toward women in their sentences
 and in the granting of bail. In Hudood cases, a female or non-Muslim witness is not
 accepted. This means that if a man rapes a woman in the presence of several
 women, he cannot be convicted under the Hudood ordinances ecause female wit-
 nesses are not accepted. Similarly, if a Muslim man rapes a Christian woman in
 the presence of several Christian men and women, he cannot be convicted under
 Hudood ordinances because non-Muslim witnesses are not accepted.
 The Parliamentary Commission of Inquiry for Women criticized the Hudood ordi-
 nances and recommended that they be repealed. The Commission charged that the
 laws on adultery and rape have been subject to widespread misuse, with 95 percent
 of the women accused of adultery being found innocent either in the court of first
 instance or on appeal. However, by that time, the Commission pointed out, the
 woman may have spent months in jail, suffering sexual abuse at the hands of the
 police and the destruction of her reputation. The Commission found that the main
 victims of the Hudood laws are poor women who are unable to defend themselves
 against slanderous charges. The laws have also been used by husbands and other
 male family members to punish their wives and female relatives for reasons having
 nothing to do with sexual propriety, according to the Commission.
 Marital rape is not a crime. The 1979 Hudood ordinances abolished punishment
 for raping one's wife. The Commission of Inquiry for Women has, however, rec-
 ommended reinstating penalties for marital rape. Marriage registration (nikah)
 sometimes occurs years before the marriage is consummated (rukh sati'). The
 "nikah" (non-consummated) marriage is regarded as a formal marital relationship.
 In one 1996 case, a 13-year-old girl, whose nikah had been performed but rukhsati
 had not taken place, decided to divorce her husband. The husband kidnaped the
 girl, raped her, and then released her. The police refused to register a rape case ar-
 guing t at they were a married couple.
 There are numerous reports of women killed or mutilated by male relatives who
 suspect them of adultery. Few such cases are investigated seriously and those who
 are arrested are often acquitted on the grounds that they were "provoked," or for
 a lack of witnesses. Scores of men and women from Balochistan and rural areas of
 
 
 1689
 Sindh and Punjab provinces are killed annually for alleged illicit sexual relations
 in so-called "honor' killings. While the tradition of such killing applies equally to
 offending men and women, women are more likely to be killed than men. In one
 incident in March, seven people, including five policemen, were killed near Larkana
 in Sindh. A reporter who covered the story said that the trouble stemmed from pro-
 longed enmity between two factions of a clan over an "honor" murder. The Commis-
 sion of Inquiry for Women rejected the whole concept of "honor" as a mitigating cir-
 cumstance in a murder case and recommended that such killings be treated as sim-
 ple murder.
 The Commission also drew attention to the problem of "enforced prostitution and
 trafficking in women," noting that women are the victims of exploitation by police
 and pimps, and should be treated with compassion. Most of the women in question
 are brought in from Bangladesh, usually under the false pretense of working in le-
 gitimate jobs in Pakistan. It is mostly a problem in Sindh province and includes
 Bangladeshi, Burmese, Sri Lankan, Indian, and Afghani women.
 There are significant barriers to the advancement of women, beginning at birth.
 In general, female children are less valued and cared for than male children. Ac-
 cording to a United Nations study, girls receive less nourishment, health care, and
 education than boys. According to a 1996 report by the Islamabad-based Human De-
 velopment Center, only 16 women are economically active for every 100 men. Some
 progress has been made over the past several years in getting more females into
 school. A recent survey found that the enrollment rate for girls under age 12 was
 65 percent, less than that of boys (75 percent), but considerably higher than the
 1990 figure of 50 percent. Similarly, the female literacy rate has doubled during the
 past two decades, although, at roughly 27 percent, it is just over half that of males.
 Discrimination against women is particularly acute in rural areas. In some areas
 of rural Sindh and Balochistan, female literacy rates are 2 percent or less. A survey
 of rural females by the National Institute of Psychology found that 42 percent of
 parents cited "no financial benefit" as the primary reason they tended to send their
 sons rather than their daughters to school. Similarly, a study by the NWFP Direc-
 torate of Primary Education discovered that most girls in rural areas do not go to
 school because they have to look after the household while their mothers help their
 fathers in the fields.
 Human rights monitors and women's groups believe that Shari'a has had a harm-
 ful effect on the rights of women and minorities, reinforcing popular attitudes and
 perceptions, and contributing to an atmosphere in which discriminatory treatment
 of women and non-Muslims is more readily accepted.
 Both civil and religious laws theoretically protect women's rights in cases of di-
 vorce, but many women are unaware of them, and often the laws are not observed.
 The Parliamentary Commission of Inquiry for Women recommended that marriage
 registration (nikahnama) be made mandatory and that women, as well as men, have
 the right to initiate divorce proceedings. It also called for the punishment of those
 who coerce women or girls into forced marriages. There is no concept of alimony.
 A husband is legally bound to maintain his wife until 3 months after the divorce.
 A father is bound to maintain his children until they reach the age of 14 for males,
 or, if they are females, 16 years old. However, the legal system is so complicated
 and lengthy that is can take years for the children to get maintenance.
 In inheritance cases women generally do not receive-or are pressed to surren-
 der-their due share of the inheritance. In rural areas, the practice of a woman
 "marrying the Koran" is still widely accepted if the family cannot arrange a suitable
 marriage or wants to keep the family wealth intact. A woman "married to the
 Koran is forbidden to have any contact with males over 14 years of age, including
 her immediate family members. Press reports indicate that the practice of buying
 and selling brides still takes place in parts of NWFP and the Punjab.
 In a case that was followed closely both in Pakistan and abroad, a special three-
 member bench of the Lahore High Court on March 10 upheld the Federal Shari'a
 Court's ruling that a Muslim woman can marry without the consent of her wali
 (guardian), which in turn takes away the wali's right to grant such consent on be-
 half of the woman without her approval. This decision in the so-called "Saima" case
 overruled a 1996 decision by a Lahore High Court judge that a woman's marriage
 without the consent of her parents or guardian was invalid.
 There are limits on the admissibility and value of women's testimony in court (see
 Section i.e.).
 Although a small number of women study and teach in universities, postgraduate
 employment opportunities remain largely limited to teaching, medical services, and
 the law. Nevertheless, an increasing number of women are entering the commercial
 and public sectors.
 
 
 1690
 According to the Ministry of Health, the Government through 1996 had trained
 and deployed around 37,000 female rural health workers. The Government has
 scrapped its previous goal of having 100,000 female health workers by 1998 because
 it says it wants to improve the quality of those it has selected.
 Women's organizations operate primarily in urban centers. Many concentrate on
 educating women about existing legal rights. Other groups concentrate on providing
 legal aid to poor women in prison who may not be able to afford an attorney.
 Children.-There is no federal law on compulsory education, and neither the fed-
 eral or provincial governments provide sufficient resources to assure universal edu-
 cation. Pakistan's education system is in disarray, with studies showing that only
 70 percent of children under the age of 12 are enrolled in school, less than half of
 whom actually complete primary school. Even those children who make it to the
 fifth grade are not assured of being able to read and write. According to UNICEF
 figures, a nationwide sample of children in grade five revealed that only 33 percent
 could read with comprehension, while a mere 17 percent were able to write a simple
 letter. Development experts point to a number of factors for the poor state of public
 education, including the low percentage of gross national product devoted to edu-
 cation, and inefficient and corrupt federal and provincial bureaucracies. One mem-
 ber of the Prime Minister's education task force estimated that up to 50 percent of
 the education budget is "pilfered."
 Government provision of health care for children is somewhat better-especially
 with the program to deploy rural health workers-but health care services in most
 areas remain seriously inadequate. Many children begin working at a very early age
 (see Section 6.d.). At the age of 5 or 6, female children are often responsible or
 younger siblings.
 Children are sometimes kidnaped to be used as forced labor, for ransom, or to
 seek revenge against an enemy (see Sections 6.c. and 6.d.). In rural areas, it is a
 -traditional practice for poor parents to give their children to rich landlords in ex-
 change for money or land, according to human rights advocates. These children are
 frequently abused by their owners. Incidents of rape and murder of minor teenage
 children are common. A 1996 survey conducted in Punjab showed that 40 percent
 of reported rape victims were minors, with the youngest victim in the study only
 8 years old. A UNICEF-sponsored study of Punjab found that 15 percent of girls re-
 ported having been sexually abused. Child prostitution involving boys and girls is
 widely known to exist but is rarely discussed. The NGO Shabab-I-Milli launched a
 campaign to combat child prostitution by raising public awareness about the prob-
 le. The Commission of Inquiry for Women observed that child sexual abuse is a
 subject that "has been virtually ignored in Pakistan," and called for a public edu-
 -cation campaign on the subject, including introducing it into school curriculums and
 training nurses and doctors in how to handle such cases.
 Legal rights for children are theoretically protected by numerous laws that incor-
 porate elements of the U.N. Convention on the Rights of the Child. However, the
 Government frequently fails to enforce these laws. There are two facilities-one in
 Karachi and one in Multan-that serve are reform schools for juvenile offenders.
 There is only one jail in each province for convicted prisoners under 21 years of age.
 Although Punjab and Sindh provinces have laws mandating special judicial proce-
 dures for child offenders, in practice, children and adults are essentially treated
 equally. Human rights advocates estimate that roughly 3,500 minors, ages 9 to 21
 years, are imprisoned in jails throughout the country.
 According to press reports, there are several madrassahs (religious schools) where
 children are illegally confined and kept in unhealthy conditions. One investigative
 report, in an English-language daily, detailed the death of a 9-year-old boy who was
 killed on September 23 while escaping from a madrassah near the Punjabi city of
 Multan. The boy reportedly was kept in chains at the madrassah and, while at-
 tempting to cut the chains on a railroad track, was struck and killed by a train.
 The Human Rights Commission of Pakistan filed an appeal with a local court for
 an investigation of the incident, as well as a cancellation of the madrassah's reg-
 istration. As of December, the courts had not acted on the case.
 People With Disabilities.-There are no laws requiring equal accessibility to public
 buildings for disabled persons. The vast majority of mentally ill and mentally re-
 tarded individuals are taken care of by their families. There is a legal provision re-
 quiring organizations to reserve at least 1 percent of their work forces for qualified
 disabled persons. Organizations that do not wish to hire disabled persons can in-
 stead give a certain amount of money to the Government treasury, which goes into
 a fund for the disabled.
 Religious Minorities.-Government authorities afford religious minorities less
 legal protection than is afforded to Muslim citizens. Members of religious minorities
 
 
 1691
 are subject to violence and harassment, and police at times refuse to prevent such
 actions or to charge those who commit them.
 Ahmadis are often targets of religious intolerance, much of it instigated by local
 religious leaders. For example, the chief mullah of the central mosque of Pattoki dis-
 tributed a handbill in which he declared that all Ahmadis, as apostates, should be
 killed under Shari'a, but that, regretfully, the law had not been applied. Ahmadi
 leaders charge that militant Sunni mullahs and their followers stage frequent
 marches through the streets of the Ahmadi capital of Rabwah in central Punjab.
 Backed by mobs of 100 to 200 people, the mullahs purportedly stride down the
 streets uttering diatribes against Ahmadis and their founder, a situation that often
 leads to violence. Police are generally on hand during these marches, the Ahmadis
 claim, but as a rule do not intervene to prevent trouble. A number of Ahmadis were
 seriously injured in attacks by religious extremists, and Ahmadi leaders attribute
 three murders of their group during the year to anti-Ahmadi zealots. All three of
 the victims had received numerous threatening letters prior to their murders.
 Ahmadis suffer from harassment (see Section 2.c.) and discrimination and have
 limited chances for advancement into management levels in government service.
 Even the rumor that someone may be an Ahmadi or have Ahmadi relatives can sti-
 fle opportunities for employment or promotion. Ahmadi students are subject to
 abuse by their non-Ahmadi classmates, and the quality of teachers assigned to the
 schools by the Government is poor. Young Ahmadis and their parents also complain
 of difficulty in gaining admittance to good colleges, forcing many children to go
 abroad for higher education. Certain sections of the Penal Code have also caused
 problems for the group (see Section 2.c.), particularly the provision that forbids
 Ahmadis from "directly or indirectly" posing as Muslims. Armed with this vague
 wording, mullahs have brought charges against Ahmadis for using the standard
 Muslim greeting form and naming their children Mohammad.
 Other religious minority groups also experience considerable discrimination in em-
 ployment and education. In Pakistan's early years, minorities were able to rise to
 the senior ranks of the military and civil service. Today, many are unable to rise
 above mid-level ranks. Discrimination in employment is believed to be common.
 Christians in particular have difficulty finding jobs other than those of menial labor,
 although Christian activists say that the employment situation has improved some-
 what in the private sector. Christians find themselves disproportionately overrepre-
 sented in Pakistan's most oppressed social group-that of bnded laborers. Like
 Ahmadis, many Christians complain about the difficulty that their children have in
 gaining admission to government schools and colleges, a problem they attribute to
 iscrimination. Many Christians continue to express fear of forced, marriages be-
 tween Muslim males and Christian women, although the practice is relatively rare.
 Reprisals against suspected converts to Christianity are common, and a general at-
 mosphere of religious intolerance has led to acts of violence against religious minori-
 ties (see Section 2.c.). There are also restrictions on testimony in court by non-Mus-
 lims (see Section i.e.).
 During the year, large-scale sectarian violence in the Punjab between Shi'a and
 Sunni extremist groups claimed the lives of 195 people, including professionals, bu-
 reaucrats, and religious scholars who were specifically targeted. Indiscriminate
 shootings at mosques led to fear of general religious unrest. However, the public at
 large generally suported government actions to stem terrorism. Press reports state
 that over 220 people were killed nationwide in sectarian violence during the year.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The Industrial Relations Ordinance of 1969 (IRO)
 provides for the right of industrial workers to form trade unions but is subject to
 major restrictions in some employment areas. The Essential Services Maintenance
 Act of 1952 (ESA) covers sectors associated with the state administration, i.e., gov-
 ernment services and state enterprises, such as oil and gas production, electricity
 generation and transmission, the state-owned airline, and ports. Workers in these
 sectors are allowed to form unions. However, the ESA sharply restricts normal
 union activities, usually prohibiting, for example, the right to strike in affected orga-
 nizations. The ESA also exempts export promotion zones (EPZ's) from the IRO's pro-
 vision granting workers the right to form trade unions.
 Union members make up only about 10 percent of the industrial labor force and
 3 percent of the total estimated work force. Contract labor continues to flourish, un-
 dercutting the power of the unions and exploiting workers willing to work on tem-
 prary contracts. These workers receive fewer benefits and have no job security.
 ere is no provision in the law granting the right of association to agricultural
 workers.
 
 
 1692
 Legally required conciliation proceedings and cooling-off periods constrain the
 right to strike, as does the Government's authority to ban any strike that may cause
 "serious hardship to the community" or prejudice the national interest. The Govern-
 ment may also ban a strike that has continued for 30 days.
 Strikes are rare. When they occur, they are usually illegal and short. The Govern-
 ment regards as illegal any strike conducted by workers who are not members of
 a legally registered union. Police do not hesitate to crack down on worker dem-
 onstrations. The law prohibits employers from seeking retribution against leaders
 of a legal strike and stipulates criminal penalties for offenders. The courts may im-
 prison employers for violating this prohibition, but they are more likely to fine
 them. The law does not protect leaders of illegal strikes.
 Unions may belong to federations, and there are seven major federations. The
 Government permits trade unions all across the political spectrum. While many
 unions remain aloof from party politics, the most powerful are those associated with
 political parties. After the PPP came to power n 1988, it successfully oranized
 trade unions under the banner of the Peoples' Labor Bureau (PLB). The PLBs main
 competitors are the Jamaat-I-Islami's National Labor Federation and the MQM-
 backed labor unions.
 In May the Cabinet passed an amendment to the IRO which states that: 1) only
 employees of the represented industry can hold office in a trade union; and, 2) if
 trade unions form a federation, the federation cannot bargain with individual em-
 ployers; each component union has to bargain for itself. The first provision dis-
 advantages smaller unions, which may not have enough officers capable of bargai-
 ing. The second prvision is an attempt to weaken the power of the federations. This
 amendment has been challenged by the trade unions and, as a result, has not yet
 come into force. On November 21, the Prime Minister announced the Government's
 new investment policy, in which, in order to improve working relations among em-
 ployees and employers, trade union activity will be industry-based and not factory-
 based. The new policy also decrees that, in order to check the growth of trade
 unions, unions receiving less than 20 percent of the votes in a referendum will be
 automatically dissolved and their registrations canceled.
 The International Labor Organization (ILO) has repeatedly stated that current
 law and practice violate the Government's commitments under ILO Convention 87.
 The ILO has urged the Government to lift prohibitions against union activity in re-
 spect to teachers, radio, television, railway, forestry, hospital, and other government
 employees, as well as to rescind the existing ban on strikes. The ILO also expressed
 concern about the practice of artificial promotions that exclude workers from the
 purview of Convention 111. In response to a government request, the ILO has pro-
 vided technical assistance to help bring the country's labor laws into conformity
 with the world body's conventions.
 In 1994 a government task force on labor prepared a report recommending im-
 provements on worker rights problems, which were the basis for the development
 of a new labor policy by the Government. At present, the Government has not yet
 approved the new labor policy. However, the Government has implemented two com-
 ponents of the proposed labor policy: 1) improvements in the workers' welfare fund;
 and, 2) increases in social security benefits for workers. On August 20, the Prime
 Minister and trade union representatives agreed to establish a committee to exam-
 ine the labor laws and draft legislation to bring them in conformity with ILO con-
 ventions and the national constitution.
 Federations are free to affiliate with international federations and confederations.
 For example, trade unions belong to the International Confederation of Free Trade
 Unions (ICFTU) and to secretariats affiliated to the ICFTU.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The right of industrial work-
 ers to organize and freely elect representatives to act as collective bargaining agents
 is established in law. The IRO prohibits antiunion discrimination by employers. If
 found guilty of antiunion discrimination, employers are required to reinstate work-
 ers fired for union activities.
 In general, legally constituted unions have the right to bargain collectively. How-
 ever, the many restrictions on forming unions (see Section 6.a.) preclude collective
 bargaining by large sections of the labor force, e.g., arcultural workers, who are
 not provided with the right to strike, bargain ollectivey, or make demands on em-
 ployers.
 The ESA also restricts collective bargaining. For each industry subject to the ESA,
 the Government must make a finding, renewable every 6 months, on the limits of
 union activity. In cases in which the Government prohibits collective bargaining,
 special wage boards decide wage levels.
 These boards are established at the provincial level and comprise representatives
 from industry, labor, and the provincial labor ministry, which provides the chair-
 
 
 1693
 
 man. The chairman may name additional industry and labor representatives to the
 board. Despite the presence of the labor representatives, unions are generally dis-
 satisfied with the boards' findings. Disputes are adjudicated before the National In-
 dustrial Relations Commission. A worker's right to quit may also be curtailed under
 the ESA. Dismissed workers have no recourse to the labor courts.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The Constitution and the law pro-
 hibit forced labor. However, critics argue that the ESA's limitation on some worker
 rights constitutes a form of compulsory labor. The Government informed the ILO's
 Committee on the Application of Standards in 1990 that amendments were under
 consideration to rectify the problem. However, the Government has taken no further
 action.
 Illegal bonded labor is widespread. Bonded labor is common in the brick, glass,
 and fishing industries and is found among agricultural and construction workers in
 rural areas. There is no evidence that bonded labor is used in the production for
 export of sporting goods and surgical equipment. However, bonded labor is report-
 edly used in the production of carpets or export. Conservative estimates put the
 number of bonded workers at several million.
 According to press reports, in the remote areas of rural Sindh, reports of bonded
 agricultural labor and debt slavery have a long history. Landlords have kept entire
 families in private prisons and families have been sold by one landlord to another.
 According to press reports, raids by government officials and human rights activists
 over a 2-year period from January 1995 to January 1997 resulted in the liberation
 of 349 bonded laborers.
 The Bonded Labor System (Abolition) Act adopted in 1992, outlawed bonded labor,
 canceled all existing bonded debts, and forbade lawsuits for the recovery of existing
 debts. However, the provincial governments, which are responsible for enforcing the
 law, have failed to establish enforcement mechanisms. Hence, the law is largely in-
 effective. Lacking employment alternatives, many workers have voluntarily re-
 turned to bondedlabor.
 Children are sometimes kidnaped to be used as forced labor. According to ILO es-
 timates from October 1996, 3.3 million children between the ages of 5 and 14 years
 (about 8 percent of the reference population) are "economically active." Of these,
 about two thirds work in agriculture alone. Seventy percent of the working children
 have the status of "unpaid family helpers." Many observers believe that the ILO es-
 timates understate the true dimensions of the problem. Observers also believe that
 the incidence of bonded labor among such children is significant, but there are no
 reliable figures available on this.
 d. Status of Child Labor Practices and Minimum Age for Employment.-Child
 labor is common and results from a combination of severe poverty, employer greed,
 and inadequate enforcement of laws intended to control it. The Constitution pro-
 hibits slavery, forced labor, the trafficking in human beings, and employment of
 children aged 14 years and under in factories, mines, and other hazardous occupa-
 tions. The Employment of Children Act of 1991 prohibits the employment of chil-
 dren under age 14 in certain occupations and regulates their conditions of work.
 Under this law, no child is allowed to work overtime or at night.
 In October 1996, the Government announced the results ofits first comprehensive
 child labor survey conducted with the assistance of the ILO's International Program
 for the Elimination of Child Labor (ILO/IPEC). According to the survey, 8.3 percent
 (or between 3.3 and 3.6 million) of children between the ages of 5 and 14 years
 work. The child labor force is predominately male (73 percent) and predominately
 rural (71 percent). About 60 percent of child labor is in Punjab. Some 45.8 percent
 of child laborers work 35 hours or more per week and 12.6 percent work 56 hours
 or more. The majority (67 percent) of children work in agriculture, forestry, hunting,
 and fishing industries; 11 percent in the manufacturing sector; 9 percent in whole-
 sale/retail; and 8 percent in social/personal services. In occupational terms, craft and
 related trade work account for about 19 percent of child laborers, while 71 percent
 work in unskilled jobs. Only the Government and exporters regard the ILO survey
 as an accurate measurement of the incidence of child labor. Many observers believe
 that it understates the true dimensions of the problem.
 Child labor is widely employed in the carpet industry, much of which is family-
 run. Children are also employed in other export industries. However, some export
 sectors have taken active measures to eliminate or phase out child labor. Human
 rights activists acknowledge that surgical equipment manufacturers have removed
 children from their factories; however, child labor in this industry may still occur
 at home. In February soccer ball manufacturers, importers, the ILO, and UNICEF
 agreed upon an action plan (the Atlanta Agreement) to eliminate child labor from
 the soccer ball industry within 18 months. This project, based in Sialkot, addresses
 monitoring of the production and assembly of soccer balls, education of child labor-
 
 
 1694
 ers, rehabilitation and income generation. Under the Atlanta Agreement, soccer ball
 manufacturers claimed to have eliminated 40 percent of their child labor before the
 August implementation date of the agreement. However, such claims are not verifi-
 able.
 Under the memorandum of understanding with the Government, the ILO/IPEC
 program in Pakistan is involved with a number of other projects concernin child
 labor. There is an ILO county program in which the ILO works with the Govern-
 ment, employers, workers, ad NGO s to develop a national policy and plan of action
 for child labor. The Government is establishing a pilot program of 18 rehabilitation
 centers for former child laborers through the Pakistan Bait-U-Mal, the Govern-
 ment's social welfare fund. Each center educates 60 to 100 children. The ILO is cre-
 ating a similar program in conjunction with the European Union.
 In response to international criticism, the Government has begun to push provin-
 cial authorities to enforce child labor laws. According to the Ministry of Labor, dur-
 ing the period from Januar-y 1995 to April 1997, 16,571 inspections of businesses
 suspectedI of violating the Employment of Children Act of 1991 were carried out.
 These resulted in 6,325 prosecutions and 1,409 convictions. Fines ranged from an
 average of $7 in the NWFP to an average of $140 in Balochistan. However, these
 fines are not large enough to be a significant deterrent.
 The Child Care Foundation (CCF) of Pakistan, a national NGO, was established
 in October 1996 with the support of the Government through the Ministry of Com-
 merce. The CCF board is currently in the process of developing a child labor mon-
 itoring system.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-Labor regulations are governed by federal stat-
 utes applicable throughout the country. The minimum wage is approximately. $47
 (1,650 rupees) per month. Although this wage provides a meager subsistence living
 for a small family, the minimum wage applies to only a small part of the work force,
 and most families are large.
 The law, applicable nationally, provides for a maximum workweek of 54 hours,
 rest periods during the workday, and paid annual holidays. These regulations do not
 apply to agricultural workers, workers in factories with fewer than 10 employees,
 and to the small contract groups, which are subdivisions within factories of 10 or
 fewer workers. Many workers are unaware of the regulations protecting their rights
 because of their lack of education.
 The provinces have been ineffective in enforcing labor regulations, because of lim-
 ited resources, corruption, and inadequate regulatory structures. In general, health
 and safety standards are poor. Although organized labor presses for improvements,
 the Government has done little and weakly enforces existing legal protection. Work-
 ers cannot remove themselves from dangerous work conditions without risking loss
 of employment.
