 PAKISTAN
 A martial law regime, headed by General Zia ul-Haq who serves
 as President and Chief Martial Law Administrator, rules
 Pakistan. The military (and to a lesser degree the civil
 service and the main religious party) provide most of the
 active support for the regime. Although nonparty elections
 have taken place for local government bodies, no elected
 legislative representation at the provincial or national level
 exists. The Government has announced national and provincial
 elections for February and March 1985. A Federal Advisory
 Council established in 1981 serves primarily as a sounding
 board for policy decisions by the Government. While
 restrictions on civil and political rights exist, public and
 private expressions of opposition to the regime occur.
 General Zia has headed the Government of Pakistan since a
 military coup in July 1977 deposed Prime Minister Bhutto. The
 coup ended months of disturbances sparked by allegations that
 Bhutto had rigged the March 1977 national elections. Zia
 promised new elections within 90 days. Citing security
 concerns, however, the regime failed to hold those elections
 and ones subsequently promised for November 1979. Bhutto was
 hanged in April 1979 for conspiring to murder a political
 opponent.
 The Government banned political parties in 1979. President
 Zia, in 1981, promulgated the Provisional Constitutional Order
 (PCO) which formally suspended those parts of the 1973
 Constitution dealing with the exercise of certain civil and
 political rights--already suspended in practice. The order
 curtailed the independence and responsibilities of the
 judiciary. Military courts gained the authority to try
 virtually any crime.
 Although Pakistan has made impressive economic strides in
 recent years, it remains underdeveloped, illiterate, and
 poor. Social, political, economic, religious, and regional
 differences have caused turmoil since Pakistan's creation in
 1947 and have hindered the development of democratic
 institutions. Authoritarian regimes have ruled for most of
 its history, and human rights abuses have been common.
 The Soviet invasion of Afghanistan in 1979 compounded
 Pakistan's internal problems. Pakistan, a leader of
 international opposition to that invasion, provides refuge for
 between 2 and 3 million Afghans and suffers an intense
 campaign of Soviet-inspired propaganda, disinformation, and
 terrorism. Air raids and rocket and artillery barrages
 launched from Afghanistan against Pakistani border villages
 killed some 200 civilians during 1984. Despite this constant
 pressure, Pakistan has allowed the refugees freedom of
 movement and employment, and, with major international
 support, provided generous humanitarian aid.
 Human rights trends in 1984 were mixed. The Government
 increased its use of special military courts to try
 individuals accused of a range of alleged subversive
 activities. Critics charge that these courts regularly
 violate the rights of the accused. Although the Government
 has not reinstituted formal prepublication censorship, in May
 it reminded the press of the prohibition on reporting on the
 activities of banned political parties.
 
 
 1360
 PAKISTAN
 The Government released most of the persons arrested in
 connection with the Movement for the Restoration of
 Democracy(MRD) civil disobedience campaign in the fall of
 1983. As the country prepared for elections in 1985, a number
 of prominent politicians were released from detention, though
 many still faced restrictions on their ability to travel and
 speak. A national referendum held December 19 asked voters to
 approve tne Government's policy of Islamization and its plans
 to transfer power to a civilian government. Despite legal
 sanctions, many opposition politicians boycotted the
 referendum, which they denounced as unfair. The regime
 claimed over 62 percent of the electorate participated in the
 vote, with more than 97 percent voting in favor. According to
 the terms of the referendum, the Government declared the
 result as having elected Zia ul-Haq President for an
 additional five years, and a demonstration of public support
 for Zia's plans for the country's political future.
 Preparations for elections, e.g., updating voter lists and
 registering new voters, continued as the year ended. The
 Government, in January 1985, announced that provincial and
 national elections would take place in February and March, and
 lifted most legal restrictions on participation by
 individuals. Martial law will apparently end some time after
 the newly elected legislature meets.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 The Government apparently did not instigate any political
 killings in 1984. Cross-border air raids and artillery
 attacks by Communist forces based in Afghanistan, and several
 terrorist bombings presumably committed by Kabul's agents in
 Pakistan, resulted in about 200 deaths. In August, the
 Government executed three members of the terrorist Al-Zulfiqar
 organization convicted by a special military court of killing
 a policeman.
 In October, a group of *bandits," while robbing a bus in rural
 Sind, disarmed and murdered five Pakistani soldiers. Also
 that month, police fired upon buses coming from a university
 near Hyderabad. According to official sources, five
 individuals--including three university students--died and six
 were injured. The police claimed that "notorious* bandits had
 hijacked tne buses and opened fire when told to pull over. A
 number of organizations within the country, including the bar
 associations of Lahore, Northwest Frontier Province, and
 Baluchistan, condemned the police action, maintaining that the
 buses contained only students on their way to a seminar. In
 November, the Government of Sind Province ordered a judicial
 inquiry into the incident.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no known disappearances resulting from official
 actions. Reports indicate that individuals are sometimes held
 incommunicado and without official notification to their
 families for extended periods. In one celebrated case, which
 some foreign critics of the regime initially labeled a
 *disappearance," military authorities in January arrested
 
 
 1361
 PAKISTAN
 attorney Raza Kazim. According to the local press, and
 apparently in response to the publicity generated by a writ of
 habeas corpus filed by his wife, in July the Government
 charged Kazim with "attempting to seduce Army personnel,' in
 effect, treasonous behavior. Other sources indicated,
 however, that Kazim was not charged until much later.
 Kidnapping, usually for ransom, remains common, particularly
 in the semiautonomous tribal areas and in some of the more
 remote areas of Sind.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 There are frequent and credible allegations of police,
 paramilitary, and military torture of detainees. In
 September, over 100 lawyers belonging to the Lahore Bar
 Association issued a statement charging that systematic
 torture of prisoners occurred at 5 prisons.
 As under previous regimes, policemen and jailers use brutal
 arrest and interrogation methods. Local press reports
 indicate that at least six persons died while under police
 custody in 1984. The Government investigates nearly all
 publicized allegations of torture. In June, six police
 officers received prison sentences for their part in torturing
 to death a suspect in Jhang in 1979. Another officer was
 suspended in September for torturing persons to obtain a bribe.
 Four persons accused of helping the AI-Zulfiqar terrorist
 organization hijack a Pakistani plane to Kabul and,
 eventually, Damascus received death sentences. Three had
 initially received prison sentences, later changed to death
 sentences on the order of the Governor of Sind. Critics
 argued that the death penalty was excessive for abetting a
 hijacking, and that the reversal of the original sentences
 violated military regulations.
 Three classes of prison facilities exist. Class "C" cells,
 wnich usually have dirt floors, no furnishings, and poor
 quality food, generally hold common criminals. The use of
 handcuffs and fetters is common in 'C cells. Political and
 foreign prisoners usually receive "B' cells, which provide
 improved treatment, less-crowded conditions, and better food.
 Only very prominent individuals receive "A" accommodations,
 which can include air conditioning and private servants.
 Thirty-two new air conditioned cells for 'political prisoners'
 were opened in August in Rawalpindi.
 Eighteen persons under trial by a special military court for
 seeking in concert with a foreign power to overthrow the
 Government are apparently in leg fetters and handcuffs. The
 superintendent of the Rawalpindi Jail informed the Lahore High
 Court that such treatment was necessary since the prisoners
 had received commando training and represented a 'serious
 security hazard.' Another 54 prisoners in Kot Lokhput jail in
 Lahore for subversive activities are also allegedly in fetters.
 In 1979, the- Government promulgated the Hadood ordinances
 which prescribed traditional Islamic punishments for theft,
 adultery, and consumption of alcohol; penalties include
 flogging, stoning, and amputation. According to reports,
 public flogging of persons convicted of sexual assault,
 adultery, drinking alcohol, possession of narcotics, and
 
 
 1362
 PAKISTAN
 robbery took place in 1984. A local press report claimed that
 a woman had been flogged (though not publicly). Because of
 the very strict Islamic rules of evidence in the ordinance, no
 stoning or amputation sentences have yet been executed.
 Tribal councils in remote areas may have imposed stoning
 sentences not strictly in accordance with Islamic strictures.
 In its report Torture in the Eighties, Amnesty International
 noted that it had received detailed reports indicating
 frequent torture of prisoners in Pakistan and that prisoners
 subjected to torture include political party workers, trade
 unionists, teachers, students, journalists, lawyers, and
 prisoners held for ordinary criminal offenses. Amnesty
 received allegations of physical abuse by police from 27
 students arrested in demonstrations in Lahore.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Martial law regulations authorize detention of up to 90 days
 for persons who act in a manner prejudicial to the regime.
 Although legally these detentions can be extended only for up
 to two years, in practice they are occasionally extended
 beyond that period. Detainees do not have access to a lawyer,
 nor may they apply for bail. Civilian courts cannot review
 decisions of the martial law authorities and habeas corpus
 petitions have no effect.
 Almost all of the thousands of persons seized in connection
 with the disobedience campaign conducted by the Movement for
 the Restoration of Democracy in 1983 were released during
 1984, including Ghulam Mustapha Jatoi, the head of the
 Pakistan People's Party (PPP) in Sind, and the Pir of Ranipur,
 another prominent Sindhi PPP Leader. Mumtaz Bhutto, former
 Chief Minister of Sind and nephew of the late Prime Minister
 Bhutto, left the country for medical treatment. Several
 individuals under various forms of detention for longer
 periods were also released, including President of the
 T    ki-nX- e-lstiqlal Party Air Marshal Asghar Khan, under house
 arrest since 1979; Benazir Bhutto, daughter of the former
 Prime Minister and a leader of the PPP, under house arrest
 since 1981; and Pakistan Democratic Party President Nawabzada
 -Nasrullah Khan, under house arrest since 1981. Few detentions
 for purely political activities occurred in 1984.
 Although no official statistics exist, the current number of
 detainees is about 300 (compared with some 5,600 at the end of
 1983). About 100 of these are being tried by special military
 courts on various charges of subversion and terrorism.
 Summary military courts convicted some 250 to 300 individuals
 connected with anti-regime activities in Sind on various
 charges. Human rights groups estimate that there are between
 500 to 1,500 political prisoners.
 Political detainees and prisoners receive visitors on a fairly
 regular basis. Since last fall, some prominent detainees have
 been shifted to house arrest (e.g., Vice President Makhdoum of
 the Sind Branch of the PPP), while others have been
 periodically transferred to hospitals for medical treatment
 (e.g., Chairman Rasul Bux Palejo of the Sindhi Awami Tehrik, a
 leftist party).
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Three judicial systems operate in Pakistan: a civilian
 
 
 1363
 PAKISTAN
 judiciary based on Anglo-Saxon law, Shari'a benches operating
 under Islamic law, and martial tribunals. According to the
 1981 Provisional Constitutional Order, the civilian judiciary
 cannot review actions of the martial law authorities and the
 military courts. The Government required all Supreme and High
 Court judges to swear to uphold the Order; thirty-one judges
 lost their seats for not complying.
 The Shari'a benches try offenses under the Hadood ordinances
 but otherwise operate similarly to ordinary civilian courts.
 Cases referred to the Shari'a benches are heard by additional
 and sessions court judges from the civilian court system who,
 in practice, apply the ordinary criminal procedure code in
 handling most cases. Defendants in the Sharila courts can
 obtain bail and lawyers of their choice; judges and attorneys
 must be familiar with Islamic law.
 The existence of three overlapping judicial systems sometimes
 leads to the arbitrary assignment of cases to one or the other
 court. While the military courts can try virtually any crime,
 and martial authorities can transfer cases from one court to
 another, the choice as to which system of courts will exercise
 jurisdiction appears in many cases to rest with localpolice
 officials, giving rise to charges of corruption.
 Summary military courts do not grant defendants the right of
 counsel and can dispose of cases in minutes. Although special
 military courts do not prohibit defense counsel, military
 judges and prosecutors, often untrained in the law, frequently
 treat defense attorneys with contempt. In cases of
 subversion, judges can impose secrecy on the proceedings and
 expel witnesses and defendants accused of acting in a
 .subversive' or "dilatory' manner. Military court sentences
 can be appealed only to the martial law administrators (i.e.,
 the provincial governors), if the sentence is for less than 14
 years imprisonment, or to the Chief Martial Law Administrator
 if the sentence is death, amputation, or more than 14 years
 imprisonment.
 During the year, two major special military court trials
 received considerable attention in the local press. In one,
 54 individuals, imprisoned in Kot Lakhpat jail in Lahore, are
 accused of membership in the terrorist AI-Zulfiqar
 organization and of having committed acts of subversion and
 terrorism. Knowledgeable persons assert that foreign
 involvement in this case contributes to official reluctance to
 hold a public trial. Lahore Bar Association members have
 complained that the defense attorneys in the case have not had
 adequate access to the prisoners or to documents necessary for
 tne defense and that the defendants have not chosen their own
 counsel. A special military court in Rawalpindi has been
 trying 18 prisoners and 24 other individuals in absentia for
 trying to overthrow the regime. Informed sources indicate
 that the defendants are accused of receiving terrorist
 training and funding from a foreign power, presumably Libya.
 The defendants announced in October that they had instructed
 their lawyers to withdraw from the case, charging that because
 of prejudicial statements by President Zia and alleged bias on
 the part of the court they had *lost confidence in the ability
 of the court to do justice in this case." The case continues,
 however, and private attorneys still represent the defendants.
 
 
 1364
 PAKISTAN
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Decisions about occupation, education, place of residence, and
 family size are made without official interference. While
 police must obtain a warrant before entering a private home,
 authorities have ignored this formality during operations in
 Sind to seize arms and stem 'banditry.*
 Pakistan traditionally has maintained a domestic intelligence
 service to monitor certain political activists, in addition to
 tracking terrorists and foreign intelligence agents. Informed
 persons allege that wiretapping is widely used against
 opposition politicians.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Freedom of expression is restricted. The press may not print
 statements by leaders of the "defunct" political parties.
 Such statements, however, in one form or another, often find
 their way into the press. Although the regime allows
 criticisia of tne bureaucracy, police brutality, official
 corruption, and policies on numerous issues, the press may not
 'defame' Islam, the Martial Law Administration, or the
 President, nor incite "religious or regional tensions.'
 Immediately before the December 19 referendum, the Government
 issued ordinances which proscribed advocating a referendum
 boycott. Anyone convicted could go to jail for up to three
 years, receive heavy fines, and be barred for seven years from
 national or provincial elective office.
 Despite these legal limits to dissent, opposition to the
 regime is vocal. Numerous politicians, for example, defied
 the ban on campaigning against the referendum. By year's end,
 no prosecutions had been brought against them under the new
 ordinances. Pakistanis are not guarded in their private
 conversation and appear very willing to criticize the regime.
 The Government operates the radio and television stations and
 strictly controls the news they carry. The official press
 trust controls four of the larger daily newspapers. The other
 daily newspapers are privately owned and more critical of
 official policies. The Government and the enterprises it
 controls are the largest advertisers and have withdrawn
 advertising from newspapers considered to have become too
 critical, thus effectively restricting editorial freedom.
 Since the lifting of prepublication censorship in 1982, the
 press has engaged in a tug-of-war with the Government in an
 effort to expand the limits of coverage. After a spate of
 press reports on internal political matters, in May the
 Government reinstated the ban on reporting statements by
 opposition politicians, although late in 1984 the press began
 again to test its limits. The Government banned reporting on
 a press conference given by Asghar Khan, head of the
 Tehrik-E-Istiqlal, shortly after his release from house arrest
 in October.
 Although literary and creative works remain generally free
 from censorship, Pakistani books and magazines dealing with
 politics are frequently banned. On a sporadic basis, the
 authorities confiscate such literature. Foreign publications
 
 
 1365
 PAKISTAN
 critical of the regime are occasionally seized. No effort has
 been made to restrict access to foreign broadcasts.
 L. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 President Zia banned political activities in 1979. Only
 gatherings of a nonpolitical nature--e.g., religious,
 patriotic, or family events (weddings, funerals)--may take
 place. The Government has on several occasions issued
 externment orders, which prohib L a person from entering a
 province for some time, against officeholders of the Movement
 for the Restoration of Democracy.
 While workers in most jobs may form labor unions, elect
 collective bargaining agents, and negotiate on wages and
 working conditions, only seven percent of the work force is
 unionized. Union activities in the state-run Pakistan
 International Airlines have been prohibited since 1981.
 Although strikes and employer lockouts are banned, a number of
 "go-slows" and other minor labor disputes occur. Formal union
 affiliation with the 'defunct" political parties is banned,
 but the Government allows unions to maintain relations with
 international bodies such as the International Labor
 Organization (ILO) and the International Confederation of Free
 Trade Unions (ICFTU).
 At the 1984 ILO Conference in Geneva, the Committee on the
 Application of Conventions and Recommendations discussed
 Pakistan's Essential Services (Maintenance) Act of 1952, which
 prohibits workers in essential industries from leaving their
 jobs without government permission. Various workers' and
 employers' members maintained that this Act violates the ILO
 Convention on Forced Labor. The Government argued it needed
 the Act due to a shortage of skilled manpower and the
 emergency situation created by the influx of refugees. The
 Committee urged the Government to reexamine its position.
 In February, the Government banned the often politicized and
 volatile student unions. Widespread student demonstrations
 resulted, some violent. Authorities arrested several hundred
 students but quickly released most of them.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Pakistan is an Islamic republic. Minority religious groups,
 such as Hindus, Christians, and Parsis do not enjoy the same
 legal rights as do Muslims. Reports of discrimination against
 minority groups in the areas of employment and education
 appear well-founded. Under the 1973 Constitution, members of
 religious minorities cannot become President or Prime
 Minister. In general, minority groups can practice their
 religion openly. Foreign clergy may enter the country to
 serve congregations but proselytizing Muslims is prohibited.
 Members of minority religious groups can maintain links with
 their coreligionists in other countries and undertake travel
 for religious purposes.
 The Ahmadi sect, which considers itself Muslim despite
 theological differences with traditional Islam, has
 historically felt oppressed. In 1974, the Bhutto regime,
 responding to pressure and violence from conservative Muslims
 who rejected the Ahmadis as fellow Muslims, amended the
 Constitution to declare the Ahmadis a non-Muslim minority. In
 April 1984, the Government banned the use of Muslim
 
 
 1366
 PAKISTAN
 terminology and proselytizing by the Ahmadis. Authorities in
 December closed the Ahmadi printing press in Rabwah, and
 suspended for three months the community's official
 publications, including a daily newspaper and several
 periodicals.
 Pressure on the Ahmadis to renounce their claim to Islam and
 sporadic clashes between anti-Ahmadi groups and the Ahmadis
 continued in 1984. A confrontation in November resulted in
 the deaths of two persons who apparently sought to deface an
 Ahmadi house of worship. Ahmadi and anti-Ahmadi conferences
 were scheduled during December in Rabwah and Chiniot,
 respectively. When the Government failed to respond to Ahmadi
 requests for permission to hold their annual convention--
 expected to draw some 250,000 Ahmadis from around the world--
 the convention moved to Qadian, India. When the Government
 denied the anti-Anmadis permission to use a public park for
 their meeting, they held it in a mosque. These events
 demonstrated tne Government's reluctance to deal forcefully
 with anti-Ahmadi agitation.
 In October, violent clashes occurred between Muslims of the
 majority Sunni and the minority Shi'a sects in Karachi,
 causing hundreds of injuries, extensive property damage, and
 perhaps as many as 30 deaths. The Government detained 16 of
 the more radical leaders of the two sects. Nearly 100 rioters
 were arrested; most were quickly released.
 The Government continued its efforts to make Pakistan into an
 Islamic society. In August, it established a system of Nizam
 -e-Salaat in which 'pious men* in every locality were
 appointed to encourage all Muslims to pray five times a day.
 Ordinances established Qazi (Islamic) courts and amended the
 military service acts to allow courts martial to impose
 Islamic punishments.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 PaKistanis generally have freedom of movement within the
 country. Opposition politicians are occasionally barred from
 entering certain provinces. The Government has denied
 passports to a few politicans. For most Pakistanis, foreign
 travel is unrestricted; some 3 million work abroad. In
 general, the right of citizens to return to the country is
 recognized. High-ranking officials have claimed that even
 Benazir Bhutto and other members of the opposition Pakistan
 People's Party now abroad may return to the country.
 According to official figures, nearly 3 million Afghans have
 fled to Pakistan as a result of the Soviet invasion. The
 Government administers over 300 refugee camps and bears much
 of the cost of inland transportation of relief goods provided
 by the various donors. The Government also bears
 administrative costs for supporting the refugee program and
 from time to time issues cash payments to the refugees to
 supplement international donations of food, clothing, and
 shelter. Although only residents of official refugee villages
 may draw relief articles, Pakistan has placed few restrictions
 on travel or employment by Afghans. Given the number of
 refugees and the strain on resources, remarkably few incidents
 of violence between them and local residents have occurred.
 Over 2,000 Iranians have sought refugee status in Pakistan and
 
 
 1367
 PAKISTAN
 the number is reportedly growing. On several occasions,
 Iranians occupied local U.N. offices to publicize their
 demands. The authorities do not recognize them as refugees,
 but allow them to stay.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 A martial law regime headed by an active-duty general has
 governed Pakistan since July 1977. A lieutenant general
 holding the titles of governor and martial law administrator
 governs each of the four provinces. The federal Cabinet
 consists of 4 active-duty military officers and 19 civilians.
 The Martial Law Administration disbanded the National Assembly
 in July 1977; since then Pakistan has not had elected
 legislative representation at the provincial or national level.
 The regime created a 287-member Majlis-e-Shoora, or Federal
 Advisory Council in 1981. The Government selected the members
 of the Council to represent the former National Assembly
 constituencies: the professions, labor, women, and
 minorities. Since it first convened in January 1982, the
 Council has met 10 times. Although members criticize certain
 government actions, the Majlis remains an advisory rather than
 a legislative Dody with little effect on specific decisions.
 As a sounding board, however, it has prompted the Government
 to justify publicly specific policy decisions.
 The regime has permitted some popular participation in local
 government. In 1979 and in 1983, it conducted nonparty
 elections through universal suffrage to fill seats for
 four-year terms in 'local bodies' (i.e., local, district, and
 municipal councils). These bodies represented the first
 experiment in local government in 15 years.
 President Zia reiterated his pledge to hold elections for
 provincial and national assemblies by March 23, 1985. In
 January 1985, the Government announced that provincial and
 national assembly elections would take place in February with
 Senate elections in March. It remained unclear who would
 participate in the elections and what powers the provincial
 and national assemblies would have.
 On December 2, Zia announced that a national referendum would
 be held December 19 to ask voters to accept or reject his
 plans to turn Pakistan into an Islamic society and to transfer
 power to an elected Government. A positive vote would confirm
 Zia as President for another five years from the time the
 yet-to-be-elected National Assembly first met (March 23,
 1985). Prior to the referendum, it had been believed that the
 National Assembly would elect the President. (The Government
 has claimed that the referendum was a one-time measure made
 necessary by the serious security threat the country faces
 from abroad and from foreign-sponsored terrorism at home.)
 Despite ordinances providing punishment for advocating a
 boycott of tne referendum, many opposition politicians did so,
 arguing that it was unfair to link Zia's presidential term to
 Islamization. Official claims that over 62 percent of
 eligible voters participated in the referendum, with over 97
 percent voting in favor, were doubted by the opposition and
 most observers.
 
 40-387 0 - 85 - 87
 
 
 1368
 PAKISTAN
 Section 4 Government Attitude Regarding International and
 Non-governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 A iack of official information and the limited ability of the
 press to investigate and criticize makes investigation of
 human rights abuses difficult. Domestic human rights
 organizations, however, operate largely free of official
 harassment. There has been no official retribution against
 bar associations which have criticized abuses of human rights.
 The Government has allowed visits by international human
 rights organizations, but has not responded to critical
 reports by Amnesty International, Freedom House, the Lawyers
 Committee for International Human Rights, and others.
 In its 1984 report, Amnesty International expressed concern
 over several 'prisoners of conscience," use of military courts
 and summary procedures, use of the death penalty and sentences
 calling for flogging and amputation, and the possible
 expulsion of refugees to territories where their life or
 freedom would be threatened. Reports it received claimed that
 dozens of political prisoners had been detained for over two
 years without formal charges and that some political prisoners
 had been tortured or had died while in police custody.
 Freedom House calls Pakistan *not free.'
 ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND CULTURAL SITUATION
 Althougn growth in gross domestic product fell from 6.1
 percent in 1982/83 to 4.4 percent in 1983/84, continued
 relative economic prosperity since 1977 has led to a gradual
 rise in living standards. The percentage of the population
 living below the absolute poverty line had fallen, as of 1979,
 to 32 percent in the cities and 29 percent in the rural
 areas. According to official 1984 estimates, the poorest 20
 percent of households earn 7.5 percent of the total income.
 Social and economic upward mobility is increasingly possible,
 particularly as a result of repatriated funds from family
 members working abroad. Pakistan, with a population of 96
 million, faces many problems common to the developing world:
 an overall adult literacy rate of 20.7 percent (1972
 estimate), an infant mortality rate of 125.8 per 1,000, a life
 expectancy at birth of 51 years for males and 49 years for
 females; an annual population growth rate of between 2.6
 percent and 3.1 percent and a per capita gross national
 product of $380 dollars as of 1982. Programs for improving
 living conditions have had mixed results. Substantial
 disparities between urban and rural life exist. For example,
 in 1976, 60 percent of urban dwellers had access to potable
 water compared to only 17 percent in rural areas. According
 to tne World Bank, urban areas have a literacy rate of 40
 percent; the countryside, 13.7 percent (1972 estimates).
 A key element of the six year (1983-88) plan is a higher level
 of allocations for social sectors. Priorities for these
 sectors are reflected in the current year's budget, where
 projected outlays for education, with emphasis on primary
 education, are to grow 19.8 percent over last year.
 Expenditures in support of health services are to increase by
 24 percent, with major outlays destined to fund the
 establishment of basic health centers at the village level and
 
 
 1369
 PAKISTAN
 to permit the completion of a national immunization program to
 reduce the infant mortality rate.
 Some believe that corruption has become more widespread over
 the past decade as large sums of money have entered the
 country from overseas workers and narcotics trafficking.
 Socially prominent Pakistanis suffer less at the hands of
 officialdom than those less well-off, partly because of their
 ability to return favors or offer inducements to appropriate
 civil servants and partly because of the general deference
 still accorded social 'betters.' Although the original caste
 distinctions common to South Asian societies are disappearing
 in Pakistan, clan (Baradari) affiliations, which in some ways
 parallel the old system, can still help or hinder those
 seeking education, employment, or justice.
 Pakistani society assigns women a subordinate role in terms of
 civil, political, and individual rights. Many Pakistani
 Muslims interpret the Koran's injunction on modesty to mean
 tnat women should remain in "purdah," either at home or behind
 the veil. These attitudes have contributed to an adult female
 literacy rate of only 10.3 percent compared to 29.6 percent
 for males (1972 estimates). As of 1980, the primary school
 enrollment ratio was only 27.7 percent for girls as compared
 to 69.3 percent for boys. The ratio of men to women in
 secondary educational institutions, according to 1983
 Pakistani statistics, was better than five to one. Eight
 times as many men as woaen work outside the home, and those
 women who work or attend school usually do so in separate
 facilities. Although urban women are represented in the
 universities, post-graduate employment opportunities remain
 largely limited to teaching, medical services, and the law,
 with a small number of women entering the commercial and
 public sectors. 'Islamization* has reversed some of the
 social gains made by women in past years. Women may not
 participate in international athletic competition abroad. The
 Government determines appropriate dress for women appearing on
 television and in the print media. On October 27, President
 Zia promulgated the Qanun-I-Shahadat (Law of Evidence) which
 stipulates that either two men, or one man and two women,
 attest to instruments dealing with financial or future
 obligations. There has been public condemnation of the
 Qanun-I-Shahadat order by the Women's Action Forum, women
 lawyers' associations, and other activist groups.
 
 
 1370
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: PAKISTAN
 1982     1983    1984
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL...      200.2    278.7    307.4
 LOANS .............. .....  81.5  114.5   122.5
 GRANTS ................. 118.7    164.2    184.9
 A.AID ....................... 100.0   200.0    225.0
 LOANS ................... 34.0    67.0     75.0
 GRANTS .............       66.0   133.0    150.0
 (SEC.SUPP.ASSIST.)...       100.0   200.0    225.0
 B.FOOO FOR PEACE .......       97.5    75.8     79.0
 LOANS .................. 47.5      47.5     47.5
 GRANTS .............       50.0    28.3     31.5
 TITLE I-TOTAL ..........      47.5     47.5     47.5
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS .....       47.5    47.5     47.5
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR .....       0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE I-TOTAL .........      50.0     28.3     31.5
 E.RELIEF.EC.OEV & WFP.        50.0    28.3     31.5
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY .....       0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST,..         2.7     2.9      3.4
 LOANS .............. .... 0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............      . 2.7     2.9      3.4
 PEACE CORPS ......       0.0      0.0      0.0
 NARCOTICS ........        2.7     2.9      3.4
 OTHER ..............    0.0      0.0      0.0
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL.          0.6    260.8    300.8
 LOANS .............   ... 0.0    260.0    300.0
 GRANTS .............        0.6     0.8      0.8
 A.MAP GRANTS .........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.CREDIT FINANCING...          0.0   260.0    300.0
 C.INTL MIL.ED.TRNG...         0.6      0.8      0.8
 D.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK,.         0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS ........       0.0      0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. & MIL ..      200.8    539.5   "608.2
 LOANS ................... 81.5   374.5    422.5
 GRANTS ............. .... 119.3  165.0    185.7
 ----------------------------------------------------------
 OTHER US LOANS ..........       0.0      0.0      0.0
 EX-IM BANK LOANS .......       0.0      0.0      0.0
 ALL OTHER .............. .... 0.0      0.0      0.0
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1982     1983    1984     1946-84
 TOTAL ........   555.6    581.1   643.4   5361.4
 IBRD             138.5     75.2   131.5   1137.3
 IFC               19.8     90.2    25.3    201.6
 IDA              171.0    228.8   174.5   1977.5
 108                0.0      0.0     0.0      0.0
 ADB              213.0    180.1   312.1   1770.6
 AFDB               0.0      0.0     0.0      0.0
 UNDP              13.3      6.8     0.0    129.3
 OTHER-UN           0.0      0.0     0.0    145.1
 EEC                0.0      0.0     0.0      0.0
 
 
 1371
