 PAKISTAN
 Pakistan is an Islamic republic with a democratic political system. The Prime
 Minister, selected by a majority within a popularly elected Parliament, has wide
 constitutional power. The Pakistan Muslim League (PML) Government of Prime
 Minister-Mian Nawaz Sharif, which came to power in February 1997 with a massive
 Parliamentary majority, passed constitutional amendments (the 13th and 14th)
 which removed the power of the President to dismiss the Government at his discre-
 tion and banned defections from political parties, two of the most frequently used
 methods of bringing down previous governments. These measures, which enjoyed
 opposition support, were aimed at enhancing political stability at the national level.
 As a result, the Government has greater power than any of its predecessors since
 the return of formal democracyin 1988. The Government's power was further en-
 hanced by a 1997 constitutional confrontation between the Prime Minister and the
 Chief Justice of the Supreme Court over the selection of five new justices for the
 Court. As a result of this struggle, the former President resigned in December 1997,
 and the Prime Minister's candidate was elected by the Parliament to the presidency.
 That same month, a Supreme Court panel deprived, the Chief Justice of his position
 and a new Chief Justice was sworn in. Some observers feared that this confronta-
 tion damaged the prestige and independence of the judiciary. The Constitution pro-
 vides for an independent judiciary; however, it is subject to executive branch influ-
 ence. Nonetheless, the Supreme Court demonstrated a continued degree of inde-
 pendence on a number of occasions.
 Responsibility for internal security rests primarily with the police, although para-
 military forces, such as the Rangers and Frontier Constabulary, provide additional
 support in areas where law and order problems are especially acute, such as Kara-
 chi and the frontier areas. Provincial governments control the police and para-
 military forces when they are assisting in law and order operations. The regular
 army also occasionally is deployed to assist in maintaining public order in sensitive
 areas during certain religious holidays. Members of the security forces committed
 numerous serious human rights abuses..
 Pakistan is a poor country, with great extremes in the distribution of wealth be-
 tween social classes. Its per capita annual income is $490. The overall illiteracy rate
 is 62 percent, and is even higher for women. Cotton, textiles and apparel, rice, and
 leather products are the principal exports. The economy includes both state-run and
 private industries and financial institutions. The Constitution provides for the right
 of private businesses to operate freely in most sectors of the economy. The Govern-
 ment made several economic reforms, including privatizing state-owned enterprises
 and reducing tariffs. Politically driven confrontations with Independent Power
 Projects (IPPS) and the Government's inability to repay investors in hard currency
 have damaged investor confidence and hampered privatization.
 The Government's human rights record remained poor, with serious problems in
 several areas. Despite attempts to reform and to professionalize the police, police
 committed numerous extrajudicial killings and tortured, abused, and raped citizens.
 While the officers responsible for such abuses sometimes were transferred or sus-
 pended for their actions, there is no evidence that any police officers were brought
 to justice. In general, police continued to commit serious abuses with impunity. Pris-
 on conditions remained poor, and police arbitrarily arrested and detained citizens.
 In Karachi killings between rival political factions often were carried out with the
 assistance of criminal gangs. However, many such killings also were believed to
 have been committed by or with the participation of security forces. The Govern-
 ment has used the "accountability" process-which supposedly was designed to ex-
 pose previous wrongdoing, recoup ill-gotten gains, and restore public confidence in
 government institutions-for political purposes by harassing and arresting a num-
 ber of prominent politicians and bureaucrats connected with the main opposition
 party. Few of those arrested 'and questioned have been put on trial. Case backlogs
 
 
 1935
 
 lead to long delays in trials, and lengthy pretrial detention is common. The judiciary
 is subject to executive influence, and suer from inadequate resources, inefficiency,
 and corruption. Despite concerns about damage to the judiciary due to the December
 1997 confrontation between the Prime Minister and the Chief Justice of the Su-
 preme Court, there were several instances in which the Supreme Court showed a
 continued degree of independence, striking down draconian laws favored by the Gov-
 ernment, including limits on freedom of speech, elements of a controversial
 antiterrorist law, and some restrictions on fundamental liberties imposed by the
 state of emergency declared in the wake of Pakistan's nuclear tests in May. The La-
 hore High Court and the Supreme Court struck down key provisions of the 1997
 Anti-Terrorist Act, virtually halting the operation of special antiterrorist courts.
 Human rights leaders and others had criticized the controversial law, charging that
 it violated the Constitution by setting up a parallel judicial system charged with de-
 ciding cases in a truncated time period (7 days) and by granting the police extraor-
 dinary powers that threatened individual liberties. On November 20, the Prime
 Minister announced the establishment of military courts in Karachi. These courts
 are authorized to try terrorists swiftly, and those convicted may appeal only to a
 higher military court. In October the National Assembly voted for a 15th constitu-
 tional amendment, which would oblige the Government to enforce the Shari'a (Is-
 lamic law). However, by year's end, the measure had not yet been voted on in the
 Senate, where the Government lacks the two-thirds majority needed to amend the
 Constitution. The Government infringed on citizens' privacy rights. Although the
 press largely publishes freely, the Government uses its large advertising budget to
 influence content, journalists practice self-censorship, and the broadcast media re-
 main a closely controlled government monopoly. The Government's actions against
 the Jang newspaper group because of an editorial stance critical of the Government
 were particularly egregious. The Government imposes limits on freedom of assem-
 bly, movement, and-for the Ahmadis in particular-of religion.
 On October 30, Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif invoked article 232 of the Constitu-
 tion to suspend the Sindh Assembly and to impose Governor's Rule in the province.
 in response to growing law and order problems, including politically motivated vio-
 lence, which by year's end had led to the killings of more than 1,000 persons. Politi-
 cal groups, including rival Sunni and Shi'a sectarian extremists, various factions of
 the Muttheda Quami Movement (MQM), and MQM opponents, were responsible for
 killings, while religious extremists continued to discriminate against and persecute
 religious minorities, particularly Ahmadis and Christians, justifying their activities
 in part on legislation that discriminates against non-Muslims. Despite government
 imposed procedural changes that made the registration of blasphemy charges more
 difficult, at least two more Chrstians were charged with blasphemy and remain in
 prison in Punjab. A Shi'a Muslim and a Christian both were convicted of blasphemy
 and sentenced to death, although to date such sentences have never been carried
 out. A Roman Catholic Bishop committed suicide, apparently to protest the Chris-
 tian's sentencing. The suicide was followed by communal disturbances in Punjab.
 Another Christian was convicted of blasphemy on a lesser charge and released for
 time served (42 years). Three Ahmadis sentenced in 1997 to life in prison for blas-
 phemy remained incarcerated. Religious and ethnic-based rivalries resulted in nu-
 merous murders and civil disturbances. Traditional social and legal constraints kept
 women in a subordinate position in society. Significant numbers of women continued
 to be subjected to violence, abuse, rape, trafficking, and other forms of degradation
 by their spouses and members of society at large. Violence against children, as well
 as child abuse and prostitution, remained problems. Female children still lag far be-
 hind boys in education, health care, and other social benefits. The Government and
 employers continued to restrict worker rights significantly. Bonded labor by both
 adults and children remained a problem. Debt slavery persists. The use of child
 labor remained widespread, although it is now generally recognized as a serious
 problem and industrial exporters have adopted a number of measures to eliminate
 child labor from specific sectors. Mob violence and terrorist attacks remained prob-
 lems.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-The extrajudicial killing of criminal
 suspects, often in the form of deaths in police custody or staged encounters in which
 police shoot and kill the suspects, is common. In Punjab a police crackdown on noto-
 rious criminals resulted in scores of extrajudicial killings, especially in staged en-
 counters around Lahore. Public criticism of these killings was muted, since crime
 dropped noticeably. In contrast to previous years, the police exhibited greater selec-
 
 
 1936
 
 tiVity in choosing their victims, focusing on those widely believed to be violent crimi-
 nals. During the year, 143 persons were killed in 72 encounters. Suspected crimi-
 nals were killed by the police to prevent them from implicating police in crimes dur-
 ing court proceedings. Police officials maintain in private that due to the lack of con-
 crete evidence, witness intimidation, corruption in and threats against the judiciary,
 and sometimes political pressure, courts often fail to punish criminals involved in
 serious crimes. Police professionalism is low. The police view the killings of criminal
 suspects as appropriate in light of the lack of effective action by the judiciary
 against criminals. The judiciary, on the other hand, faults the police for presenting
 weak cases that do not stand up in court.
 Police officers occasionally are transferred or briefly suspended for their involve-
 ment in extrajudicial killings. However, court-ordered inquiries into these killings
 so far have failed to result in any police officer receiving criminal punishment. In
 general, police continued to commit such killings with impunity.
 On July 18, four criminal suspects were apprehended in Karachi and brought to
 Lahore by authorities. Newspapers heralded the arrest as "the bust of the year,"
 and photographed their arrival at Lahore airport. However, despite this public evi-
 dence poice later claimed that the suspcts were killed in a July 19 encounter in
 Lahore "after an exchange of gunfire." On July 21, the Lahore police killed Abdus
 Salam; he was bindfolded and'hs hands were tied when he was shot. The police
 claimed that he was being transported to a witness identification lineup when three
 motorcyclists shot-him. No police officers were injured in this alleged "attack." Local
 eyewitnesses reported that the police removed Abdus from their vehicle, shot him,
 and then fired shots into the air. In one  of many other examples, three alleged rob-
 bers were killed in a claimed shootout outside Lahore on August 3. However,
 sources told the press that police arrested tvo of the robbers in late July.
 In some instances, action was taken against police suspected of abuse. Awais
 Akram, a bank teller, was tortured severely 'and pushed from the roof of Civil Lines
 police station in Lahore on March 15. Two senior police officers were suspended and
 charged with responsibility for his murder. According to human rights advocates,
 the two police officers have not beei reinstated to their positions and the case is
 currently before the Lahore High Court. Three police officers were charged with the
 May 11 killing of Arbab Yousah, age 18, the son of-a Pakistan People's Party (PPP)-
 supported candidate in Punjab's local government elections. Arbab was arrested on
 May 4 on robbery charges brought by the local ruling Pakistan Muslim   League
 (PML) candidate. Police claim that Arbab died of natural causes. On May 12, police
 in the Northwest Frontier Province (NWFP) arrested Ghulam Jillani, a 14-year-old
 boy, in Manshera. Jillani was arrested on theft charges, and subsequently was sexu-
 ally abused and tortured to death by the local police. The police initially tried to
 portray the death as a suicide. In response, angry protestors set fire to police offices
 and residences. The NWFP Chief Minister fired the entire staff of the police station
 where the incident occurred, and arrested those involved on a murder charge. The
 Chief Minister also formed a judicial tribunal to investigate the incident. According
 td press reports, in late July two men died while in police custody in Lahore. The
 two were believed by police to have been responsible for robbing a bank, the first
 such crime in Lahore in months. Police claimed to have killed the suspects in a
 shoot-out. However, medical examiners told the press that they believed that the
 suspects were tortured, since their bodies had broken limbs andnumerous wounds
 consistent with severe electric shock. The bodies also exhibited signs-of at least 24
 hours of decay, although the police claimed to have shot the suspects just a few
 hours earlier. Three other police officers were charged with the August 8 murder
 of Abbas at Gogera, Punjab. Abbas' body was dumped into a canal and recovered
 3 days later 60 miles downstream. The leading police official of the district orga-
 nized the search and recovery of the body and-publicly stated that his constables
 were responsible and should be prosecuted. The accused were granted prearrest bail
 by the local judge.
 Politically motivated violence remained a problem in Karachi, despite the pres-
 ence within the ruling coalition in Sindh province for much of the year of the
 Muttehida Qaumi Movement (MQM), which previously had been a cause of much
 of the violence. The MQM was formed by Altaf Hussein in 1984 as a student move-
 ment to further the rights of Mohajirs, the descendants of Urdu-speaking Muslims
 who migrated from India to Pakistan following partition in 1947. It soon became an
 organization with criminal elements, which generated income through extortion and
 other forms of racketeering. Despite this, the MQM-Altaf, in part because of its effi-
 cient organization and willingness to use violence and intimidation to achieve its
 goals, became the dominant political party in the Sindh urban centers of Karachi
 and Hyderabad. The MQM, despite a number of-moderate and. nonviolent leaders
 now in the Senate, National Assembly and Sindh Provincial Assembly, has not been
 
 
 1937
 able to separate itself from its violent past. As a result, it has antagonized followers,
 suffered violent breakaways, and continually has been at odds with successive gov-
 ernments. The MQM is presently split between the original MQM, formerly known
 as the Mohajir Quami Movement, and headed by Altaf Hussain (MQM-Altaf), a
 large breakaway group (MQM-Haqiqi), and other, smaller factions.
 Violence among these rival MQM factions, especially between the Muttehida
 Quami Movement (MQM-Altaf) and the Mohajir Quami Movement (MQM-Haqiqi),
 continued in waves. The fighting intensified in June, resulting in more than 171
 persons killed. Some of the attacks were believed to have been carried out either
 with police participation or acquiescence. Affected neighborhoods were under the
 control of gunmen. The violence was exacerbated by the creation of a new MQM fac-
 tion, the Basic Association of Citizens of Karachi (BACK), headed by a former body-
 guard of the self-exiled London-based MQM leader Altaf Hussein. The BACK was
 implicated in the torture killings of members of the other two MQM factions (the
 MQM-Altaf and the MQM-Afaq/Haqiqi). These two factions also continued to kill
 each other's activists. The violence slowed somewhat after the Sindh police in-
 creased their presence in Karachi in late June, and paramilitary rangers were al-
 lowed to enter houses without warrants to make arrests. By year's end, more than
 1,000 persons had been killed in politically related violence.
 The fragile Sindh governing coalition between the ruling PML and the MQM-Altaf
 finally collapsed in Auust, but the MQM-Altaf did not brng down the minority gov-
 ernment of Sindh PML Chief Minister Liaqat Jatoi. The MQM-Altaf was angered
 by the Government's inaction in clearing the "no-go areas" occupied by the rival
 MQM-Haqiqi faction, where MQM-Altaf organizers were barred from entry. The
 MQM-Altaf also complained that paramilitary ranger and police operations were di-
 reted primarily aginst them, rather than their rivals. The MQM-Altaf accused se-
 curity forces of killing and torturing scores of its workers. Overall, police and secu-
 rity forces remained free from legal and judicial restraint in Sindh.
 On October 30, the Prime Minister invoked Article 232 of the Constitution to sus-
 pend the Sindh Assembly and impose Governor's Rule in the province after the Oc-
 tober 17 killing of former Sindh governor Hakim Mohammad Saeed. The Govern-
 ment took these steps to combat the growing violence in Karachi. Saeed had been
 outspoken in his criticism of the MQM, which he blamed for terrorist acts in Kara-
 chi. The authorities barricaded the Sindh Provincial.Assembly and forbade meetings
 of Assembly members. On November 21, two MQM Members of the Provincial As-
 sembly (MPAs) were arrested for arms possession during a raid on the MQM office
 in Karachi. Duringquestioning, police beat one of the MPAs, whose eye showed the
 effects of a severe blow in a newspaper photograph. Police claims that he was resist-
 ing arrest were weakened by the fact that the MPA involved is an underweight,
 older man in poor health. One MQM activist died in police custody in October, ap-
 parently as a result of beatings, and another was injured in custody.
 Politics are often a source of violence. In May, 54 persons died in election related
 violence in Punjab (see Section 3).
 During the year there were also killings of government officials. On July 25, there
 was an attempt on the life of National Assembly Member Ibrahim Paracha in
 Kohat; in late August and early September, three lower level government officials
 were killed and another was wounded.
 Asif Ali Zardari, the husband of former Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto, remained
 on trial for the murder of Benazir Bhutto's brother, Murtaza Bhutto. The trial con-
 tinued in closed session at the Karachi jail. Zardari also is facing corruption charges
 and has been implicated in the death of a witness in the Murtaza Bhutto murder
 case. In 1997 Zardari was elected to the Senate, and the Sindh High Court ruled
 that he should be allowed to take his seat. During the year, Zardari was permitted
 to attend senate sessions. In order for Zardari to attend, Senate Chairman Wasim
 Sajiad must issue a production order for Zardari to be released from prison and to
 be housed in a jail in Rawalpindi during senate sessions.
 On April 26, masked gunmen killed 22 villagers in their homes in Barankot,
 Kashmir. On May 4, Foreign Affairs Ministry spokesman Tariq Altaf accused Indian
 agents of carrying out the attack in the Pakistani-controlled area of Kashmir.
 Mob violence remained a problem, and at times resulted in deaths. On February
 1, a mob diverted from prayers at a mosque in Jhampir attacked and beat to death
 a faith healer in nearby Astana.
 Terrorism continued to be a problem, and often resulted in loss of life. In Feb-
 ruary three persons were killed when a bomb exploded near a Shi'a mosque in Ka-
 rachi. In February and March, there was a series of bombings on trains in Punjab.
 On March 9, 10 persons were killed and 30 injured in an explosion on a train bound
 for Quetta from Lahore; on March 10, at least 8 persons were killed and 540 were
 injured in the bombing of a commuter train bound for Lahore. At year's end, it was
 
 
 1938
 not known who was responsible for the bombings. On October 31, 4 persons were
 killed and 30 were injured in a bombing outside of the main mosque in Sialkot, Pun-
 jab. The attack was one of approximately 24 bombings or attempted bombings in
 the area during the year.
 In August, a Shi'a extremist convicted of killing 23 persons in a 1997 bombing
 was executed. In April, two men were sentenced to death for killing five persons in
 1997 (see Section I.e.).
 Indian Government forces fired mortar and artillery shells across the border into
 Pakistani-controlled Kashmir during the year, killing a number of persons..For ex-
 ample, on July 30, Indian troops fired mortars that killed 11 persons and wounded
 20 others in the part of Kashmir controlled by Pakistan. Pakistan government forces
 fired mortar and artillery shells across the line of control into Jammu and Kashmir,
 killing a number of persons. In an August 5 statement to Parliament, India's Union
 Defense Minister stated that Pakistani firing across the line of control into Jammu
 and Kashmir on July 27 and 28 had killed 31 civilians and 81 members of the secu-
 rity forces.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no confirmed cases of politically motivated dis-
 appearances. Those killed in intra-Mohajir violence in Karachi sometimes are first
 held briefly by opposing groups (or, as the MQM-Altaf alleges, 'by security forces)
 and tortured. However, bodies of these victims, often mutilated, generally are
 dumped in the street soon after the victims are abducted.  ,     - 1     , I
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 Although expressly forbidden by the Constitution and the Penal Code, torture and
 other cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment by police remained common. Police
 routinely use force to elicit confessions. While no figures are available on reports
 of torture by security forces, there were fewer reports of torture in the press.
 Human rights observers suggest that because of the widespread use of physical tor-
 ture by the police, suspects usually confess to crimes regardless of their guilt or in-
 nocence; the courts subsequently throw out many such confessions.
 Common torture methods include: beating, burning with cigarettes, -whipping the
 soles of the feet, sexual assault, prolonged isolation, electric shock, deni - of food
 or sleep, hanging upside down, forced spreading of the legs with bar fetters, and
 public humiliation. Some magistrates help cover up the abuse by issuing investiga-
 tion reports stating th ththe victims died of natural causes.
 Torture by the police occurs throughout the country. Awais Akram, a bank teller,
 was tortured severely and pushed from the roof of Civil Lines police station in La-
 hore on March 15 (see Section l.a.). In a widely reported incident in the NWFP,
 a 14-year-old boy was arrested on May 12 in Manshea and was sexually abused
 and trturedprior to his death at the hands of police (see Section l.a.). In late July,
 two men died while in police custody in Lahore; their bodies bore signs of torture
 (see Section L.a.):
 During the first week after the imposition of Governors Rule in Sindh on October
 30 (see Section L.a.), the Human Rights Commission of Pakistan (HRCP) received
 nearly 100 complaints of illegal arrests, harassment of women by police and security
 forces, and torture in custody. Most of those detained after the imposition of Gov-
 ernor's Rule were MQM-Altaf members or their relatives.
 Despite some cases during the year in which police officers were investigated or
 charged in connection with abuse of detainees, the failure of successive governments
 effectively to prosecute and to punish abusers is the single greatest obstacle to end-
 ing or reducing the incidence of abuse by the police., The authorities sometimes
 transferred, suspended, or arrested offending officers, but seldom prosecuted or pun-
 ished them. Investigating officers generally shield their colleagues. Amnesty Inter-
 national (AI) estimates that at least 100 persons die from police torture each year.
 The failure to prosecute and punish abusers in a timely fashion was one of the chief
 arguments used by the Nawaz Sharif Government in introducing the  15th Amend-
 ment designed to enforce Shari'a law throughout the country (see Section I.e.).
 The Anti-Terrorism Act passed in 1997 allowed confessions obtained while in po-
 lice custody to be used to convict defendants in the new "special courts." Human
 rights organizations and the press criticized this provision of the law, as it is com-
 monly believed that the police regularly torture suspects. Police generally did not
 attempt to use confessions to secure convictions under this law and the Government
 agreed to amend the law after the Supreme Court invalidated this and other sec-
 tions of the Anti-Terrorist Act.
 Due to greater scrutiny by nongovernmental organizations (NGO's) and the
 media, as well as a program of prison inspections in the Punjab, torture and abuse
 may be less common in prisons than it is in police stations.
 Police and prison officials frequently use the threat of abuse to extort money from
 prisoners and their families. Police accept money for registration of cases on false
 
 
 1939
 charges and may torture innocent citizens. Persons pay police to humiliate their op-
 ponents and to avenge their personal grievances.
 In the past, successive governments recruited police officers in violation of consid-
 erations of merit and the department's regulations. In some instances, recruits had
 criminal records. In 1997 Punjab province Chief Minister Shahbaz Sharif declared
 that his own police were "corrupt and inefficient." He appointed new senior officials
 to improve effectiveness, while resisting pressure to appoint those recommended by
 influential supporters to police positions. In an attempt to increase police profes-
 sionalism, a Punjab elite police training academy was established in November 1997
 and began training hundreds of constables. It is widely acknowledged that police
 corruption is most serious at the level of the Station House Officer (SHO), the offi-
 cial who runs each individual precinct. Three hundred new SHO's recruited on merit
 are due to begin a long-delayed 20-month special training course. If they are allowed
 to replace corrupt SHO's, observers believe that they might improve police perform-
 ance greatly. However, SHO's are very powerful (it is suspected that some have
 murdered senior police officers that were trying to inhibit their corruption), and ob-
 servers question whether their replacement is feasible.
 It is commonly accepted, and high-ranking government officials have stated pub-
 licly, that police stations are sold-meaning that police officials pay bribes to politi-
 cians and senior officials in the department in order to get posted to the police sta-
 tions of their choice. The police then recoup their investment by extorting money
 from the citizenry.
 Even when actions are taken to address police abuses, the results are often mixed.
 In urban Sindh, the operation of citizen-police liaison committees helped to curb
 some police excesses, but there are still many complaints of police abuse.
 Special women's police stations were established in 1994 in response to growing
 numbers of complaints of custodial abuse of women, including rape. These police
 stations are staffed by female personnel, but receive even less material and human
 resources than regular police stations, according to human rights advocates. Accord-
 ing to the Government's own Commission of Inquiry for Women, the stations do not
 function independently or fulfill their purpose. Despite court orders and regulations
 requiring that female suspects be interrogated only by female police officers, women
 continued to be detained overnight at regular police stations and abused by male
 officers. In a study of Lahore newspapers from January to July 1997, the Commis-
 sion of Inquiry for Women found 52 cases of violence or torture of women while in
 police custody. A woman, "Nasreen," accused the SHO of Lahore's Mozang police
 station of raping her on August 25, after she visited the station to register a com-
 plaint against her in-laws. The case is under internal investigation by Lahore police.
 A police subinspector in Shiekhupura, Punjab, allegedly stripped, hung upside
 down, and tortured a woman on April 20 in an attempt to extort money from her
 after her husband's arrest. Police then raided her home, and took 70 grams of gold
 and a tape recorder. A bailiff from the Lahore High Court released her from custody
 after her son took legal action. The internal police investigation mentioned only iMle-
 gal confinement. Instances of abuse of women in prisons are less frequent than in
 police stations.
 The Hudood Ordinances, promulgated by the central martial law government in
 1979, were an attempt to make the Penal Code more Islamic. These ordinances pro-
 vide for harsh punishments for violations of Islamic law, or Shari'a, including death
 by stoning for unlawful sexual relations and amputation for some other crimes.
 These Koranic penalties-known as Hadd punishments-require a high standard of
 evidence. In effect, four adult Muslim men of good character must witness an act
 for a Hadd punishment to apply. In 19 years, not a single Hadd punishment has
 been carried out. However, on the basis of lesser evidence, ordinary punishments
 such as jail terms or fines are imposed. From 1979 to 1995, over 1 million Hudood
 cases were filed with the police, and 300,000 have been heard by the courts. The
 laws are applied to Muslims and non-Muslims alike.
 Women frequently are charged under the Hudood laws on sexual misconduct, such
 as adultery. Approximately one-third of the women in jails in Lahore, Peshawar,
 and Mardan are awaiting trial for adultery. Most women tried under the ordinance
 are acquitted, but the stigma of having been jailed for adultery is severe. A Hudood
 law meant to deter false accusations is enforced weakly, and one human rights mon-
 itor claimed that 80 percent of all adultery-related Hudood cases are filed without
 any supporting evidence. According to Amnesty International, men accused of rape
 sometimes are acquitted and released while their victims are held on adultery
 charges. The Commission of Inquiry for Women has recommended that the Hudood
 laws be repealed, as they are based on an erroneous interpretation of Shari'a (see
 Section 5).
 
 
 1940
 The Federal Crimes Regulation (FCR), which applies in the Federally Adminis-
 tered Tribal Areas (FATA), allows the punishment of relatives, friends, and neigh-
 bors of suspects. Authorities are empowered to blockade villages or to detain fellow
 members of a fugitive's tribe in order to obtain the surrender of a fugitive. On De-
 cember 13, a Shariat court established by the Tehrik-i-Tulaba, an extremist Islamic
 group in Orakzai Tribal Agency, fined six alleged accomplices to a murder and
 burned down their homes as punishment (see Sections i.e. and 1.f.). ,
 Police at times use excessive force against demonstrators. On April 20, police beat
 PPP demonstrators in front of Parliament who were protesting the trial of PPP lead-
 er Benazir Bhutto on corruption charges. Two PPP Senators who attempted to inter-
 vene also were -beaten by police and required hospitalization. Fifty-one PPP dem-
 onstrators were arrested. At year's end, no action had been taken against the police
 officers involved in the incident. Police also used excessive force in dispersing Chris-
 tian demonstrators in Lahore on May 15, beating and arresting hundreds of dem-
 onstrators, including elderly women.
 Police at times also beat and arrested journalists (see Section 2.a.).
 Terrorist bombings occur on occasion. Soon after the death of an MQM activist
 in custody on October 2, two small bombs exploded in central Karachi, but no one
 was injured. On December 22, a small bomb planted under a pew in St. Patrick's
 Cathedral in Karachi went off, causing minor damage and injuring one person.
 Other bombs resulted in numerous deaths and injuries (see Section l.a.).
 Prison conditions are extremely poor. Overcrowding is a major problem, and the
 Law Commission estimates that almost every jail in the country has two to three
 times more prisoners than its nominal capacity. According to official statistics, the
 country's jails have a capacity of 34,101 prisoners, but, as of June 30, 1997, they
 held 81,904 convicted and "under trial" prisoners. In Punjab 54,561 are being held
 in 28 facilities with a capacity of 17,271. Some 80 percent of prisoners are "awaiting
 trial," mostly for petty offenses.
 There are three classes (A, B, and C) of prison facilities. Class "C" cells generally
 hold common criminals and those in pretrial detention. Such cells often have dirt
 floors, no furnishings, and poor food. The use of handcuffs and painful leg fetters
 is common. Prisoners in these cells reportedly suffer the most abuse, such as beat-
 ings and being forced to kneel for long periods. The Senate's Committee on Human
 Rights reported to the Prime Minister that at one facility in Hyderabad, 60 pris-
 oners-were confined in a space 100 feet by 30 feet with only one latrine. Such un-
 sanitary conditions are common in small, poorly ventilated and decrepit colonial-era
 prisons. Inadequate food, often consisting of only-a few pieces of bread, leads to
 chronic malnutrition for-those unable to supplement their diet with help from family
 or friends. Mentally ill prisoners usually are not provided with adequate treatment
 and often are not segregated from the general prison population. Foreign prisoners
 often remain in prison long after their sentences are completed because there is no
 one to pay for their deportation to their home country. Conditions in "B" and "A"
 cells are markedly better than in "C" cells. Prisoners in "A" cells are permitted to
 have servants, special food, and televisions. The authorities reserve "A" cells for
 prominent persons. Especially prominent individuals-including some political fig-
 ures-sometimes are held under house arrest and permitted to receive visitors.
 The Government permits prison visits by human rights monitors.
 Landlords in rural Sindh and political factions in Karachi operated private jails.
 Such jails are believed to exist in tribal and feudal areas. Human rights groups al-
 lege that as many as 50 private jails, housing some 4,500 bonded laborers, were
 being maintained by landlords in lower Sindh. Some prisoners reportedly have been
 held in them for many years. On September 9, a Sindh landlord, Rias-Mureed Khan
 Marri, led a group of armed men to seize a group of 107 of his former bonded labor-
 ers, who had been freed 2 years ago. In the attack, at least 25 persons, including
 a British priest, were injured, one woman miscarried, and an elderly woman later
 died from her wounds. NGO and press pressure moved the Sindh Chief Minister to
 intervene. Eighty-five members of the group were released. At year's end, the police
 were searching for the remaining 22.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The law regulates arrest and detention
 procedures; however, the authorities do not always comply with the law, and police
 arbitrarily arrested and detained citizens. The law permits a Deputy Commissioner
 (DC) of a local district to order detention without charge for 30 days of persons sus-
 pected of threatening public order and safety. The DC may renew detention in 30-
 day increments, up to a total of 90 days. Human rights monitors report instances
 in which prisoners jailed under the Maintenance of Public Order Act have been im-
 prisoned for up to 6 months without charge. For other criminal offenses, the police
 may hold a suspect for 24 hours without charge. After the prisoner is produced be-
 fore a magistrate, the court can grant permission for continued detention for a maxi-
 
 
 1941
 mum period of 14 days if the police provide material proof that this is necessary
 for an investigation.
 Police may arrest individuals on the basis of a First Incident Report (FIR) filed
 by a complainant. The police have been known to file FIR's without supporting evi-
 dence. FIR's thus frequently are used to harass or intimidate individuals. Charges
 against an individual also may be based on a "blind" FIR, which lists the perpetra-
 tars as "person or persons unknown." If the case is not solved, the FIR is placed
 in the inactive fie. When needed, a FIR is reactivated and taken to a magistrate
 by the police, who then name a suspect and ask that the suspect be remanded for
 14 days while they investigate further. After 14 days, the case is dropped for lack
 of evidence, but another FIR is then activated and brought against the accused. In
 this manner, rolling charges can be used to hold a suspect in continuous custody.
 If the police can provide material proof that detention (physical remand or police
 custody for the purpose of interrogation) is necessary for an investigation, a court
 may extend detention for a total of 14 days. However, such proof may be little more
 than unsubstantiated assertions by the police. In practice, the authorities do not
 fully observe the limits on detention. Police are not required to notify anyone when
 an arrest is made and often hold detainees without charge until a court challenges
 them. The police sometimes detain individuals arbitrarily without charge, or on
 false charges, in order to extort payment for their release. Human rights monitors
 report that a number of police stations have secret detention cells in which individ-
 uals are kept while the police bargain for a higher price for their release. There are
 also reports that the police move prisoners from one police station to another if they
 suspect a surprise visit by higher authorities. Some women continue to be arbitrar-
 ily detained and sexually abused (see Section 1.c.). Police also detain relatives of
 wanted criminals in order to compel suspects to surrender (see Section 1.f.). Police
 have been known to detain persons in connection with personal vendettas. In early
 December, Humaira Mahmood, daughter of a Punjabprovincial assembly member,
 was taken by her brother and several Punjab police officers from a shelter in Kara-
 chi where she had taken refuge from her family after marrying against the wishes
 of her father. Sindh police cooperated in the raid of the shelter. Mahmood was held
 illegally until public protests led Governor Moinuddin Haider to intervene (also see
 Sections 2.d. and 5).
 The law stipulates that detainees must be brought to trial within 30 days of their
 arrest. However, in many cases trials do not start until 6 months after the filing
 of charges.
 The Government permits visits by human rights monitors, family members, and
 lawyers. However, in some cases, authorities refuse family visits and in some police
 stations persons are expected to pay bribes in order to visit a prisoner. The Feder-
 ally Administered Tribal areas (FATA) have a separate legal system, the Frontier
 Crimes Regulation (FCR), which recognizes the doctrine of collective responsibility.
 Authorities are empowered to detain the fellow members of a fugitive's tribe, or to
 blockade the fugitive's village, pending his surrender or punishment by his own
 tribe in accordance with local tradition. The Government continued to exercise such
 authority, repeatedly, during the year. A boy, Roman Al, arrested in 1993 at the
 age of 12 for his fugitive elder brother's crimes, was sentenced to 42 years' imprison-
 ment in 1994. In 1996, a petition against this sentence in the Peshawar High Court
 was dismissed. Al's appeal to the Secretary of the Home Department and to the
 Supreme Court both still are pending.
 The Government sometimes uses mass arrests to quell civil unrest. Sectarian vio-
 lence in the Punjab prompted the Government on several occasions to round up
 hundreds of members of extremist groups and students at religious schools believed
 to be terrorist recruiting centers and training grounds. Police also arrested dem-
 onstrators, including members of religious minorities and political parties (see Sec-
 tions 2.a. and 2.b.).
 The Accountability Commission established by the 1996-97 caretaker government
 has been overshadowed by an "accountability cell" headed by a close associate of the
 Prime Minister, Senator Saifur Rehman. This cell, ostensibly initiated to uncover
 corruption in an evenhanded manner, has conducted politically driven investigations
 of, and campaigns of vilification against, opposition politicians, senior civil servants,
 and business figures. These investigations are designed to extract evidence and in
 some cases, televised confessions of alleged wrongdoers. Authorities arrested and
 questioned the wife and daughter of former Pakistan Steel executive Usman Farooqi
 in an attempt to pressure the already-imprisoned Farooqi. In an effort to compel a
 former bureaucrat to return to Pakistan, the Government prevented the departure
 of family members, even those who were not citizens of Pakistan, on the grounds
 that they were "beneficiaries" of alleged corruption. In late July, the Lahore High
 Court ruled that this approach was invalid.
 
 
 1942
 The opposition PPP compiled a list of 91 cases in which the Government had sub-
 jected its supporters to harassment, police raids, or threats. The total also includes
 party workers killed in personal vendettas or in Karachi's political violence.
 Most politicians and bureaucrats ,who have been charged with corruption or other
 crimes are out on bail. The MQM contends that 750 of its members are still in jail
 on politically motivated charges that date from the 1992-96 period. Since the begin-
 ning of Governor's Rule in October hundreds. of MQM activists have been arrested
 in the government's crackdown on terrorism. The MQM asserts that they are tar-
 geted, despite government claims of even-handedness.
 The Government does not use forced exile.
 * e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The Constitution provides for an independent judi-
 ciary, however, in practice, the judiciary is subject to political influence. During the
 course of 1997, the judiciary vigorously asserted its authority in disputes with the
 executive branch, but was outmaneuvered b the Prime Minister. At one point, sup-
 porters of the Prime Minister stormed the Supreme Court building. The Chief Jus-
 tice was forced to flee the building when police took no action to stop the Prime
 Minister's supporters. Executive power was enhanced by the constitutional con-
 frontation between the Prime Minister and the Chief Justice over the selection of
 Supreme Court justices. As a result of this struggle, President Farooq Leghari re-
 signed in December 1997, and the Prime Minister's own candidate, former judge
 Rafiq Tarar, was selected for the presidency by the National Assembly. Also, a Su-
 preme Court panel deprived the Chief Justice of his position and a: new- Chief Jus-
 tice was sworn in. Many observers fear that these events damaged the prestige and
 independence of the judiciary. However, the Supreme Court demonstrated a contin-
 ued degree of independence on a number of occasions. Nonetheless, low salaries, in-
 adequate resources, heavy workloads, and corruption contribute to judicial ineffi-
 ciency, particularly in the lower courts.
 In May the Lahore High Court Bar Association boycotted the swearing-in of new
 judges and objected to the removal of other "temporary judges" appointed earlier to
 the court. Pro-opposition lawyers believed that the executive was stacking the court
 with political sympathizers, but some, neutral observers argued that merit played
 a role in most appointment decisions. The Lahore High Court overturned several
 provisions of the Government's Anti-Terrorism Act on March 9, citing its limitations
 on the judiciary's independent appellate authority. On May 15, the Supreme Court
 upheld the High Court's ruling, and gave the Government 90 days to amend the
 law. The Government amended the legislation in October. However, the antiterrorist
 courts remained mostly idle. Most of the controversial provisions of the law were
 never tested and only one execution of a terrorist suspect has been carried out
 under the law, after appeals to both the Lahore High Court and the Supreme Court.
 Mehram Ali, a Shi'a extremist who was convicted of the killing of 23 persons in the
 1997 bombing of the Lahore sessions court, was hanged in prison on August 11. Two
 men were sentenced to death on April 5 for the killing of five Iranians in Rawal-
 pindi in 1997, but have not yet been executed.
 On May 18, the Supreme Court also upheld the right of parliamentarians to ex-
 press dissent from party policy. The 14th Amendment to the Constitution allows the
 expulsion of any party member who commits a "breach of party discipline," a meas-
 ure meant to limit problematic defections and corrupt "horse trading." Defectors are
 still subject to expulsion-but are allowed to speak their minds as long as they vote
 with their party. The Supreme Court's decisions in these cases restored the faith
 of many in the independence of the judiciary.
 On May 28, immediately after Pakistan's nuclear tests, President Tarar declared
 a state of emergency, suspending all fundamental rights ensured by the Constitu-
 tion. On July 13, as the Supreme Court was considering the constitutionality of this
 move, the President overturned some of the state of emergency provisions, restoring
 18 of 27 fundamental rights enumerated in the Constitution. On July 28, the Su-
 preme Court upheld the state of emergency declaration but ruled that the Govern-
 ment's effort to suspend fundamental rights under Article 233(2) of the Constitution
 was without justification under the circumstances leading to the state of emergency
 and thus was not legal. However, the Supreme Court did not challenge the Govern-
 ment's curtailment of fundamental rights under article 233(j) of the Constitution.
 Nevertheless, the Government generally did not invoke the state of emergency to
 deny fundamental liberties in court cases.
 The judicial system involves several different court systems with overlapping and
 sometimes competing jurisdictions. There are civil and criminal systems with special
 courts for banking, antinarcotics and antiterrorist cases, as well as the federal
 Shariat appeals courts for certain Hudood offenses. The Hudood ordinances crim-
 inalize nonmarital rape, extramarital sex (including adultery and fornication), and
 various gambling, alcohol, and property offenses. The appeals process in the civil
 
 
 1943
 system is: civil court, district court, High Court, and the Supreme Court. In the
 criminal system, the progression is magistrate, sessions court, High Court, and the
 Supreme Court.
 Special antiterrorist courts began operation in Punjab in August 1997, and were
 virtually shut down by decisions of the Lahore High Court in March and the Su-
 preme Court in May. Subject to appeal, these decisions allowed previous convictions
 of the courts to stand and the courts continued to convict a few prisoners without
 recourse to disputed provisions. In October, the Government amended the lawpur-
 suant to the decision of the Supreme Court. The antiterrorist courts, designed for
 the speedy punishment of terrorist suspects, have special streamlined procedures,
 but due to continued terrorist intimidation of witnesses, police, and judges, produced
 only a handful of convictions of terrorist suspects before their operation was effec-
 tively suspended by the March Lahore High Court decision. The judiciary has ar-
 gued that it has not been able to try and convict terrorist suspects in a timely man-
 ner because of poor police casework, prosecutorial negligence, and the resulting lack
 of evidence. Under the Anti-Terrorist Act, terrorist killings are punishable by death
 and any act, including speech, intended to stir up religious hatred is punishable by
 up to 7 years' rigorous imprisonment. Cases are to be decided within 7 working
 days, and trials in absentia were permitted, though trials in absentia were banned
 by the Lahore High Court decision in March. Appeals to an appellate tribunal also
 were required to take no more than 7 days, but appellate authority since has been
 restored to the High and Supreme Courts. Under the Anti-Terrorist Act, bail is not
 to be granted if the court has reasonable grounds to believe that the accused is
 guilty. Because of the law's bail provisions, Islamic scholar Yusuf Ali was unable
 to obtain bail. After the suspension of this provision, judges continued to avoid hear-
 ing his bail application. He has been held in a "C" class cell since March 1997.
 Leading members of the judiciary, human rights groups, the press, and politicians
 from a number of parties expressed strong reservations about the new courts, charg-
 ing that they constitute a parallel judicial system and could be used as tools of polit-
 ical repression. However, concerns over political use of the act were largely unreal-
 ized. Government officials and police believed that the deterrent impact of the act's
 death penalty provisions contributed significantly to a reductionin sectarian terror
 after its passage. The antiterrorist courts also are empowered to try persons accused
 of particularly "heinous" crimes, such as gang rape and child murders, and several
 convicts have been executed under these provisions. In 1997 cases filed under sec-
 tion 295(a) of the Penal Code (one of the so-caled blasphemy laws) were transferred
 to the antiterrorist courts. Human rights advocates feared that if blasphemy cases
 were tried in the antiterrorist courts, alleged blasphemers who in the past normally
 were granted bail or released for lack of evidence were likely to be convicted, given
 the less stringent rules of evidence required under the Anti-Terrorism Act.
 The Government continued to complain that the existing court system was inad-
 equate to address serious challenges to public authority from terrorist violence. On
 November 20, Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif announced the establishment of mili-
 tary courts in Karachi, which had been under Governor's Rule since October 30.
 These courts were to try cases involving heinous acts and terrorism. They were in-
 tended to bring swifter justice to the city, which had been plagued by terrorism, vio-
 lence, and a general breakdown in law and order. Military courts began operating
 on December 6. By December 20, six persons had been convicted and sentenced to
 death, and four others had been sentenced to rigorous imprisonment. The HRCP
 protested that the military courts and Governor's Rule violate the Constitution.
 The civil judicial system provides for an open trial, the presumption of innocence,
 cross-examination by an attorney, and appeal of sentences. Attorneys are appointed
 for indigents only in capital cases. There are no jury trials. Due to the limited num-
 ber of judges, the heavy backlog of cases, and lengthy court procedures, cases rou-
 tinely take years, although defendants are required to make frequent court appear-
 ances. Under both the Hudood and standard criminal codes, there are bailable and
 nonbailable offenses. According to the Criminal Procedures Code, the accused in
 bailable offenses must be granted bail. The Code also stipulates that those accused
 in nonbailable offenses should be granted bail if the crime of which they are accused
 carries a sentence of less than 10 years. Many accused, especially well-connected in-
 dividuals who are made aware of impending warrants against them, are also able
 to obtain pre-arrest bail, and are thus spared both arrest and incarceration.
 The federal Shariat Court and the Shari'a bench of the Supreme Court serve as
 appellate courts for certain convictions in criminal court under the Hudood ordi-
 nances. The Hudood ordinances criminalize nonmarital rape, extramarital sex (in-
 cluding adultery and fornication), and various gambling, alcohol, and property of-
 fenses. The federal Shariat Court also may overturn any legislation judged to be in-
 
 
 1944
 consistent with the tenets of Islam. However, these cases may be appealed to the
 Shari'a bench of the Supreme Court.
 The judicial process continued to be impeded by bureaucratic infighring, inac-
 tivity, and the overlapping jurisdictions of the different court systems. While some
 vacant judgeships were fed this year, heavy backlogs that severely delayed the ap-
 plication of justice remained, due to scores of unfilled judgeships and to archaic and
 inefficient court procedures. The politicized appointment process also holds up the
 promotion of manylower court judges to the High Courts. Although the higher level
 judiciary is considered competent and generally honest, there are widespread re-
 ports of corrupti6n among lower level magistrates and minor court functionaries.
 Persons in jail, awaiting trial sometimes are held for periods longer than the sen-
 tence they would receive if convicted. Court officials report that each judge reviews
 between 70 and 80 cases per day, but that action is taken on only 3 or 4 each week.
 Eighty thousand criminal cases Were reported pending in Sindh at the'end of 1997,
 67,800 of which were in Karachi. The Law Ministry, in reply to a question in the
 National Assembly in 1997, reported that there were over 150,000 cases pending
 with the superior judiciary, which includes the Supreme Court and the four provin-
 cial High Courts. Clogged lower courts exacerbate the situation; the majority of
 cases in the High Courts consist of appeals of lower court rulings. Once an appeal
 reaches the High Court, there are further opportunities for delay because decisions
 of individual judges frequently are referred to panels composed of two or three
 judges. There continued to be charges that magistrates and police, under pressure
 to achieve high conviction rates, persuade detainees to plead guilty without inform-
 ing them of the consequeices. Poitically powerfuIl persons also attempt to influence
 magistrates' decisions and have used various forms of pressure on magistrates, in-
 cluding the threat to transfer them to other assignments.
 The Penal Code incorporates the docfrine of Qisas (roughly, an eye for an eye)
 and Diyat (blood money). Qisas is not known to have been invoked, but Diyat is
 used, with the result that compensation is sometimes paid to the family of a victim
 in place of punishment of the wrongdoer. Under these ordinances only the family
 of the victim, not the State, may pardon the defendant. The Hudood, Qisas, and
 Diyat ordinances apply to -both ordinary criminal courts and Shariat courts. Accord-
 ing to Christian activists, if a Muslim murders a non-Muslim, he can compensate
 for the crime by paying the 'victim's family Diyat; however, a non-Muslim does not
 have the option of paying Diyat and must serve a jail sentence-or face the death
 penalty for his crime. .Although not commonly used, the Penal Code's provision for
 iyat occasionally is applied, particularly in the NWFP. Failure to ay Diyat in non-
 capital cases can result in indefinitely extended incarceration, under Section 331 of
 the Diyat ordinance. The Human Rights Commission of Pakistan made public the
 case of one such convict, Nosheran Khan, in the NWFP. Khan has been in prison
 since 1996 and cannot be released until he pays his Diyat fine of approximately
 $3,843 (PRs 20,000).
 Appeals of certain Hudood convictions involving penalties in excess of 2 years' im-
 prisonment -are referred exclusively to the Shariat courts and are heard jointly by
 Islamic scholars and High Court judges using ordinary criminal procedures. Judges
 and attorneys must be Muslim and be familiar with Islamic law. Within these lim-
 its, defendants in a Shariat court are entitled to the lawyer of their choice. There
 is a system of bail.
 The Hudood ordinances criminalize nonmarital rape, extramarital sex (including
 adultery and fornication), and various gambling, alcohol, and property offenses. Of-
 fenses are distinguished according to punishment, with some offenses liable to
 Hadd, or Koranic punishment (see Section 1.c.), and others to Tazir, or secular pun-
 ishment. Although both types of cases are tried in ordinary criminal courts, special
 rules of evidence apply in Hadd cases. For example, a non-Muslim may not testify
 against a Muslim, but may testify against another non-Muslim. Likewise, the testi-
 mony of a woman is not admissible in cases involving Hadd punishments. No Hadd
 punishment has ever been applied in the 19 years that the Hudood ordinances have
 been in force. A woman's testimony regarding financial matters is not admissible
 unless corroborated by another woman (see Section 5).
 Administration of justice in the FATA is normally the responsibility of tribal el-
 ders and maliks, or leaders. They may conduct hearings according to Islamic law
 and tribal custom. In such proceedings the accused have no right to legal represen-
 tation, bail, or appeal. The usual penalties consist of fines, even for murder. How-
 ever, the Government's political agents, who are federal civil servants assigned to
 tribal agencies, oversee such proceedings and may impose prison terms of up to 14
 years. Paramilitary forces under the direction of the political agents frequently per-
 form punitive actions during enforcement operations. For example, in raids on crimi-
 nal activities, the authorities have been known to damage surrounding homes as
 
 
 1945
 
 extrajudicial punishment of residents for having tolerated nearby criminal activity.
 On December 13, Khial Ghaffer was executed publicly in Khadezo village in Orakzai
 Tribal Agency after being found guilty of murder 3 weeks before by a local Shariat
 court established by the Tehrik-i-Tulaba, an extremist Islamic group in Orakzai. Six
 of Ghaffer's alleged accomplices were fined and their homes were razed (see Sections
 1.c. and i.f.).
 In remote areas outside the jurisdiction of federal political agents, tribal councils
 occasionally levy harsher, unsanctioned punishments, including flogging or death by
 shooting or stoning.
 Another related form of rough justice operating in the NWFP, particularly in the
 tribal areas, is the concept of Pakhtunwali, or the Pakhtun Tribal Code, in which
 revenge is an important element Under this code, a man, his family, and his tribe
 are obligated to take revenge for wrongs-either real or perceived-in order to re-
 deem their honor. More often than not, these disputes arise over women and land,
 and frequently result in violence, such as the July killings of Hidayat Bibi and her
 husband. Hidayat's uncle killed both of them after they eloped (see Section 5).
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Government infringes on citizen's privacy rights. Prior to the substantive suspension
 of the Supreme Court in May, the Anti-Terrorism Law allowed police, or military
 personnel acting as police, to enter and to search homes and offices without search
 warrants, and to confiscate property or arms likely to be used in a terrorist act
 (which is defined very broadly). This provision was never tested in the courts. By
 prior law, the police had to obtain a warrant to search a house, but they did not
 need a warrant to search a person. Regardless of the law, the police entered homes
 without a warrant and have been known to steal valuables during searches. In the
 absence of a warrant, a policeman is subject to charges of criminal trespass. How-
 ever, policemen seldom are punished for illegal entry.
 The Government maintains several domestic intelligence services that monitor
 politicians, political activists, suspected terrorists, and suspected foreign intelligence
 agents. Credible reports indicate that the authorities routinely use wiretaps and
 intercept and open mail. In his order dismissing former Prime Minister Bhutto in
 1996, President Leghari accused the Government of massive illegal wiretapping, in-
 cluding eavesdropping on the telephone conversations of judges, political party lead-
 ers, and military and civilian officials. In 1997 the Supreme Court directed the fed-
 eral Government to seek the Court's permission before carrying out any future wire-
 tapping or eavesdropping operations. Nonetheless, that same year, a lawyer for a
 former director of the Intelligence Bureau, charged with illegal wiretapping during
 Benazir Bhutto's second term in office, presented the Supreme Court with a list of
 12 government agencies that still tapped and monitored telephone calls of citizens.
 The case is pending in the Supreme Court. A press story in October quoted anony-
 mous cabinet ministers who complained of wiretapping of their telephones by the
 Intelligence Bureau.
 Police sometimes arrest and detain relatives of wanted criminals in an attempt
 to compel suspects to surrender. In some cases, the authorities have detained whole
 families in order to force a relative who was the subject of an arrest warrant to sur-
 render (see Section 1.d.).
 The Frontier Crimes Regulation, the separate legal system in the FATA, permits
 collective responsibility, and empowers the authorities to detain innocent members
 of the suspect's tribe, or blockade an entire village (see Section 1.d.). The Govern-
 ment demolished the houses of several alleged criminals, as well as the homes of
 those who allegedly tolerated nearby criminal activity. On December 13, a Shariat
 court established by the Tehrik-i-Tulaba, an extremist Islamic group in Orakzai
 Tribal Agency, fined six alleged accomplices to a murder and burned down their
 homes as punishment (see Sections 1.c. and i.e.). On December 29, riots occurred
 in Karachi in response to the demolition by security forces of up to 300 homes in
 the low income Gharibabad neighborhood, which is widely considered to be an
 MQM-Altaf stronghold. Authorities claimed that the homes were built without per-
 mits and that they sheltered terrorists and criminals.
 In March three young girls who had converted to Islam from Christianity were
 removed from their parent's custody by a court (see Section 2.c.). The importance
 of the parent's religion in the judge's decision, however, was not clear.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of speech
 and of the press, and citizens are broadly free to discuss public issues; however,
 journalists practice a degree of self-censorship, conforming to prevailing journalistic
 practice and local mores. Views expressed in editorials and commentary are often
 frank and pointed in their criticism of the Government. True investigative journal-
 
 
 1946
 
 ism is rare, instead the press acts freely to publish charges and countercharges by
 named and unnamed parties and individuals representing competing class, political
 and social interests.
 Anyone who damages the Constitution by any act, including the publication of
 statements against the spirit of the Constitution, can be prosecuted for treason.
 However, prosecutions under this provision have been rare. The Constitution also
 prohibits the ridicule of Islam, of the armed forces, or of the judiciary. This provi-
 sion served as grounds for the 1997 charges against the presidential candidacy of
 Rafiq Tarar, the current President, based on press statements made several years
 previously that were critical of the judiciary. The charges against Tarar were later
 dismissed.
 The Penal Code mandates the death sentence for anyone defiling the name of the
 Prophet Mohammed, life imprisonment for desecrating the Koran, and up to 10
 years in prison for insulting another's religious beliefs (i.e., any religion, not just
 Islam) with intent to outrage religious feelings (see Section 2.c.). The effectively sus-
 pended Anti-Terrorist Act stipulates imprisonment with rigorous labor for up to 7
 years for using abusive or insulting words, or possessing or distributing written or
 recorded material, -with intent to stir up sectarian hatred. No warrant is required
 to seize such material. On'January 19; the editor of the Urdu daily Pakistan and
 several other journalists from that paper were arrested and held-briefly for publish-
 ing a routine passage from a serialization of a popular account of the life of the
 Prophet Mohammed. The work quoted an incident in which the Prophet's son-in-
 law, Ali, who is revered by members of the Shi'a sect, reportedly drank alcohol be-
 fore the revelation of its prohibition. Any concerns that publication of this item
 would enrage the Shi'a were proved groundless. After a published apology, authori-
 ties released the editor and journalists.
 The competitive nature of politics helps'to ensure press freedom, since the media
 often serve as a forum for political parties, commercial, religious, and various other
 interests, as well as influential individuals, to compete with and criticize each other
 publicly. Although the press does not criticize Islam as such, leaders of'religious
 parties and movements are not exempt from the public scrutiny and criticism rou-
 tinely experienced by their secular counterparts. The press traditionally has avoided
 negative coverage of the armed forces, and the Office of Inter-Services Public Rela-
 tions (ISPR) has served to hold press coverage of military matters under close re-
 straint. Officially, the ISPR closely controls and coordinates the release of military
 news and access to military sources.
 Detailed 'public discussion of the military as an institution is severely hampered
 since any published discussion, let alone criticism, of the defense budget is pro-
 scribed by law. However, in 1997 this code of silence was undermined when a Na-
 tional Assembly committee, by discussion of defense appropriations and corruption
 in defense contracts in open session, made possible (and legal) newspaper coverage
 of the same issues. Discussion of the defense budget continued during the year, es-
 pecially in the English language press. The resignation of Chief of Army Staff Gen-
 eral Jehangir Karamat in October also was widely discussed in the press.
 Government leaks, while not uncommon, are managed carefully: It is common
 knowledge that journalists, who routinely are underpaid, are on the unofficial pay-
 rolls of many competing interests, and the military (or elements within it) is pre-
 sumed to be no exception. Favorable press coverage of the Prime Minister's family
 compound/hospital/college south of Lahore was widely understood to have been ob-
 tained for a price. Rumors of intimidation, heavy-handed surveillance, and even
 legal action to quiet the unduly curious or nondeferential reporter are common. The
 Government has considerable leverage over the press through its substantial budget
 for advertising and public interest campaigns, its control over newsprint, and its
 ability to enforce regulations. The country's leading Urdu daily, Jang, and the
 English-language daily News, both owned by Shakil Ur-Rehman, were cut off for a
 time from critical government advertising revenue after publishing articles unflat-
 tering to the Government. The Jang group also was served with approximately $13
 million in tax notices, harassed by government inspectors, and pressured not to pub-
 lish articles. There is credible evidence that Senator Saifur Rehman, a close associ-
 ate of the Prime Minister and head of the Accountability Bureau,. demanded that
 a number of journalists and editors be fired. Jang also reportedly had difficulty ob-
 taining sufficient newsprint to publish. Rehana Hakim, editor of the English-lan-
 guage monthly Newsline also has complained that her publication, which is highly
 critical of the Government and does not receive government advertising revenue,
 has been raided and harassed by tax inspectors and security agents. The editors of
 the weekly The Friday Times have alleged government harassment of their staff as
 well. On March 19, Public of Karachi, a local Urdu-language daily, was banned by
 the local magistrate and ceased publication on March 20.
 
 
 1947
 
 The State no longer publishes daily newspapers; the former Press Trust sold or
 liquidated its string of newspapers and magazines in the early 1990's. The Ministry
 of Information controls and manages the country's primary wire service-APP, the
 Associated Press of Pakistan. APP is both the Government's own news agency and
 the official carrier of international wire service stories to the local media. The few
 small, privately owned wire services usually are circumspect in their coverage of
 sensitive domestic news and tend to follow a government line.
 A Print, Press, and Publications Ordinance, requiring the registration of printing
 presses and newspapers, was allowed to lapse in 1997 after several years of waning
 application. In practice, registering a new publication is a simple administrative act,
 and is not subject to political or government scrutiny.
 In August Government attempts to establish a Press Council, led by the editor
 of the Urdu daily Nawai-e-Waqt, were successfully opposed by journalist unions.
 Journalists objected to the inclusion of government representatives and the exclu-
 sion of working journalists from what was supposed to be a self-regulating rather
 than a government-directed body.
 Foreign books must pass government censors before being reprinted. Books and
 magazines may be imported freely, but are likewise subject to censorship for objec-
 tionable sexual or religious content. English language publications have not been af-
 fected by the direct proscription of books and magazines promulgated by the Chief
 Commissioner in Islamabad, who banned five Sindhi-language publications in the
 second half of 1997 for "objectionable material against Pakistan," i.e., expressions
 of Sindhi nationalism.
 Privately owned newspapers freely discuss public policy and criticize the Govern-
 ment. They report remarks-made by opposition politicians, and their editorials re-
 flect a wide spectrum of views. The effort to ensure that newspapers carry their
 statements or press releases sometimes leads to undue pressure by local police, po-
 litical parties, ethnic, sectarian, and religious groups, militant student organiza-
 tions, and occasionally commercial interests. Such pressure is a common feature of
 journalism, and, when a group is extreme in its views, can include physical violence,
 the sacking of offices, the intimidation or beating of journalists, and interference
 with the distribution of newspapers. At times, landlords and their agents, who have
 become accustomed to terrorizing the powerless on their lands in an atmosphere of
 impunity, also retaliate against journalists who shed light on their crimes. For ex-
 ample, on August 17, two journalists who had alleged that a landlord was respon-
 sible for the kidnaping and gang rape of an orphan were fired upon by the landlord
 in question. The local police SHO had not registered the rape. Journalists working
 in small provincial towns and villages generally can expect more difficulties from
 arbitrary local authorities and influential individuals than their big city counter-
 parts.
 However, violence against and intimidation of journalists is a nationwide problem.
 For example, in January, the federal police ransacked the home of Raja Tariq, a
 crime reporter for Jang. The police, who had no warrant, accused him of harboring
 MQM activists. The police officials who raided his home reportedly were suspended.
 On June 21, police officers beat journalist M. Ismail Jatoi in Shikarpur for
 photographing a policeman allegedly in the act of taking a bribe. On July 9, a bomb
 exploded in the offices of Dawn, a daily newspaper in Karachi. No one was injured,
 but the building was damaged. A car bomb had exploded nearby 30 minutes prior
 to the explosion in the offices of Dawn. The newspaper recently had been publishing
 stories on sabotage and terrorism. On July 19, police in Hyderabad beat two jour-
 nalists. An investigation into the incident was ordered, and the police officer in-
 volved was suspended. On August 16, PML youth wing activists attacked the editor-
 in-chief of a local weekly newspaper in Chukwal, Punjab, for publishing what they
 considered an anti-PML story. On September 15, Pervaiz ul Hassan was arrested
 after reporting on corruption in the local police force and civil administration. In
 September a journalist in Peshawar began receiving death threats and went into
 hiding after publishing articles about child abuse at various local madrassahs (reli-
 gious schools) and about the Jamiat-i-Ulema-i-Islam party's General Secretary for
 the NWFP. Members of the Tehrik-i-Jafaria Pakistan (TJP) attacked four journal-
 ists in Karachi after covering the funeral of a slain TJP leader and the subsequent
 riot. TJP members seized and damaged the journalist's cameras and other equip-
 ment to prevent publication of photographs of the incident. In early October 2 Af-
 ghan journalists were shot at in separate incidents in connection with articles they
 had published. Taliban agents are suspected to have been the gunmen.
 Zafaryab Ahmad, a free-lance Lahore-based ournalist, was arrested in 1995 and
 charged with sedition after he reported on child labor. He was accused of working
 with Indian Intelligence to damage Pakistan's carpet industry exports through false
 reporting. His case still is pending in the courts. While child labor is now accepted
 
 
 1948
 
 publicly as a general problem by both the Government and industry leaders,
 Zafaryab was not permitted to leave the country and take up a prestigious academic
 fellowship abroad until December, 5 months after he requested permission to de-
 part.
 The broadcast media are government monopolies. The Government owns and op-
 erates the bulk of radio and television stations through its two official broadcast bu-
 reaucracies, the Pakistan Broadcasting Corporation (PBC) and Pakistan Television
 (PTV). Domestic news coverage and public affairs programming on these broadcast
 media are closely controlled by the Government and traditionally have reflected
 strongly the views of the party in power. One private radio station, one television
 broadcaster, and a semi-private cable television operation have been licensed under
 special contractual arrangements with the Government (these are under investiga-
 tion-for possible corruption in making deals, but so far no irregularities have been
 found). The private television station occasionally has been closed due to disputes
 with the Ministry of Information and to financial difficulties. None of these stations
 is permitted to produce news and public affairs programming; the private television
 station rebroadcasts or simulcasts the regular PTV evening news. However, the pri-
 vate Shalimar Television Network (STN) rebroadcasts Cable News Network (CNN)
 and British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC) feeds. While STN routinely censors
 those segments considered to be socially or sexually offensive, rarely, if ever, are for-
 eign news stories censored for content. The Ministry of Information monitors adver-
 tising on all broadcast media, editing or removing advertisements deemed morally
 objectionable. The Prime Minister established strict rules regarding morality in gov-
 ernment broadcasting and advertising on PTV in 1997, banning western-style danc-
 ing, male and female co-hosting of programs, and depictions of women washing in
 soap commercials. In January the government of Punjab stated that dances per-
 formed by women would be banned from television broadcasts, but took no steps to
 implement the decree. Satellite dishes are readily available on the local market and
 are priced within reach of almost everyone with a television set-well into the
 lower-middle classes. South Asian satellite channels (usually India-based) have be-
 come very important sources of news and information, as well as popular entertain-
 ment.
 Literary and creative works remain generally free of censorship. Dance perform-
 ances, even classical performances, are subject to protest by certain religious groups.
 Obscene literature, a category broadly defined by the Government, is subject to sei-
 zure. Dramas and documentaries on previously taboo subjects, including corruption,
 social privilege, narcotics, violence against women, and female inequality, are broad-
 cast on television, but some sensitive series have been cancelled before broadcast.
 The Government and universities generally respect academic freedom. However,
 the atmosphere of violence and intolerance fostered by student organizations, typi-
 cally tied to political parties, continued to threaten academic freedom, despite the
 fact that a 1992 Supreme Court ruling prohibits student political organizations on
 campuses. On some campuses, well-armed groups of students, primarily from radi-
 cal religious organizations, clash with and intimidate other students, instructors,
 and administrators on matters of language, syllabus, examination policies, grades,
 doctrine, and dress. These groups facilitate cheating on examinations, interfere in
 the hiring of staff at the campuses, control new admissions, and sometimes control
 the funds of their institutions. At Punjab University,, the largest university in the
 province, Islami Jamiat-e-Tulaba (IJT-the student wing of the religious political
 party Jamaat-i-Islami) imposes its self-defined code of conduct on teachers and other
 students.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution provides for
 freedom "to assemble peacefully -and without arms subject to any reasonable restric-
 tions imposed by law in the interest of public order", and although the Government
 generally permits peaceful assembly, it occasionally interferes with large rallies,
 which are held by all political parties.
 District magistrates occasionally exercised their power under the Criminal Proce-
 dures Code to ban meetings of more than four persons when demonstrations seemed
 likely to result in violence. This provision was invoked frequently in May during the
 Islamic month of Muharram, when tensions between Sunni and Shi'a Muslims tra-
 ditionally peak.
 Police sometimes used excessive force against demonstrators. Police beat opposi-
 tion politicians, including Senate opposition leader Aitzaz Ahsan, who was taking
 part in a small peaceful demonstration on April .20 outside the National Assembly
 (see Section 1.c.). Police also used excessive force in dispersing Christian demonstra-
 tors in Lahore on May 15, beating and arresting hundreds of demonstrators, includ-
 ing elderly women. The police responded to criticism by stating that numerous acts
 
 
 1949
 of vandalism and arson required them to move to restore order and prevent retalia-
 tion against Christians (see Sections 1.c. and 2.c.).
 The Government usually did not interfere with large political rallies. However,
 the authorities sometimes prevented leaders of politico-religious parties from travel-
 ing to certain areas if they believed that the presence of such leaders would increase
 sectarian tensions or cause public violence.
 The Constitution provides for freedom of association subject to restriction by gov-
 ernment ordinance and law. However, these ordinances and laws have not been
 known to have been used since the martial law period. There are no banned groups
 or parties.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-Pakistan is an Islamic republic in which 96 percent of
 the population is Muslim, and the Government imposes limits on freedom of reli-
 gion. While the majority belong to the Sunni sect, some 20 to 25 percent of the pop-
 ulation is Shi'a. The Constitution requires that laws be consistent with Islam and
 imposes some elements of Koranic law on both Muslims and religious minorities.
 While there is no law establishing the Koranic death penalty for apostates (those
 who convert from Islam), social pressure against such an action is so powerful that
 most such conversions take place in secret. Reprisals and threats of reprisals
 against suspected converts are common. For example, according to the HRCP, Mu-
 hammad Akram was threatened with death by an influential local religious organi-
 zation after he joined the Ahmadiyya community, whose members are regarded as
 non-Muslims under the Constitution. The threat was published on the organiza-
 tion's own letterhead, but no legal action was taken against the group.
 "Islamiyyat" (Islamic studies) is compulsory for all Muslim students in state-run
 schools. Students of other faiths are not required to study Islam but are not pro-
 vided with parallel studies in their own religion. In practice, many non-Muslim stu-
 dents are compelled by teachers to complete the Islamiyyat studies. The new edu-
 cation policy announced by the Government on March 27 included provisions for in-
 creased mandatory Islamic instruction in public schools.
 Minority religious grups fear that the explicit constitutional imposition of Shari'a
 (Islamic law) favored by the Prime Minister in his proposed 15th amendment and
 his goal of Islamizing government and society may further restrict the freedom to
 practice non-Islamic religions. The Government counters that the proposed amend-
 ment contains specific language protecting the rights of minorities. Discriminatory
 religious legislation has encouraged an atmosphere of religious intolerance, which
 has led to acts of violence directed against minority Muslim sects, as well as against
 Christians, Hindus, and members of Muslim offshoot sects such as Ahmadis and
 Zikris (see Section 5).
 Prime Minister Sharif has spoken out in support of the rights of religious minori-
 ties, and hosted a Christmas dinner in 1997 for 1,200 persons. In September, the
 Government removed colonial-era entries for "sect" from government job application
 forms to prevent discrimination in hiring. However, the faith of some, particularly
 Christians, often can be ascertained from their names.
 In February 1997, a mob looted-and burned the Christian village of Shantinagar
 in Punjab. Local police participated in the attack and are suspected of having insti-
 gated the riot by inventing spurious charges that a Christian man had desecrated
 a copy of the Koran. Hundreds of homes and a dozen churches were destroyed, and
 20,000 persons were left homeless. The central Government took immediate relief
 action, deploying troops briefly to restore order, and the Prime Minister visited the
 village. The Government has rebuilt damaged and destroyed homes, but has not
 provided compensation for personal property lost in the incident. The villagers re-
 main fearful of further attacks, and the police officers believed to be responsible for
 the riot, though transferred and briefly suspended, have not faced criminal sanc-
 tions. The 86 persons who were charged with offenses related to the attack remain
 free on bail and there was no indication that authorities planned to bring them to
 trial.
 On March 19, a district court in Rawalpindi removed three sisters, ages 11 to 15,
 who had converted from Christianity to Islam, from the custody of their Christian
 parents. The importance of the parent's religion in the judge's decision, however,
 was not clear.
 The Ahmadis are subject to specific restrictions under law. A 1974 Constitutional
 amendment declared Ahmadis to be a non-Muslim minority because, according to
 the Government, they do not accept Mohammed as the last prophet of Islam. How-
 ever, Ahmadis regard themselves as Muslims and observe Islamic practices. In 1984
 the Government inserted Section 298(c) into the Penal Code, prohibiting Ahmadis
 from calling themselves Muslim and banning them from using Islamic words,
 phrases, and greetings. The constitutionality of this Section was upheld in a split-
 decision Supreme Court case in 1996. The punishment for violation of this section
 
 
 1950
 
 is imprisonment for up to 3 years and a fine. This provision has been used exten-
 sively by the Government and anti-Ahmadi religious groups to harass and to per-
 secute Ahmadis (see Section 5). Ahmadis continue to suffer from a variety of restric-
 tions of religious freedom and widespread societal discrimination, including violation
 of their places of worship, being barred from burial in Muslim graveyards, denial
 of freedom of faith, speech, and assembly, and restrictions on their press. Several
 Ahmadi mosques remained closed. Waheed Ahmed, an Ahmadi living in Golarchi,
 Sindh province, was arrested on March 14, beaten by police, and sentenced on April
 21 to 10 years' imprisonment by an antiterrorist court for allegedly misrepresenting
 the religion of Laiq Punhor on his census form. Punhor was fearful of admitting on
 his form that he was an Amadi and asked Waheed for advice. When authorities
 confronted Punhor, he denied that he was an Ahmadi and implicated Waheed in the
 "false" census entry. Tabloid-style Urdu newspapers also frequently whip up popular
 emotions against Ahmadis by running "conspiracy" stories. On June 20 at Swat, in
 the-Northwest Frontier Province, local police and ruling party officials raided the
 home of an Ahmadi scholar and local leader of the Ahmadi community. They seized
 all of his religious literature, claiming that he was running a center of proselytiza-
 tion. The scholar was not at home, but his son was arrested. The raid appeared to
 have been instigated by a June 18 story in the Urdu daily newspaper Ausaf alleging
 the existence of an Ahmadi "preaching headquarters" in Swat.
 Ahmadi sources also reported that on June 4 the district magistrate of Loralai,
 Baluchistan, summarily expelled three Ahmadis from the district on charges of
 preaching.
 Section 295(a), the blasphemy provision of the Penal Code, originally stipulated
 a" maximum 2-year sentence for insulting the religion of any class of citizens. This
 sentence was increased to 10 years in 1991. In 1982 Section 295(b) was added,
 which stipulated a sentence of life imprisonment for "whoever willfully defiles, dam-
 ages, or desecrates a copy of the holy Koran." In 1986 another amendment, Section
 295(c), established the death penalty or life imprisonment for directly or indirectly
 defiling "the sacred name of the holy Prophet Mohammed." In 1991 a court struck
 down the option of life imprisonment. These laws, especially Section 295(c), have
 been used by rivals and authorities to threaten, punish, or intimidate Ahmadis,
 Christians, and even orthodox Muslims. No one has been executed by the State
 under any of these provisions, although religious extremists have killed some per-
 sons accused under them. Since 1996 magistrates have been required to investigate
 allegations of blasphemy to see whether they are credible before filing formal
 charges. On September 8, a Shi'a Muslim, Ghulam Akbar, was convicted of blas-
 phemy in Rahimyar Khan, Punjab, for allegedly making derogatory remarks about
 the Prophet Mohammed in 1995. He was sentenced-to death, the first time a Mus-
 lim had been sentenced to death for a violation of the blasphemy law. Akbar had
 been free on bail prior to this sudden and unexpected conviction.
 Three Ahmadis were convicted of blasphemy in December 1997. Abdul Qadeer,
 Muhammad Shahbaz, and Ishfaq Ahmad were found guilty of violating Section
 295(c) and sentenced to life imprisonment and $1,250(PRs 50,000) fines. Lawyers for
 the men have appealed the decision to the Lahore High Court, whose ruling had
 not been issued by year's end. The Lahore High Court has turned down an applica-
 tion for bail while this appeal is under consideration. Their request for bail has been
 taken to the Supreme Court, which has not yet given a date for a bail hearing. In
 the meantime, the men are serving their sentences in the Sheikhupura jail. A num-
 ber of other persons are in jails awaiting trial on blasphemy charges. A Muslim reli-
 gious scholar, Muhammad Yusuf Ali, was charged under Sections 295(a) and (c) and
 has been jailed in a class "C" cell since March, 1997. Due to threats by religious
 extremists, his wife had to resign from her job as a professor and go into hiding
 with their children. According to Ahmadi activists, 44 Ahmadis were charged with
 violating blasphemy and anti-Ahmadi laws during 1998. Ahmadi leaders state that
 145 Ahmadis were awaiting trial on blasphemy charges under section 295(c), as of
 September 30.
 The case of Anwar Masih, who has been jailed since December 1993, was settled
 with his conviction on a lesser blasphemy count under Section 295(a). Conviction
 under this section does not require the death sentence, and he was released for time
 served on April 24. Ayub Masih (detained since October 1996), was convicted of
 blasphemy under Section 295(c)for making favorable comments about author
 Salman Rushdie and was sentenced to death on April 27. Ayub's family and 13
 other landless Christian families were forced from his village in 1996 following the
 charges. Although the case was pending appeal before the Lahore High Court,
 Ayub's principal defender, Faisalabad Roman Catholic Bishop and human rights ac-
 tivist John Joseph, committed suicide on-May. 6 with a handgun. outside the Sahiwal
 court where Ayub had been convicted, to protest the conviction. The High Court ap-
 
 
 1951
 
 eal still was pending at year's end. Bishop Joseph's remains were taken to his
 ometown for burial, but a congregation of thousands of Christians prevailed upon
 the family to allow burial at the Faisalabad Cathedral. The day of his funeral, May
 10, was marked by violence, as angry Christians confronted police. Mobs of Muslim
 extremists moved to attack Christian property, and they, in turn, were repelled by
 police. Another Christian, Ranjha Masih, was arrested as a mob was beating him
 for allegedly throwing stones at an Islamic sign. He, too, was charged with blas-
 hemy, adremains in Falsalabad prison. Ater the Faisalabad authorities quelled
 Muslimx      t mobs on May 11, the violence spread to Laore, where on May
 15, a Christian demonstration marred by vandalism was dispersed by police using
 excessive force. Hundreds were arrested and scores injured by the police (see Section
 2.b.). However, the police prevented retaliatory attacks on Christians by those
 whose property had been destroyed~by demonstrators, and, within several days,
 nearly all of those arrested were released. The provincial government issued orders
 to civil administrators to keep the peace and block registration of frivolous blas-
 phemy charges.
 Nevertheless, Shafiq Masih, another Faisalabad Christian, was charged with blas-
 phemy on May 31, following a dispute with a neighbor. In Faisalabad a crowd of
 over 1,000 persons soon converged on Shafiq's home and were prepared to lynch him
 when the police intervened. Despite instructions to investigate thoroughly any
 charges before registering a case, the local police chief charged Shafiq with blas-
 phemy to calm the sentiments of the mob. Another Christian, Nazir Masih, was
 charged under Sections 298 and 298(a) for allegedly insulting the daughtr of the
 opt Mohammed and was arrested on Augt 11 at Patoki. These charges do not
 carry the death penalty. He is being held at the central jail in Sahiwal
 Sectarian violence between the Sunni and the Shi'a continued to take its toll. In
 the Punjab, a deadly pattern of Sunni-Shi'a violence resumed in which terrorists kill
 persons because of their membership in rival sectarian organizations, or simply for
 their religious identification, On January 11, Sunni extremist gunmen attacked a
 Shi'a religious meeting at the Mominpura graveyard in Lahore, killing 25 worship-
 pers and wounding 50 others. Shi'a riot followed the massacre, in which govern-
 ment offices and courthouses were burned in Lahore. For most of the year, the vio-
 lence remained one-sided, with Sunni terrorists sporadically killing Sh'a govern-
 ment officials, police, or members of the Shi'a religious political party, the TJP.
 However, on July 17, gunmen killed Salim Reza, vice president of the radical Tehrik
 Pakistan (STP) in Karachi; but ther e   credible allegations that Reza's killing
 was not carried out for political reasons. On July 19, Abdul Wahid Qadri, leader
 of an STP faction, was killed. On September 13, four Sunnis, including the deputy
 secretary general of the anti-Shi'a group Sipah-e-Sahaba-e-Pakistan (SSP) were shot
 and killed in their vehicle outside Islamabad. Anti-Shi'a riots and attacks followed
 throughout the country. In September, 21 Shi'ites were killed by gunmen and 20
 were injured while attending an outdoor religious ceremony in Kot Addu, Punjab.
 Outside of Punjab there were other significant incidents of Sunni-Shia violence. Vio-
 lence between the two sects claimed at least 35 lives and resulted in scores of inju-
 ries in Hangu, NWFP in March before the deployment of police and army troops
 and negotiations restored calm.
 When blasphemy and other religious cases are brought to court, extremists often
 pack the courtroom and make public threats about the consequences of an acquittal.
 As a result, judges and magistrates, seeking to avoid a confrontation with the ex-
 tremists, ofen continue trials indefinitely, and the accused is burdened with further
 legal costs and repeated court appearances. Many judges also seek to pass the cases
 to other jurists. Prior to his killing in 1997, Lahore High Court justice Arif Iqbal
 Hussain Bhatti, one of the two judges who in 1995 ruled to acquit accused Christian
 blasphemers Salamat and Remat Masih, received several death threats from Is-
 lamic extremist groups. Bhatti's killer, presumed to be a religious extremist, has not
 been arrested; there were unconfirmed reports that the killer himself may have
 been killed in a staged encounter with the police.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the County, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-Most citizens enjoy freedom of movement within the country and the
 freedom to travel abroad, however, the Government at times limits these rights. The
 authorities at times prevent political party leaders from traveling to certain parts
 of the country (see Section 2.b.). Travel to Israel is prohibited by law. Government
 employees and students must obtain "no objection' certificates before traveling
 abroad, although this requirement rarely is enforced against students. Citizens reg-
 ularly exercise the right to emigrate. However, an Exit Control List (ECL), which
 is constantly being revised, is used to prevent the departure of wanted criminals
 and individuals under investiatiaon for defaulting on loans, corruption, or other of-
 fenses. An estimated 3,000 to 4,000 individuals are on the ECL. No judicial action
 
 
 1952
 
 is required to add a name to the ECL, and there is no judicial recourse or formal
 appeal mechanism if one's name is added. Zafaryab Ahmed, a prominent human
 rights activist, was placed on the ECL and was not allowed to leave the country
 until December (see Section 2.a.). However, in some cases courts have directed the
 Government to lift restrictions on some ECL-listed politicians' travel abroad. For ex-
 ample, Benazir Bhutto, former Prime Minister and leader of the PPP, was placed
 on the ECL and was prevented from leaving the country on December 28. Bhutto
 was allowed to leave on December 31, following a court order to the Government
 to lift the travel restriction against her.
 Use of the ECL authority to harass political opponents increased in 1998. The
 wife of a former advisor to Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto also was placed on the
 ECL and prevented from leaving the country on the grounds that her husband is
 being investigated for corruption. The woman, who was not a citizen, was not al-
 lowed to depart despite her urgent need for medical treatment. The accountability
 cell argued that she was a "beneficiary" of her husband's alleged corruption. The La-
 hore High Court ruled this approach invalid and she eventually was allowed to de-
 part the country after a life-threatening delay of her treatment. However, the air-
 port official that honored the court decision and allowed her departure reportedly
 was removed from his post by order of the accountability cell chief. The British di-
 rector of the HUBCO Power Company was placed on the ECL on September 14, and
 MQM moderate Senator Nasreen JaM also was placed on the list and prevented
 from leaving the country after the imposition of Governor's Rule.
 The ECL sometimes is used by the politically powerful for personal revenge. In
 November Humaira Mahmood, daughter of a Punjab provincial assembly member,
 was placed on the ECL along with her husband. Mahmood married against the
 wishes of her father in 1997. She appealed the placement of her name on the ECL
 to the Sindh High Court, which was to rule in February 1999 (see Sections 1.d. and
 5).
 Pakistan does not grant asylee status, but confers "prima facie" status based on
 guidelines established in a 1981 handbook. The handbook follows the provisions of
 the 1951 United Nations Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees, but it is
 not considered legally binding.
 The Government cooperates with the office of the United Nations High Commis-
 sioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and other humanitarian organizations in assisting ref-
 ugees. First asylum has been provided to refugees from Afghanistan since 1979,
 when several million Afghans fleeing Soviet occupation poured across the border.
 There still are believed to be 1.2 million Afghan refugees in Pakistan who have been
 granted first asylum.
 The Government has not granted permanent legal resettlement to Afghan refu-
 gees but allows them to live and work in Pakistan. Many are self-supporting and
 live outside of refugee camps, which has resulted in some hostility among local com-
 munities, whose residents believe that Afghans take job opportunities from them.
 A large number have obtained Pakistani identity cards and are expected to remain
 in Pakistan indefinitely.
 According to the UNHCR, there were no reports of the forced return of persons
 to a country where they feared persecution. The Government is cooperating with the
 UNHCR to support voluntary repatriation of Afghans to rural areas of Afghanistan
 considered to be safe. During the year, approximately 93,000 Afghans returned to
 Afghanistan. Since 1988 some 2.7 million Afghans have repatriated from Pakistan.
 Afghan refugees have limited access to legal protection and depend on the ability
 of the UNHCR and leaders of their groups to resolve disputes among themselves
 and with Pakistanis. Police frequently attempt to prevent Afghan nationals from en-
 tering the cities, and reports exist that some have been forced back into refugee
 camps. Most able-bodied male refugees have found at least intermittent employment
 but are not covered by labor laws. Women and girls obtained better education and
 health care than is currently available in Afghanistan from NGO's who provided
 services. However, Afghan women working for NGv's occasionally have been targets
 for harassment and violence by conservatives, including Taliban sympathizers, in
 the Afghan refugee community.
 The resettlement of Biharis continued to be a contentious issue. The Biharis are
 Urdu-speakers from the Indian state of Bihar who went to East Pakistan-now
 Bangladesh-at the time of partition in 1947. When Bangladesh became independ-
 ent from Pakistan in 1971, the Biharis indicated a preference for resettlement in
 Pakistan. Since that time, a pproximately 250,000 Biharis have been in refugee
 camps in Bangladesh. While the Mohajir community-descendants of Muslims who
 immigrated to present-day Pakistan from India during partition-supports resettle-
 ment, the Sindhi community opposes it. In 1993 the Government flew 342 Biharis
 
 
 1953
 
 to Pakistan and placed them in temporary housing in central Punjab. No further
 resettlement has occurred.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens have the right and the ability to change their government peacefully.
 With certain exceptions, citizens 21 years of age and over have the right to vote.
 However, several million nomads and bonded laborers may not vote because the na-
 tional election commission has ruled that they do not "ordinarily reside in an elec-
 toral area, nor do they own or possess a dxelling or immovable property in that
 area." Bonded laborers with an address and an identity card are eligible to vote.
 Political parties have been allowed to operate freely since the full lifting of martial
 law in 1988. Unregistered political parties are permitted to participate in elections.
 Members of the national and provincial assemblies are elected directly. The Con-
 stitution requires that the President and the Prime Minister be Muslims. The Chief
 of the Army Staff historically has exercised influence on many major policy deci-
 sions. However, in October Chief of Army Staff General Jehangir Karamat resigned
 after making a public speech critical of government policy. His resignation was
 widely interpreted as evidence of his commitment to observing democratic norms.
 The Prime Minister then named his replacement, General Pervez Musharaf.
 National elections for national and provincial assemblies were held in February
 1997. Election observers, including teams from the HRCP, and groups representing
 the European Union, the Commonwealth of Nations, and the South Asian Associa-
 tion for Regional Cooperation, concluded that the elections were generally "free and
 fair" with no evidence of systemic or widespread abuse of the electoral process.
 Elections for local government bodies were held in Punjab on May 20. At least
 54 persons died in local vendettas during the campaign and balloting. Although rul-
 ing party candidates won most seats, the provincial government did not name chair-
 men to these bodies or allow them to take office until December. Specially nomi-
 nated women, worker, and peasant representatives were chosen, after long delay,
 on October 15. Elections have not been held in the other provinces since 1993, when
 these bodies were dissolved by a caretaker government because of charges of corrup-
 tion. In the interim, appointed civil servants continue to administer local govern-
 ments in all four provinces. The Khidmat (Service) Committees appointed by the
 Government in April and heavily packed with PML members were widely seen as
 an attempt to eliminate the need for local elections in Sindh.
 Because of a longstanding territorial dispute with India, the political status of the
 northern areas-Hunza, Gilgit, and Baltistan-is not resolved. As a result, more
 than 1 million inhabitants of the northern areas are not covered under any Con-
 stitution and have no representation in the federal legislature. The area is adminis-
 tered by an appointed civil servant. While there is an elected Northern Areas Coun-
 cil, this body serves in an advisory capacity and has no authority to change laws
 or to raise and spend revenue.
 The national census, held after a delay of 7 years, was carried out in March. The
 census was postponed repeatedly due to pressure from ethnic groups and provincial
 rivalries. Census figures serve as the basis for determining political representation
 and also for allocating funds to the various provinces from the federal treasury.
 Residents of areas who expected results that indicated either greater population
 shifts to their regions or smaller shifts away from their regions disputed prelimi-
 nary census results. The 9.26 million census figure for Karachi is estimated to be
 3 to 5 million short of the actual figure.
 Although women participate in government, and former Prime Minister Benazir
 Bhutto is leader of the opposition, they are underrepresented in political life at all
 levels. Six women hold seats in the 217-member National Assembly, up from 4 seats
 in the previous Parliament. Thirty-five women, more than ever before, campaigned
 for seats in the 1997 national elections. The Parliamentary Commission on the Sta-
 tus of Women in Pakistan recommended reserving one-third of seats in all elected
 bodies for women. In April the federal Cabinet announced that women's representa-
 tion in local councils should be increased by 100 percent, but by year's end no steps
 had been taken to implement this announcement. While women participate in large
 numbers in elections, some women are dissuaded from voting in elections by family,
 relig!ous, and social customs in rural areas. According to the Parliamentary Com-
 mission, women in some tribal areas were intimidated into not voting during the
 1997 elections. Announcements were made on mosque loudspeakers that voting by
 women was un-Islamic and women going to polling stations risked having their
 houses burned down. As a result, no more than 37 women out of 6,600 registered
 to vote actually cast ballots in Jamrud, in the Khyber Agency. On December 14, a
 
 
 1954
 seminar on women's political participation was held in Lahore, which drew a num-
 ber of politically prominent persons, professionals, and others.
 Under the electoral system, minorities vote for reserved at-large seats, not for
 nonminority candidates who represent actual constituencies. Because of this, local
 parliamentary representatives have little incentive to promote their minority con-
 stituents' interests. Many Christian activists state that these "separate electorates"
 are the greatest obstacle to the attainment of Christian religious and civil liberties.
 Ahmadi leaders encourage their followers not to register as "non-Muslims," so most
 Ahmadis are completely unrepresented. In the National Assembly (NA), Christians
 hold four reserved seats; Hindus and members of scheduled castes another four;
 Ahmadis one; and Sikhs, Buddhists, Parsis, and other non-Muslims one. Each of the
 four categories is maintained on a separate electoral roll, and minorities cannot cast
 votes for the Muslim constituency seats. Also, under Article 106 of the Constitution,
 seats in the provincial assemblies are reserved for-minorities. The 1997 general elec-
 tion report states that each Christian NA member represents 327,606 persons; each
 Hindu and scheduled castes NA member, 319,029; the Sikh, Buddhist, Parsi, and
 other non-Muslim member, 112,801; and the Ahmadi member 104,244. These fig-
 ures significantly understate the population of most of-the minority groups because
 they are based on 1981 census figures. The 1998 census figures for religious minori-
 ties have not yet been published.
 The February 1997 elections for the eight National Assembly members from the
 FATA were for the first time conducted on the basis of universal adult franchise.
 Prior to 1997, in keeping with local traditions, tribal leaders, or maliks, appointed
 in the governor's name by the central Government's political agents in each agency,
 elected the FATA National Assembly members. In accordance with the Govern-
 ment's general ban on political party activities in the FATA, candidates were not
 allowed to register by political party and political party rallies were not allowed.
 However, several political parties did campaign covertly for their candidates. Tribal
 people, including large numbers of women in some of the tribal agencies, registered
 to vote, despite campaigns by some tribes against female participation in the elec-
 tions. However, on election day, far fewer registered women in proportion to reg-
 istered men actually voted, as tribal traditions against public roles for women re-
 asserted themselves.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 There are several domestic human rights organizations, and new human rights
 and legal aid groups continue to form. These groups are generally free to operate
 without government restriction. The Government has provided protection to human
 rights lawyers defending accused blasphemers following threats and attacks on the
 lawyers by religious extremists. These threats became more explicit and public in
 1998, with signed graffiti calling for the murder of well-known human rights activist
 Asma Jahangir.
 International human rights organizations have been permitted to visit Pakistan
 and travel freely.
 Several international NGO's operate in the country, many of which aid refugees.
 In July two NGO's that serve Afghan refugees, Shelter Now International and
 Serve, experienced difficulties in getting the visas of several staff members renewed.
 This occurred after allegations that the groups had engaged in proselytization ap-
 peared in the press. Both NGO's denied having proselytized.
 The Ministry of Human Rights, established in 1995, is now a department within
 the Ministry of Law, Justice, Human Rights, and Parliamentary affairs. Some 125
 employees staff the department, which is headquartered in Islamabad and has four
 regional offices. The department has set up a "fund for women in distress and de-
 tention" and a "relief and revolving fund" for victims of human rights violations. Be-
 cause of its limited budget, the department operates primarily on a case-by-case
 basis, but is seeking help from donor agencies on projects for institutional capacity
 building and human rights awareness. The department was able to finalize and
 begin limited implementation of a reform program for jails. However, the depart-
 ment is not viewed as very effective by human rights observers. The Government
 has failed to take follow-up action on the 1997 report of the Commission of Inquiry
 for Women.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution provides for equality before the law for all citizens and broadly
 prohibits discrimination based on race, religion, -caste, residence, or place of birth.
 In practice, however, there is significant discrimination based on these factors.
 
 
 1955
 
 Women.-Domestic violence is a widespread and serious problem. Human rights
 groups estimate that anywhere from 70 to 90 percent of women are victims of do-
 mestic violence at the hands of their husbands, in-laws, or other relatives. The Par-
 liamentary Commission of Inquiry for Women reported that violence against women
 "has been described as the most pervasive violation of human rights in Pakistan,
 and it called for legislation clearly stating that domestic violence against women is
 a criminal offense. While abusers may be charged with assault, cases rarely are
 filed. Police usually return battered wives to their abusive family members. Women
 are reluctant to file charges because of societal mores that stigmatize divorce and
 make women economically and psychologically dependent on their relatives. Rel-
 atives are also reluctant to report cases of abuse in order to protect the reputation
 of the family.
 In 1998 there were hundreds of incidents involving violence against women re-
 ported in the press. The press continued to draw attention to killings of married
 women by relatives over dowry or other family-related disputes. Most of the victims
 are burned to death; allegedly in kitchen stove accidents; some women were report-
 edly burned with acid. A press survey of 107 "stove deaths" in Lahore covering the
 p eriod from January to June found that only 2 resulted in murder charges.
 Shahnaz, a     , of ando Gujran, told her parents as she lay dying in the hospital
 on May 3 that her husband poured gasoline on her and set her on fire. The police
 registered a case against her husband and three other in-laws. The case remained
 pending without any progess as of December. In 1997 a study of 145 "stove deaths"
 found that almost all of the fires were deliberately set. According to the Commission
 of Inquiry for Women, newspapers from Lahore reported an average of 15 cases of
 stove deaths per month during a 6-month period in 1997; most of the victims were
 oung arried women. The Commission noted that many cases are not reported by
 hoptland, even when they are, the police are reluctant to investigate or file
 charges. Human rights monitors agree that most "stove deaths" are in fact murders
 bsed upon a suspicion of illicit sexual relationship or on dowry demands. Increased
 media coverage of cases of wife burnings, spousal abuse, spousal murder, and rape
 has helped to raise awareness about violence against women.
 A crisis center for women in distress was opened in 1997 in Islamabad. The cen-
 ter, the first of its kind in Pakistan, is an initiative of the Ministry of Women's De-
 velopment with the assistance of local NGO's. The center offers legal and medical
 referrals from volunteer doctors and lawyers, counseling from trained psychologists,
 and a hot line for women in distress. Although the center opened before funding had
 been allocated and staff hired, the center is now fully staffed. Staff for a second cen-
 ter in Vehari, in southern Punjab, began training in October.
 Rape is an extensive problem. In 1997 the National Assembly passed a law that
 provided for the death penalty for persons convicted of gang rape. No executions
 have been carried out under this law and conviction rates remained low. This is be-
 cause rape, and gang rape in particular, is commonly used as a means of social con-
 trol by landlords and local criminal bosses seeking to humiliate and terrorize local
 residents. Therefore, police rarely respond to and are sometimes implicated in these
 attacks. It is estimated that less than one-third of all rapes are reported to the po-
 lice. The police themselves frequently are charged with raping women (see Section
 1.c.). The HRCP in 1997 tallied 671 rapes in and around Lahore from press reports;
 385 of the victims were minors, and 370 had been gang raped. FIRs were fied in
 479 cases, and arrests were made in 87 cases. According to a police official, in a
 majority of rape cases the victims are pressured to drop rape charges because of the
 threat of Hudood adultery charges being brought against them. All consensual ex-
 tramarital sexual relations are considered violations of the Hudood Ordinances. Ac-
 cordingly, if a woman cannot prove the absence of consent, there is a risk that she
 may be charged with a violation of the Hudood ordinances for fonication or adul-
 tery. The maximum punishment for this offense is public flogging or stoning. In
 Hudood cases, a female or non-Muslim wituess is not allowed to testify. Thus, if a
 man rapes a woman in the presence of several women, he cannot be convicted under
 the Hudood Ordinances because women cannot testifyr. Simlarly, if a Muslim man
 rapes a Christian woman in the presence of other Christian men and women, he
 cannot be onvited because non-Musim witesses cannot testify.
 According to an HRCP lawyer, the Government has brought fewer charges against
 women under the Hudood Ordinances than in the past, and the courts have shown
 greater leniency toward women in their sentences and in the granting of bail. Even
 if a woman wishes to bring rape charges, she may have trouble bringing her
 attacker to justice. According to Amnesty International, men accused of rape some-
 times are acquitted and released, while their victims are held on adultery charges.
 According to Human Rights Watch, on April 6, two Afghan women reportedly were
 raped after being taken off of a bus traveling to Peshawar. The attacker was ar-
 
 
 1956
 
 rested but was released after paying a bribe to the police. He was only rearrested
 after the Pakistan Commission for Afghan Refugees became involved in the case.
 The Parliamentary Commission of Inquiry for Women criticized the Hudood ordi-
 nances relating to extramarital sex and recommended that they be repealed, assert-
 ing that they are based on an erroneous interpretation of the Shari'a. The Commis-
 sion charged that the laws on adultery and rape have been subject to widespread
 misuse,-with 95 percent of the women accused of adultery being found innocent ei-
 ther in the court of first instance or on appeal. However, by that time, the Commis-
 sion pointed out, the woman may have spent months in jail, suffering sexual abuse
 at the hands of the police, and the destruction of her reputation. The Commission
 found that the main victims of the Hudood laws are poor women who are unable
 to defend themselves against slanderous charges. The laws also have been used by
 husbands and other male family members to punish their wives and female rel-
 atives for reasons having nothing to do with sexual propriety, according to the Com-
 mission. Approximately one-third or more of the women in jails in Lahore, Pesha-
 war, and Mardan are awaiting trial for adultery under the Hudood ordinance. In
 June 35 of 80 femaleprisoners in Peshawar were imprisoned on Hudood violations.
 In Mardan 11 of 16 female prisoners in June had been jailed for violations of the
 Hudood ordinances.
 Marital rape is not a crime. The 1979 Hudood Ordinances abolished punishment
 for raping one's wife. However, the Commission of Inquiry for Women has rec-
 ommended reinstating penalties for marital rape. Marriage registration (nikah)
 sometimes occurs years before a marriage is consummated (rukh sati). The nikah
 (nonconsummated) marriage is regarded as a formal marital relationship. In one
 1996 case, a 13-year-old girl, whose nikah had been performed but rukh sati had
 not taken place, decided to divorce her husband. The husband kidnaped the girl,
 raped her, and then released her. The police refused to register a rape case arguing
 that they were a married couple.
 There are numerous reports of women killed or mutilated by male relatives who
 suspect them of adultery. Few such cases are investigated seriously and those who
 are arrested often are acquitted on the grounds that they were "provoked," or for
 a lack of witnesses. While the tradition of killing those suspected of illicit sexual
 relations' in so-called "honor killings", in order to restore tribal or family honor
 (which is known as "karo-kari" in Sindh), applies equally to offending men and
 women, women are far more likely to be killed than men. Between January and
 June, the press covered approximately 40 such cases in Punjab. The problem is be-
 lieved to be even more extensive in rural Sindh. According to Amnesty Inter-
 national, on January 11, a man in Sandwa village, Gujranwala, killed his daughter
 and the man she allegedly had an-affair with. Tribal custom among the Baluch and
 the Pathans also sanctions such killings. The Commission of Inquiry for Women has
 rejected the whole concept of "honor" as a mitigating circumstance in a murder case
 and recommended that such killings be treated as simple murder.
 The Commission also drew attention to the problem of "enforced prostitution and
 trafficking in women," noting that women are the victims of exploitation by police
 and pimps, and should be treated with compassion. A Karachi-based NGO estimates
 that 100 to 150 women are trafficked to Pakistan each day from Bangladesh, and
 are sold for both domestic labor throughout the country and for prostitution in Ka-
 rachi. They usually are deceived with false prospects of working in legitimate jobs
 in Pakistan. Smaller numbers of Burmese, Sri Lanan, Indian, and Afghan women
 also are trafficked. Such women generally do not have legal residency, and, if ar-
 rested                   in in jail for violation of immigration laws and/or viola-
 tions of the Hudood ordinance. Without money to pay for bail, they often are bailed
 out by their p imps, who force them to return to prostitution. Despite widespread
 general knowledge about trafficking, the Government has done little to stem the
 flow of women trafficked into the country or to help victims of trafficking. On De-
 cember 15, a conference on trafficking in women was held in Islamabad, which at-
 tracted an audience that included a justice of the federal Shariat Court, as well as
 government officials, journalists, and activists.
 There are significant barriers to the advancement of women, beginning at birth.
 In general, female children are less valued and cared for than male children are.
 According to a United Nations study, girls receive less nourishment, health care,
 and education than boys do. According to a 1996 report by the Islamabad-based
 Human Development Center, only 16 women are economically active for every 100
 men.
 Discrimination against women is particularly acute in rural areas. In some areas
 of rural Sindh andBalo   icstan, female iteracy rates are 2 prcent or less. A survey
 of rural females by the National Institute of Psychology found that 42 percent of
 parents cited "no financial benefit" as the reason theykept their daughters from at-
 
 
 1957
 tending school, and sent their sons instead. Similarly, a study by the NWFP direc-
 torate of primary education concluded that most girls in rural areas do not go to
 school because they have to look after the household while their mothers help their
 fathers in the fields.
 Human rights monitors and women's groups believe that a narrow interpretation
 of the Shari a has had a harmful effect on the rights of women and minorities, as
 it reinforces popular attitudes and perceptions and contributes to an atmosphere in
 which discriminatory treatment of women and non-Muslims is more readily accept-
 ed.
 Both civil and religious laws theoretically protect women's rights in cases of di-
 vorce, but many women are unaware of them, and often the laws are not observed.
 The Parliamentary Commission of Inquiry for Women has recommended that mar-
 riage registration (nikahnama) be made mandatory and that women, as well as
 men, have the right to initiate divorce proceedings. It also has called for the punish-
 ment of those who coerce women or girls into forced marriages. A husband is legally
 bound to maintain his wife until 3 months after the divorce. A father is bound to
 maintain his children until they reach the age of 14 for males, or, if they are fe-
 males, to the age of 16. However, the legal system is so complicated and lengthy
 that it can take years for the children to get maintenance.
 In inheritance cases women generally do not receive-or are pressed to surren-
 der-the share of the inheritance they are legally due. In rural areas, the practice
 of a woman "marrying the Koran" still is widely accepted if the family cannot ar-
 range a suitable marriage or wants to keep the family wealth intact. A woman
 "married to the Koran" is forbidden to have any contact with males over 14 years
 of age, including her immediate family members. Press reports indicate that the
 practice of buying and selling brides still occurs in parts of the NWFP and the Pun-
 jab.
 A special three-member bench of the Lahore High Court upheld in 1997 the fed-
 eral Shariat Court's ruling that a Muslim woman can marry without the consent
 of her wali (guardian-usually her father). In practice, however, social custom dic-
 tates that couples are to marry at the direction of family elders. When this custom
 is violated, especially across ethnic lines, violence against the couple may result. For
 example, the February marriage of a teenage Pathan girl to a Mohajir man in Kara-
 chi against her family's will led to large-scale ethnic riots in Karachi, the bringing
 of a kidnaping case against the groom, the shooting -and serious injury of the groom
 in the courtroom, and numerous death threats against the groom and his family.
 On May 26, a woman in Karachi was killed by her father, Alauddin, for marrying
 a mechanic from his auto repair shop. In July in the NWFP, Hidayat Bibi and her
 husband were killed by her uncle after they eloped. In a well publicized case,
 Humaira Matmood, daughter of a Punjab provincial assembly member, in 1997
 married against the wishes of her father. Soon after her marriage, she was beaten
 severely by her brother and allegedly was forced to register a marriage to her cous-
 in. In November she took refuge in a shelter for women, in Karachi. Mahmood's
 brother and several Punjab policemen from her father's district kidnaped her from
 the home in December, with the acquiescence of Sindh police. Protests by women's
 groups led to the intervention of the governor and Mahmood's release from illegal
 detention to Darl Aman, a government-run shelter for women. Mahmood's name,
 along with her husband's, was placed on the ECL, preventing them from leaving the
 country. At year's end, Mahmood was appealing the placement of her name on the
 ECL (also see Sections l.d. and 2.d.).
 The admissibility and value of women's testimony is limited in certain court cases
 (see Section i.e.).
 Although a small number of women study and teach in universities, postgraduate
 employment opportunities largely remain limited to teaching, medical services, and
 the law. Nevertheless, an increasing number of women are entering the commercial
 and public sectors.
 According to the Ministry of Health, the Government through 1996 had trained
 and deployed approximately 37,000 female rural health workers. The Government
 scrapped its goal of training and employing 100,000 female health workers by 1998
 because it intended to improve the training of those already employed.
 Women's organizations operate primarily in urban centers. Many concentrate on
 educating women about existing legal rights. Other groups concentrate on providing
 legal aid to poor women in prison who may not be able to afford an attorney.
 Children.-There is no federal law on compulsory education, and neither the fed-
 eral or provincial governments provide sufficient resources to assure universal edu-
 cation. The education system is in disarray, with studies showing that only 65 to
 70 percent of children under the age of 12 are enrolled in school, less than half of
 whom actually complete primary school. However, another study found that over 60
 
 
 1958
 percent of school-age children in relatively wealthy Karachi do not attend school, in-
 dicating that the actual number of children in school may be far lower than previous
 studies indicated. Even those children who make it to the fifth grade are not as-
 sured of being able to read and write. According to UNICEF figures, a nationwide
 sample of children in grade five revealed that only 33 percent could read with com-
 prehension, while a mere 17 percent were able to write a simple letter. Development
 experts point to a number of factors for the poor state of public education, including
 the low percentage of gross national product devoted to education, and inefficient
 and corrupt federal and provincial bureaucracies. One member of the Prime Min-
 ister's Education Task Force estimated that up to 50 percent of the education budg-
 et-is "pilfered."
 Some progress has been made over the past several years in getting more girls
 into school. A recent survey found that the enrollment rate for girls under age 12
 was 65 percent, less than that of boys (75 percent), but considerably higher than
 the 1990 figure of 50 percent. Since official government figures count at most 1.5
 million school-age children in public and private schools and madrassahs in Karachi
 (of an estimated 4 million or more between the ages of 5 and 14), enrollment figures
 of 65 and 75 percent are difficult to account for. Similarly, the female literacy rate
 has doubled during the past two decades, although, at roughly 27 percent, it is just
 over half that of males.
 The federal Government announced a new education policy on March 27, which
 dealt mostly with the construction of new schools but which included provisions for
 increased Islamic instruction in public schools. Education is a provincial responsibil-
 ity under the Constitution. In 1998 the government of Punjab, the country's most
 populous province, began an ambitious program to improve the quality of its edu-
 cational system. A comprehensive survey was performed to identify school buildings
 that were being misused and the large numbers of teachers and administrators who
 were not performing their duties or even showing up for work. Administrative action
 against these "ghost schools" began and the Government was better placed to en-
 sure that its education budget was not misused. The Punjab government also
 worked closely with both international and local NGO's to improve primary and sec-
 ondary education.
 Health care services, like education, remained seriously inadequate for the na-
 tion's children. In this area, the government of Punjab also actively combated cor-
 ruption, adopting private management techniques and working with NGO's to im-
 prove the quality of care.
 Many children begin working at a very early age (see Section 6.d.). At the age
 of 5 or 6, many female children assume responsibility for younger siblings.
 Children sometimes are kidnaped to be used as forced labor, for ransom, or to
 seek revenge against an enemy (see Sections 6.c. and 6.d.). In rural areas, it is a
 traditional practice for poor parents to give their children to rich landlords in ex-
 change for money or land, according to human rights advocates. These children fre-
 quently are abused- by these landlords and held as bonded laborers for life. Land-
 lords also have been known to pay impoverished parents for the "virginity" of their
 daughters, whom the landlords then rape. Incidents of rape and murder of minor
 teenage children are common. A 1996 survey conducted in Punjab showed that 40
 percent of reported rape victims were minors, with the youngest victim in the study
 only 8 years old. A UNICEF-sponsored study of Punjab found that 15 percent of
 girls reported having been sexually abused. Sexual abuse of boys is more common
 in segments of society where women and girls traditionally remain within the home.
 A Human Rights Commission of Pakistan study in the NWFP found 723 cases of
 sexual abuse of boys and 635 of girls between January and June. Child prostitution
 involving boys and girls is widely known to exist but rarely is discussed. The NGO
 Shabab-i-Milli has launched a campaign to combat child prostitution by raising pub-
 lic awareness about the problem. The Commission of Inquiry for Women has ob-
 served that child sexual abuse is a subject that "has been virtually ignored in Paki-
 stan," and called for a public education campaign on the- subject, including introduc-
 ing it into school curriculums and training nurses and doctors in how to handle such
 cases.
 Children's rights' theoretically are protected by numerous laws that incorporate
 elements of the U.N. Convention on the Rights of the Child. However, the Govern-
 ment frequently fails to enforce these laws. There are two facilities-one in Karachi
 and one in Bahawalpur-that serve as reform schools for juvenile offenders. There
 is only one jail in each province for convicted prisoners under 21 years of age and
 children frequently are incarcerated along with the general prison population. Many
 children in prison were born to female inmates who were sexually abused by prison
 guards. Although Punjab and Sindh provinces have laws mandating special judicial
 procedures for child offenders, in practice, children and adults essentially are treat-
 
 
 1959
 
 ed equally. An estimated 3,200 children are held in the nation's prisons, some as
 young as 8 years old. In Punjab 1,508 children under age 18 were found in prison
 in an NGO survey, 16 of whom were below the age of 12. They often spend long
 periods of time in prison awaiting trial. One child spent 3 years and 4 months
 awaiting trial. Peshawar's jail contained 183 children, 40 percent of whom were Af-
 ghan refugees. These prisoners were separated from the adult prisoners. Federal
 Lao *Mnster Sheikh Rashid, a former political prisoner, arranged for the release
 of some 100 children held for vagrancy who could not meet bail.
 According to press reports, there are several madrassahs where children are con-
 fined illegally and kept in unhealthy conditions. On Augst 1, 14 children were
 found in fetters at a madrassah in Lahore. The principal of the madrassah, Gari
 Khadim Husain, was arrested, but was released when he claimed that the parents
 were responsible for the use of fetters. Syed Afzal Haider, a member of the Council
 of Islamic Ideology, has condemned the fettering of children. Sexual abuse of boys
 is widely believed to occur at some madrassahs.
 People With Disabilities.-There are no laws requiring equal accessibility to public
 buildings for disabled persons. The vast majority of the physically and mentally dis-
 abled are cared for by their families. However, in some cases these individuals are
 forced into begging, while organized criminal "beggarmasters" skim off much of the
 proceeds. There have been allegations of exploitation of microcephalic persons at
 Jhelum, a Punjab town where such individuals are cared for at a local shrine. There
 is a legal provision requiring public and private organizations to reserve at least 2
 percent of their jobs for quaifed disabled persons. Organizations that do not wish
 to hire disabled persons can instead give a certain amount of money to the govern-
 ment treasury, which goes into a fundfor the disabled. This obligation rarely is en-
 forced. A National Council for the Rehabilitation of the Disabled provides some job
 placement and loan facilities.
 Religious Minorities.-Government authorities affod religious minorities less
 legal protection than is afforded to Muslim citizens. Members of religions minorities
 are subject to violence and harassment, and police at times refuse to prevent such
 actions or to charge persons who commit them.
 Ahimadis are often targets of religious intolerance, much of it instigated by orga-
 nized religious extremists. For example, in a July 11 sermon at a rally in Lahore,
 the head of the influential Tanzeem Islami organization, Israr Amed, stated that
 the Government and Muslims have a right to commit a "general massacr" of the
 Ahimadis, since they are heretics. Ahmadi leaders charge that militant Sunni
 mullahs and their followers sometimes stage marches through the streets of
 Rabwah, a predominantly A  madi town and spiritual center in central Punjab.
 Backed by mobs of 100 to 200 persons, the mullahs purportedly stride down the
 streets uttering diatribes against the Ahmadis and their founder, a situation that
 often leads to violence. Police are generally on hand during these marches, the
 Ahmadis claim, but as a rule do not intervene to prevent trouble. A number of
 Amadis were seriously injured in attacks by religious extremists, and Ahmadi lead-
 ers attribute several killings of Auhadis during the year to anti-Amadi extremists.
 Mohammad Ayub Azam was shot on July 7 in Wah, Punjab. Before he died in the
 hospital an hour later, he reported that the killers asked if he was an Ahmadi be-
 fore shooting him. On August 4, Malik Naseer, age 85, a retired police inspector,
 was killed in Vehari on his way to attend religious services. He was the leader of
 the Atrmadi community in Vehari, and Ahmadis believe he was killed for that rea-
 son.
 Ahmadis suffer from harassment (see Section 2.c.) and discrimination and have
 limited chances for advancement into management levels in government service.
 Even the rumor that someone may be an Ahmadi or have Amadi relatives can sti-
 fle opportunities for employment or promotion. Ahmadi students in public schools
 are subject to abuse by their non-Ahmadi classmates, and the quality of teachers
 assigned to predominantly Ahmadi schools by the Government is poor. However,
 most Ahmadis are home-schooled or go to private Ahmadi-run schools. Young
 Amadis and their parents also complain of difficulty in gaining admittance to good
 colleges, forcing many children to go abroad for higher education. Certain sections
 of the Pena    d also   have a    robem fo the group (see Section 2.c.), par-
 ticularly the provision that forbids Ahmadis from "directly or indirectly" posing as
 Muslims. Armed with this vague wording, mullahs have brought charges against
 Abmadis for using the standard Muslim greeting form and naming their children
 Mohammed.
 Other religious minority groups also experience considerable discrimination in em-
 ployment and education, In Paistan's early yers, minorities were able to rise to
 the senior ranks of the military and civil service. Today, many are unable to rise
 above mid-level ranks. Discrimination in employment is believed to be common.
 
 
 1960
 
 Christians in particular have difficulty finding jobs other than those of menial labor,
 although Christian activists say that the employment situation has improved some-
 what in the private sector. Christians find themselves disproportionately overrepre-
 sented in Pakistan's most oppressed social group-that of bonded laborers. Like
 Ahmadis, many Christians complain about the difficulty that their children have in
 aining admission to government schools and colleges, a problem they attribute to
 scrimination. Many Christians continue to express fear of forced marriages be-
 tween Muslim males and Christian women, although the practice is relatively rare.
 Reprisals against suspected converts to Christianity occur, and a general atmos-
  here of religious intolerance has led to acts of violence against religious minorities
 also see Section 2.c.). There are also restrictions on certain testimony in court by
 non-Muslims (see Section i.e.).
 A local Muslim cleric and a mob destroyed a Christian church in Sheikhupura,
 Punjab in December 1997. The cleric objected to the construction of the building on
 land sold by his brother-in-law to a Christian group. On the night of January 26,
 three armed intruders killed Noor Alam, the Presbyterian Church of Pakistan pas-
 tor who led the building of the church. Police made no arrests for either the killing
 or the property destruction. Another cleric was arrested near Faisalabad on Decem-
 ber 23 for pulling down a crucifix and a microphone set up in a Roman Catholic
 church for Chstas. The vandal was released quickly.
 On November 18, nine members of a Christian family were killed and mutilated
 in their home in Nowshehra, in an attack that some Christians alleged was sectar-
 ian. On December 29 and 30, four family members were arrested and charged with
 the crime. They asserted their innocence to the  pe investigation of the
 incident was closed by year's end.
 Sectarian violence in the Punjab between Shi'a and Sunni extremist groups
 claimed the lives of 75 persons, including professionals, bureaucrats, and religious
 scholars who were targeted specifically. Indiscriminate shootings at religious gather-
 ings, such as at the Mominpura graveyard in Lahore (see Section 2.c.), led to fear
 of general religious unrest. Press reports state that 130 persons were killed nation-
 wide in sectarian violence from January to October.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The Industrial Relations Ordinance of 1969 (IRO)
 provides for the right of industrial workers to form trade unions but is subject to
 major restrictions in some employment areas. The Essential Services Maintenance
 Act of 1952 (ESA) covers sectors associated with the state administration, i.e., gov-
 ernment services and state enterprises, such as oil and gas production, electricity
 generation and transmission, the state-owned airline, and ports. Workers in these
 sectors are allowed to. form unions. However, the ESA sharply restricts normal
 union activities, usually prohibiting, for example, the right to strike in affected orga-
 nizations.
 Union members make up only about 10 percent of the industrial labor force and
 3 percent of the total estimated work force. Contract labor continues to flourish, un-
 dercutting the power of the unions and exploiting workers willing to work on tem-
 porary contracts. These workers receive fewer benefits and have no job security.
 There is no provision in the law granting the right of association to agricultural
 workers.
 Legally required conciliation proceedings and cooling-off periods constrain the
 right to strike, as does the Government's authority to ban any strike that may cause
 "serious hardship to the community" or prejudice the national interest. The Govern-
 ment also may ban a strike that has continued for 30 days.
 Strikes are rare. When they occur, they are usually illegal and short. The Govern-
 ment regards as illegal any strike conducted by workers who are not members of
 a legally registered union. Police do not hesitate to crack down on worker dem-
 onstrations. The law prohibits employers from seeking retribution against leaders
 of a legal strike and stipulates criminal penalties for offenders. The courts may im-
 prison employers for violating this prohibition, but they are more likely to fine
 em. The law does not protect leaders of illegal strikes.
 Unions may belong to federations, and there are seven major federations. The
 Government permits trade unions all across the political spectrum. While many
 unions remain aloof from politics, some are associated with political parties. Unions
 associated with opposition parties are allowed to carry on their activities freely.
 In 1997 the Cabinet passed an amendment to the IRO which states that: 1) only
 employees of the represented industry can hold office in a trade union; and 2) if
 trade unions form a federation, the federation cannot bargain with individual em-
 ployers; each component union has to bargain for itself. The first provision dis-
 advantages smaller unions, which may not have enough officers capable of bargain-
 
 
 1961
 
 ing. The second provision is an attempt to weaken the power of the federations. This
 amendment has been challenged by the trade unions and, as a result, has not yet
 come into force. Late in 1997, the Prime Minister announced the Government's new
 investment policy, under which, in order to improve working relations among em-
 ployees and employers, trade union activity would be industry-based and not fac-
 tory-based. The new policy also decrees that, in order to check the growth of trade
 unions, unions receiving less than 20 percent of the votes in a referendum are to
 be dissolved automatically and their registrations canceled. No action has been
 taken to implement these elements of the investment policy.
 The International Labor Organization (ILO) has stated repeatedly that current
 law and practice violate the Government's commitments under ILO Convention 87.
 The ILO has urged the Government to lift prohibitions against union activity with
 respect to teachers, and radio, television, railway, forestry, hospital, and other gov-
 ernment employees, as well as to rescind the existing ban on strikes. The ILO also
 expressed concern about the practice of artificial promotions that exclude workers
 from the purview of Convention 111. In response to a government request, the ILO
 has provided technical assistance to help bring the country's labor laws into con-
 formity with the ILO's conventions. However, no legislative remedies have been ap-
 plied.
 In 1994 a government task force on labor prepared a report recommending im-
 provements on worker rights problems, which were the basis for the development
 of a new labor policy by the Government. The Government has not yet approved the
 new labor policy; however, the Government has implemented two components of the
 proposed labor policy: 1) improvements in the workers' welfare fund; and 2) in-
 creases in social security benefits for workers. In 1997 the Prime Minister and trade
 union representatives agreed to establish a committee to examine the labor laws
 and draft legislation to bring them into conformity with ILO conventions and the
 national Constitution. No concrete action has yet been taken by this committee.
 Federations are free to affiliate with international federations and confederations.
 For example, trade unions belong to the International Confederation of Free Trade
 Unions (ICTFU) and to secretariats affiliated with the ICTFU.
 The United States revoked generalized system of preferences (GSP) trade benefits
 in 1996 for failure to make progress on worker rights issues.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The right of industrial work-
 ers to organize and to freely elect representatives to act as collective bargaining
 agents is established in law. The IRO prohibits antiunion discrimination by employ-
 ers. Under the law, private employers are required to reinstate workers fired for
 union activities. However, in practice, such redress has not been available to work-
 ers.
 In general, legally constituted unions have the right to bargain collectively. How-
 ever, the many restrictions on forming unions (see Section 6.a.) preclude collective
 bargaining by large sections of the labor force, e.g., agricultural workers, who are
 not provided with the right to strike, to bargain collectively, or to make demands
 on employers. The National Bank of Pakistan Employees Union filed suit against
 the Government for implementing a banking companies ordinance that prohibited
 union activities in banks during working hours and allowed only current bank em-
 ployees to serve as bank trade union officials.
 The ESA also restricts collective bargaining. For each industry subject to the ESA
 (see Section 6.a.), the Government must make a finding, renewable every 6 months,
 on the limits of union activity. In cases in which the Government prohibits collective
 bargaining, special wage boards decide wage levels.
 These boards are established at the provincial level and comprise representatives
 from industry, labor, and the provincial labor ministry, which provides the chair-
 man. The chairman may name additional industry and labor representatives to the
 board. Despite the presence of the labor representatives, unions generally are dis-
 satisfied with the boards' findings. Disputes are adjudicated before the National In-
 dustrial Relations Commission. A worker's right to quit also may be curtailed under
 the ESA. Dismissed workers have no recourse to the labor courts.
 The ESA exempts export promotion zones (EPZ's) from the IRO's provision grant-
 ing workers the right to form trade unions. Only one EPZ currently exists, in Kara-
 chi. Fewer than 6,000 persons are employed there, according to government sources.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The Constitution and the law pro-
 hibit forced labor, including forced labor by children, however, the Government does
 not enforce this prohibition effectively. Critics argue that the ESA's limitation on
 some worker rights, especially the right to quit, constitutes a form of compulsory
 labor. The ILO has objected to this violation of Convention 29. The Government has
 responded that the maintenance of essential services is required for the defense and
 
 
 1962
 
 security of the country, and that continued reviews have limited these services to
 a few, e.g., electricity generation and distribution, air and sea ports, etc.
 Illegal bonded labor is widespread. Bonded labor is common in the brick, glass,
 and fishing industries and is found among agricultural and construction workers in
 rural areas. There is no evidence that bonded labor is used in the production for
 export of sporting goods and surgical equipment., However, bonded labor reportedly
 is used in the production of carpets for export under the peshgi system, by which
 a worker is advanced money and raw materials for a carpet he promises to com-
 plete. Conservative estimates put the number of bonded workers at several million-
 The Constitution and the law prohibit slavery. However, in the remote areas of
 rural Sindh bonded agricultural labor and debt slavery have a long history. Land-
 lords have kept entire families in private prisons and families have been sold by
 one landlord to another. According to press reports, raids by Government officials
 and human rights activists over a 2-year period from January 1995 to January 1997
 resulted in the liberation of 349 bonded laborers.
 The Bonded Labor System (Abolition) Act adopted in 1992 outlawed bonded labor,
 canceled all existing bonded debts, and forbade lawsuits for the recovery of existing
 debts. However, the provincial governments, which are responsible for enforcing the
 law, have failed to establish enforcement mechanisms. Hence, the law is largely in-
 effective. Lacking employment alternatives, many workers have voluntarily re-
 turned to bonded labor. In one case, a Sindh landlord kidnaped over 100 of his
 former bonded laborers on September 9, but was compelled to free them after inter-
 vention by NGO's and the government of Sindh province (see Section 1.c.).
 Children sometimes are kidnaped to be used as forced labor. According to 1996
 ILO estimates, 3.3 million children between the ages of 5 and 14 years (about 8 per-
 cent of this population group) are "economically active." Of these, about two-thirds
 work in agriculture. Seventy percent of the working children have the status of "un-
 paid family helpers." Many observers believe that the ILO estimates understate the
 true dimensions of the problem. Observers also believe that the incidence of bonded
 labor among such children is significant, but there are no reliable figures available
 on this.
 d. Status of Child Labor Practices and Minimum Age for Employment.-Child
 labor is common and results from a combination of severe poverty, employer greed,
 and inadequate enforcement of laws intended to control it. The Constitution pro-
 hibits the employment of children aged 14 years and under in factories, mines, and
 other hazardous occupations. The Employment of Children Act of 1991, whose provi-
 sions were extended by the President on November 20 to the FATA, prohibits the
 employment of children under age 14 in certain occupations and regulates their con-
 ditions of work. Under this law, no child is allowed to work overtime or at night.
 The Government acknowledges that child labor is a problem. The Constitution pro-
 hibits forced labor, including forced labor performed by children. However, forced
 and bonded labor by children is common (see-Section 6.c.).
 In 1996 the Government announced the results of its first comprehensive child
 labor survey conducted with the assistance of the ILO's International Program for
 the Elimination of Child Labor (ILO/IPEC). According to the survey, 8.3 percent (or
 between 3.3 and 3.6 million) of children between the ages of 5 and 14 work. The
 child labor force is predominately male (73 percent) and predominately rural (71
 percent). About 60 percent of child labor in the country occurs in Punjab. Some 45.8
 percent of child laborers work 35 hours or more per week and 12.6 percent work
 56 hours or more. The majority (67 percent) of children work in agriculture, forestry,
 hunting, and fishing industries; 11 percent in the manufacturing sector; 9 percent
 in wholesale/retail; and 8 percent in social/personal services. In occupational terms,
 craft and related trade work accounts for about 19 percent of child laborers, while
 71 percent work in unskilled jobs. Only the Government and exporters regard the
 ILO survey as an accurate measurement of the incidence of child labor. Many ob-
 servers believe that it understates the true dimensions of the problem, with high-
 range estimates of as many as 20 million child laborers.
 Child labor is widely employed in the carpet industry, much of which is family-
 run. Carpet manufacturers are working with ILO/IPEC to establish a program to
 eliminate child labor from the industry through monitoring and rehabilitation.
 Other export sectors, notably surgical equipment and sporting goods, have taken ac-
 tive measures to eliminate or phase out child labor. Human rights activists acknowl-
 edge that surgical equipment manufacturers have removed children from their fac-
 tories; however, child labor in this industry still occurs at rudimentary offsite filing
 and polishing centers run by subcontractors for low-end items. Child labor is not re-
 garded as a particular problem in the textile and apparel industries, but no specific
 studies have been performed on this issue.
 
 
 1963
 
 In October 1997, soccer ball manufacturers, importers, the ILO, and UNICEF im-
 plemented an 18-month action plan agreed upon in February 1997 (the Atlanta
 Agreement) to eliminate child labor from the soccer ball industry. This project,
 based in Sialkot, monitored the production of soccer balls at newly established
 stitching centers, and had set up 154 rehabilitation centers for the education of
 former child laborers and their younger siblings by October. The project also sought
 to identify unemployed adults from the families of former child stitchers to take up
 stitching work and replace lost income. ByOctober, 50 percent of production was
 verified as having moved to monitored stitching centers. Women have been reluctant
 to move from their homes to stitching centers. The project is working to establish
 small home-based stitching centers in individual villages to counter this unwilling-
 ness to travel to work, and some 80 village-based stitching centers had been set up
 for women as of October. By years end, approximately 5,400 children had been re-
 moved from *he industry.
 Under a memorandum of understanding with the Government, the ILO/IPEC pro-
 gram in Pakistan is involved with a number of other projects concerning child labor.
 The ILO works with the Government, employers, workers, and NGO's in pursuing
 a national policy and plan of action for child labor. The Government estabhe 30
 rehabilitation centers (50 are planned) for former child laborers through the Paki-
 stan Bat-u-Ma, the Governments social welfare fund. Each center educates 120
 children. The ILO created a similar program in conjunction with the European
 Union, specifically targeting child bonded laborers. In December, the ILO and the
 Swiss   ency for D    l    t    d
 combat child labor in the NW  a   n.  C
 In response to international criticism, the Government has begun to push provin-
 cial authorities to enforce child labor laws. The Punjab labor department carried out
 a child labor training program for all of its inspectors during the year. Hundreds
 of convictions are obtained each yea fr violations of child labor laws, but low fines
 levied by the courts (ranging from an average of $7 (PRs 350) in the NWFP to an
 average of $140 (PRs 7,000) in Balochistan) do not serve as a significant deterrent
 The 1991 Employment of Children Act allows for fines of up to $350 (PR a 17,500).
 The Child C are Foundation (CCF) of Pakistan, a national NGO, was established
 in October 1996 with the support of the Government through the Ministry of Com-
 merce. At year's end, the CCF Board was still in the process of developing a child
 labor monitoring system.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-Federal statutes applicable throughout the
 country govern labor regulations. The minimum wage for unskilled workers is ap-
 proximately $38 (PRs 1,950) per month, with only slightly higher minimum rates
 or sat   workers. Although this wage provides a subsistence living for a small
 family, the minimum wages practically apply only to the formal sector of the econ-
 omy, and do not affect agricultural workers. The minimum wage is usually inad-
 equate toprovide a decent standard of living to support workers and their families,
 since famioes tend to be large.
 The law, applicable nationally, provides for a maximum workweek of 54 hours,
 rest periods during the workday, and paid annual holidays. These regulations do not
 apply to agricultural workers, workers in factories with fewer than 10 employees,
 and to the small contract groups, which are subdivisions within factories of 10 or
 fewer workers. Many workers are unaware of the regulations that protected their
 rights because of their lack of education.
 The provinces have been ineffective in enforcing labor regulations, because of lim-
 ited resources, corruption, and inadequate regulatory structures. However, the gov-
 ernment of Punjab has enhanced its activities, particularly in regard to bonded and
 child labor. In general, health and safety standards are poor. Although organized
 labor presses for improvements, the Government has done little and weakly enforces
 existing legal protection. Workers cannot remove themselves from dangerous work
 conditions without risking loss of employment.
