Pakistan
General Pervez Musharrafs military-backed government, in office since a 1999
coup detat, declared a state of emergency on November 3, 2007, suspending the
constitution and dismissing two-thirds of the countrys senior judges including
the chief justice of the Supreme Court, Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry. A swift
crackdown followed, with Pakistani authorities arresting thousands of lawyers,
judges, and opposition activists and violently suppressing peaceful protests.
Prominent human rights defenders were among those detained or placed under
house arrest, including the chairperson of the independent Human Rights
Commission of Pakistan and a UN Special Rapporteur, Asma Jahangir. Some of
those detained were questioned by Pakistans feared Inter-Services Intelligence
(ISI) agency and Military Intelligence (MI) agency, known for using torture against
opponents of the government. With the declaration of martial law, Musharraf
imposed sweeping censorship rules on the media, closing down private television
channels and international media agencies.
Following the suspension of the constitution, Musharraf issued a series of
decrees that muzzle the media, allow the military to detain, charge, and try any
civilian, and allow courts to revoke lawyers licenses to practice law. The constitution
was then amended so that these and other such measures will remain
legal even after the constitution is restored.
On November 28, Musharraf retired as army chief and the following day he took
the oath of office as president under the suspended constitution for a five-year
term. Though Musharraf claims to be transitioning to civilian rule, his election
was widely regarded as illegal and the country remains effectively under military
control.
Ongoing concerns at this writing include arbitrary detention, lack of fair trials,
mistreatment, torture, and enforced disappearances of terrorism suspects and
political opponents; harassment, intimidation, and censorship of the media;
increasing unrest amid military operations in the tribal areas bordering
Afghanistan; and legal discrimination and mistreatment of religious minorities.
Judicial Independence Undermined
2007 saw a movement for judicial independence borne out of the events of March
9, when General Musharraf first tried to dismiss Supreme Court Chief Justice
Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry for alleged misuse of office. Justice Chaudhry
refused to resign, triggering nation-wide protests against Musharraf. Authorities
violently suppressed the movement, led by Pakistani lawyers, to restore the chief
justice, beating lawyers, opposition activists, and media personnel covering
unfolding events. On May 12, 42 people died in violence led by activists of the
Mutahedda Qaumi Movement (MQM), a major coalition partner in the Musharraf
government, trying to stop Chaudhry from entering Karachi to address the Sindh
High Court Bar Association. In the face of relentless country-wide protests,
Musharraf backed down temporarily and the Supreme Court restored the chief
justice to office on July 20.
In November the Supreme Court was due to decide on the legality of Musharrafs
presidential election which had occurred in October. However, the court never
ruled because of the imposition of the state of emergency on November 3.
Attempts by Supreme Court judges to bar the government from proclaiming emergency
rule and urging government officials not to implement emergency orders
were thwarted as the judges were summarily fired and detained. Justice Chaudhry
was dismissed and placed under house arrest along with his family, including a
seven-year-old son and a teenage daughter. Overall, almost two-thirds of 97 senior
judges declined to accept emergency rule and were dismissed, many placed in
detention or under house arrest. They were replaced by Musharraf loyalists and,
on November 19, a puppet Supreme Court quickly dismissed the legal challenges
to Musharrafs reelection as president.
On November 10, Musharraf issued a presidential decree allowing military trials
of civilians for certain offences previously under the purview of the judiciary. The
amendments were made retroactive to January 1, 2003, effectively sanctioning
impunity of the army for detention and disappearances of civilians since that
time. Until the sacking of most of its judges, the Supreme Court had been investigating
some 400 cases of disappearances of Musharrafs political opponents
and terrorism suspects.
Opposition Leaders Return
Two exiled opposition leaders, Benazir Bhutto and Nawaz Sharif, returned to
Pakistan in 2007. Under pressure from the US, Benazir Bhutto, a former prime
minister, was allowed to return to Pakistan unhindered on October 18. Bhuttos
welcoming procession was targeted by suicide bombers killing 139 people and
injuring several hundreds. Bhutto and her husband have claimed that members
of the government and elements within the security services may have been complicit
in the attack.
On November 25, Nawaz Sharif, another former prime minister, was finally
allowed to return to Pakistan. Earlier, on September 10, Pakistan and Saudi
Arabia had flouted international law by forcibly transferring Sharif into exile in
Saudi Arabia as he attempted to end seven years of exile by returning to Pakistan.
The Pakistani governments actions were in direct contravention of a Supreme
Court ruling that Sharif had an inalienable right to enter and remain in the country.
Thousands of political activists from the parties headed by Bhutto and Sharif, as
well as smaller political groups, have been arrested in order to prevent post-emergency
protests. Bhutto herself has been intermittently placed under house arrest
to prevent her from leading demonstrations in the aftermath of the crackdown on
lawyers and activists.
Freedom of Expression
Concerted and increasing attempts by the Pakistani government to muzzle the
media continued throughout 2007. Journalists faced persistent pressure and
threats from the government to tone down their coverage of the anti-government
protests. Media offices were physically attacked and closely monitored by the
security forces. Reporters working for local, regional, national, and international
media faced torture, kidnapping, illegal detention, beatings, and coercion.
On March 16, riot police attacked the Islamabad offices of the Jang Group, which
houses the newspapers Jang, The News, and Geo TV. Police broke into the offices,
damaging property and terrorizing journalists while the media attempted to cover
an anti-government protest underway outside.
On May 22, the Mohajir Rabita Council (MRC), an affiliate of the MQM, issued a
statement naming 12 eminent Pakistani journalists as enemies. On May 29,
journalists working for the Associated Press (AP) and the Agence France-Presse
(AFP) wire services found identical envelopes, each containing a 30mm bullet,
planted in their cars. Two of these journalists were named in the MRC statement.
The MQM has a long record of political harassment, extortion, torture, and targeted
killings, but Musharraf took no action in response, failing even to press the
MQM to discipline its affiliate and ensure that such threats cease.
Throughout the year, several privately-run TV channels, including Aaj TV, ARY, and
Geo TV, reported their transmissions were taken off air by cable operators
because they were transmitting footage of violence by state authorities.
Since the November imposition of martial law, Musharraf has imposed sweeping
curbs on the media through two presidential decrees and hundreds of journalists
have been threatened, beaten, attacked, and detained. Some international journalists
were expelled and many private and international television stations were
removed from the air for several weeks. They were restored after they accepted
government restrictions including bans on journalists and programming deemed
objectionable by the government. Country-wide protests against curbs on the
media have been violently suppressed on multiple occasions.
Unrest in Balochistan
Political unrest in the southwestern province of Balochistan continued in 2007.
Though the dispute in Balochistan is essentially political, centered on issues of
provincial autonomy and exploitation of mineral resources, the Pakistani military
and Baloch tribal militants have increasingly sought a military solution to their
disagreements. The Pakistani military has arbitrarily detained, tortured, and disappeared
militants and political opponents; Baloch militants have continued to
target civilians and use landmines in sporadic retaliatory attacks.
Counterterrorism
Serious violations of human rights continue to accompany Pakistans large-scale
counterterrorism operations. Terrorism suspects are frequently detained without charge or, if charged, are often convicted without proper judicial process. Human
Rights Watch has documented scores of illegal detentions, instances of torture,
and disappearances in Pakistans major cities. Counterterrorism laws also continue
to be misused to perpetuate personal vendettas and as instruments of
political coercion.
It is impossible to ascertain the number of people disappeared in counterterrorism
operations because of the secrecy surrounding such operations. Until the
imposition of the state of emergency, the Supreme Courtinvestigating 400
cases of enforced disappearanceshad been maintaining pressure on the government,
publicly stating that it had overwhelming evidence that Pakistans intelligence
agencies were detaining terror suspects and other opponents and repeatedly
urging the authorities to free such individuals or process them through the
legal system. In response to pressure from the Supreme Court, scores of those
who disappeared were freed or charged, and some foreign or dual citizens were
deported to their countries of origin.
Torture and ill-treatment of such individuals in custody remains a serious concern.
Rangzieb Ahmed, a British citizen of Pakistani origin was held in illegal custody
for over a year during which time he alleges he was severely tortured by
Pakistani intelligence agents. He was deported to the UK in September after
Pakistans Supreme Court ordered his release. The British government failed to
intervene to prevent the torture though they admit having access to Ahmed during
his incarceration. Ahmed was arrested at Londons Heathrow airport upon
arrival.
A peace agreement between the government, tribal leaders, and militants closely
allied with the Taliban signed in September 2006, collapsed within months. As a
result, the Pakistan Army continues to engage in aggressive counterterrorism
operations in Pakistans Federally Administered Tribal Areas along the Afghan
border, with efforts particularly focused on the Waziristan region. Hundreds of
Pakistani troops are being held hostage by pro-Taliban militants. In October 2007
Pakistani authorities launched a major offensive in north Waziristan. Reports
indicate the offensive has been accompanied by civilian displacement,
extrajudicial executions, house demolitions, arbitrary detentions, and
harassment of journalists.
Armed groups in Pakistans tribal areas continue to engage in vigilantism and violent
attacks, including murder and public beheadings. Selective military operations
aside, the government has done little to apprehend, let alone prosecute,
Taliban and militant leaders guilty of committing serious human rights abuses
across the border in Afghanistan, and increasingly in Pakistan.
Throughout November 2007 Taliban attacks and operations spread into settled
areas of the North West Frontier Province. Battles during this month between pro-
Taliban militants and security forces in the Swat valley saw hundreds killed and
thousands of civilians displaced.
Gender and Religious Discrimination
Legal discrimination and persecution on grounds of gender and religion continued
in 2007. As in previous years, violence against women and girls, including
honor killings, rape, domestic violence, and forced marriages, remained serious
problems. According to the Human Rights Commission of Pakistan, honor killings
continued to rise in 2007 and growing extremism posed new threats to womens
rights.
The Ahmadi religious community was a particularly frequent target of religious
discrimination in 2007. Numerous blasphemy cases were registered against its
members and scores were arrested.
Key International Actors
The US, UK, and EU all issued statements urging Musharraf to end the state of
emergency, release those arrested, and hold free and fair elections. However,
their actions did not match their words. At this writing, all three were continuing
to prop up Musharraf with substantial military and economic assistance.
The Bush administration continues to provide significant political support to
Musharraf. The United States has notably failed to press strongly for human rights
improvements in the country or for the release and restoration to office of ousted
Supreme Court Chief Justice Iftikhar Muhammad Chaudhry and other judges. As in previous years, the US muted its criticism in exchange for Pakistans support in
counterterrorism operations.
However, in a largely symbolic gesture, on November 20 Pakistan was suspended
from the Commonwealth in response to Musharrafs actions. The suspension is
expected to remain in force until the restoration of some form of constitutional
rule.
Pakistan still has not signed the International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights or ratified the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights. Pakistan has played a negative role as a member of the UN Human Rights
Council and has fought to prevent scrutiny and criticism of Organization of Islamic
Conference (OIC) states.