 PAKISTAN
 
 Throughout its three decades of independence, Pakistan has
 been preoccupied with a search for its national identity.
 The social, political, economic and regional differences
 which characterize Pakistan's diverse society have led
 frequently to instability and deterioration in the human
 rights environment. As a result, Pakistan has been governed
 by martial law or other undemocratic regimes for most
 of its thirty-four years. Presently it is under military
 rule.
 Pakistan's third and longest experience with martial law
 began with the ouster of former prime minister Bhutto by the
 army led by Chief of Staff General Mohammad Zia-ul-Haq in
 July 1977. The Martial Law Administration (MLA)-- with
 General Zia serving as president and chief of army staff--
 continued during 1981 to alternate periods of increased
 restrictions on political activities with intervals in which
 restrictions were somewhat eased. No general elections were
 scheduled during 1981, political parties remained "dissolved"
 (i.e., severely limited in their actions), and censorship,
 particularly of domestic news critical of the MLA, remained
 in effect.
 A series of events in February and March resulted in wide-
 spread detentions. Large demonstrations occurred on univer-
 sity campuses, as the Movement for the Restoration of Democracy
 (MRD) was formed. In March, hijackers diverted a Pakistani
 airliner to Afghanistan, and then successfully negotiated
 the release of 54 Pakistani political prisoners. Demonstra-
 tions were threatened on the April anniversary of former
 prime minister Bhutto's execution, but proved minimal. In
 the midst of this turmoil, Zia promulgated a provisional
 constitutional order which amended the 1973 constitution
 so as to deny civil and political rights which had already
 been suspended in practice. The order justifies itself by
 stating that the president and chief martial law administrator
 "shall have and shall be deemed always to have had the power
 to amend the Constitution." The order significantly curtailed
 the jurisdiction and independence of the judiciary.
 Pakistani society is Islamic and traditional, largely rural
 and poor. Development is often slow paced and sometimes
 related only indirectly to basic human needs. The govern-
 ment is seeking to make Pakistani law and custom consistent
 with Islamic precepts. Some innovations, such as the distri-
 bution of revenues from compulsory "zakat" (a tax levied on
 savings accounts), have been directly beneficial to the
 poor.
 Pakistan is providing generous humanitarian assistance to
 over two million Afghan refugees. The presence of this large
 and growing number of displaced persons, largely concentrated
 in Pakistan's Northwest Frontier province and in Baluchistan,
 creates a serious economic burden. It also contributes to
 social tensions stemming from competition with the local
 population for scarce resources.
 (1072)
 
 
 1073
 In September 1981, Pakistan's ambassador to the United
 Nations protested 62 territorial violations and 371
 violations of Pakistani air space from Afghanistan since
 the April 1978 pro-Soviet coup in that country. Incidents
 in 1981 included two strafing attacks on a Pakistani
 border post by Afghan MIG-17's, strafing of a civilian
 bus, and searches of a border village by Afghan troops
 (all in Baluchistan province). The government of Pakistan
 also believes that agents of the Kabul regime are seeking
 to infiltrate the various Afghan resistance groups which
 have organized themselves in Pakistan, making possible
 acts of sabotage and subversion. The March hijacking
 of a Pakistani airliner to Kabul revealed the existence
 of a terrorist organization calling itself *Al-Zulfikar,l
 which is headquartered in that city. Since then, there
 have been reports of training of Pakistani dissident
 elements in Afghanistan, and several bombings in the
 Northwest Frontier province. It was largely based on
 these threats that the government justified its
 suppression of opposition elements following the
 March hijacking.
 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Torture
 The 1973 Constitution bans torture. During 1981 there were
 at least four cases in which prisoners allegedly died while
 in police custody. In all four cases, allegations of police
 brutality were reported in the local press. Each of the
 cases occurred in a different stage in the arrest-interro-
 gation-detention cycle, and there is no evidence to indicate
 government acquiescence in the actions of individual police
 officers. All four cases were investigated, and in two cases
 murder charges were filed against the policemen involved,
 although the charges had not been adjudicated as the year
 ended. In one case, local police were reported to have
 mistreated seven persons during a murder investigation in
 the village of Tayyib Khani. Accounts did not refer to
 specific forms of torture, but the hospital certified that
 one of the seven later died as a result of massive injuries.
 One of the 54 prisoners freed in exchange for the release of
 the passengers of the Pakistani airliner hijacked in March,
 Mazhar Ali Khan, alleged in a BBC interview in April that he
 and his fellow prisoners had been tortured. He claimed that
 they were deprived of sleep and hanged with a rope in a
 manner which constituted torture. There has been no corrobo-
 ration of Mr. Khan's claims. Some of those detained in the
 wake of the hijacking asserted that they were subjected to
 lengthy interrogation sessions lasting up to 48 hours and
 that they were handled roughly, although not tortured.
 However, these sources indicated that non-political
 prisoners were subjected to torture with electrical devices.
 Other examples: A former prisoner in Lahore claimed that he
 received electrical shocks and was repeatedly slapped in the
 face by police interrogators; also in Lahore, a political
 
 
 1074
 leader convicted for holding a political meeting in his
 residence was reported to have been denied medical treatment
 on orders of military authorities; in Sialkot, a police
 assistant sub-inspector was formally charged with having
 beaten a prisoner who received serious injuries; and a
 student in Faisalabad alleged that he was stripped and
 beaten, then tied to a charpoy (a portable bed) and hung
 upside down.
 Primitive forms of interrogation have been routinely used by
 police .  It seems to be the case that as a reflection of
 class structure in Pakistan, socially or politically prominent
 individuals suffer less at the hands of authorities than do
 the less well-off.    There are, for instance, different
 classes of cells for different kinds of prisoners (see next
 section).
 b. Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment
 President Zia and the Pakistan government have endorsed the
 establishment of punishments as codified under the Sharia,
 the traditional Islamic code.
 Ploggings of offenders have been ordered, but are carried
 out only rarely in public. Several sentences of amputation
 have been announced, but none are known to have been
 carried out. In September a school bus driver was
 sentenced to death by stoning for adultery.   This was the
 first sentence of this kind imposed in Pakistan.   The co-
 defendant, an eighteen year old woman, was sentenced to
 100 lashes.    At the end of 1981 the sentences of the
 district shariat court had not been carried out pending an
 appeal to the federal shariat court, which earlier in the
 year ruled that stoning is not a proper Islamic punishment.
 There are three classes of facilities for prisoners:  -A,"
 "B,l and 1C.1  "C" is designated for ordinary criminals and
 prisoners.  Overcrowding in these facilities is a problem.
 The Punjab home secretary reported that in September there
 were 20,500 prisoners in his province's jails, which have
 a capacity of 17,400 prisoners.    Depending on means and
 social/political status, a prisoner may be given improved
 treatment, including less crowded cells and better food.
 In Karachi central prison, foreigners and political
 prisoners are put in class IB confinement. Only a few
 prominent individuals received "A" class accommodations,
 but even class "A' cells are not particularly good.
 According to one former inhabitant, class "A" cells are
 small and have dirt floors and "disgusting toilet faci-
 lities.,
 c. Disappearances
 Given the press censorship which exists in Pakistan, arrests
 frequently are not reported, particularly if they involve
 individuals who are not socially or politically well-known.
 Although the crime of kidnapping is common, especially in
 tribal areas, there are no known reports during 1981 that
 individuals have "disappeared." as a result of actions taken
 * by the security authorities.  There are reports that indi-
 viduals are sometimes held incommunicado or in an unknown
 location while detained.
 
 
 1075
 d. Arbitrary Arrest and Imprisonment
 Since independence--and before--Pakistan has had legisla-
 tion authorizing preventive detention. Martial law order
 no. 12 of July 1979 authorizes limited (90 day) detention
 of persons who might act in a manner *prejudicial" to the
 regime. While detention is "limited," it may be, and
 occasionally is, extended indefinitely without judicial
 review. Under this authority there have been a sub-
 stantial number of detentions without charge or trial of
 various political figures. The grounds for arrest include
 expressing anti-regime sentiments in private receptions,
 distributing anti-regime literature, and participating in
 public demonstrations. In connection with the formation
 of an opposition political coalition and widespread student
 demonstrations in February, the hijacking of the Pakistani
 airliner in March. and the death anniversary of the late
 prime minister Bhutto in April, large numbers of political
 activists---an estimated total of at least 1,500, including
 most leaders and officers of opposition political parties--
 were detained for periods of time ranging up to a few
 months. Most of these detentions were made on preventive
 grounds, rather than for violations of laws or martial law
 orders. Based on available data, it was estimated that as
 of December 1981 the number of persons remaining in deten-
 tion for purely political reasons had declined to under 400.
 Most are being held in Sind Province. Two prominent poli-
 tical figures remain in custody: Air Marshal (ret) Asghar
 Khan, the Tehriq-e-Istiqlal party leader who was detained
 in 1979, remains under house arrest! Benazir Bhutto, daughter
 of the former prime minister, was detained in jails in
 Sukkur and Karachi for most of 1981, with her originalg0
 day detention being extended three times during the year.
 On December 27 her detention was modified to house arrest
 at the Bhutto family home in Larkana (Sind).
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Three judicial systems currently operate in Pakistan: a
 civilian judiciary based on Anglo-Saxon law, shariat
 benches operating under Islamic laws, and military
 tribunals. The provisional constitutional order announced
 in March significantly restricts the powers of the civilian
 judiciary to review actions and decisions of the martial
 law authorities and the military courts. Military courts
 are authorized to try virtually every criminal case in
 Pakistan. The right of counsel is a routine part of pro-
 ceedings at both general and special courts martial,
 although there are reports that the right to defense counsel
 has on occasion been denied. Defendants are not always
 accorded privacy to consult with their counsel. There
 appear to be differences from province to province in the
 current operations of the martial law courts. In the
 Punjab, for example, they have become less active, while
 in Sind both special courts and summary military tribunals
 are frequently convened alongside a civil court system.
 The provisional constitutional order also required supreme
 and high court judges to swear an oath of allegiance. The
 chief justice, two supreme court judges and at least nine
 high court judges refused to take the required oath, there-
 by relinquishing their positions, while several other high
 
 
 1076
 court judges were not invited to take it, and thereby also
 lost their positions.
 In connection with the order's abolition of civilian
 courts' appeal jurisdiction over the decisions of military
 courts, provincial high court stay orders were invalidated
 in at least two politically controversial cases of prisoners
 under death sentence, and the prisoners were executed. One
 of these cases, that of the Baluch student leader Hamid
 Baluch, who was hanged in June, aroused widespread
 criticism both inside Pakistan and among outside human
 rights groups due to serious procedural irregularities
 in the trial.
 Amnesty International expressed its concern to Pakistan
 authorities in March over reports that six political
 prisoners were being tried in camera, urging that the
 defendants concerned be allowed counsel of their choice
 and that their trials be transferred to open courts. No
 response was received to this appeal.
 In 1980 the former attorney general, Yahya Bakhtiar, was
 tried for election rigging by a special civilian court
 under a law specifically created for his case. Although
 he was found guilty in March 1981, the sentence of five
 years' imprisonment was not imposed. He was detained
 until May under preventive detention provisions, then
 set free.
 f. Invasion of the Home
 Police are required to obtain a warrant before entering a
 residence, and they generally respect the inviolability of
 the home. There have been a few press reports in which
 individuals have charged the police with entering their
 domicile without a warrant.
 2. Respect for Civil and Political Liberties Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech, Press, Religion and Assembly
 The martial law administration's tolerance of dissent has
 varied since it came to power in mid-1977. Limitations on
 political activities and expression which were instituted in
 the first years of the Zia government were liberalized
 somewhat in 1978 and in the months immediately preceding
 the election scheduled for November 1979. However, when
 general elections were postponed on October 16, 1979, strict
 censorship was reintroduced and several opposition newspapers
 were closed.
 But 1981 also saw a revival of *approved" political activities
 by the conservative and Islamic political parties which,
 like other parties, had been legally banned since 1979.
 Press conferences and party conclaves were frequently held by
 such parties. Elements of the Pakistan People's Party and
 the political alliance known as the Movement for the Resto-
 ration of Democrary (MRD) were also permitted to meet one
 another, foreign diplomats, and journalists, although formal
 party activity remained prohibited.
 Press censorship of domestic political news continued to be
 heavy, although critical news items occasionally appeared.
 
 
 1077
 Besides a range of registration requirements, the MLA
 appointed local censors, who review all items prior to
 publication. According to journalists, it was difficult to
 predict which stories would be banned, since guidelines were
 not consistently applied.
 Confiscation and banning of domestic books and periodicals
 occurred frequently. In late 1981 the government indicated
 that censorship of "literary and creative' books had been
 lifted. Foreign publications came into the country more or
 less freely, but were read by only a small percentage of the
 public. A much larger portion of the public listened to
 foreign radio broadcasts, which frequently covered critically
 domestic developments not reported in the Pakistani press.
 Although political parties were illegal, reporting on the
 activities of individual politicians was common. While
 criticism of the government bureaucracy was permitted,
 including reports of police brutality and official corrup-
 tion, articles which defamed the martial law administration
 or the president, or those which criticize Islam or the
 Islamization program, were prohibited, as were news items
 which might conceivably contribute to religious or regional
 tensions.
 Local bodies--popularly elected on a non-party basis--
 frequently criticized the performance of the bureaucracy
 in localities and, occasionally, the newspapers reported
 such criticism. However, censorship, as well as the threat
 of investigation or legal action against individual
 reporters or news organizations, instilled a sense of
 caution on the part of reporters and editors who did not
 wish to risk jail, shutdown of their publication, or other
 punitive restrictions. Nevertheless, in August the Council
 of Pakistani Newspaper Editors' Standing Committee expressed
 its deep concern about the effect censorship had on the
 credibility of the press and on its "solemn duty* to
 protect the public interest.
 Pakistani society traditionally assigns a subordinate
 role to women. For example, 70 percent of all six to
 eleven year old boys attend school, compared with only
 25 percent of all girls. This disparity increases in
 public secondary schools. In the past three years, the
 number of primary schools for boys has increased by 5.5
 percent, while those for girls increased by only 3 percent.
 Women are well represented in Pakistani universities. For
 example, 60 percent of Karachi University's student body
 is female. However, professional opportunities are
 limited largely to teaching, medical services and the
 law. A small number of women are government civil
 servants. As part of its Islamization program, the
 government has placed restrictions on the appearance
 of actresses in television advertisements. A handful
 of women have been active in national and provincial
 politics and the Pakistan Peoples' Party is currently
 led by former prime minister Bhutto's widow.
 The All-Pakistan Women's Association has had little real
 influence with the government, even though its founder
 president, Begum Rana Liaquat Ali Khan, is the widow of
 Pakistan's first prime minister. She actively opposes
 a government plan to repeal the 1961 Muslim Family Law
 
 
 1078
 ordinances, which have afforded women some protection
 from unilateral divorce actions by their husbands.
 Minority religious groups and their adherents are denied
 certain rights enjoyed by the majority Muslims, but were
 allowed to participate in the 1979 local elections in which
 certain seats were reserved for them. Christians, Parsis,
 Hindus and others, including the followers of the Ahmadi
 sect, are considered to be minorities whose members cannot
 be elected as president or prime minister. (Although the
 Ahmadis consider themselves Muslims, the government does
 not accept them as such, because they do not believe
 Mohammad was the last prophet.) Upon leaving office in
 September, the president's adviser on minority affairs
 regretted that during his tenure he was unable to do much
 for the sweepers and scavengers, most of whom are Christians.
 He said they constituted "the largest segment of our society'
 .which has suffered continued deprivation of rights and
 privileges.
 Restrictions exist-on the right of assembly. The year's
 largest demonstrations occurred on university campuses in
 February. In two other unsanctioned protest gatherings,
 demonstrators are reported to have been killed when police
 opened fire on protesters. In August, in the town of Mirpur
 (in Pakistan-held Jammu and Kashmir, where martial law is
 not applicable), citizens protesting increased water and
 property tax rates claim several of their number were
 killed, although the government claims there was only one
 death, from unspecified causes.   In the second incident,
 a police confrontation with workers at the inauguration of
 Pakistan's first steel mill in September is alleged to have
 resulted in two deaths. Events which would predictably
 lead to demonstrations (such as the anniversary of Bhutto's
 execution) are preceded by detentions which, although
 short in duration, have the intended effect of preventing
 mass assemblies.
 On.August 16, all Pakistan International Airlines (PIA)
 labor.unions and associations were banned by the government
 until March 31, 1982, as part of an effort to reorganize
 the state-run corporation. Such heavy-handed tactics are
 -resented in labor circles, which also were concerned about
 the reported detentions without charge of at least 15 union
 leaders.
 b. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel Emigration and Repatriation
 A 1978 martial law regulation imposes a penalty of up to
 14 years imprisonment and confiscation of property for
 persons failing to appear before a military or civilian
 court. This provision appears to have been aimed at promi-
 nent politicians and some accused political activists and/or
 terrorists who have fled the country. The regulation makes
 it difficult for others to leave. Some opposition figures
 have been denied passports for foreign travel, and in other
 cases have been refused the foreign exchange needed to
 finance their children's study abroad. Within the country
 there is general freedom of movement for citizens, but a
 few prominent opposition leaders are banned from certain
 areas where their presence is deemed prejudicial to the
 government's interests.
 
 
 1079
 Pakistani workers are free to emigrate in order to work
 abroad. The government frequently assists them to do so and
 accepts them upon their return. President Zia has encouraged
 Pakistanis to return home, even if they have acquired a
 foreign nationality, in order to assist in the development
 of the country. But Pakistan's economy is also signifi-
 cantly aided by the remittances--exceeding two billion
 dollars in 1981--which the tens of thousands of Pakistanis
 working abroad send home. Their inflows have improved
 opportunities for social mobility and increased the share of
 income received by lower income strata.
 Pakistan has freely and hospitably accepted the Afghan
 refugees who have fled the Soviet occupation of their
 homeland. International contributions for the refugee
 relief effort are coordinated by the United Nations High
 Commissioner for Refugees, but Pakistan itself is bearing a
 substantial portion of relief costs. The government of
 Pakistan provides the personnel to administer over three
 hundred refugee camps and bears the cost of inland trans-
 portation of relief commodities. It also makes cash payments
 of fifty rupees ($5) per person per month to registered
 refugees as a supplement to international donations of
 food, shelter, and clothing. No restrictions have been
 placed on movement throughout the country by refugees,
 except that only camp residents are eligible for the
 relief distribution program. Violent incidents resulting
 from friction with local inhabitants have occurred on
 occasion, but have been remarkably few and easily
 controlled in view of the magnitude of the refugee
 population and the stresses on the local habitat which
 have been created.
 c. Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 All political parties were legally dissolved by President
 Zia in October 1979, when he announced indefinite postpone-
 ment of the scheduled general elections. The government
 does not permit political parties to hold public meetings
 or rallies, but Pakistanis are able to discuss politics in
 restricted forums. Foreign contacts with Pakistani poli-
 ticians are generally free, but on occasion they are moni-
 tored by security authorities. Some locally elected offic-
 ials have found that political activity on behalf of the
 opposition can lead to dismissal by the MLA or to other
 unfortunate consequences. Thus, in terms of Pakistan's
 traditional political parties, political participation was
 very'limited in 1981.
 President Zia, whose regime otherwise has circumscribed
 political activities, has tried to encourage public parti-
 cipation in government at the grass-roots level by
 conducting non-party elections through universal suffrage
 to fill seats on local and municipal councils ("local
 bodies") throughout the country in 1979. The local bodies
 elected were the first in fifteen years. They have an
 uneasy partnership with the Pakistani civil service (which
 traditionally has made most local decisions), but seem to
 be establishing themselves as functional institutions in
 the country. The performance of the local bodies varies;
 
 89-510 0 - 82 - 69
 
 
 1080
 in some areas they exercise independent control over collecting
 and disbursing tax revenues. However, Baluchistan, a
 'province with a history of separatist sentiments and efforts
 to achieve greater autonomy, is governed almost entirely by
 non-Baluch civil and military officials.
 Compared to the local bodies, the provincial advisory
 councils have no power at all. Reports indicate that the
 Punjab provincial council, which met in late August, sat
 dutifuly through a series of lectures delivered by govern-
 ment officials. Formation of the long-forecast federal
 advisory council was announced on December 24. All of its
 350 members are appointed by the president, and its
 announced responsibilities are purely in the nature of
 recommendations.
 3. Government Attitude and Record Regarding International
 and Non-governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations of
 Human Rights
 The Human Rights Society of Pakistan is basically a ceremonial
 organization, since it makes no effort to evaluate the
 situation in the country. Its activities have not been
 impeded by the government. An awards ceremony was held in
 May to honor three prominent, though politically uncontro-
 versial, Pakistanis, and the government-controlled press
 provided modest coverage of the event.
 Amnesty International (AI) has a resident Pakistani represen-
 tative. In its 1980 report on Pakistan, AI expressed deep
 concern over five cases in which prisoners died while in
 custody, allegedly after being tortured. AI urged clemency
 for prisoners sentenced to be executed and called on
 President Zia to restore the right of civil high courts to
 hear appeals from political prisoners convicted by military
 courts. The government responded to the report, stating
 that it had received only one report of death after torture,
 that only two political prisoners were being detained, and
 that flogging and the death penalty are mandatory punishments
 for certain crimes under the Sharia laws observed in
 Pakistan. An urgent appeal by AI to President Zia in
 August 1981, requesting a stay of execution on behalf of
 Abdul Nasir Khan, a member of the Pashtun Student Fede-
 ration who was convicted of murder, went unheeded.
 In its report of September 1981 before the House Foreign
 Affairs Committee, Amnesty International USA said that the
 human rights situation in Pakistan had deteriorated
 "sharply" since the beginning of 1981. The GOP did not
 respond to AI's charges at the time.
 4. Economic and Social Circumstances
 While the government appears to be sincere in its efforts
 to meet basic human needs, budgetary resources are insuffi-
 cient to cover the normal range of social services. Pakistan
 faces many problems common to the developing world: an adult
 literacy rate of only 24 percent (1976-1979 statistics), a
 high population growth rate of 3.1 percent (1970-1978), and
 a relatively low GNP of $336 (1981 estimate). Moreover,
 Pakistan's traditional society--largely rural--resists
 
 
 1081
 change, and government efforts to improve rural living
 conditions produce improvements only slowly. There are
 substantial disparities in living conditions experienced in
 urban areas, as opposed to those in the countryside, where
 over two-thirds of Pakistan's 84 million people live.
 Whereas 60 percent of all city dwellers have access to safe
 water, only 17 percent of the rural population does. On the
 other hand, 32.8 percent of the population in urban areas
 live below the absolute poverty level, compared to 29
 percent in rural areas (1976-1979 statistics). A deficit
 of over one million housing units exists in urban areas and
 the shortage in rural areas is reportedly several times as
 great.
 In 1981, the government increased its overall expenditures
 on social services by 8 percent, slightly below the annual
 rate of inflation. Various foreign-supported projects for
 housing, electrification, education and health in rural
 areas are underway. Special emphasis has been put on
 development in the relatively undeveloped province of
 Baluchistan and parts of Northwest Frontier province.
 There has been an upturn in the economy in the last four
 years and overseas workers' remittances have increased
 effective consumer demand. Several good crops have
 resulted in more abundant food supplies.
 
 
 1082
 U.S.OVEKSLA3 -LOANS AND ckANli- OhLIGATIONS AND LUAN AU1IOKIZATIUNs
 (U.S.FISCAL VIARS - MILLIONS LU DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: PArISTAN
 IvTv     I 08 1980 1q
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOIAL...         50..    58.6      76.8
 LOANS ................. .   5.Z     ..7.5      7..5
 GRANTS ............        . ..2     11.1      29.3
 A.AIU ...................      ..1       0.0      0.0
 LOANS........ ........    1.2      0.0       U.O
 GRANIS.... ................  1.9     0.0       0.0
 ISE(..SUPP.ASSlT.)...         0.0      0.0      n.0
 B.FOJO FOR PEACE.......         .it.Z    56.1      7b.:)
 LOANS................U... .       '.7.5    47.-5
 GRANTS............      ..2       10.6      2b.8
 TITLE I-TUAL..........      . 38.0     41.,     47.
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS.....         36.0      7.,     '7.5
 PAY. IN FUR. LuRR.....          0.0      0.0       (1.0
 TITLE I-TOTAL........           . .id    10.6     2h.8
 E.RELIEF.EC.DEV G wFP.          3.2     10.6      2b.6
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY.....          U.U       0.0      0.0
 C.0THER ECUN. ASSIST...         0.1       0.5      0.5
 LOANS..............o        0.0      0.0       0.0
 GRANTS...... ......    ..    0.1      0.5       0.5
 PEACE CORPS .....(.0                 .        0.0
 NARCbTICS..o....           0.1      0.5       0.5
 OTHER.............         0.0      0.0       0.0
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-IOTAL...         0.5      0.0       0.0
 LOANS ...............     0.0      0.0       0.0
 GRANTS... .........          0.5      0.0       0.0
 A.MAP  GRANTS ..........         '.u      C.")     t..0
 B.CREDIT SALES-   -MSo...       0.0       0.0     (.0
 C.INIL MIL.Ef.TRNG....         0.5       0.0      0.0
 0oTRAN-XCESS STOLK..           0.0       3.0      0.0
 E.UTHER GRANTS ........         0.0      0.0       0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. & NIL-           50.9     5ti.0     76.
 .LOANS..... .........        45.2     47.5     '7.5
 GRANTS..............         5.7      11.1     29.3
 01HER US LOANS.........    ..    25.9       0.0      0.0
 EX-IN BANK LOANS .....2..        5.9       0.0      0.0
 ALL OTHER...........  .  .   .  .U       0.0      0.0
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNAIUNAL AGENCIES
 1979     19d0      1981     1946-81
 TOTAL.........    270.8    31#9.3   79o3    3554.3
 XSRD                0.0      U.O      0.0    "66.2
 IFC                33.4      6.6      3.,4    66.2
 IDA               109.0    165.0    202.0    1402.1
 108                 0.0      0.0      0.0       0.0
 AD8                92.1    169.9    i93.3    lOAo5t
 AFOB                0.0      0.0      0.0       0.0
 UNOP               12.3      7.6     15.3     109.3
 OTHER-UN           24.0      0.0     65.3     145.1
 EEC                 0.0      0.0      0.0       0.0
 
 
