Pakistan
2008 was a tumultuous year for Pakistan. Elections in February that ushered in a
return to civilian rule were followed by the formation and rapid collapse of a coalition
government, the forced resignation of former army chief Pervez Musharraf as
president after nearly nine years in power, and the ascension to the presidency in
September of Asif Zardari, the controversial widower of assassinated Pakistan
People’s Party (PPP) leader Benazir Bhutto. The new civilian government inherited
a dramatically worsening security situation and skyrocketing food and fuel prices.
The new government initially agreed to an uneasy cohabitation with Musharraf
and accepted demands from the army for transfer of power on the basis of “legal
continuity,” whereby the new government would not challenge the legal basis of
Musharraf’s rule nor attempt to hold him or the army legally accountable for
Musharraf’s coups and abuses during his time in power. Many arbitrary measures
enacted under emergency rule can only be rolled back through constitutional
amendments that require a two-thirds majority in both chambers of parliament.
Musharraf was forced out in August 2008, but Zardari inherited all the powers
Musharraf had accrued.
Since the civilian government came to power, civil and political rights protections
have improved. Media restrictions have been revoked, opposition rallies and
demonstrations have been allowed to proceed without government hindrance or
violence, and military personnel have been withdrawn from civilian administrative
and political positions. The government has emphasized dialogue to resolve the
political dispute between the federal government and Balochistan province and
to extend meaningful political rights to the troubled tribal areas bordering
Afghanistan.
While the new government has been keen to promote civil liberties and human
rights, its rhetoric has not always been matched by action. Ongoing structural
concerns include lack of an independent judiciary and fair trials; mistreatment,
torture, and unresolved enforced disappearance of terrorism suspects and opponents
of the previous military government; military abuses in operations in the
tribal areas; the failure to commute death sentences; and legal discrimination
against and mistreatment of religious minorities and women.
Elections
On February 18, 2008, Pakistanis went to the polls to vote in elections for the
National Assembly (the lower house of parliament). The elections took place in a
period of tumult, after President Musharraf’s imposition in November 2007 of a
state of emergency, his controversial and illegal November 2007 reelection, his
sacking and arrest of many Supreme Court and other senior judges, and the
December 27 assassination of former prime minister Benazir Bhutto. In a rebuke
to Musharraf, major opposition parties made serious gains and formed a shortlived
coalition government.
The pre-election period was marred by widespread electoral manipulation and a
concerted attempt by the government to prevent or reduce the scale of an opposition
victory. Human Rights Watch documented the abuses and released an audio
tape of Musharraf’s attorney general speaking of his awareness of a plan to “massively
rig” the elections. The European Union Election Observer Mission concluded
that the elections “fell short of a number of international standards for genuine
democratic elections.”
Judicial Independence
Upon assuming power, the government released all judges detained by Musharraf
and restored their salaries. Most of the 42 judges fired by Musharraf returned to
work under a deal with the PPP-led government that required them to take a fresh
oath of office under the constitution.
However, despite repeated public assertions to the contrary, President Zardari
reneged on commitments and his signed agreement with opposition leader
Nawaz Sharif to restore to office deposed Supreme Court Chief Justice Iftikhar
Muhammad Chaudhry, who had been arbitrarily fired and detained by Musharraf
during emergency rule.
The lawyers’ movement, which rose to prominence in 2007, has weakened as a
political force since the advent of an elected government but retains significant
support in the legal fraternity and in civil society.
Balochistan
The Pakistani government apologized in 2008 to the people of Balochistan for
excesses and abuses under Musharraf, released high-profile political prisoners in
the province, and affirmed its intention to reach a rights-respecting political compact
between the Pakistani federation and the province. These overtures calmed
the situation in Balochistan considerably and attacks by both Baloch militants
and the Pakistani military stopped.
The dispute in Balochistan is essentially political, centered on issues of provincial
autonomy and exploitation of mineral resources. The Zardari government has
accepted that hundreds of political opponents were “disappeared” from
Balochistan during Musharraf’s rule, but progress in locating them or informing
their next-of-kin has remained slow.
Terrorism, Counterterrorism, and “Disappearances”
Pakistan was rocked by a spate of suicide bombings in 2008 that targeted the
political and military elite of the country and the symbols of its power. The most
high-profile attack took place on September 20 in Islamabad, destroying the
Marriot Hotel, killing 54, and injuring hundreds. The attack came just hours after
President Zardari had delivered his first address to a joint session of parliament.
Terrorism suspects are frequently detained without charge or, if charged, are
often convicted without proper judicial process. Human Rights Watch has documented
scores of illegal detentions, instances of torture, and “disappearances” in
Pakistan’s major cities. Counterterrorism laws also continue to be misused. It is
impossible to ascertain the number of people “disappeared” in counterterrorism
operations because of the secrecy surrounding such operations. Pakistan’s
Interior Ministry, now controlled by the elected government, has estimated the
total at 1,100. However, the government has not provided details of how many
were suspected of links to al Qaeda and the Taliban and has made negligible
progress in resolving cases and recovering victims.
Until the imposition of the state of emergency in November 2007, the Supreme
Court was investigating 400 cases of enforced disappearance. In response to
pressure from the Supreme Court, scores were freed or produced in court and charged. The Supreme Court under Musharraf-appointed Chief Justice Abdul
Hameed Dogar has notably failed to pursue such cases.
Pakistan has yet to become a signatory to the international treaty banning
enforced disappearances.
Security Operations and Displaced Persons
At the urging of the United States, the Pakistani armed forces have engaged in
increasingly aggressive counterterrorism operations in Pakistan’s Federally
Administered Tribal Areas along the Afghan border. The operations at times have
been accompanied by massive civilian displacement, extrajudicial executions,
house demolitions, and arbitrary detentions.
Since September 2008, US drones are believed to have carried out more than a
dozen missile attacks on alleged militant targets in the tribal areas, killing dozens
of people amid persistent claims of civilian casualties. The air raids have been a
political liability for Zardari, who has called on the US to stop them. In the Bajaur
agency area, where the fighting has been most intense, more than 200,000 people
have been displaced by the Pakistani army offensive.
Armed groups in Pakistan’s tribal areas continue to engage in vigilantism and violent
attacks on civilians, including suicide bombings, murder, and public beheadings.
Despite selective military operations and periodic peace deals, the government
has not succeeded in preventing the Taliban and members of other militant
groups from committing serious human rights abuses.
Throughout 2008 Taliban suicide bomb attacks and operations continued in the
settled areas of the North West Frontier Province. Battles between pro-Taliban militants
and government security forces in the NWFP’s Swat valley displaced civilians
and led to severe insecurity.
Discrimination
Legal discrimination against religious minorities and women continues to be a
serious concern.
The Ahmadi religious community continues to be targeted. Blasphemy cases were
registered against Ahmadis in 2008 and two members were murdered in the
province of Sindh after Dr. Aamir Liaquat Hussain, a popular religious talk-show
host on Geo TV, declared Ahmadis appropriate targets for murder under Islamic
law.
Violence against women and girls, including rape and domestic violence, and
forced marriage remain serious problems. “Honor killings” were perpetrated
across the country in 2008, with particularly gruesome cases reported from Sindh
and Balochistan provinces. In one case, five women were reported to have been
shot and buried alive for marrying against their families’ wishes.
Despite condemnation from human rights groups, Israrullah Zehri, a senator from
Balochistan province who publicly defended honor killings as “tribal custom,”
and legislator Hazar Khan Bijrani, accused of presiding over a tribal jirga (council)
that in 2006 ordered the handing-over of five girls, aged six and younger, as
“compensation” in a dispute, were elevated to Pakistan’s cabinet by President
Zardari in November 2008.
Growing extremism poses new threats to women’s rights, particularly in the tribal
regions bordering Afghanistan. In 2008, the Taliban and other insurgent groups
destroyed more than 100 girls schools and imposed other barriers to prevent girls
from attending schools.
Freedom of Expression
Journalists continue to face pressure and threats from non-state actors and elements
of Pakistan’s intelligence apparatus, but there has been a marked
decrease in government-sponsored attacks since Musharraf was forced to step
down. The elected government revoked sweeping curbs on the media put in place
by Musharraf.
Death Penalty
Pakistan’s prime minister announced in June 2008 that more than 7,000 inmates
on death row in Pakistan would have their sentences commuted. In a July meeting with Human Rights Watch the prime minister again emphasized his intention to
commute the death sentences. Between the June announcement and this writing
in late 2008, however, 15 more people were executed, according to the Human
Rights Commission of Pakistan.
Despite commitments to reduce the number of offenses for which the death
penalty is applicable, Zardari actually increased their number in November by
adding “cyber-terrorism” to the list of crimes punishable by death. Pakistan’s Law
Ministry appears to be stalling the commutation of death sentences and blocking
proposals to limit the applicability of the death penalty.
Key International Actors
The United States and United Kingdom, the key external actors in Pakistan,
remain focused on counterterrorism in their dealings with Pakistan, subordinating
all other issues. The US, working closely with Pakistan’s notoriously abusive Inter-
Services Intelligence agency, has had a direct role in “disappearances” of counterterrorism
suspects.
While the US and UK supported a return to electoral democracy in 2008, they
backed Musharraf even after the February elections, despite his personal unpopularity
and the illegality of his hold on office. When it became clear that his continuation
in office was untenable, they successfully urged the elected government
not to prosecute or hold Musharraf legally accountable for abuses under his rule
in return for facilitating his resignation. In contrast, they notably failed to urge full
restoration of the judiciary.
On April 17, 2008, the Pakistani government ratified the International Covenant on
Economic, Social and Cultural Rights and signed both the International Covenant
on Civil and Political Rights and the UN Convention against Torture.
Under Musharraf, Pakistan played an extremely negative role at the UN Human
Rights Council (HRC); the change in government has been accompanied by some
improvements in approach. Still, Pakistan’s positions at the HRC often do not fully
reflect the administration’s stated commitments to human rights and it continues
to play an actively obstructive role on some issues. Pakistan was reviewed under
the Universal Periodic Review mechanism of the HRC in May 2008. 