PAKISTAN
Section 736 of the International Security and Development Act of 1981 provides:
In authorizing assistance to Pakistan, it is the intent of Congress to promote and expedite the restoration of full civil liberties and representative government in Pakistan.
As with last year's Country Report, this year's Report accurately and candidly details the principal human rights abuses in Pakistan. However there also appears to be a greater effort to deflect criticism from President 2ia-ul-Haq by creating the impression that the status of human rights in Pakistan is no worse under his military rule than under previous regimes. What distinguishes President Zia from his predecessors, however, is his success in institutionalizing one-man rule, destroying the country's legal framework, emasculating the judiciary, and stripping Pakistani citizens of their fundamental civil and political rights. This notable change of tone in the 1982 Report, perhaps reflects the State Department's interest in allaying growing public and Congressional concern over the massive military aid the United States is providing to Pakistan.
While the Report concludes that "[t]he Government made little real movement during 1982 toward restoring basic
-71-
civil and political rights," this statement does not give emphasis to the steps that have been taken in recent years by President Zia to destroy the vestiges of the rule of law and consolidate his position of absolute power.
By promulgating the Provisional Constitutional Order of 1981, Zia assumed unbridled power to amend the Constitution and make law. Article 15 of the PCO effectively extinguished the civilian courts' traditional writ power to protect individuals from official abuse by immunizing the orders and actions of the martial law authorities and the decisions of the military tribunals from judicial scrutiny. The PCO suspended all fundamental rights guaranteed by the Constitution of 1973, including the rights not to be deprived of life or liberty without due process, arrest and detention safeguards, protection against double jeopardy and retrospective punishment, protection against self-incrimination and injury to personal dignity, i.e., torture, freedom of assembly and association, and freedom of speech.
Noting the existence of this provision the Report states only that it "significantly eroded the powers and independence of Pakistan's judiciary." It does not mention Article 17 which required all Supreme and High Court judges to take an oath of adherence to the validity of any provision of the PCO. This oath, which led the Chief Justice of Pakistan and four of the six Supreme Court judges to resign.
-72-
is trivialized in the Country Report as "what to some
justices seemed to be an unconstitutional oath of 1/
allegiance."
That the Provisional Constitutional Order, which took effect in March 1981, was not merely a formal assertion of the totality of Zia's power is demonstrated by the events of 1982.
Martial Law Regulation No. 54 of 1982
Perhaps the most ominous development in 1982 was the promulgation, on September 23, of Martial Law Regulation No. 54. The Country Report inaccurately implies that this Regulation applies only to cases of subversion. In fact, the Regulation declares unlawful "any act [done] with intent to impair the efficiency or impede the working of, or to cause damage to" any property or "any offence liable to cause insecruity, fear or despondency amongst the public." It also makes unlawful the failure to convey to the police or martial law authorities information regarding persons committing such
V Another example of this type of reporting is found in the Country Report's discussion of the position of women. The report tells of one women's group's opposition to a proposed new federal law of evidence "which they claimed would impose on women and men equal obligations without affording women equal rights." [Emphasis added.] The report might have said that the proposed rule provides that women's testimony will be given one-half the weight of men's.
-73-
acts. It further provides that "a Military court on the basis of police or any other investigation alone, may, unless the contrary is proved, presume that the accused has committed the offence charged with." This regulation was made retroactive to July 5, 1977. Violation of the regulation is punishable by death, life imprisonment, up to 14 years of "rigorous imprisonment," flogging, and forfeiture of property. There would be no judicial review of the j udgnent.
Expansion of the Role of Summary Military Courts
As the Country Report correctly states, President Zia has given the military courts virtually unlimited, unreviewable jurisdiction over most criminal matters, regardless of whether they constitute violations of martial law regulations. A complaint frequently voiced by members of the bar and admitted by a high government official to a representative of the Lawyers Committee, is that military authorities, as a practical matter, decide even civil cases by threatening criminal prosecution if the parties do not resolve the dispute in a particular manner.
The Report says very little about the summary military courts before which the majority of ordinary criminals and political defendants are now tried. The summary military courts are presided over by a single
-74-
military officer, a captain or major usually without legal training. Although the defendant may have a lawyer in court, the lawyer may not participate in the trial. The defendant must cross-examine prosecution witnesses himself or herself. In some instances the trial is set the day after the arrest, giving the accused no time to prepare his defense or call witnesses. (In other cases, the maximum sentence that a prisoner would receive if he were tried and convicted is shorter than the time spent awaiting trial.) The trials are closed. The presiding officer need not frame formal charges or record more than a memorandum of the evidence. The accused cannot appeal the decision to a higher court. In 1982 President Zia increased the sentencing power of these courts from one year and fifteen lashes to three years and 30 lashes. Ignoring the grave human rights implications of the greatly expanded role of summary military courts, the Country Report simply states that "in 1982 the Government increasingly relied on summary military courts to relieve the backlog of cases in the civil courts."
Political Prisoners
The number of political prisoners at any given time is difficult to estimate because of the pattern of arrests, imprisonment, release and rearrest, and because the government regards anyone detained under any law allowing
-75-
preventive detention or charged with violating any martial law regulation or order — whether for sabotage or for advocating the restoration of democracy — as an ordinary criminal and not a political prisoner. However, the Country Report's estimate of "400 persons detained in Pakistan for political reasons at the end of 1982" is both far below that of other observers and misleading in the narrowness of its frame of reference, i.e., December 31, 1982.
The Report states elsewhere that in February and March Martial law authorities arrested about 4,400 individuals. By stating that these arrests were in response to demands for law and order and that those arrested were "reported to be habitual offenders," the Report might create the impression that this was a roundup of recidivating thieves and muggers. Actually the arrests were the result of a nationwide crackdown on persons associated with the political opposition including political leaders and party workers. (That they were "habitual offenders" may simply reflect the fact that political activists tend to get arrested, released and rearrested with some frequencey.) Another several hundred persons were arrested in August and September in response to a bombing at Lahore Airport.
A number of leaders of the bar were arrested in October and November for having participated in lawyers' conventions where speakers called for an end to martial law.
-76-
reinstatement of the 1973 Constitution and the holding of elections. Some were tried by summary military courts, convicted and sentenced to one year's imprisonment. However they were released without explanation upon Zia's return to Pakistan from the United States in late December. One of them, the President of the Karachi Bar Association, who was imprisoned from October 25 to December 23, told a representative of the Lawyers committee for International Human Rights that there were 350-400 political prisoners in Karachi Central Jail when he was there. Another advocate released from the Lahore Central Prison in late December said that there were a few hundred there. Estimates of the total number of political prisoners detained at some time during the year were as high as 35,000. In interviews with more than thirty bar leaders, politicians and recently released prisoners, the lowest estimate of the number of political prisoners as of December 31 was 2,000.
Regardless of the accuracy of the Country Report's estimate of 400, using December 31 as the date as of which political prisoners are counted makes it easy for the government to temporarily reduce the number and does not measure the extent of political arrests and detentions as would an estimate, as was used in the 1981 Report, of the total number arrested or detained at any time during the year.
-77-
In general, the Country Report is marked by a tendency to accurately describe the breakdown of human right protection in piecemeal fashion, while avoiding as much as possible the inescapable conclusion that President Zia is the main force behind these disturbing events. He made clear his intentions with respect to human rights in Pakistan on Meet the Press during his visit to Washington in December 1982:
Mr. Monroe:
Mr. President, your government put out an order saying the military courts could presume the guilt of suspects investigated by the police unless the suspects could prove their innocence. When critics of the government are arrested, their families often cannot find out why they were arrested or where they're baing held. Political parties are banned. Newspapers cannot even print the names of your political opponents. Aren't these the characteristics of dictatorship?
President Zia:
No, sir. These are the characteristics of a good government, in my opinion, in an area where I come from.
-78-
