Pakistan
The State Department report on Pakistan for 1992 provides a detailed and comprehensive survey of human rights problems in the country. It accurately describes an unimproved human rights situation in Pakistan and faults the government's failure to address chronic abuses in numerous areas. In several instances, however, the report fails to recognize the government's complicity in human rights abuses, such as its promotion of a social climate in which abuses occur or its failure to properly investigate and prosecute responsible parties. The report also tends to quote critics of the government's policies in place of presenting the State Department's own view.
The report's discussion of human rights violations in Sindh omits important political factors. Although the report accurately describes the government's complicity with the practice of torture by the political party Mohajir Qaumi Mahaz (MQM), it suggests that the civilian government ultimately took action against the MQM. In fact, the army acted more or less independently in discovering and publicizing the existence of MQM torture cells. There is no evidence that Pakistan's civilian leadership ever intended to act against the MQM.
The report should have discussed accusations against the Central Investigative Agency (CIA) and its chief in Sindh, Irfanullah Marwat. The CIA has been accused of abducting airline stewardesses and other women who were then allegedly raped by Marwat and his friends. There is compelling evidence that Marwat, who is the son-in-law of President
Ishaq Khan, organized the rape of Veena Hayat, a Bhutto associate, in 1991. The CIA has also been accused of abducting businessmen for extortion.
While the report describes the arrest of thousands of opposition Pakistan Democratic Alliance (PDA) supporters in connection with the "long march" campaign in November, it concludes that "most had been released by early December." In fact, those who were not released were charged with sedition and were to be tried by the Special Courts for the Suppression of Terrorist Activities. The report should also have noted the arrests of opposition leaders in the weeks after the "long march." On December 22, several hundred PDA members were reportedly arrested when they peacefully demonstrated near the Parliament building in Islamabad. Former Federal Minister Muk-htar Awan suffered serious head injuries when police hit him with batons. The secretariat building of the Pakistan People's Party (PPP) was raided, reportedly without a search warrant, and approximately 40 PPP workers were arrested.
The report appropriately criticizes the government for failing to prosecute and punish police responsible for torture and abuse. The report should, however, attempt to follow up on specific cases of extrajudicial killings. For instance, the death of Muhammad Vusuf Jakhrani, which the report accurately describes as having resulted from several days of torture, was not investigated. Even when cases were registered or proceedings begun, results have often not been made public. In November 1990, Mohammad
278
Pakistan
Idrees Bajwa was killed in an alleged "encounter" with policemen in Toba Tek Singh. An investigation report on Bajwa's death published in June 1991 reported the registration of a manslaughter case against six policemen. Officials have not publicized the results of the charge. In another case, Ahmad Shakeel was reportedly tortured to death at the CIA detention center in Karachi on April 25, 1990. After Shakeel's father filed a private complaint in court, proceedings reportedly began against eight CIA officers. Again, no results were ever publicized.
The report correctly cites "pervasive evidence of misuse of police powers." But government action has fostered an environment conducive to police abuses. The report fails to mention the promulgation on July 19 of a presidential ordinance, intended primarily for Sindh but which covers all of Pakistan, that gave army personnel immunity from civil and criminal liability during operations, and conferred on the army full powers of search, arrest and seizure of weapons. The report should have noted the discovery of police torture cells in Multan and Gandasinghwala, near Lahore. It also does not discuss cases in which police engaged in psychological abuse of suspects. For instance, the police paraded a person through the streets of Lahore after tearing off his clothes. In another incident, the faces of five detainees were blackened before they were dragged through the streets. In Kabirwala, police paraded two boys in the streets, flogging them at street crossings.
The report correctly states that although "the courts have traditionally experienced pressure from the executive,
the high courts have exhibited a degree of independence." It should have also noted instances where the government has taken action against judges who issued rulings unfavorable to the government. After the presiding judge of a Special Court under the Suppression of Terrorist Activities Act acquitted Benazir Bhutto's husband, Asif Zardari, the government barred the judge from hearing other cases involving opposition leaders. The report should also have pointed out the difficulties lower court judges face when opposed by the police. In Sindh, 13 officers refused to release a suspect in violation of a judicial order.
In discussing the right to bail, the report misstates the effect of Ordinance XV, promulgated on November 1 6. The ordinance rescinded regulations under which a prisoner continuously held for two years pending trial was automatically granted bail. The report correctly notes that Ordinance XXII, which bars the high courts from hearing bail applications from those facing trial in the special courts, was aimed at Asif Zardari. However, the report understates the scope of the ordinance, which could have been applied in cases other than Mr. Zardari's. The ordinance, withdrawn under heavy public pressure, drastically restricted the high court's review of the special courts, denying the high court the authority to grant bail, accept habeas corpus petitions or quash proceedings. The ultimate effect would have been to undermine the authority of the high courts in relation to the special courts and to increase executive power.
The report mentions the imprisonment of children only in the context of the
279
Pakistan
hudood laws. In Punjab and Sindh alone, more than 4,000 children were in prison in 1992. Most were incarcerated on charges of petty theft and vagrancy, as well as sexual offenses. The law providing for automatic bail for children under 14 is rarely applied. Moreover, under the Hudood Ordinance, children of all ages may be sentenced to up to five years in jail. According to the Human Rights Commission of Pakistan (HRCP), nearly half of all incarcerated children share cells with adults and nearly a quarter have been found to have been sexually abused in jail. In the same study, a majority of child detainees interviewed complained of torture by the police.
The report does not mention the serious overcrowding in Pakistan's prisons. The HRCP reported that there were 2,700 prisoners in Gujranwala jail which has a capacity of 740. The figures at other jails also reflect serious overcrowding: Gujrat (873 prisoners, 377 capacity), Jhelum (579 prisoners, 396 capacity), Sheikhupura (1531 prisoners, 377capacity), and Sahiwal (2736 prisoners, 1565 capacity).
The report makes no mention of due process concerns associated with the death penalty or punishments of amputation. After four years in which there were no judicial executions in Pakistan, 19 people were hanged in 1992. Seven people in Punjab were handed down the punishment of amputation. The fact that many of the decisions were by special "speedy trial" courts, in which there are fewer due process protections, should have been raised in the report.
The report greatly overstates the
freedom and independence of both human rights activists and of journalists. The report's contention that "[djomestic human rights organizations operate free of official harassment" is not entirely accurate. On November 18, police arrested 12 members of the Human Rights Commission of Pakistan who were monitoring human rights violations by the police during an opposition demonstration. The 12 activists, along with three other detainees, were held in a 9 X 9 foot cell in an Islamabad police station, without bedding or food for over 30 hours. The detainees were not shown any detention orders nor were any grounds for keeping them in custody communicated to them. Contacts with lawyers and friends could only be established with great difficulty. After intervention by foreign journalists and diplomats, the authorities decided to release the two women on the team. Only after the women refused to leave their colleagues did the administration release all 12 members of the group.
The report's statement that the government "ceased exercising control over the quota of newsprint allocated to publications" is not entirely accurate. After articles critical of the government appeared in The Friday Times, authorities reportedly refused the publication its quota of subsidized newsprint, forcing it to buy its newsprint at expensive open market rates.
Government "advice" to journalists is not limited to particular stories. In November, government officials pressured Jang editors to fire two reporters: Hamid Mir in Lahore and Azhar Sohail in Islamabad. Mir had written a story about the role of the Utility Store Corporation of
280
Pakistan
Pakistan in contributing to inflation, while Sohail had written an article about a controversial mapping plan.
The report accurately describes the charges of sedition leveled against the Islamabad edition of The News for printing a poem critical of the government. The report should have noted, however, that while the charges were dropped in October, the intimidation did not stop. In late December, government officials reportedly pressured state-owned banks to forbid The News and Jan Publications from importing newsprint stocks and then had their newsprint warehouses sealed off by customs officials who accused them of "smuggling." Charges of "concealment" and "tax evasions" were also leveled against the newspaper owners.
Although the report recognizes the government's failure to prevent violence against the press, it omits cases in which government officials are themselves responsible for threats and harassment. The Committee to Protect Journalists reported that in October, Jawad Nazir, the chief news editor of The News, Lahore edition, failed to include a news item whose publication had been urged by the director of the Press Information Department in Lahore. The official responded by telling Nazir that a ceiling fan might fall on him or he might be run over by a truck. Several days later, Nazir was followed by eight to 10 unidentified men in a van.
While the report describes the arrest of journalists in connection with the "long march," it does not mention the physical abuse of journalists in detention. On November 18, Mariana Baabar of The
News was reportedly beaten and verbally assaulted in police custody.
The arrest on blasphemy charges of Dr. Akhtar Hameed Khan is accurately described by the report as having been motivated by personal vengeance on the part of a former employee. Dr. Khan, a prominent social worker who runs a community welfare project in the Orangi district of Karachi, was also a target, however, of developers and others irritated with his campaign against poverty and corruption. The report should have mentioned the political motives behind the charges. The report also fails to state that the blasphemy charge against Dr. Khan in Karachi was dropped only after intervention by prominent intellectuals and by international organizations such as the International Monetary Fund, which has invested in Dr. Khan's development projects. Finally, the report should have described the continued harassment of Dr. Khan. A fatwa issued against him by local clerics still stands and it is reported that thousands of posters calling for Khan's death were put up in Karachi.
The report fails on other occasions to describe either the broader social context of wrongful arrests or the devastating aftermath of such actions. The report's account of the case of Gul Masih omits the political motivations behind his arrest on blasphemy charges. Masih was arrested on December 10, 1991 on the urging of Aslam Kachela, a Muslim League candidate for local office. Masih's arrest occurred only a few days after his brother, Aziz Masih (the local minority councillor), had refused to support Kachela in the elections. Kachela was also the divisional head of the Anjuman Sipah-i-Sahaba, a
281
Pakistan
militant political-religious group to which Sajjad Hussain, Gul Masih's accuser, also belonged. The report also should have discussed the consequences of the arrest for Gul Masih's brother, Bashir Masih. After Bashir Masih was released and cleared of all charges, local mullahs organized a procession demanding that he be rearrested and hanged along with his brother. At Friday prayer, mullahs called for the execution of both brothers while wall posters also denounced the "blasphemers." Bashir Masih was not allowed to resume his job at the transport office which he had held for 20 years and was forced, along with his family, to seek sanctuary with the Catholic Church.
Religious leaders played a similar role in the January killing of Naemat Ahmar. After his arrest for the murder, Farooq Ahmed was visited by numerous local clerics who applauded his "courage" and "heroism." Some members of the local clergy joined to hire lawyers for Ahmed's defense. The report should have addressed this atmosphere of intolerance which condoned and even encouraged the crime.
The report greatly understates the brutality of the attacks against Hindus following the destruction of the Babri mosque in Ayodhya, India. On December 8, six Hindu children, all under the age of 10, were reportedly stoned to death when a mob stormed a temple in southwestern Pakistan. In Loralai on December 8, a Hindu woman and five children were burned to death. In addition, about 100 temples were destroyed and 200 houses and shops were looted and burned. In most of these cases, law enforcement officials acted as silent spectators to the
destruction. Requests for protection were ignored and no arrests were made.
The report does not mention the fervor with which Islamic militants pushed for the inclusion of a person's religion on citizenship identity cards. In Kamalia, Islamic militants protested the government's slowness in deciding to include religion on identity cards by imposing a social boycott on the approximately one hundred Christian families in the area. These families were refused food, medicine, and other essentials for several weeks.
In several instances the report presents both sides of important human rights debates without offering a State Department view. In its efforts to appear neutral, the report fails to criticize clear violations of internationally recognized human rights. This tendency is most notable in the discussions of legal and constitutional issues. For instance, the report recounts both the government's defense of the special courts as well as the due process concerns of "critics, including many lawyers and human rights monitors." The practices referred to in the report, in addition to those omitted such as the denial of a public hearing, violate international standards for fair trials and should have been strongly condemned in the report. The report declines to express a position on both the trial of Asif Zardari and on the "accountability" of courts generally. It does not dispute the government's contention that the opposition's "long march" was "illegal."
The report's discussions regarding the social standing of women, violence against women in custody, and the role
282
Pakistan
of the hudood ordinances in the oppression of women are generally very good. The report should have noted that women not in the custody of their fathers or husbands may be detained without charge. The victims of rape and abduction may also be held in custody.
Minority women are particularly vulnerable to police abuses. At the Jaya Bagga Police Station in Lahore, police attempted to elicit confessions of two Christian women accused of the theft of buffalos by stripping them and making them dance in front of them. Similar humiliations of Christian women were reported in Sirajganj Colony in Nazima-bad. In Tando Ghulam Haider, police held a Hindu family in custody and raped the 12-year-old girl of the family.
The report's statement that "Pakistanis are generally free to travel abroad" is not entirely accurate. In numerous instances, the government has refused people the right to travel, usually on the grounds that their presence in Pakistan was required for an official investigation. In some of these cases, there is widespread belief that travel was denied for political reasons. The government also made travel more difficult in 1992 by requiring police verification for issuance of a passport.
In its discussion of the treatment of Afghan refugees, the report should have mentioned the Pakistani government's failure to protect the refugees from human rights abuses committed by various Afghan mujahidin factions. These factions hold numerous prisoners in detention centers on Pakistani soil with the acquiescence of the Pakistani authorities.
Approximately 1,000 persons remain imprisoned in locations such as Shamsha-too, Munda and Warsak near Peshawar, the majority of whom are under the control of the Hezbe Islamic faction.
The report also understates the effects of the government's decision to limit the number of refugees from Afghanistan. This policy decision was made in August during a period of heavy fighting in which more than 120,000 residents were displaced. While the policy was in effect, thousands of families were stranded at the Afghan-Pakistani border. In September, the government deported hundreds of Afghan Sikhs as well as many Hindus. This action constituted the first time in the past 14 years that Afghans had been deported.
The report's discussion of worker rights is generally very good. The report failed to address two chronic problems: the denial of the right of minority unions to represent their members in individual grievances, and the practice of falsely promoting employees in order to remove them from the category of "workman" for union purposes. The report should also have expressed the views of the State Department on worker rights rather than simply attributing complaints to the International Labor Organization.
The report's discussion of the sale of Pakistani children did not mention reports of smuggling of children for use as donors of body organs for transplant. These children were reportedly smuggled through coastal sites such as Makran, Gawadar, Pasni and Ormara. In one case, smugglers attempted to ship seven children aged 2 1/2 to four years. In another
283
Pakistan
case, an attempted smuggling involved 32 children aged two to seven years. There is no effective law in existence which punishes parents for the sale of their children. The current maximum fine for a parent or guardian pledging the labor of a child is 50 rupees (about US $2).
In its discussion of the Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA), the report understates the extent to which FATA tribespeople are de jure deprived of civil liberties. The Frontier Crimes Regulations of 1901 (FCR), which constitutes both the procedural and substantive criminal law of FATA, lacks many civil liberties guaranteed in the Pakistani Constitution. In contrast to Articles 9 and 10 of the Constitution (the protection of life and liberty and limits on arrest and detention, respectively), FATA residents may be detained without charge or trial and may be even be arrested by other private individuals. Section 40 of FCR allows for three years' imprisonment without charge followed by a second three-year term. In contrast to Article 12 of the Constitution, Section 12(2) of FCR allows for imposition of punishment higher than prescribed by law. The FCR also lacks provisions providing compensation for government taking or destruction of private property. The Pakistani courts have found the FCR to be in violation of Article 8 of the Constitution (by virtue of its inconsistency with the protection of fundamental rights under Article 1), as well as violating Islamic principles, yet it continues to be applied.
284
