 PAKISTAN
 In the fourth year since Pakistan's return to democratic rule, Prime Minister
 Nawaz Sharif, who is also head of the Islamic Jamhoori Ittehad (IJI) political party
 coalition, and President Ghulam Ishaq Khan continued to work together as the civil-
 ian leaders of Pakistan's federal parliamentary democracy. The Chief of Army Staff,
 General Asif Nawaz, also wields considerable influence on many major policy deci-
 sions and is the third member of the unofficial 'troika" which governs the nation.
 Responsibility for internal security rests primarily with the police, although para-
 military forces, such as the Rangers and Frontier Constabulary, are charged with
 maintaining law and order in frontier areas. Police forces are under provincial con-
 trol, as are paramilitary forces when assisting in law and order operations. Both
 forces were responsible for human rights abuses in 1992. The army and para-
 military forces, under the nominal control of the Sindh provincial government (but
 
 
 1160
 under the effective control of the army and Central government), were called upon
 in May to help restore law and order in Sindh province. This law and order opr-
 ation also sparked charges of human rights violations by the army units involved
 and of selective targeting of certain political elements in Sindh. Aocordin to the
 U.S. Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, total military expenditures for 1989
 were $2,488 million. While the Government recognizes that too much of its gross
 national product is devoted to military spending, there is no indication that efforts
 will be made to reduce these expenditures in the near future.
 Pakistan has a mixed economy of both state-run and private industries and finan-
 cial institutions. Cotton textiles and apparel, rice, and leather products are the prin-
 cipal export products. The Government is pursuing an ambitious program of eco-
 nomic reform, emphasizing the privatization of government-owned financial institu-
 tions, industrial units, and utilities and the continued diminution of the public sec-
 tor's role in the economy. The liberalization of foreign investment and exchange con-
 trols are also important priorities. The Constitution assures the right to private
 property and of private businesses to operate freely in most sectors of the economy.
 There was little change in the human rights situation in 1992, and serious prob-
 lems remained in several areas. The press and political organizations continued to
 exercise considerable, but not unfettered, freedom of expression. The overt repres-
 sion of political opponents, a particular problem in Sindh, lessened but nonetheless
 remained an issue of concern. Selective prosecution of opposition political leaders
 continued. The arbitrary detention, arrest, torture, and other abuse of prisoners and
 detainees also continued to be a serious problem. There were no significant efforts
 to reform either the police or judicial systems, and responsible authorities did little
 to prosecute and punish those responsible for abuses.
 Heightened sectarian clashes between the Sunni and Shi'a communities resulted
 in numerous murders. Non-Muslim minorities continued to be the subject of unoffi-
 cial persecution by religious zealots. The Government did little, despite complaints
 to curb these activities and continued its support for religious legislation designed
 to Islamize Pakistan.
 Social and legal constraints kept women in a subordinate position in society, and
 significant restraints remained on workers' rights. The use of child and bonded labr
 remained widespread in spite of legislation to prohibit these practices.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-Extrajudicial killings, often in the
 form of staged "police encounters"-shootouts resulting in the death of suspects-
 continued in 1992. There were also scores of credible reports from thc media and
 human rights monitors concerning prisoners' deaths while in police custody, includ-
 ing reports of instances in which prisoners alleged to have been killed in shootouts
 probably died as a result of police torture. Law enforcement personnel were rarely
 charged or tried for these killings, which human rights groups say numbered in the
 hundreds.
 Many questions remain regarding the deaths in May of seven men alleged by the
 authorities to have been terrorists of the Al-Zulfiqar Organization (AZO). The seven
 were reportedly killed in an exchange of fire with a naval patrol beat at sea, near
 Shah Bandar. Official reports say that on May 9 the group was intercepted on its
 way to India for terrorist training. Family members of the deceased claim that only
 one or two of the badly decomposed bodies returned to them had gunshot wounds;
 all reportedly showed signs of torture. The other 14 alleged AZO members arrested
 in this incident are being tried in special courts in Karachi.
 In the course of the army cleanup operation in Sindh, at least nine villagers of
 Tando Bhawal were killed in a massacre on June 5. Journalists produced evidence
 that the victims were farm laborers involved in a land dispute rather than "terror-
 ists and saboteurs," as the army had originally announced. The army subsequently
 took responsibility for the deaths, relieving four senior officers and arresting a major
 for a field general court-martial. The major was convicted and sentenced to death,
 and 13 soldiers who participated in the massacre received life sentences.
 Several deaths reportedly occurred in army custody during the operation in Sindh.
 One of the reported deaths in army custody was that of political activist Mohammad
 Yusuf Jakhrani. Arrested at his village home in Sindh without charges on June 7,
 Jakhrani was tortured during several days of political interrogation before succumb-
 ing to his injuries on June 12. Subsequent to his death the 55-year-old Jakhrani
 was charged with possession of liquor and pornography.
 Two Christians accused of blaspheming the Prophet Muhammad were murdered
 before a legal judgment could be rendered in their cases. Teacher Naemat Ahmar
 
 
 1161
 was stabbed to death in Faisalabad on January 6. His teenage assailant said he
 took the law into his own hands when the authorities did not respond to unsubstan-
 tiated accusations of blasphemy appearing in anonymous posters. The assailant's
 bail application is pending in the High Court.
 A paraplegic detainee, Tahir lqba, died under suspicious circumstances in July
 at Kot Lakhpat prison in Lahore, where he had been in custody since the end of
 1990. Iqbal, who had converted to Christianity some 5 years before, was on trial for
 having allegedly desecrated the Koran and insulted the Prophet of Islam, charges
 which the efendant denied. Suspicions that Iqbal had been poisoned, perhaps by
 religious zealots, led to a judicial inquiry into the circumstances of his death. The
 inquiry is still under way, but to date no charges have been brought.
 Ethnic and sectarian tensions were also a cause of politically motivated killings,
 as rival ethnic/political parties and organizations and their student wings frequently
 clashed. Leaders of beth Shia and Sunni organizations were assassinated through-
 out Pakistan, and sectarian clashes left dozens dead. The authorities made little
 rgress in preventing this type of violence or punishing those responsible, in part
 ue to the random and often spontaneous nature of these incidents, the influential
 connections of many of the perpetrators, and the political risks associated with pro-
 ceeding against the radical elements in either community.
 In addition to these extraidicial killings, there was a substantial problem with
 interfactional violence, including murder and kidnapings, involving Afghan refugees
 and their forein supporters resident in Pakistan. Such abuses are addressed in the
 count  report or   ghanistan.
 b. DIappearance.-There were no reports of government-instigated disappear-
 ances, but there were continuing credible reports of government-instigated abduc-
 tions in which the victims were subsequently found to have been detained in govern-
 ment custody or arrested (see Section 1.d.).
 There were reports of kidnapings by rival ethnic/political parties. Perpetrators
 were rarely apprehended in these cases. Most victims were eventually released after
 ransoms were paid, but several perished.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 As in past years, there continued to be persuasive evidence of misuse of police pow-
 ers. Army units in Sindh were also accused of abusing political activists and their
 families. In one incident, with the apparent complicity of army and Sindh govern-
 ment officials, members of a dissident wing of the Mohajir Qaumi Mahaz (MQM)
 political party severely beat former Provincial Assembly member Afzal Munif to
 force him into joining their ranks. Police and jailers routinely use force to elicit con-
 fessions and to compel detainees and prisoners to incriminate others.
 Beating, whipping the soles of the feet with rubber whips, sexual assault, and pro-
 longed isolation occur in Pakistani jails. When deaths result, suicide is the com-
 monly offered explanation. Police frequently use the threat of abuse to extort money
 from prisoners and their families. Whole families have been detained to force a rel-
 ative who is the subject of an arrest warrant to surrender.
 In November police arrested thousands of opposition supporters in conjunction
 with the opposition's *long march." By early December most had been released, but
 critics objected to police inattention to legal requirements in apprehending and de-
 taining those arrested. Human rights groups recorded credible reports of abuse of
 detainees (many of whom were prevented from communicating with their families)
 and several credible reports of torture. There were credible reports that Pakistan
 People's Party (PPP) Central Information Secretary Salman Taseer was badly beat-
 en by police and hung upside down for several hours. In addition to beating the
 soles of his feet, police also reportedly rolled weighted iron bars over Taseer's legs,
 causing muscle damage.
 There were continuing credible reports that women in police custody, or who went
 to a police station to file a report or inquire after a detainee, were sexually abused.
 This abuse is often not reported due to societal taboos, police intimidation, and fam-
 ily pressure. One international human rights group reported that more than 70 per-
 cent of women in police custody are subjected to sexual or physical violence. Accord-
 ing to the report, not a single officer has been punished for such abuses.
 There are few policewomen to perform matron duties, despite regulations requir-
 ing that policewomen be present for the questioning or detention of female suspects
 in station houses. Some women under detention are reportedly coerced by police offi-
 cers to trade sexual favors for their release; other women are simply raped. Despite
 the promulgation of regulations in 1991 to prohibit police from keeping women over-
 night in custody, in practice women are arbitrarily detained overnight and are sexu-
 ally abused both in police custody and in prisons. Upon release from prison, women
 are often ostracized by their family and friends and barred from their homes.
 
 
 1162
 In the widely publicized 1991 case of Aasia Ayub, in which the defendant alleged
 physical and sexual assault when held overnight for questioning in a Rawalpindi
 stationhouse, the Chief Justice of Pakistan in 1992 ordered the Punjab government
 to file a petition against the judgment of a "speedy trial" court, which acquitted the
 police officer defendant. The appeal is being heard by the Supreme Appellate Court.
 In general, however, police accused of abuse are seldom tried and punished; they
 are generally released on bail or quietly transferred to another district. Similarly,
 olice assigned to investigate abuses by other police generally shield their colleagues
 from such charges, and courts seldom charge policemen with offenses other than
 contempt of court. Those who attempt to bring charges against police are often
 threatened and end up dro      the charges.
 There continued tobe     abe reports that some ethnic/ political parties tortured
 opponents and, in some cases, used torture to enforce party disciphne among their
 own members. In the course of the military cleanup operation in Sindh, the army
 turned up torture cells it alleged were used by the MQM for these purposes.
 Many observers credibly maintain that the use of torture was common knowledge
 but that the Government had previously deferred action against the MQM for fear
 of losing its political support. At the time of the army action, the MQM was a mem-
 ber of the national Government, with three ministers in the national Cabinet.
 The Hadood Ordinances, promulgated by the central Government in 1979, provide
 harsh punishments for violating the Islamic code of behavior. They apply to Mus-
 lims and non-Muslims alike, but weigh most heavily on women. A woman who re-
 ports a case of rape to the authorities or files for a divorce can find herself charged
 with adultery under these Ordinances. All consensual extramarital sexual relations
 are considered violations of the Hadood Ordinances. The predominantly male police
 force reportedly uses the Hadood Ordinances to threaten people on the basis of per.
 sonal and political animosities. The Committee for the Repeal of the Hadood Ordi-
 nances estimates that over 2,000 women are in jails in Pakistan awaiting trial
 under this law. It is estimated that three-fourths of the female prisoners in Karachi
 and Lahore are awaiting trial or are imprisoned under these Ordinances. Minor
 children are also frequently held under the Hadood Ordinances, often charged with
 adultery or with being "addicts" under the Hadood prohibition provision. Extended
 imprisonment is the most common punishment for those convicted under the
 Hadood Ordinances, although there have also been reports of floggings.
 Convicted criminals and those in pretrial detention are held in three classes of
 prison facilities. Class "C" cells, which generally hold common criminals, suspected
 terrorists, and low-level political activists. They often have dirt floors, no furnish-
 ings, and poor food. The use of handcuffs and fetters is common. Prisoners in these
 cell reportedly suffer the most abuse, such as beatings and being forced to kneel
 for long periods. Conditions in "B" and "A" cells are markedly better, with the latter
 reserved for "prominent" persons.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-Pakistani law permits the detention for
 30 days under court order of persons suspected of threatening public order and safe-
 ty. Such court orders are renewable for 30 days at a time, up to a total of 90 days,
 if the Government can demonstrate that the detainee threatens public safety. Under
 the law, detainees must be informed expeditiously of the reason for their detention,
 but this requirement is not always met.
 The Government made extensive use of police and paramilitary forces to prevent
 opposition marchers from participating in the PPP's "long march" agitation cam-
 paign in mid-November. Thousands of opposition activists were arrested. In most
 cases the detainees were never charged with an offense, nor were legal justifications
 for their detention provided. Detainees were held for extended periods ranging up
 to 3 weeks. Most had been released by early December. The Government maintains
 that such measures were necessary to prevent an illegal march on the capital.
 In the frst months of 1992, the Sindh government detained hundreds of opposi-
 tion activists, mostly from the PPP, accusing them of being "terrorists." Many of the
 detained PPP workers were held for long periods of time without charge or were
 falsely implicated in criminal cases. Some of them, however, were charged with
 what observers considered to be legitimate criminal counts. By midyear, the number
 of opposition members (both PPP and Jeay Sindh, a Sindhi nationalist party) being
 held, either under preventive detention or in pretrial status on criminal charges,
 had swelled with the inclusion of MQM supporters. The press estimated that the
 number detained through October was around 3,500. Former detainees claim that
 prisoners under preventive detention frequently are held incommunicado. The PPP
 made repeated and credible charges that many of the detained workers were moved
 to station houses and detention centers far from their homes and that family mem-
 bers were often unable to locate them for several days or weeks. The Sindh High
 Court reprimanded the army and Sindh police for detaining family members of un-
 
 
 1163
 derground MQM leaders in order to discover the whereabouts of the activists or to
 force their surrender. The police sometimes detain citizens without charge in order
 to extort payment for their release.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Tria/.-The civil judicial system provides for an open
 trial, cross-examination, representation by an attorney, and appeal of sentences. At.
 torneys are appointed for indigents in capital cases. There are no juries. Owing to
 the limited number of judges, the heavy backlog of cases, and outdated court proce-
 dures, cases can drag on for years. There is also a special Shari'a Court which oper-
 ates as an appellate court for cases relating to the enforcement of the Hadood Ordi-
 nances. It also rules on whether laws are offensive to Islam.
 In some cases, although provided for by law, bail was arbitrarily denied. Human
 rights groups complain that bail is often set at unreasonably high levels for indigent
 defendants. By presidential ordinance, the Code of CriminalProcedures was amend-
 ed in November to revoke the statutory right to bail in serious cases when the trial
 lasted more than 2 years. Similarly, aIDecnber ordinance amendment rovided
 that no courts other than the special court may grant bail to any accused person
 being tried before such a court. Both ordinances were widely seen as deliberate at-
 tempts to prevent the granting of bail to Asif Zardari-husband of former Prime
 Minister Bhutt  who has been detained since November 1990.
 Although the courts have traditionally experienced pressure from the executive,
 the high courts have exhibited a degree of independence deciding a number of im-
 portant cases against the Government. There continued to be concerns, however,
 that the judiciary's independence from the executive is not yet complete, especially
 at levels below the highest courts. In particular, critics point to the President's
 p ower to transfer high court justices or decline to grant new appointees tenure as
 devices that could provide the executive undue influence over the provincial high
 courts.
 There were continuing charges that magistrates and police, under pressure to
 achieve high conviction rates, persuade persons in custody to plead guilty without
 informing them of the consequences. Politically powerful persons also attempt to in-
 fluence magistrates' decisions and have used various forms of pressure, including
 the threat of transfer, to do so. Magistrates also perform a wide variety of adminis-
 trative functions for the provincial governments, reducing the time they devote to
 their judicial duties.
 The judicial process continued to be impeded by bureaucratic infighting and inac-
 tivity on a considerable scale. Although appointments in 1992 of new judges in-
 creased the number of judges at the Lahore High Court to 38 (of 50 seats) and at
 the Karachi High Court to 21 (of 28), many high court seats remained vacant.
 Scores of positions in the lower magistracy also remained unfilled. Dozens of people
 are reportedly awaiting trial in Sindh jails who have been held for periods longer
 than the sentence they would receive if convicted. Among these are Africans and
 citizens of other South Asian countries jailed for having overstayed their visas or
 for being involved in the drug trade.
 Administration of justice in the Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA) is
 normally the responsibility of the elders and maliks (appinted leaders) of individ-
 ual tribes who, in response to complaints, conduct a pubic hearing according to the
 dictates of Islamic law and tribal custom. There is no professional legal representa-
 tion for the accused. The usual penalties consist of fines, even for murder, although
 the Government's political agents directing the assemblies of elders and maliks
 (jirgas) have the authority to levy prison terms of up to 14 years. In more remote
 areas outside the effective jurisdiction of the political agents, jirgas occasionally levy
 harsher, unsanctioned punishments, including flogging or death by shooting or ston-
 ing.
 Also in the FATA, paramilitary forces under the direction of the political agent
 frequently perform punitive actions during enforcement operations. For example, in
 raids on narcotics trafficking facilities they have been known to bulldoze surround-
 ing homes as extrajudicial punishment of residents for having tolerated nearby
 criminal activity. Similarly, vigilante groups have increased their activities within
 the FATA, administering public floggings for drug trafficking, theft, for disrespect
 to women, and even for shaving off one's beard, considered to be an act of deliberate
 disrespect toward the elders.
 Cases referred to the Federal Shari'a Court are heard jointly by Islamic scholars
 and judges from the civilian court system who usually employ ordinary criminal pro-
 cedures. Both judges and attorneys must be Muslim and be familiar with Islamic
 law. Defendants in the Shari'a court are entitled to bail and lawyers of their choice.
 A 1990 Shari'a court decision called for the Islamic concepts of Qisas (roughly an
 "eye for an eye") and Diyat ("blood money") to be made part of the Penal Code. The
 Qisas and Diyat Ordinance, promulgated to comply with the court ruling, was en-
 
 
 1164
 
 acted in 1990, amended twice in 1991, and remains in effect. The Ordinance allows
 compensation to be paid to a victim's family in lieu of the accused receiving punish-
 ment. The right to seek pardon or commutation is not available to defendants under
 the Ordinance.
 Under the Suppression of Terrorist Activities (Special Courts) Act of 1975, the
 Government established special courts to try cases involving crimes of a "terrorist"
 nature (e.g., murder and sabotage). In 1987 another ordinance was passed establish-
 ing special "speedy trial" courts. The jurisdictional authority of both types of special
 courts was modified under amendments made in 1988, and they have continued to
 operate since that time. The Twelfth Constitutional Amendment, passed by Par-
 liament in July 1991, created another tier of special courts to deal with particularly
 heinous crimes. Cases involving bomb blasts, sabotage, highway robberies, banditry,
 or kidnaping may be brought before these courts, and the Government may transfer
 cases from any other court to a special court, or from one special court to another
 (in the same province).
 In August 1991, the President promulgated new versions of the Terrorist Affected
 Areas (Special Courts) Ordinance and the Special Courts for Speedy Trials Ordi-
 nance. Under the new provisions, the provincial government's right to set up speedy
 trial courts and to refer cases to these courts was made the exclusive domain of the
 Federal Government. An appeal goes to a special court, the Supreme Appellate
 Court, rather than to the high courts. In addition, the Government may refer a
 broader range of cases to the special courts. Persons tried in these courts are
 charged with violent criminal offenses, however, rather than nonviolent or political
 acts.
 Critics, including many lawyers and human rights monitors, believe the special
 courts violate the principles of fair trial. Time constraints on investigations and
 trials, including the strict limitation on adjournments, may detract from the
 accused's right to an adequate defense. Some critics believe the special court proce-
 dures have effectively repudiated the principle of the presumption of innocence.
 They also cite the encroachment of the federal authorities upon the provincial gov-
 ernment's constitutional authority to administer justice and the inherent unfairness
 of parallel courts to which cases may be more or less arbitrarily assigned. In 1991
 a special unit was established in the Prime Minister's office to decide which cases
 would be referred to the new speedy trial courts, a process that many see as having
 become highly politicized. Another problem faced by those brought to trial under the
 special courts is obtaining bail. Under the special courts provisions, bail is denied
 if it appears to the court that there are reasonable grounds on which to believe the
 accused committed a scheduled offense.
 Government officials and some attorneys argue that, in spite of their disadvan-
 tages, these courts are necessary to ease the judicial backlog;, that all requirements
 of the rules of evidence still apply, as well as the right to counsel; and that the
 judges must meet the same standard as those appointed to a high court. They note
 that decisions of the speedy trial courts may be appealed to the Supreme Court.
 However, for these courts only one appeal is allowed and it may only be made
 through a special appellate bench appointed by the Government. The press reported
 a number of convictions in these speedy trial courts, usually for illegal possession
 of arms or kidnaping. In 1992 the Supreme Court did remand one case because the
 sentence given appeared to be inappropriate to the section of the law under which
 the accused was charged.
 After the dissolution of the Bhutto government in 1990, President Ghulam Ishaq
 Khan, citing a 1977 law, established special "accountability" tribunals to try mem-
 bers of the previous federal and provincial governments on criminal and corruption
 charges. Trials under these tribunals continued in 1992. Only members of the
 Bhutto government, all of whom belong to the PPP, were charged with corruption
 and misconduct, while no members of other political parties were brought to trial.
 International observers maintain that the accountability tribunals do not meet
 minimum standards for due process and that the trial procedures used could pre-
 vent the accused from presenting a full defense. Some Pakistani attorneys and
 judges, however, maintain that in practice the actual conduct of the tribunals has
 nonetheless been balanced and fair.
 The most prominent of the accused to be convicted, former law minister Iftikhar
 Gilani, appealed his conviction in 1991. The Supreme Court's hearing of the appeal
 was still under way late in 1992, and Gilani has retained his National Assembly
 seat, which would be forfeited if his conviction stands, while the appeal is under
 consideration. The remaining "Presidential references" cases, including seven
 against Benazir Bhutto, are still before the accountability tribunals.
 In the first months of 1992, legal proceedings against Asif Zardari, continued to
 be held in closed session in the Landhi Prison. Concern was voiced that this process
 
 
 1165
 could spark numerous "due process' abuses. Since the Sindh High Court's May 4
 decision declaring illegal the Federal Government's order to try two of the pending
 civil cases against Zardari in the prison, only criminal proceedings against Zardari
 have been held in the prison. Zardari has been held without bal for 2 years. He
 has been acquitted on 8 of the 10 charges the Government brought against him.
 Since Zardan's acquittal in the so-called MQM firings case, his trials have been con-
 ducted in an open courtroom.
 Estimates as to the number of political prisoners in Pakistan vary widely, since
 human rights groups disagree on the definition of a political prisoner. Political activ-
 ists arrested on criminal charges as well as party workers detained for political rea-
 sons have been called politica[prisoners by some human rights groups.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-Al-
 though police are required by law to obtain a warrant before entering a private
 home, this legal requirement is often ignored, particularly during arrests of sus-
 pected bandits and during communal disturbances. Pakistan maintains several do-
 mestic intelligence services which monitor politicians, political activists, suspected
 terrorists, and suspected foreign intelligence agents. Informed sources maintain that
 wiretapping is commonplace, mail is occasionally intercepted and opened, and sur-
 veillance is often used.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-Freedom of speech and the press is guaranteed
 in the Constitution of Pakistan. Pakistanis generally discuss and debate public pol-
 icy issues freely, but some laws restrict free speech. Laws against bringng Islam
 or the armed forces into discredit or ridicule remain in force, and the Shari'a bill
 signed by the President in 1991 calls for promoting Islam through the mass media
 and the censoring of "objectionable" and obscene material. Article 6 of the 1985
 Constitution provides for the death penalty for those who damage the Constitution
 by any act, wich includes publishing statements against the spirit of the Constitu-
 tin   eotr and editor. exercise self-censorship in these areas.
 The Shari'a Court decision of 1990 making death the punishment for anyone con-
 victed of intentionally uttering contemptuous remarks or offering insult to the
 Prophet Muhammad, or to any of the prophets, was supported by the Federal Cabi-
 net  which voted in July 1991 to bring the Pakistani Penal Code into compliance
 with the court's inding. Most of those accused of blasphemy are Ahmadis or Chris-
 tians. In November GuI Masih, a Christian, became the first person sentenced to
 death for blasphemy. He and his brother were accused by a neighbor of having in-
 sulted the Prophet of Islam and were arrested for blasphemy. The brother was re-
 leased after a month and a half in custody. Gul Masih's case is on appeal.
 In 1992 a prominent sociologist and development worker, AkhtariHameed Khan,
 faced trial on blasphemy charges, brought by a disgruntled former employee, in two
 jurisdictions. In both cases Khan is accused of publishing a document that blas-
 phemes the Prophet and defiles Islam. The charges a ppear to have been motivated
 y personal vengeance. The blasphemy charge leveled against him in Karachi has
 been dropped, and he anticipates the charge filed in the Punjab will be dropped in
 the near future.
 The press in Pakistan enjoys a remarkable degree of freedom compared to the
 past, but some restrictions remain. A government-owned press trust still controls
 two newspapers, an English-language daily and an Urdu daily. Other holdings of
 the National Press Trust have been privatized, however, as the Sharif Government
 moved to fulfill its promise to disband it. One of the two main wire services is con-
 trolled by the Ministry of Information. Other newspapers are privately owned and
 their circulation far exceeds that of the government-owned press.
 The Government owns and operates radio and television stations and strictly con-
 trols the news they carry. The Shalimar Television Network (STN), a semiprivate
 television station established in 1990, provides programs with considerable inde-
 pen dene from government oversight. STN began broadcastingCable News Network
 (CNN) programs in 1990-;CNN is shown live, but segments that are considered so-
 cially offensive are scrambled or blocked out for the local audience. Live CNN broad-
 casts were disallowed for a brief period in November to permit government censors
 to black out coverage of opposition activities before airng the programs after an
 hour's delay. Satellite televi"on reception, which has become increasingly wide-
 spread, is not susceptible to such censorship or scrambling. In June a policy of open.
 ness in the electronic media was announced. In the latter half of 1992, opposition
 activities received increasing television news coverage, although it remained quite
 limited in comparison to coverage of governmental activities.
 The Shari'a Law did not include guidelines for censorship. However, after the pas-
 sage of the law, there was a significant increase in censorship of "objectionable ma-
 
 
 1166
 
 terial" on television. The Ministry of Information also keeps a close watch on adver-
 tisements broadcast by STN, editing or removing those found objectionable. In 1992
 critics objected to the strict enforcement of the requirement that women cover their
 heads with a long head scarf in all locally produced television programming.
 Since 1985 there has been relatively free discussion of government policies and
 open criticism of the Government in the privately owned press. The press routinely
 reports remarks critical of the Government made by opposition politicians, and edi-
 torials reflect a broad spectrum of views. Government newspapers and wire services,
 however, are circumspect in their coverage of the news, and criticism of the military
 is rare. The Sharif Government continued to use the government press to project
 the government line. The Government also exploits the newspapers dependence on
 government advertising, an important source of revenue for them, as a way of influ-
 encing editorial policy. In June government advertising in a national daily was
 abruptly halved in response to the first of a series of articles critical of the current
 Government; the paper was warned that all government advertising would be with-
 drawn if further installments were published. The paper stopped the series but con-
 tinued printing stories critical of the Government.
 The Government in 1992 ceased exercising control over the quota of newspit al-
 located to publications. Importation of newsprint is freely allowed, with tarits paid
 by all parties in proportion to the amount they import. The Government also signifi-
 cantly eased requirements for launching new publications.
 Government officials often provide informal "advice" on stories, and the advice is
 often followed. One weekly, The Friday Times, has frequently been a sharp critic
 of the Government, ignoring official press "advice." It receives no government adver-
 tising but continues to be pressured in the form of threats of violence, including
 rape and kidnaping, against its editor and publisher and their children.
 In September charges of sedition were brought aganst a reporter, the editor-in-
 chief, and editor of a major newspaper group for pub ication of a poem sharply criti-
 cal of the Government. The Government ordered that the case be heard in the
 speedy trial court but withdrew the action after the Pakistani press and political
 leaders charged the Government with assaulting freedom of the press. The almost
 universal condemnation of the Government's decision to press its sedition charges
 prompted it to reconsider and withdraw the case.
 The final version of the Shari'a bill contained a provision limiting the use of con-
 fidential sources in p rss stories about the Government or prominent politicians.
 While no journalist has been accused under this provision, some observers fear it
 may be used to restrict press reporting. A 1989 press act allows journalists access
 to all federal and provincial government files except "highly sensitive defense fles."
 Under this act, publication permits are still required but in theory may be obtained
 at the local level; in practice, however, journalists say that they have never been
 allowed access to any government fies.
 A print, press, and publications ordinance requires the registration of printing
 presses and newspa prs and allows the Government to confiua     newspapers or
 magazines deemed objectionable.
 At the beginningof 1992, two cases of ontempt of ourt were registered against
 a national daily. The action was taken in the high cou  of indh against comments
 published on a special tribunal's findings in the widely publicized eena Hayat rape
 case. The case is still being heard.
 A human rights group reported the unlawful detention and torture in April of four
 journalists covering a by-election in Sanghar. Police and armed officials of the pro-
 vincial government reportedly dragged the journalists from their vehicle, beat them
 with rifle butts, and threatened to kill them. Two managed to escape, but the other
 two were held for interrogation and were severely beaten. The district magistrate
 eventually apologized to the journalists, but the poice subrintedent reportedly ad-
 vised them not to file a complaint or publish photographs they had taken of election
 Arhung   ightru     pre    h   nafldtninadtruei                pi ffu
 vineptember and November, polie attacked journalists and photographers in
 Islamabad who were recording police action eainst opposition prtestors. Threats
 and harassment, including arrests on trumped-up charges, continued against jour-
 nalists throughout Pakistan. The lack of government action in response to these
 events, coupled with public criticism of the press by high government officials, led
 to concern that the Government was not doing enough to prevent violence against
 the press.
 Academic freedom is generally recognized by government and university authori-
 ties. A threat to academic freedom, however, is found in the atmosphere of violence
 and intolerance fostered by student organizations which typically are tied to politi-
 cal parties. On campuses, well-armed groups of students of varying political persua-
 sions clash frequently and intimidate other students, instructors, and administra-
 
 
 1167
 tors on matters of language, syllabus, examination policies, doctrine, and dress. On
 July 1, the Supreme Court issued an interim order banning student politics from
 all educational institutions. The provincial governments are preparing proposals for
 the implementation of the decision, which requires entering students and their par-
 ents to p ledge that the students will not take part in politics on campus. Those who
 violate the oath will face expulsion. Those already enrolled must also renounce par-
 ticipation in politics.
 Literary and creative works are generally free of censorship. Obscene literature,
 a category broadly defined by the Government, is subject to seizure. Authorities
 have occasionally banned or confiscated books and magazines dealing with sensitive
 political topics. However, dramas and documentaries on once taboo subjects, includ-
 ing corruption, social privilege, narcotics, violence against women, and female in-
 equality, are aired on Pakistani television. Conservative religious and political
 gups have been active in enforcin their own code of morality on Pakistani society.
 ere is concern that the Shari'a bll's passage in 1991 has bolstered these groups'
 efforts by placing gater pressure on individuals to conform to Islamic sensibilities.
 b. Freedo  of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-Peaeful assembly was per-
 mitted in most cases, although district magistrates occasionally exercised their
 power under Section 144 of the Criminal Procedure Code to ban meetings of more
 than four people whenever violent demonstrations seemed in the offing. This section
 was invoked in July in Karachi, allegedly to prevent opposition demonstrations, and
 remains in effect. Section 144 is frequently employed in the capital for the same rea-
 son. Section 144 was imposed in Islamabad and extended to Rawalpindi in Novem-
 ber to discourage the opposition from marching on the federal capital. The usual
 route for processions in Lahore was also off-limits to such groups during parts of
 November and December.
 For the most part, political leaders were able to travel freely and address large
 rallies. Leaders of politicoreligious parties were sometimes barred from travel to cer-
 tain areas. The Federal and the Northwest Frontier Province (NWFP) governments
 issued externment orders to prevent PPP cochairperson Benazir Bhutto from enter-
 ing Islamabad-Rawalpindi and the NWFP for a period of 30 days beginning Novem-
 ber 18. She was forcibly detained and flown out of the capital area on November
 18. The orders were lifted on November 26.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-Pakistan is an Islamic republic with a population that
 is 97 percent Muslim. The Constitution as now amended requires all laws to be con-
 sistent with Islam. Generally, members of minority groups may practice their own
 religion openly, maintain links with coreligionists in other countries, and travel for
 religious purposes.
 Conversions are permitted, but the Government prohibits proselytizing among
 Muslims and has refused to renew the residence permits of some foreign mission-
 aries who have ignored this ban. Although enabling legislation has yet to be passed,
 some minority groups fear that the 1991 Shari'a laws goal of "Islamizing" all as-
 pects of Pakistan's government and society may further restrict freedom to practice
 their religion. In practice, the religious legislation has encouraged an atmosphere
 of religious intolerance which has  ed to acts of violence directed at Ahmadis and
 Christians. In the wake of the destruction of the Babri mosque in Ayodhya India
 angry mobs attacked Christian and Hindu homes and places of worship at several
 places in Pakistan. The Government promised compensation to the victims, but
 uman rights monitors believe it could have taken stronger measures to protect the
 minorities.
 A 1974 constitutional amendment declared Ahmadis to be a non-Muslim minority
 because they do not accept Muhammad as the last prophet. The Ahmadis, however,
 look on themselves as Muslims, for whom many Muslim practices are an important
 feature of the practice of their religion. In 1984 the Government made it illegal for
 an Ahmadi to call himself a Muslim and banned Ahmadis from using Muslim termi-
 nology. Legislation passed in 1986, apparently aimed at Ahmadis, making blas-
 pheming the prophet Muhammad a capital offense was upheld by the Shari'a Court
 in 1990 and supported by the Federal Cabinet in 1991. In 1992 the Senate unani-
 mously adopted a bill to amend the blasphemy law so that the death penalty is
 mandatory in cases of conviction for defiling the name of the Prophet Muhammad.
 In 1992 there were new reports of the forced conversion of female members of the
 Ahmadi sect. Police continued to close down Ahmadi places of worship, which cannot
 be called mosques under Pakistani law. A number of attacks on individual congrega-
 tions were reported. Early in 1992 police raided an Ahmadi house of worship in
 Kotri (Sindh), arresting all the worshipers at their prayers. Some of those detained
 were reportedly beaten and abused at the police station.
 In 1992 Ahmadis were again detained for displaying the Islamic Profession of
 Faith (Kalima) and other Koranic verses. Two of those detained without bail were
 
 
 1168
 
 charged with blasphemy for having translated the Koran into a regional Pakistani
 language. Many Ahmadis were eventually released, but several were tried, con-
 victed, and received prison sentences. On February 25 in Sargodha, a magistrate
 sentenced four Ahmadis to 8 years' rigorous imprisonment and a fine of approxi-
 mately $32 for having built an Ahmadi house of worship on their own land. Anti-
 Ahmadi plaintiffs had charged that the "non-Muslim" place of worship injured their
 religious feelings.
 In March a public notice for applicants to a general nursing course in Lahore re-
 quired candidates to submit a statement saying, in effect, that they were not
 Ahmadis. On July 15 the Lahore High Court reserved judgment on several bail ap-
 plications for a family, including a 9-month old child, against whom a case had been
 registered for using Islamic phrases on a wedding invitation. Three Muslim neigh-
 bors of the Ahmadi family were also accused of blasphem  for providing the invita-
 tion cards to the Ahmadis. The father of the bride-to-be has been jailed since May
 17.
 Hindus complain of continued kidnapings and forced conversion of young women,
 desecration of Hindu shrines and temples, disruption of prayer services, and the
 burning of Hindu texts as well as the torture of detained Hindus. Christians have
 had difficulty obtaining permission from local and federal officials to build new
 churches and continue to work through the courts to regain possession of edu-
 cational institutions nationalized during the 1970's.
 All minority groups expressed concerns about the Government's order that the na-
 tional identity card include designation of the holder's religion. Pakistani passports
 already carry designation of religion. Ahmadis find the required statement of reli-
 gious affiliation on passports especially vexing as it effectively prevents them from
 performing the religious pilgrimage to Mecca, the haij. The decision to include reli-
 gion on the identity card, a longstanding proposal of the Islamists, was not submit-
 ted to Parliament and has been condemned by a broad spectrum of Pakistanis. It
 sparked violent demonstrations by the Christian community in Lahore and threat-
 ens to polarize further Pakistan's religious communities.
 In Balochistan, a sectarian political party pushed to have a group of heterodox
 Muslims known as Zikris declared a non-Muslim minority. The provincial govern-
 ment arrested 29 anti-Zikri activists who attempted to prevent the group from mak-
 ing its annual local pilgrimage.
 d.Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation. -Pakistanis generally enjoy freedom of movement within the country. In
 1992 the Sharif Government banned certain politico-religious leaders from traveling
 to certain districts or provinces for specified time periods through use of
 "externment" notices. As noted earlier, opposition leader Benazir Bhutto was forbid-
 den entry to the federal capital and the NWFP for a period in November.
 Pakistanis are generally free to travel abroad. Travel to Israel is legally prohib-
 ited, but Pakistanis nevertheless succeed in traveling to Jerusalem for religious pur-
 poses. Restrictions have been lifted on travel of Pakistanis to South Africa.
 Government employees must obtain "no objection certificates" (NOC's) before trav-
 eling abroad. Students are also required to have NOC's from their institutions. The
 exit control list, used broadly by previous governments to control foreign travel, re-
 mains a tool available to the Government but was reportedly used by the Sharif
 Government only against serious criminals.
 More than 3 million Afghans fled to Pakistan as a result of the Soviet invasion
 of Afghanistan and the ensuing civil war there. The treatment of Afghan refugees
 by the national and provincial governments has generally been exemplary. The
 movement and employment of Afghans in Pakistan has generally not been re-
 stricted, and many Afghans reside outside the camps set aside for them in the
 NWFP and Balochistan. With the change of government in Kabul, however, hun-
 dreds of thousands of Afghans returned to their homes in the spring and early sum-
 mer. At the same time, the outbreak of new fighting in Kabul among different fac-
 tions of the Government sparked a new flow of thousands of refugees, including
 many Sikhs and Hindus, into Pakistan. In August the Government attempted to
 seal the border, but traffic, human and commercial, continued to flow in both direc-
 tions over the traditionally porous line.
 Hundreds of illegal Bangladeshi immigrants are held in prisons throughout Paki-
 stan, charged with immigration violations. Almost all of these detainees are without
 the documents necessary to prove Bangladeshi citizenship. Many of the women are
 alleged to be in Pakistan as a result of trafficking in women for purposes of prostitu-
 tion, and some are detained under the Hadood Ordinances. The Government, with
 the help of the Bangladesh Government, took steps in 1990 to document and repa-
 triate some of these Bangladeshis, but the influx continues, and few are able or will-
 ing to return to Bangladesh. Many are released from jail into the custody of their
 
 
 1169
 exploiters, and the cycle repeats itself. Nongovernmental organizations (NGO's) pro
 vide legal assistance to these Bangladeshi women and girls, but their legal and-so-
 cial problems remain largely unsolved.
 Similarly, the repatriation to Pakistan of the Biharis (Urdu-speaking immigrants
 from the Indian state of Bihar who went to East Pakistan, now Bangladesh, at the
 time of partition in 1947) continued to be a contentious issue. Approximately
 250,000 Biharis have been in refugee camps in Bangladesh since 1971, waiting to
 be brought to Pakistan. Their repatriation continues to be a Pakistani political issue
 tied to the country's various ethnic problems. While the Mohajir community, made
 up of Pakistanis who emigrated from India during partition, actively supports
 Bihari repatriation, ethnic Sinfis oppose the move.Following the August visit to
 Pakistan of Bangtadesh's Prime Minister, the Government of Pakistan announced
 that approximately 12,000 Biharis would be flown from Dhaka to Lahore by the end
 of 1992. The first group of some 3,000 families would be settled in Punjab rather
 than Sindh. Thereafter, repatiation would take plain in phases, as funds become
 available and further housing is completed. By the end of the year no repatriations
 had begun and, while Pakistani officials were still saying they supported such move-
 ments, no firm dates were given for the commencement of repatriations.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 The citizens of Pakistan havee  right and the ability to change their government
 peacefully. The President, who is indirectly elected, is iven the power to dissolve
 the government by Amendment 8 to the Constitution. This authority is controver-
 sial.
 All Pakistanis aged 21 and over have the right to vote by secret ballot in elections.
 Political parties have been allowed to operate freely since the lifting of martial law
 in 1985 and 1986 and in 1988 the Supreme Court struck down a law banning un-
 registered political parties from participating in elections.
 Local governments and the provincial and national assemblies are directly elected.
 The Senate is elected by the members of the four provincial assemblies. The Presi-
 dent is indirectly elected by an electoral college consisting of the members of the
 national and provincial assemblies and the Senate. The Constitution provides that
 members of the national and provincial assemblies shall serve terms of 5 years, un-
 less the assembly is dissolved. The President is elected every 5 years, with the next
 election due in October-November 1993, and senators are elected for 6-year terms.
 The more than  2 million Pushtun ethnic people living in the Federally Adminis-
 tered Tribal Areas (FATA) do not participate in direct election of their National As-
 sembly representatives and have no representation in the NWFP provincial assem-
 bly. In keeping with local traditions, FATA's National Assembly members are elect-
 edby the tribal maiks who have been a     inted in the governor's name by the
 central Government's political agents. People iving in this area have expressed dis-
 satisfaction at having no representation in an e  hare. The vast majority of
 Pushtun ethnic people, however, live outside the FATA and, while retaining their
 tribal identity, are fully integrated into the political, social, and economic life of
 Pakistan.
 Local by-elections were held for provincial and National Assembly seats in several
 constituencies in 1992. On Marvh 4, the Punjab provincial government successfully
 held by-elections in Jhang, a center of sectarian strife. However, credible reports de-
 scribe intimidating police presence and evidence of extensive election-rigging by the
 Government in the April 28 by-election in Sanghar (Sindh). Journalists and opsi-
 tion polling agents were assaulted, and opposition supporters were arrested and oth-
 erwise prevented from voting.
 Although women participate in government, gender roles make it difficult for most
 women to succeed in politics and women are underrepresented in political life at
 all levels. At the federal level, the statute creating 20 reserved seats for women in
 the National Assembly lapsed in 1990, and its renewal was not supported by the
 government then led byBenazir Bhutto. In 1990 only six women were nominated
 y the political parties to stand as candidates for general seats in the next Assembly
 and of these only two were elected. In November 1991, the Government announced
 that the Cabinet had passed a draft of a bill reintroducing women's seats to the Na-
 tional Assembly, but no further action had been taken by the end of 1992.
 Women are often dissuaded from voting in elections by family, religious, and so-
 cial custom in the rural and more conservative parts of Pakistan. In some areas,
 women are discouraged from voting by authorities who do not provide separate vot-
 ing facilities for women who observe purdah (seclusion of women from public obser-
 vation) restrictions; these women are unwilling to unveil themselves to male poll of-
 ficials who seek to confirm their identity. In rural Sindh, women are sometimes
 
 
 1170
 
 barred from voting because they refuse to divulge their given name in public or to
 a stranger.
 The Constitution requires that the President and Prime Minister be Muslims. Al-
 though members of minority religious groups have held political office and are rep-
 resented in the economic, political, and social life of the country, they are not per-
 mitted to vote in Muslim constituencies. They must instead seek office and cast
 their ballots in countrywide, at-large constituencies reserved for them in the na-
 tional and provincial assemblies. This arrangement has been widely criticized by mi-
 nority and human rights groups. Many Ahmadis, disputing their minority status
 and their designation as non- uslims, have refused to exercise these electoral op-
 tions. Minorities, especially Christians and Hindus, complain that they are unable
 to vote for or influence the parties that will be able to form the Government.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Domestic human rights organizations operate free of official harassment, and
 their reports receive extensive coverage in the press. New human rights and legal
 aid groups continue to form and operate without government restriction. Persons af-
 filiated with various international human rights organizations have been permitted
 to visit Pakistan and travel freely.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Language, or Social Status
 In 1991 the Government passed the Shari'a bill, a law aimed at bringing all as-
 pects of government and society in Pakistan into conformity with its views on the
 tenets of Islam. Though human rights activists and women's groups feared that the
 law would have a harmful effect on women's and minority rights, the final version
 included language ensuring that women's and minority rights protected under the
 Constitution would not be affected. No enabling legislation has been passed, and the
 Shari'a law's direct impact on these groups remained limited. Nonetheless, its pas-
 sage influenced popular attitudes and perceptions, creating an atmosphere in which
 discriminatory treatment against women and non-Muslims is more readily accepted,
 if not condoned.
 Aside from the specific Shari'a legislation, some Islamic leaders continued to
 stress a conservative interpretation of Islamic injunctions to justify discrimination
 against women. It remains accepted practice to assign women subordinate roles in
 the civil, political, and managerial hierarchies.
 Many Pakistanis interpret the Koran's injunctions on modesty to mean that
 women should remain either at home or veiled. In rural areas, although women in
 small farm families generally work alongside men in the fields, they remain subordi-
 nate to men and suffer discrimination in education, employment, and legal rights.
 These attitudes have contributed to a very low adult female literacy rate, estimated,
 for example, to be only 4 percent among rural women.
 Despite clear injunctions in the Koran and the civil laws that provide for the right
 of women to inherit, in practice women generally do not receive (or are pressed to
 surrender) their due share in family inheritance. In September a human rights peti-
 tion filed in Lahore challenged the largely rural practice of marrying one's daughter
 "to the Koran" (an oath taken on the Koran wh~ch prevents her from marrying an-
 other person), so as to maintain control over her share of property. Both civil and
 religious laws protect women's rights in cases of divorce, but, as in the case of inher-
 itance laws many women are unaware of them.
 In 1992 the Supreme Court invalidated the requirement that a husband give writ-
 ten notice of a divorce to a local union council. Thus, the husband's statement of
 divorce, with or without witnesses, is the defining legal step and one which he can
 confirm or deny at will. The woman, lacking written proof of divorce, remains legally
 and socially vulnerable. For example, should she remarry she could be charged with
 adultery if her former spouse were then to deny having divorced her.
 A small number of urban women study and teach in the universities, but post-
 graduate employment opportunities remain largely limited to teaching, medical
 services, and the law, with a small number of women enteringithe commercial and
 public sectors. Karachi lawyers estimate that in recent years the number of women
 judges in civil courts there has increased so that they represent about 30 percent
 of the total. There are reports that women who apply to professional colleges face
 discrimination. Women may now participate in international athletic competition,
 although few do.
 A 1989 ruling of the Federal Shari'a Court upheld the distinction under the
 Hadood Ordinances between evidence presented in court by a man and that pre-
 sented by a woman. The court ruled that only men could testify in certain cases;
 
 
 1171
 in other cases only women's evidence would be acceptable. In certain cases the testi-
 mony of two women is required to equal that of one man.
 There is no reliable information on the extent of violence against women in Paki-
 stan, although most human rights activists agree there is a problem. Abuse within
 the family is usually treated as a private matter in this traditional society, and
 there are few instances in which redress is sought in the courts. However, there has
 been increased press reporting in recent years about the unresponsiveness or even
 involvement of police in incidents of abuse or rape of women. A Karachi-based group
 called War Against Rape (WAR) was formed in 1990 to change attitudes about rape
 and to assist rape victims. It continues to be an effective educational and aware-
 ness-raisinF group. Other nongovernmental organizations are also active in promot-
 ing women . issues.
 Women's organizations operate throughout the country but primarily in Paki-
 stan's urban centers. Many concentrate on educating women about existing legal
 rights. Other groups concentrate on providing legal aid to poor women in prison who
 may not be able to afford an attornea.
 In 1992 the press continued to    w attention to the problem of women being
 burned to death, allegedly in kitchen stove accidents. Many of these deaths are be-
 lieved to be murders perpetrated by husbands or in-laws. These incidents continued
 as they had in past years, and women's groups saw little hope of the problem being
 solved. Women also continued to be killed or mutilated by male relatives who sus-
 pect them of adultery. Few such cases are investigated seriously.
 There is much discrimination against religious minority groups in employment
 and education. In Pakistan's early years, minorities were able to rise to the senior
 ranks of the military and civil service. Today, many are unable to rise above mid-
 level ranks.
 Discrimination on ethnic and linguistic grounds underlies ethnic conflicts in sev-
 eral areas. In Sindh there continue to be conflicts between Sindhis and Mohajirs
 (Urdu-speaking immigrants originally from India). Non-Punjabis throughout Paki-
 stan resent what they see as Punjabi domination of the bureaucracy, the police, and
 the armed forces. Officially designated as "non-Muslims," Ahmadis are subject to
 discrimination and harassment and have limited chances for advancement in the
 public sector. Young Ahmadis and their parents complain of increasing difficulty in
 gaininl admittance to good colleges, forig many children to go overseas for higher
 education. They complain that charges are often filed against them for the purpose
 of harassment or extortion and that the police will not accept their complaints when
 they and their property are attacked; few cases ever come to trial.
 Christians are unable to obtain a divorce under Pakistani law. Many Christians
 fear the forced marriage of Christian women to Muslims. Many Christians also be-
 lieve they are subject to harassment by the authorities; police constables camping
 on the grounds of a major church in Lahore and the reported demolition of houses
 in a Christian colony on Easter day were examples in 1992. Christian groups rarely
 press charges against the perpetrators of such incidents and believe that authorities
 are unlikely to pursue such cases.
 Social stratification also contributes to discrimination. Socially prominent Paki-
 stanis generally suffer less at the hands of officials than those less well off, partly
 because of their ability to reciprocate favors and partly because of the general def-
 erence accorded social "betters" in Pakistani society. Among minorities, there is a
 belief that the authorities, even if they do not prosecute them, afford them less pro-
 tection under the law than is afforded Muslim citizens.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The right of industrial workers to form trade unions
 is enunciated in the Industrial Relations Ordinance (IRO) of 1969 but is subject to
 major restrictions in some employment areas. In practice, labor laws place signifi-
 cant constraints on the formation of unions and their ability to function effectively.
 Workers in export processing zones (EPZ) are prohibited from forming trade unions.
 As part of its 1992-1993 trade policy, the Government extended this prohibition to
 all export-oriented units that export at least 70 percent of their production.
 The right of unions to strike is severely constrained by legally required concilia-
 tion proceedings and cooling-ff periods and especially by the Government's author-
 ity to ban any strike found to cause "serious hardship to the community" or preju-
 dice to the national interest, or in any case after any strike has continued unre-
 solved for 30 days. Strikes continue tobe rare; when they d occur, they are usually
 illegal and short. In August the National Industrial Relations Commission prohib-
 ite a bank employees federation from staging a 1-day strike in support of the fed-
 eration president, who apparently was arrested for political reasons. Ther are also
 
 
 1172
 
 eriodic work slowdowns on the part of low-ranking government employees. Police
 o not hesitate to crack down on worker demonstrations.
 Union members still make up only about 6 percent of the industrial labor force
 and 3 percent of the total estimated work force. Contract labor continues to flourish,
 undercutting the power of the unions and exploiting workers willing to work on tem-
 porary contracts. These workers receive fewer benefits and have no job security.
 Trade unions of all political orientations are permitted, and the political leanings
 of labor leaders cover the entire spectrum. While many unions remain aloof from
 party politics, it appears that the most powerful are those associated with political
 parties. After the PPP came to power in 1988, it successfully organized trade unions
 under the banner of the Peop les Labor Bureau (PLB). The PLB's main competitors
 are the Jamaat-i-Islami's National Labor Federation and the MQM-backed labor
 unions. Labor federations are free to affiliate with international federations and con-
 federations. Pakistan has been criticized for years by International Labor Organiza-
 tion (ILO) committees for its failure to abide by Convention 87 regarding freedom
 of association and Convention 98 on the right to organize and bargain collectively,
 both of which it has ratified. The charges, repeatedly raised by Pakistani trade
 unions, have focused on the limitations on union formation, strikes, and collective
 bargaining. No Pakistani government has yet made any serious effort to change the
 laws criticized in the ILO reports.
 While expressing satisfaction with a government report that it had lifted the ban
 on trade union activities in the Pakistan International Airlines Corporation, the ILO
 in June continued to criticize the failure to do the same with respect to EPZ's, radio,
 television, and hospital employees, as well as its failure to correct the ban on strikes
 and other deficiencies. Pakistan was also asked to amend any provision of the IRO,
 the Press and Publications Ordinance, and the Political Parties Act which impose
 compulsory prison labor in a manner inconsistent with ILO Convention 105. In re-
 sponse to a request by Pakistan, the ILO agreed to provide technical assistance to
 bring the country's labor laws into conformity with the world body's conventions.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The right of workers to form
 associations and freely elect representatives to act as collective bargaining agents
 is established in law. Section 16 of the IRO specifically prohibits antiunion discrimi-
 nation by employers. Current laws, however, place major limitations on the extent
 and effectiveness of such activities. Large sections of the labor force are excluded
 from the right to organize and bargain collectively under the IRO, including the 53
 percent of Pakistan's labor force employed in agriculture. Under the Essential Serv-
 ices Maintenance Act of 1952 (ESA), normal union activities are severely restricted
 in sectors associated with "the administration of the State,* which covers a wide
 range of government services and state enterprises, such as education, health care,
 oil and gas production, and transport.
 For each industry found subject to the ESA, a finding that must be renewed every
 6 months, a specific determination is made by the Government as to what con-
 stitutes the limits of union activity. In cases in which collective bargaining has been
 barred, individual wage boards decide wage levels. Disputes are a~udicated before
 the National Industrial Relations Commission. A worker's right to quit may also be
 curtailed under this Act, and a fired worker has no recourse to the labor courts. Col-
 lective bargaining and even strikes are known in some job areas covered by the Act,
 e.g.,.the nationalized banks. Most unions continue to call for the abolition of the
 The ILO has advised the Government that a 1980 ordinance permitting it to ex-
 empt EPZ's from the provisions of any law is inconsistent with the requirements of
 ILO Conventions 87 and 98. An EPZ, with its own labor regulations, including regu-
 lations governing how workers may bargain collectively, is functioning in Karachi.
 Over the years the ILO also expressed concern about the ban on trade union activi-
 ties in several specific organizations, including the government-run Pakistan Tele-
 vision station. It asked that collective bargaining rights be given to bank officers
 and employees.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-Forced labor has always been spe-
 cifically prohibited by law. However, critics argue that the ESA's limitation on some
 employees' rights to leave their jobs constitutes a form of compulsory labor. The
 Government informed the ILO's Committee on the Application of Standards in 1990
 that amendments were under consideration to rectify the problem and that steps
 had been taken to address other forced labor issues. However, the Government took
 no further action on the ESA issue, and the ILO expressed disappointment that leg-
 islation inconsistent with ILO conventions on forced labor had not yet been re-
 pealed.
 Illegal bonded labor is widespread. Bonded labor is common in the brick, carpet,
 glass, and fishing industries and is found among agricultural and construction work-
 
 
 1173
 ers in rural areas. Estimates on the number of people in Pakistan bonded to their
 employers by debt range as high as 20 million, several million of whom are children.
 In the brick kiln industry, a workers' association succeeded in bringing the plight
 of bonded brickmakers in Punjab before the Supreme Court. The Court's 1989 com-
 promise ruling reinforced prohibitions on forced labor and forcible collection of debts
 and limited salary advances to 1-week's wages but upheld the legality of existing
 debts. The Court granted laborers the right to work wherever they wished and to
 make arrangements other than bonded labor to pay their existing debts.
 As a result of ILO pressure and continuing publicity about this issue, new legisla-
 tion was drafted to address the bonded labor problem. Adopted in March, the Bond-
 ed Labor System (Abolition) Act of 1992 is the first law officially recognizing the
 existence of bonded labor in Pakistan. It outlaws the bonded labor system, cancels
 all existing bonded debts, and forbids lawsuits for the recovery of existing bonded
 debts. In principle, the law enables laborers to work where they wish and should
 result in all bonded debt recovery cases brought by employers being thrown out of
 court. The new legislation has not been fully implemened but it offers a basis for
 court cases which could improve the bonded labor situation. In September, for exam-
 ple, the Lahore High Court freed 38 brick kiln workers, including women and chil-
 dren, who had been kept in forced labor camps under armed guard for about a year.
 However, little progress was made in the industries employing bonded laborers. Re-
 sistance to the new law has been strong, reports of violations continue to appear,
 and the workers' movement is divided over the issue. Due to the lack of employment
 alternatives, many workers have voluntarily returned to bonded labor at the kilns
 and elsewhere.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-Despite legal limitations, child
 labor is common. Child labor is limited by at least four separate statutes and Article
 11 of the Constitution. The confusing definition of what constitutes a "child" was
 improved by the National Assembly's adoption of the Employment of Children Act
 of 1991 which defined the child as "a person who has not completed his 14th year
 of age. The Act also set 7 hours as the maximum workday for a child, inclusive
 of 1"hours rest after 3 hours of continuous work. Although the Act reiterated re-
 strictions against the employment of children in hazardous industries, it did little
 to  promote much    needed enforcement mechanisms and remains essentially
 unimplemented.
 A Punjab Labor Department study concluded that about a million children are en-
 gaged in carpet weaving throughout Pakistan. In addition to suffering work-related
 health problems and receiving beatings if they try to avoid work, these children re-
 main uneducated, 42 percent never having attended school and 58 percent having
 dropped out.
 News reports highlighted the continued smuggling of young Pakistani children to
 the Gulf countries. Most of the boys, many of whom are preschool age, are used as
 jockeys in camel races. Thousands of young Pakistanis were reportedly smuggled to
 the Gulf in recent years. In some cases the children, usually from rural areas, were
 kidnaped. In other cases, poor parents are said to have sold their children to the
 traffickers.
 While much child labor is in the traditional framework of family farming or small
 business, the abusive employment of children in larger industries and government
 business is also widespread. Although there are no reliable official statistics, unoffi-
 cial surveys and occasional press features suggest that violations of existing laws
 are common. Unofficial estimates indicate that one-third of Pakistan's total labor
 force of 33 million is made up of workers under age 18. The employment of children
 is sometimes linked with stories of child prostitution and abuse.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-Labor regulations in Pakistan are governed by
 federal statutes applicable throughout the country. These provide for, or require the
 provincial governments to provide for, a legal minimum wage as well as certain
 worker protection and welfare services. The mimmum wage, which varies from prov-
 ince to province, is not enough to support even a small family. Although the Prime
 Minister has promised to more than double the minimum wage, implementing legis-
 lation has not yet been introduced. The law provides for a maximum workweek of
 54 hours, rest periods during the workday, and paid annual holidays. These regula-
 tions apply, however, only to a small minority of the labor force; they specifically
 do not apply to agricultural workers, to workers in Pakistan's numerous small fac-
 tories with fewer than 10 employees, and to the small contract groups of under 10
 workers into which factory work forces are increasingly divided. Due in part to a
 lack of education, many workers are unaware of the regulations protecting their
 rights.
 Provincial governments, which are responsible for enforcing labor regulations,
 have generally been ineffective. The attention given to enforcement varies among
 
 
 1174
 the provinces in proportion to the significance of industrial labor. In all cases, lim-
 ited resources, corruption, and inadequate regulatory structures hamper the effort.
 In general, worker health and safety standards are poor, and little is being done
 to improve them. Organized labor is occasionally able to press for improvements,
 and some legal protections apply, although they are weakly enforced.
