PAKISTAN
The State Department human rights report on Pakistan for 1993 provides a very good account of an unusual year in Pakistani politics. The report's descriptions of Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif s dismissal by the President, Sharif s reinstatement by the Supreme Court and the subsequent elections which brought Benazir Bhutto to office accurately reflect the political tumult of 1993. The report is particularly strong in discussing the fall elections which, while described as "free and fair," actually were closed to religious minorities, to persons living in certain outlying areas and, effectively, to most women.
The report's only mischaracterization of the October elections is its contention that they were "among the most peaceful in Pakistan's history." hi fact, the election campaign saw a total of 159 violent conflicts and 73 known casualties, numbers which render the 1993 elections some of the more violent in recent history.
The report provides a generally accurate account of other human rights problems in Pakistan. Its discussions of the Pakistani legal system and of the widespread abuse of women are especially strong. In several areas, however, the report fails to discuss significant aspects of important human rights problems. This is especially true of the discussions of police violence and of the various manifestations of religious and sectarian intolerance.
The report accurately cites the large number of killings by police in Pakistan. Nonetheless, the report's statement that most of the "encounter killings" were at the hands of the army, and that such killings declined in 1993, ignores the fact that the Pakistani police continue to kill people in this maimer. The report should also have elaborated on the nature of "encounter killings." Generally, the deaths that result from "encounters" are explained by the police in one of three ways; (1) the deaths occurred following attacks on law enforcement officials; (2) the deaths occurred during the "escape" of a detainee; or (3) the deaths occurred simply as a result of a "disagreement" on the street with law enforcement officials. The frequency with which these explanations are offered along with the lack of police casualties resulting from these "encounters" suggests the lack of police credibility. Of the 183 cases of "encounter killings" in 1993, none resulted in the prosecution of law enforcement officers. This pattern of impunity virtually guarantees that further abuses will occur. Indeed, police officers who take part in an "encounter killing" are often rewarded and promoted shortly after the incident, thereby providing official approval and legal sanctity to the killing. The report also fails to mention this fact.
The death of Aseem Thebo, not mentioned in the report, is a typical "encounter" case. Two days after Thebo's arrest on May 20, his family was told to claim his dead body from the police station at Tando Allahyar. Although police
258
PAKISTAN
officials stated that Thebo was killed while trying to escape from custody, witnesses who saw the dead body reported that torture marks were clearly visible and that both his arms and legs were broken. No police or army officer was injured in the "encounter."
While the report could not mention every prominent case of death in police custody, it should have included the killing of 13-year-old Mujahid Hussain Kaandhro in Khairpur. In mid-September, head constable Mehir Shah arrested the boy and took him to the police station where he was undressed and flogged with a leather strip until he lost consciousness. Kaandhro, while still unconscious, was returned to his family only after they paid a 1,000 rupee bribe. He died from his injuries on September 20.
The report accurately describes torture as "routine" but fails to describe the numerous ways in which torture is practiced in Pakistan. According to Amnesty Intemational, victims have reported being beaten with sticks and leather truncheons, kicked with heavy boots, had their legs pulled apart, their genitals beaten or damaged by heavy metal or wooden rollers, burned with cigarettes or given electric shocks. Others have been hung upside down, stripped and dragged naked through the streets or subjected to mock execution. Prisoners are sometimes kept standing for many hours or made to stand continually with arms outstretched. This form of torture, along with the denial of food and sleep for prolonged periods, is used particularly against political prisoners, presumably because it does not leave easily recognized physical marks. Blindfolding upon arrest (and sometimes throughout long periods of detention) is common. Prisoners are often blindfolded during physical torture so that they do not know when the next blow or kick is coming.
The report fails to discuss the complicity of certain magisfrates and doctors in the torture and killings of prisoners. The law requires that a detainee be brou^t before a magistrate within 24 hours of arrest. On the way to the magisfrate, detainees are often threatened with more torture if they reveal that they have been subjected to torture. Magistrates are reported in many cases not to have taken any cognizance of visible injuries or verbal statements by detainees about torture suffered in custody.
Medical staff also collaborate with police in hiding evidence of torture. On April 25, Gulloo Macchi, a 28-year-old man from the village of Kot Nizamani, near Tando Jam in Sindh province, was arrested during a raid on his village by officers of Chambar police station. On the following day, his family was informed that he had committed suicide by slitting his own throat. The doctors' first post mortem confirmed the police story. Upon complaints by villagers that Macchi had been tortured to death, the body was exhumed and a second post mortem was conducted. Its report raised the possibility that Macchi's neck wound was not self-inflicted and that his throat was cut following his death by other causes. Macchi's case is unusual only in that protests led to official inquiries.
259
CRITIQUE 1993
Indeed, medical staff often participate in the actual torture of prisoners: by evaluating the victims' capacity to withstand torture, by supervising the torture through the provision of medical treatment if complications occur, by providing medical knowledge and skills to the torturer or even by participating directly.
The report's account of rape of women in custody is generally very good. However, given the almost complete lack of prosecutions of police for rape, it is probably an overstatement to credit the government with "efforts to bring an end to sexual abuse by the police," The report also should have described how minority women are particularly mistreated in prison. On February 27, policemen from the Tando Jam police station near Hyderabad severely beat a fourteen-year-old low-caste Hindu girl, Shakina, after arresting her on charges of theft. Hundreds of Bangladeshi women were also jailed in Pakistan and were often subjected to similar treatment.
While the report accurately describes the enormous problem of abuse against women in Pakistan, it fails to mention the numerous instances of public humiliation of women, especially in Punjab. The 48 cases of public humiliation reported in Punjab in 1993 included cases in which girls were stripped and dragged naked through the streets.
The use of excessive force by police during attempts to control crowds is conunon in Pakistan. During demonstrations in Karachi in July, mounted police beat women demonstrators with wooden sticks and injured several of them. In another case, on August 7, apparently without warning, police attacked a group of demonstrating workers and labor unionists. When police teargassed and beat the demonstrators with wooden sticks, dozens fled to the Hyderabad Press Club where police then opened fire.
While the report discusses conditions in Pakistani j ails and prisons, it does not mention the existence of private rural jails, often run by land or factory owners to detain workers. In March, a rural j ail in Nawabkot village in Sindh province was discovered when two women escaped from it and reported their ordeal to a newspaper. Some 250 men, women and children reportedly had been forced to work 12 hours a day under the supervision of several gunmen and many of the prisoners had been tortured and raped. The fact that authorities often know of the existence of private jails is especially apparent from the visits made by politicians to the landowners. Indeed, rural private jails are sometimes owned by politically powerful persons. In mid-1993, a rural jail with some 130 chained rural workers was discovered in Sanghar and was found to belong to a Member of the National Assembly, Salim Akbar Bugti.
While the report accurately describes the Pakistan government's failure to observe laws regarding detention, it does not describe the scope of the problem. There are, in fact, many cases in which prisoners are wrongly held for long periods.
260
PAKISTAN
sometimes for up to ten years or more. These detentions can last for years beyond the prescribed prison term, or may even occur without any charge at all.
Like its predecessor, the 1993 report states that there were no government-instigated disappearances. However, a customs inspector, Allah Rakhio, disappeared in the custody of the army in 1992. The subject's family filed a petition in the High Court of Siddhi, which reportedly urged the Home Secretary of the provincial government of Sindh to investigate his whereabouts. No such investigation is known to have taken place.
While the report accurately states that the blasphemy law had been amended so that the death penalty is mandatory, it fails to mention specific cases in which alleged blasphemers were sentenced to death. In particular, the report should have noted that the three Christians charged with blasphemy in 1993, Manzoor Masih, Rehmat Masih and Salamat Masih, were in fact sentenced to death. This sentence is significant not only because their "crime" was that of blasphemy but also because of allegations that they were not given a fair trial. Indeed, strong evidence suggests their innocence. Despite the fact that Salamat Masih and Manzoor Masih are illiterate, they were charged with writing blasphemous statements on the walls of a mosque. Furthermore, there is no hard evidence to support the accusations since the "witnesses" to the crime claim to have erased the writing on the walls. Finally, the report should have been especially critical of the death sentence imposed on Salamat Masih who was only 13 years old.
The report should have also described the larger contexts in which these cases occurred. Salamat, Manzoor and Rehmat Masih were reportedly arrested following a period of sectarian conflict in the area in which they live, and their arrests may have been the result of hostility by Muslims towards members of the minority Christian community. Following their arrests, their families were harassed, a Christian church was attacked and demonstrations were held to demand capital punishment for the accused. Public hostility ultimately forced many Christian families of the village, including those of the three accused, to leave their homes.
Fair trials in blasphemy cases are particularly difficult since the cases are often used by militant religious leaders to mobilize potential constituents. Such efforts in the Masih case resulted in the defense lawyer's refiisal to appear in Court for two of the three hearings for fear of the hostile crowd. Indeed, the politicization of the blasphemy laws was such that a case of blasphemy was even filed against Prime Minister Bhutto in the Lahore High Court. She was charged under Section 295-C of the Pakistan Penal Code merely for having characterized the blasphemy laws and the system of separate electorates as violative of human rights.
The report fails to discuss certain troubling provisions of the blasphemy laws. First, the offense of blasphemy is classified as "non-bailable" and detainees
261
CRITIQUE 1993
must remain in custody until brought to trial, which may take a year or more. Second, the report fails to describe how the vagueness of the blasphemy laws allows broad discretion to the charging party. Beginning in 1980, intent requirements for blasphemy laws were dropped. Section 295 now provides that "imputation, innuendo or insinuation, directly or indirectly" is considered sufficient to prove a charge of blasphemy.
The statement that the Senate imposed the death penalty for blasphemy is not entirely accurate, The death penalty as the only punishment for blasphemy was imposed by the Federal Shari'a Court in 1991. Although the Senate adopted a bill to give effect to the ruling, the National Assembly did not. The court's ruling is nevertheless valid.
The report accurately describes the July Supreme Court decision against the Ahmadiyya Movement, or Ahmadis, upholding the Constitutionality of Ordinance XX, which imposes severe criminal penalities on the Ahmadis for the practice of their faith. However, it omits an important part of the majority opinion. In that opinion, the Court endorsed the view allegedly held by the majority Muslim community that the Ahmadi movement is "a permanent threat to [Muslim] integrity and solidarity." The Court also excused violence against Ahmadis and thereby held the Ahmadis responsible for violent attacks on their person. The report ri^tly mentions continued attacks and harassment against Christians and Ahmadis. It does not, however, adequately describe the extent of anti-Ahmadi actions by the government. In addition to the arrests of Ahmadis during 1993, actions were taken against the Ahmadi periodicals Misbah, Ansarullah and Al-Fazl under section 298-C. Personal attacks against Ahmadis were also more frequent and systematic than the report suggests. In May, lawyer Riaz Qamar, head of the Ahmadiyya community of Haroonabad, Bahawalnagar, was attacked in the middle of the night at his home. Also, an anti-Ahmadiyya wave swept Lahore's University - of Engineering and Technology and Allama Iqbal Medical College towards the end of the year. Groups of students beat up two boys and a girl student and campaigned for the expulsion of Ahmadi students and the dismissal of Ahmadi teachers.
The report also fails to mention the continued harassment of Hindus and the routine failure of police to protect them. It should also have described the October 17 pillaging of the largest Hindu temple in Pakistan, the Rama Pir Mandir in Tando Allahyar. The attack, which was carried out by a mob of nearly 300 people, followed the Indian military's siege of the Muslim Hazratbal shrine in Srinagar, Kashmir.
In addition, the report does not discuss the intensified campaign to declare the Zikris non-Muslims. A bill to that eifect was moved in the National Assembly in January and was referred to a standing committee. In Balochistan, where the Zikris are concentrated, there were attacks on Zikri houses and places of worship. The principal campaigner against the Zikris was ths Jamiat-i-Ulema-e-Islam (JUI).
262
PAKISTAN
In April, a case was filed in the Lahore High Court asking that Zikris, Bahais, Ismailis and Ahmadis be declared foreign agents and enemies of Islam.
The report does not mention the forced conversions of members of the Kalash people in the Hindukush valleys. During the Joshi festival, their celebratory effigies were destroyed by militant Muslims in attacks encouraged by local mullahs and school teachers. The Kalash elders are increasingly reluctant to send their children to the schools where attempts are made to convert Kalash children.
The statement that sectarian riots between the Sunni &nd Shia communities were less intense is incorrect. In Punjab, for instance, the numbers of deaths (26) and injuries (100) from sectarian violence were actually twice as high as in 1992. Most of the victims of sectarian violence were Shia Muslims.
The report also should have criticized the most militant of the sectarian groups, \heAnjuman-i-Sipah-i-Sahaba (ASSP), which regulai'ly denounces the Shia community and seeks openly to have the country declared a Sunni state and to limit key posts to Sunnis. The ASSP was also directly responsible for numerous acts of violence, including an attack on a Bahawalpur Shia mosque in which five persons were killed by hand grenades and shooting. There were also violent attacks on Shia processions in Gujrat (5 deaths, 21 injured and eight houses burnt), Lalamusa (7 deaths, 21 injured and two houses burnt), Shadba^ (2 killed and a hundred injured), Chakwal (7 injured) and Murree (5 shops ransacked). While much less numerous, there were also attacks on Sunni sects.
Although the report mentions the harassment of journalists, it describes nothing more grave than burglaries. In fact, the most serious incident occurred on September 24 when Sailab Mahsud, a correspondent for the Daily Jang and The News, was arrested in the Federally Administered Tribal Area (FATA) of South Waziristan and charged with conspiracy to commit war against Pakistan, harboring offenders and resistance to lawful apprehension. The charges stemmed from an interview he had conducted with Amanullah Kundi, an alleged drug frafficker who had recently escaped from police custody in South Waziristan. The arresting officers seized Mahsud's taped interview with Kundi and held him incommunicado. Mahsud was then tried under the Frontier Crimes Regulation of 1901, which provides for trial by jirga — a council of tribal elders. The trial on October 12 occurred without any legal counsel for Mahsud nor any of the normal safeguards of Pakistani criminal law. On October 13, Mahsud was sentenced to 10 years in prison. Although jirga decisions may not be appealed under the law governing FATAs, demonstrations by Pakistani journalists and widespread press coverage prompted the Jirga's reconvening and Mahsud's acquittal about a month later.
The report should have described the violence and serious threats faced by other journalists. Malik Mamraiz was killed near Tamool allegedly because he had, in the newspaper Khabraen, exposed illegal conduct on the part of a powerful local politician, Malik Ata Mohammad. Other journalists were beaten by police:
263
CRITIQUE 1993
Mirza Niaz Beg was stripped, dragged and kicked aroiind by a magistrate and policemen in Thana Sadar, Raiwind. Journalists either detained or abused by police included Mirza Naeem, Jamil Siddiqui, Niaz Jadoon, Jabbar Khattak, Jan Sarhadi, Ali Afzal Afeaal and Aslam Qaim Khani. Journalist Agha Iqrar Haroon received death threats. The Frontier Post was a frequent target of threats, both for reporting on the activities of sectarian groups and for criticizing the harassment and maltreatment of Ahmadi students and university teachers.
While the report states that the Sharif government harassed news organizations, it does not describe incidents in which allegedly pro-Sharif news organizations were themselves harassed. On April 24, Federal Information Minister Maulana Kausar Niazi ordered a probe of a recently established news agency. Mews Network International (NNI), to determine whether it had received assistance from the previous government of Nawaz Sharif Before charges had been filed against the agency, however, the Press Information Department canceled the Senate passes of several of its reporters, as well as the accreditation card of its editor-in-chief, Haiz Abdul Khaliq, prompting a walkout by the parliamentary opposition on May 5. In another case, on May 30, a procession of workers from Benazir Bhutto's PPP attacked the Lahore station of Pakistan Television (PTV), throwing stones at the building, smashing nearly all the window panes, and damaging the telephone exchange. The demonstrators apparently singled out PTV because of its close identification with Nawaz Sharif, whom the Supreme court had recently restored as prime minister. According to reports, the Lahore police took no steps to protect the station until after the attack had ended.
The report's statement that literary and creative works remained generally free of censorship ignores the case of Sabiha Sumar, a film-maker and social scientist. In 1991, Sumar made a film about Sindhi nationalism. Following a screening of the film in the United Kingdom in January 1993, Sumar received threats from the intelligence services and was forced to flee Pakistan in February.
While the report accurately describes both the freedoms and the difficulties encountered by the larger human rights organizations, it fails to describe the intimidating environment in which lesser known attorneys are forced to work. The house of the chairman of the Hyderabad District Bar Association was raided by law enforcement agencies. In Quetta, a lawyer was arrested for intervening on behalf of a detainee. Two lawyers of Kasur were beaten up by jail staff and the local lawyer community was forced to go on strike in protest. A police inspector abused a lawyer in a Lahore magistrate's court and another lawyer was threatened by the rival party outside a family court. Two lawyers in Peshawar alleged harassment by the police and a third was abducted for ransom. Finally, in Lahore, a prominent lawyer was brutally murdered.
The report's statement that prohibitions on travel based on the Exit Control List were lifted following the dismissal of the Sharif government is not entirely
264
PAKISTAN
correct. The Exit Control List remains in effect and the caretaker government is believed to have added its own set of names to the List.
As it did last year, the 1993 report fails to take a position on several important issues. This tendency is especially marked in the discussion of the special courts and the accountability tribunals, where the report attributes criticisms to "legal experts" and "international observers" and then describes the contrary arguments of the government and of "some" attorneys. The report also should have criticized the disenfranchisement of religious minorities throXigh at-Iarge elections rather than simply attribute complaints to the aggrieved minorities. Finally, the report should express an opinion of its own on labor conditions in Pakistan rather than attribute criticisms to labor organizations such as the ILO or the All Pakistan Federation of Labour (APFOL).
265
CRITIQUE 1993
