 PAKISTAN
 Pakistan has been governed by a military regime headed
 by General Zia-ul-Haq since July 1977,' and this new
 regime has made significant changes in the human rights
 record. Nearly all political prisoners have been
 released. The judiciary has been strengthened, and
 Amnesty International has again been invited to
 inspect conditions in the country. Elections were
 scheduled for October 1977, but they have been post-
 poned until investigations are completed concerning the
 alleged illegal and corrupt practices of the regime
 headed by former Prime Minister Bhutto.
 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Torture
 The 1973 Constitution bans torture, and there have
 been no indications of any such mistreatment since the
 present government assumed power in July 1977.
 b. Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 These abuses are prohibited by law and are-believed
 to be rarely practiced. One form of punishment, fol-
 lowing trial and conviction, is public flogging, which
 is sanctioned by the Koran and used in some other
 Moslem countries as well. There are unsubstantiated
 allegations that some flogging may recently have
 occurred without appropriate judicial sanction.
 c. Arbitrary Arrest or Imprisonment
 Under the Bhutto regime, thousands of political oppo-
 nents were imprisoned. Following the March 1977
 election, the Bhutto regime acknowledged imprisoning
 some 13,000 persons. The opposition parties claimed
 the figure reached 50,000. Following the initiation of
 martial law by the Zia regime, virtually all of those
 imprisoned were released. Since then, some of the
 former regime's leaders, including Bhutto, have been
 arrested and charged with various crimes, including
 
 (397)
 
 
 398
 murder. Other political activists were detained,
 but were released or charged after a short time. It
 is estimated that about 300 may still be detained for
 politically related offenses. Martial law regulations
 prohibit political demonstrations and on the few
 occasions when groups have massed in the streets,
 arrests have occurred. Most of those arrested have
 been promptly released or tried.
 d. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The military regime is encouraging fair public trials.
 Amnesty International has been invited to visit any of
 the courts or tribunals and was told, according to
 press reports that "if they find anything being done
 not fulfilling the requirements of justice," the
 problems can be "rectified." The right to legal
 counsel is guaranteed by the Constitution and honored
 in practice.
 e. Invasion of the Home
 There are no indications that the sanctity of the home
 is being violated by the military regime.
 2. Government Policies Relating to the Fulfillment of
 Such Vital Needs as Food, Shelter, Health Care and
 Education
 Former Prime Minister Bhutto was very effective in
 rousing public support by promising "bread, clothing
 and shelter" to the masses, and every politician is now
 aware of the importance of providing wider opportuni-
 ties for the poor. Reform in education and administra-
 tion and conscious efforts to lessen economic dis-
 parities have increased the opportunities for the
 poor. With U.S. assistance, housing, educational
 facilities, and health care have been improved in rural
 areas. The ration shop system provides basic food
 needs at controlled prices for the urban poor and lower
 middle classes. Land reform under Bhutto did not
 result in much change in ownership patterns, but
 tenancy reforms have markedly increased the security
 
 
 399
 and well-being of millions of tenant farmers. The
 present government has called for a new five year plan
 concentrating on such basic human needs as increasing
 water supplies, establishing health centers, and
 de-centralizing decision making, but those plans are
 still in the preparatory-stage.
 3. Respect for Civil and Political Liberties,
 Including:
 a. Freedom of Thought, Speech, Press, Religion
 and Assembly
 Martial law regulations prohibit political meetings
 in "open public places." Political leaders have been
 encouraged to have small, indoor meetings, and other
 meetings occur in mosques. Freedom of speech has also
 been restricted by martial law regulations limiting
 political activities and expressions. These restric-
 tions are expected to be lifted when political acti-
 vities resume. Freedom of religion is guaranteed by
 the constitution. The regime has substantially
 relaxed previous government restrictions on freedom of
 the press, but some journalists have recently been
 detained by authorities for short periods of time.
 Although there is no censorship, there are some
 self-imposed restrictions on full expression.
 As in some other Moslem countries, many Pakistani women
 are in purdah. This customary practice is not sanc-
 tioned officially by the government. In fact, the
 goverment has had a very positive attitude towards the
 rights of women, educational facilities have been
 expanded for them, and many women hold positions of
 responsibility. It is noteworthy that Mrs. Z. A.
 Bhutto, wife of the former Prime Minister, and Mrs.
 Wali Khan, wife of a formerly imprisoned politician, are
 now important political leaders and have attracted
 large crowds in every public appearance. The All
 Pakistan Women's Federation is one of the most powerful
 interest groups in the country and has been able to
 influence the government's attitude on many issues.
 
 
 The labor movement in Pakistan is small as would be
 expected in a country with only a limited industrial
 sector. Unions are free to organize and a number of
 successful strikes have illustrated their ability to
 obtain better pay and working conditions from em-
 ployers. In the large cities they are an important
 political force, and their support is sought by
 all political parties.
 b. Freedom of Movement Within the Country,
 Foreign Travel and Emigration
 Freedom of movement within Pakistan has only been con-
 strained in occasional political cases. Restrictions
 on travelling and residing abroad are rare. Many
 Pakistani workers have emigrated freely to other
 countries, and the government has tried to facilitate
 their movements.
 c. Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 Since its creation in 1947 Pakistan has been struggling
 with the difficulty of molding diverse tribal and
 linguistic groups into a nation. Zulfikar Ali Bhutto,
 who had won a majority in West Pakistan in the 1970
 elections, became President (later Prime Minister) in
 1971 after the Bangladesh revolt. Six years later,
 however, General Zia-ul-Haq ousted Bhutto, saying the
 ouster was necessary because of the rigging of elec-
 tions, the detention of political prisoners, widespread
 corruption, and the threat of civil war.
 The new regime, supported by most of the public because
 it ended the political turmoil in the country, came to
 power promising to reverse the corrupt policies of the
 former government and to insure that basic human rights
 would not be transgressed again. The new regime has
 also shown its respect for the rule of law by allowing
 former Prime Minister Bhutto to challenge the legality
 of the martial law administration which ousted him. By
 a unanimous decision the Supreme Court, which retains
 its independence, upheld the military intervention,
 adding, however, that its support for martial law
 rested on its limited nature and that the civil courts
 
 
 401
 had authority to review martial law actions to deter-
 mine their constitutionality. The court also urged
 the Chief Martial Law Administrator to fulfill his
 pledge to devote "all his energies" to establishing
 conditions leading to fair and free elections as soon
 as possible.
 The military rulers stated initially that new elec-
 tions would be held on October 18, 1977 and that
 campaign activities could be resumed about a month
 before that date. However, the elections were post-
 poned in order to complete court action on the charges
 against former Prime Minister Bhutto and others accused
 of illegal or corrupt practices, and the restrictions
 on political activity were reimposed. Campaign acti-
 vities are expected to resume about two months prior to
 the polling date. A'new election commission has been
 appointed to insure that fair elections will be held in
 the future. Although the electionsscheduled for
 October 1977 were postponed, the Chief Martial Law
 Administrator has said they will take place within
 "months not years." The constitution provides for
 universal adult suffrage.
 4. Government Attitude and Record Regarding Inter-
 national and Non-Governmental Investigation of
 Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 After rejecting Amnesty International overtures in
 1976, the Bhutto government resisted all efforts by
 outside groups attempting to investigate alleged human
 rights violations. Amnesty International has now been
 invited to return and examine the way the court system
 operates. The military regime has given widespread
 publicity to the charges against its predecessor and
 has stated that it would welcome suggestions from
 reputable organizations for constructive change.
 Many prominent officials have praised President Carter's
 human rights policy and said that it encouraged them to
 struggle against the irregularities of the old government.
 
 
