Pakistan
Once again the Pakistani government's assertion of its commitment to international human rights standards stands in stark contrast to the actual record in 1996. This year's State Department report on Pakistan is marred by a host of understatements and omissions, and on the whole does a poor job of analyzing the situation, especially in comparison to reports of previous years.
Perhaps the most striking shortcoming of the report is its treatment of the continuing violent persecution of religious minorities by zealots, as the Pakistani government looks the other way. Legislation that for years has been described by State Department reports as merely "discriminatory" has led to a state of such extreme intolerance that on February 6, 1997, a mob of 20,000 burned and pillaged Shantinagar, a Christian village of 15,000 people in the Paldstani province of Punjab. In the aftermath of this incident, the respected EngUsh-language daily newspaper The Dawn pointedly asked, "What do socially and politically disinherited minorities think is the root cause of their problem?" The answer was blunt: "Section 295 and 298 — the blasphemy laws." Although this incident took place too late for inclusion in the 1996 report, it is emblematic of a climate of intolerance that is seriously underemphasized in the State Department report.
As in past years, the report does accurately describe the discriminatory nature of legislation originally enacted by martial law authorities in 1984 and 1986, such as Section 295(b) Sc. (c) and Section 298 of the Pakistan Penal Code (PPC), and it does record several abuses of the rights of minorities resulting from the application of these laws. Yet the cases of harassment, abuse and violence that are dted are insufficient and even betray a certain complacency.
Besides Christians, the other victims of the blasphemy laws were mainly Ahmadis, who were declared non-Muslims in 1974. The Ahmadis continue to face an organized and increasingly violent persecution campaign, but the State Department's report refers to their plight rather dispassionately as "a variety of problems." This comment does not do justice to the full extent of abuse and violence the Ahmadis suffer. The problem is exemplified in one particular case mentioned in the report. The State Department carefully notes how "[i]n March two Ahmadi
197
Critique 1996
women were attacked in Karachi for reportedly using a piece of cloth with Koranic inscriptions. Under pressure from the militant Sunni organization, Sunni Tehreek, police registered a case against the women under Sections 295(a) and 295(c) of the PPC. The sessions court released the women on bail upon finding that the piece of cloth had no script on it." However, the report does not mention that the two women were attacked with a knife, leaving one of the women paralyzed for life. The report also fails to note that no action was taken against the women's attacker. The State Department would have done well to refer to a January 1996 report submitted by the UN Special Rapporteur on Religious Intolerance, on the "Implementation of the Declaration on the Elimination of All Forms of Intolerance and of Discrimination Based on Religion or Belief" The Special Rapporteur writes that "applying the death penalty for blasphemy appears disproportionate and even unacceptable," and that the laws applied to the Ahmadi minority are "particularly questionable and in some respects frankly unwarranted."
The Pakistani government did attempt to curb the abuse of legislation such as Sections 295 and 298, which concern the alleged defiling of the Koran (an offense punishable by life imprisonment); insult to the Holy Prophet of Islam (which carries the death penalty); and the demeaning of any other personage revered in Islam (which carries a three-year sentence). The government proposed making procedural amendments to Sections 295 and 298 which would have provided that an allegation would be examined for prima facie tenability before being registered and that any charge made falsely or without merit would be liable to punishment. Unfortunately, these much-needed amendments fell by the wayside in the face of strong opposition by religious groups and political parties. The government did ensure that judicial action in pursuance of complaints under Sections 295 and 298 becomes less automatic. As the report duly notes, "the government's unofficial changes ... have been followed by a significant drop in the number of blasphemy charges."
The State Department fails to record the enactment of the Abolition of Punishment of Whipping Act, 1996, which the UN Special Rapporteur on Torture has hailed as a "landmark development for which the government of Pakistan must be congratulated." As the Special
198
Pakistan
Rapporteur explains, this legislation was proposed by the government of Pakistan because the punishment of whipping was, in the words of the bill, "considered as violative of human dignity and... vehemently resented." Section 3 of the Act provides that: "Except in cases where the punishment of whipping is provided for as Hadd, no court shall award a sentence of whipping under any law for the time being in force." By Section 4 of the new Act, the 1909 Whipping Act was repealed. This will make judicially imposed corporal punishment for ordinary acts a thing of the past and is expected to reduce substantially the incidence of such cruel, inhuman and degrading punishments. However, it is disappointing to note that corporal punishments have not been entirely outlawed. The Abolition of Punishment of Whipping Act explicitly preserves whipping for offenses such as drinking alcohol and extra-marital sexual relations — Hadd offenses (those for which the penalty is prescribed in the Koran) — which were enshrined in law by the martial law authorities in the 1979 Hudud Ordinance.
The report overlooks another significant legal development, Pakistan's ratification of the Convention for the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW). Although the Pakistani Constitution takes precedence over the Convention, the nongovernmental Human Rights Commission of Pakistan (HRCP) has said that the subordination of CEDAW to Pakistan's Constitution "seemed on the surface no great disability," adding that there is "little in the Constitution that comes directly into conflict with the objectives of CEDAW."
The State Department report should, however, be applauded for its accurate portrayal of the traditional social and legal constraints that keep women in a subordinate position in Pakistani society. Women, the report notes, "continued to be subjected to abuse, rape and other forms of degradation by their spouses and members of society at large." The statistics it offers in support of this view correspond with those offered by local human rights organizations. The report is similarly cogent in stating that: "Human rights monitors and women's groups believe that the Shari'a law has had a harmful effect on the rights of women and minorities, reinforcing popular attitudes and perceptions, and contributing to an
199
Critique 1996
atmosphere in which discriminatory treatment of women and non-Muslims is more readily accepted."
Torture in prisons, often for the purpose of extracting confessions, resulted in the deaths of dozens of people in police custody. According to the Human Rights Commission of Pakistan, Fayyad Haideri, a Shi'a leader, was tortured to death in a Lahore police station; Sheikh Raku died in fetters in a ICarachi hospital after having been tortured while in police custody; and a 14-year-old boy accused of petty theft was tortured to death in a police station in Gojra.
The report does not spell out clearly enough the high degree of impunity enjoyed by members of the security forces implicated in the use of excessive force, torture and extrajudicial killings. Failure to investigate such abuses and prosecute the suspected perpetrators lends credence to the view that the government may condone such abuses by criminals and perhaps even contribute directly to the current level of human rights abuses. In March 1996, in response to the killing of 150 alleged militants between mid-1995 and early 1996, the Deputy Inspector General of police for ICarachi, Shoaib Suddle, acknowledged the brutal conduct by the security forces, but rejected the claim that they routinely overstepped their authority. According to Human Rights Watch, there have been no prosecutions of security officials for their actions.
The report appropriately concentrates on the human rights situation in Pakistan's largest city, ICarachi, where the UN Special Rapporteur on Torture has found that "some semblance of law and public order has returned." On November 4, 1996, the government of Benazir Bhutto was dismissed on the ground, among others, that "during the past three years, thousands of persons in ICarachi and other parts of Pakistan have been deprived of their right to live ... no meaningful steps have been taken ... to put an end to the crime of extrajudicial killings." This year's report carefully records the many widely publicized extrajudicial killings of activists of the Mohajir Quami Movement (MQM) at the hands of the security forces. However, in a noticeable departure from the 1995 report, there is no comment on the activities of the MQM activists themselves who were stated last year to have been facing "credible charges or murder and extortion." According to the HRCP, the violence in ICarachi has
200
Pakistan
significantly subsided — albeit at a disturbing cost in terms of police excesses. HRCP reports that the death toll in Karachi fell from over 2,000 in 1995 to around 300 in 1996.
The report states rather surprisingly that there were no known politically motivated disappearances in 1996. In fact, the UN Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances transmitted at least seven reported cases of disappearances to the government of Pakistan. Of these, one involving four members of the same family was widely reported. According to Amnesty International, on May 1, 1996, Zameen Hasan Ansari, a retired section officer of the Pakistan Ministry of Foreign Affairs, disappeared from his home in Islamabad along with his wife and their two grown children. Amnesty International reports that available evidence suggests that the family may have been detained by Pakistan's military intelligence agency, the Inter Services Intelligence. The agency, however, has not officially acknowledged the detention. Amnesty International furthermore claims that over the past few years, hundreds of political prisoners have been detained in Pakistan without any acknowledgment in official records, held in unauthorized places of detention, and denied communication with a lawyer or family members. The UN Special Rapporteur on Torture has also confirmed reports that the Federal Investigative Agency operates numerous "safe houses" in dties such as Islamabad where unlawfully detained persons were held for interrogation and torture.
In discussing child labor, the report notes Pakistan's progress in implementing its child labor laws. Unfortunately, there is no mention in this section of the August 1996 conference of the South Asian Association of Regional Cooperation (SAARC), where Pakistan, along with Bangladesh, Bhutan, India, the Maldives, Nepal and Sri Lanka, signed a resolution to eliminate child labor in hazardous occupations by the end of this century, and all forms of child labor by the year 2020.
Finally, like many of the other Country Reports, the report on Pakistan gives only the most cursory treatment to the issue of freedom of association, especially as it affects independent human rights monitoring and advocacy. The report notes that, "There are several domestic human rights organizations, and new human rights and legal aid groups continue
201
Critique 1996
to form. These groups are generally free to operate without government restriction." This assessment is far too sanguine. With Pakistan's NGO community assuming a more vigorous role, the government has responded by introducing a bill allowing for greater governmental control of nongovernmental and social welfare agencies. If Parliament approves the bill, all NGOs would be required to have their charters approved by a government registration authority, which would have the power to dissolve any NGO found to be acting in contravention of its constitution. NGOs are concerned that the bill would enable the government to restrict their freedom of association and limit the scope of their operations.
The 1996 report on Pakistan minimizes the climate of intolerance current in Pakistani society, and fails to convey the growing dissonance between the rhetoric of the Pakistani government and its record. These failures might have been avoided had the drafters consulted the numerous reports on human rights in Pakistan published by the UN and NGOs. It is admittedly difficult to do justice to the full complexity of the situation in Pakistan. In past years the drafters of the State Department report rose to the challenge; this year, on the whole, they did not.
202
