 PAKISTAN
 
 The Pakistan military overthrew the Government of
 Prime Minister Zulfikar Ali Bhutto in July 1977,
 imposed martial law and promised to hold elections
 within 90 days. Elections have been postponed,
 however, until late 1979. In September 1978 Presi-
 dent Fazal Elahi Chaudry stepped down and General Zia
 ul Haq assumed the Presidency of an otherwise com-
 pletely civilian government. During its early months
 in power, the Martial Law Administration released
 political prisoners detained by the Bhutto Govern-
 ment. At the same time, it began inquires into the
 alleged misdeeds of Bhutto and his followers while
 in power. As a consequence, Bhutto was tried
 and convicted of conspiracy to murder; an appeal is
 in process. The Martial Law regime has arrested and
 detained political opponents, primarily supporters of
 Bhutto.
 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Torture
 The 1971 Constitution bans torture, and there have
 been no reports of torture since 1977.
 b. Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 The Government has endorsed the establishment of
 punishments codified in the Shariat, the Muslim
 traditional code. It has carried out a few public
 floggings, but most floggings take place in private.
 Amnesty International, quoting Pakistani press
 stories, reports that as many as 161 persons have
 been sentenced to undergo flogging for committing
 political offenses. It is unclear how many were
 actually punished. Former Prime Minister Bhutto
 
 (608)
 
 
 609
 has complained about the treatment he has received
 in jail during the course of his trial and appeal
 hearing.
 c. Arbitrary Arrest or Imprisonment
 The present regime released thousands of prisoners
 incarcerated by its predecessors. Some claims put
 the number of political prisoners under the Bhutto
 regime as high as 50,000, many of whom had been
 released before the military took over.
 Limited preventive detention of persons who might act
 in a manner "prejudicial" to the regime is authorized
 under Martial Law Order (MLO) 12 of July, 1977.
 There have been a substantial number of detentions of
 political figures associated with the previous
 regime, without charge or trial. Some were detained
 under general public safety provisions of the MLO.
 Those detained included former Prime Minister
 Bhutto's wife, Begum Nusrat Bhutto, and his daughter,
 who were placed under house arrest. Most of these
 detainees have been released, but some, including
 Mrs. and Miss Bhutto, have been detained more than
 once. Other opposition figures have been charged,
 tried and convicted in open court of corruption and
 like crimes. Others found guilty of misuse of power
 have been disqualified from running for office for
 periods of up to seven years. An April 1978 Amnesty
 International report indicated that there were
 several hundred political prisoners held under
 martial law provisions in Pakistan. The Department of
 State concludes that most of these prisoners remained
 in detention at the end of 1978.
 Former Prime Minister Bhutto was convicted of con-
 spiracy to murder in March 1978, and sentenced to
 death by the Lahore High Court. His appeal to the
 Pakistan Supreme Court was still in progress at the
 time this report was written. Appeals have been made
 by international human rights groups and several
 foreign governments for commutation of the death
 sentence by executive clemency if the sentence is
 upheld by the Supreme Court.
 
 
 610
 d. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 During the initial period of Martial Law rule, the
 Government made extensive use of military tribunals
 to supplement or, in some cases, to substitute for
 the civil courts. Since then, the overall trend has
 been to remove the military from Martial Law adjudi-
 cations and to rely increasingly on civil courts.
 Military courts still try cases involving semi-polit-
 ical charges such as bribery and black marketing.
 Civilian counsel is available for those called
 before summary courts, but Amnesty International is
 critical of the "summary way in which the evidence is
 recorded before military courts." The decisions of
 these courts are subject to judicial review by the
 civilian high courts.
 The Supreme Court has placed legal limitations on the
 extra-judicial acts of the Martial Law authorities.
 It appears that the civil courts are regularly
 issuing effective writs of habeas corpus in the cases
 of almost all detained persons and that detainees are
 permitted access to civilian counsel. Political
 detainees and journalists detained for anti-regime
 activities have been permitted access to counsel and
 civilian courts. We know of no cases where attor-
 neys' services were denied to detainees. Others have
 been released without reference to the courts.
 There were improvements in the Civil Court system in
 1978. The Supreme Court upheld the legality of the
 Martial Law regime on a "doctrine of necessity,"
 which was also cited by the same court to justify the
 legality of the Ayub Khan kegime in the late 1950s.
 However, the Court retains the right of judicial
 review and, with lower courts, has occasionally acted
 against the known wishes of the Martial Law authori-
 ties The courts regularly accept writ petitions
 successfully challenging preventive detention
 orders. For example, on November 4, 1978, ten
 members of the Pakistan People's Party were released
 following a ruling by the Lahore High Court, and
 on November 17, 1978, the Lahore Court determined
 that Begum Bhutto's detention under Martial Law Order
 12 was unlawful and ordered her released.
 
 
 611
 e. Invasion of the Home
 The sanctity of the home is respected in this Muslim
 nation. The Department of State has no reports that
 homes have been entered without proper warrant by
 authorities of the current regime.
 2. Governmental Policies Relating to the Fulfillment
 of Such Vital Needs as Food, Shelter, Health Care
 and Education
 The present Government, which sees itself as a
 caretaker until a new civilian government can be
 elected, inherited obstacles to economic and social
 progress which it has been slow to address. Since
 taking office, the decline in industrial production
 has been arrested and the Government has provided
 incentives to the private sector, deeming this the
 most efficient way to encourage economic growth. At
 the same time, public sector investment continues to
 be concentrated in large, capital intensive, slow-ma-
 turing projects which were initiated during the
 previous regime. Programs beneficial to the poor have
 been initiated, mainly in primary education and basic
 health services. However, progress has been limited
 and involvement by the poor has been marginal.
 Substantial government resources are used to subsi-
 dize consumer food prices and maintain inefficient
 state-owned industries to the detriment of programs
 which better provide for basic human needs. Budget-
 ary belt-tightening measures proposed by the inter-
 national financial community may, if adopted,
 further reduce the Government's ability to embark on
 new programs in the social sector.
 The recently published Five Year Plan indicates a
 shift away from short-term economic measures toward
 an effort to address serious underlying structural
 problems. Immediate implementation of the develop-
 ment plan is problematic, however, since the Govern-
 ment's ability to redirect substantial resources to
 the social sectors and agriculture is constrained by
 the fact that in Fiscal Year 1978/79 over 70 percent
 
 
 612
 of internal budgetary resources is designated for
 defense expenditures, debt services, subsidies, and
 major infrastructure and industrial projects. At
 the same time, between 2.0 and 2.5 million metric
 tons of wheat must be imported to cover a shortfall
 in production.
 While land reform programs achieved modest success
 (3.48 million acres made available and 1.44 million
 acres distributed by 1977), land remains unequally
 distributed in Pakistan. However, a substantial
 fertilizer program has made it possible for small-
 scale farmers to increase their yields while other
 elements of production, such as credit, continue to
 be disproportionately available to the larger land
 holders. A few worthwhile comprehensive programs,
 such as a dry-land wheat program in the Punjab and
 programs to subsidize tube wells, pesticides and
 fertilizers, have been enlarged and improved.
 Pakistan has a very low standard of health, charac-
 terized by widespread, largely-preventable communica-
 ble diseases, high fertility, moderate to severe
 malnutrition (especially among women and children),
 and the absence of sanitary facilities in the rural
 areas. Thirty percent of the urban and fifteen
 percent of the rural population have access to clean
 water, and fifteen percent of the urban and virtually
 none of the rural population has access to sewage
 facilities. The health system is largely curative
 and reaches only fifteen percent of the population.
 Pakistan's family planning program has not been
 successful, due in large part to religious sensitivi-
 ty and the program's association with the politics of
 the previous regime. There is evidence, however,
 that the Government is now earnestly seeking to
 encourage family planning; the funds budgeted for
 this purpose have increased, and some legal impedi-
 ments to the distribution of contraceptives have been
 removed.
 Eighty-one percent of the adult population is illit-
 erate, partly because of the failure to retain
 
 
 613
 impoverished students in the school system, particu-
 larly at the primary level. The new Five Year Plan
 seeks to rectify this situation by emphasizing a
 quantitative expansion of primary education. Rural/
 urban inequities are to be addressed, construction of
 girls' schools is to be given priority, and training
 of women teachers is to be emphasized.
 A serious housing shortage has developed in urban
 areas as a direct consequence of increased demand
 stimulated by remittances from workers finding
 employment in the Middle East. The construction
 industry has been faced with shortages of materials
 and trained personnel.
 3. Respect for Civil and Political Liberties Includ-
 ing:
 a. Freedom of Thought, Speech, Press, Religion
 and Assembly
 During their first year in office, the Martial Law
 authorities limited political activities and expres-
 sion through*Martial Law orders and regulations. In
 1978 these restrictions were modified, and a wider
 variety of political opinion was openly expressed.
 The latest modifications permit political assembly
 on a modest scale. A few prominent newspapers,
 notably the Pakistan Times, remain under the Govern-
 ment's direction. The regime has relaxed many
 of the formal censorship controls of previous govern-
 ments, but eight newspapers out of a total of some
 one thousand are subject to pre-censorship. The
 Government states pre-censorship is required because
 these papers were printing libelous and sensational
 material. The arrest of 49 journalists and pressmen
 in early 1978 during a dispute between the Martial
 Law authorities and two pro-Bhutto newspapers,. and
 the harsh penalties the Government meted out, put
 journalists on notice that there were significant
 limits on press freedom. Subsequent brief suspension
 of newspapers and the arrest of two senior journal-
 .ists in December (one of whom was subsequently
 
 
 614
 
 released) served to underscore the restrictions on
 the press.
 The traditional Islamic practice of denying full
 participation of Muslim women in society has not
 been condoned by the Pakistani Government, but the
 regime has done little to foster women's rights
 beyond increasing educational facilities for women.
 The All Pakistan Women's Federation is an important
 interest group but has had little influence with the
 Government. In rural areas, women do not participate
 in public life. Poor women are particularly adverse-
 ly affected, for Pakistani tradition relegates
 them to a subservient role within the home.
 The labor movement in Pakistan is limited by the
 relatively small size of the industrial sector.
 Unions are important in the large cities and in the
 past have been important factors in the political
 process. Martial Law regulations currently prohibit
 both strikes and political activity by unions. A
 strike by a journalists' union resulted, as noted
 above, in arrests and detentions.
 Prejudice against the Ahmadiyas is deep-seated
 in Pakistan's overwhelmingly Muslim population. (The
 Ahmadiyas are unable to certify that they believe in
 the unity of God and the finality of Mohammad as
 God's last prophet.) The Ahmadiya sect is included
 with Christians, Hindus and others in the category of
 "Minorities", who cannot be elected President or
 Prime Minister.
 The Government of Pakistan has not impeded the Human
 Rights Society of Pakistan, which includes among its
 officers a leading Pakistan elder statesman and a
 prominent labor leader. The Society has spoken
 out against the imposition of the death penalty on
 Bhutto. Political parties have organized "legal aid
 bureaus" and provide free legal services to their
 members arrested by the current regime. These
 bureaus have been successful in securing the release
 of detained individuals.
 
 
 b. Freedom of Movement within the Country, Foreign
 Travel and Emigration
 Restrictions on travel are applied mainly to a
 limited number of opposition political leaders.
 Political activists have been placed under house
 arrest or have been denied foreign travel. A recent
 Martial Law regulation imposes a penalty of up to
 fourteen years' confinement and confiscation of
 property for persons failing to appear before a
 military or civilian inquiry. This appears to be
 aimed at prominent opposition politicians who have
 fled the country and makes it more difficult for
 other opposition politicians to leave. Pakistani
 workers are free to emigrate to work abroad. The
 Government assists them to do so and accepts them on
 their return.
 c. Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 In 1977 the Pakistan military ousted the Bhutto
 regime which had just won an overwhelming majority
 vote in the parliamentary election. President Zia
 stated that the ouster was necessary because of
 rigging of elections, arbitrary detention of thou-
 sands of political prisoners, breakdown of law and
 order, widespread corruption and the threat of civil
 war.
 The new regime promised to reverse the corrupt
 practices of the former Government and to return
 power to civilian authority through the electoral
 process late in 1977. Those elections were post-
 poned, however, on the grounds that various charges
 of murder and corruption against Bhutto should be
 resolved in court before the electorate again
 went to the polls. Elections have now been promised
 by October 1979.
 The Government promulgated two Presidential Ordinances
 on October 17, 1978, affecting political freedom.
 One of these, termed "The Freedom of Association
 Order of 1978", guarantees all citizens (except
 government employees) the right to form and partici-
 
 
 616
 
 pate in political parties. However, the other new
 ordinance modifies existing law on political parties
 to provide for the outlawing of any party whose
 activities are judged prejudicial to Islamic ideology,
 to the sovereignty, integrity, or security of
 Pakistan, to morality or to the maintenance of public
 order. The act also prohibits all parties with any
 sort of foreign affiliation or funding.
 4. Government Attitude and Record Regarding Inter-
 national and Non-Governmental Investigation of
 Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 According to Amnesty International's report of April
 1978, its representatives "received extensive cooper-
 ation from the Government and from the Chief Martial
 Law Administrator in particular". The report con-
 demned the use of such cruel and unusual punishments
 as flogging of ordinary criminals and criticized the
 Martial Law restrictions on political activity, free
 expression and the civil court system. The report
 also urged that the death penalty not be imposed
 on Bhutto. Amnesty International repeatedly invited
 the Pakistan Government to provide pre-publication
 comments on the draft report. There was no response
 to the invitation and Amnesty International proceeded
 to publish without such comment. The Government has
 not commented on the report.
 
 
