Pakistan
Six years after seizing power in a coup d’etat, President Pervez Musharraf’s
military-backed government did little in 2005 to address ongoing human
rights concerns, such as legal discrimination against and mistreatment of
women and religious minorities, a rise in sectarian violence, arbitrary detention
of political opponents, harassment and intimidation of the media, and
lack of due process in the conduct of the “war on terror” in collaboration
with the United States. In October a major earthquake in Pakistan’s North
West Frontier Province and Pakistan-administered Kashmir resulted in at
least eighty-five thousand deaths and seventy-five thousand injured, and massive
displacement of the local population.
Musharraf continued to tighten his personal grip on power. In October 2004
he secured the passage of “The President to Hold Another Office Act” in
order to remain army chief. In 2005 he stated that he will remain army chief
as long as “the national interest demands it,” and refused to rule out holding
on to both the presidency and army chief post beyond elections scheduled for
2007.
Gender-based Violence and Discrimination
As in previous years, violence against women remained rampant in Pakistan.
Under Pakistan’s existing Hudood Ordinance, proof of rape generally
requires the confession of the accused or the testimony of four adult Muslim
males who witnessed the assault. If a woman cannot prove her rape allegation
she runs a very high risk of being charged with fornication or adultery, the
criminal penalty for which is either a long prison sentence and public whipping,
or, though rare, death by stoning. The testimony of a woman carries
half the weight of a man’s testimony under this ordinance. The government
has yet to repeal or reform the Hudood Ordinance, despite repeated calls for
its repeal by the government-run National Commission on the Status of
Women, as well as women’s rights and human rights groups. Informed estimates
suggest that tens of thousands of cases under the Hudood laws are
under process at various levels in Pakistan’s legal system.
According to Pakistan’s Interior Ministry, there have been more than 4,100
honor killings in the last four years. Nongovernmental groups recorded over
600 honor killings in 2004. Proposed legislation on honor killings drafted in
consultation with nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) was sidelined in
favor of a far weaker bill. Consequently, provisions of Pakistani law that allow
the next of kin to “forgive” the murderer in exchange for monetary compensation
remained in force, and continued to be used by offenders to escape
punishment in cases of honor killings.
Domestic and international human rights organizations and media drew
attention this year to the government’s dismissive attitude regarding violence
against women. In January 2005 Shazia Khalid, a doctor, was raped by a
masked intruder alleged to be an army officer in Balochistan province.
Khalid, who subsequently fled to London, accused President Musharraf’s
principal secretary of acting on behalf of the Pakistan Army in personally
coercing her to leave the country. Mukhtaran Mai, who was gang-raped on
the orders of a village council in 2002, was denied permission to travel to the
United States in June, in order to prevent her from “maligning” Pakistan.
The ban was lifted after an international outcry.
President Musharraf subsequently sparked international outrage by publicly
stating that rape has become a “money-making concern,” and suggesting that
many Pakistanis felt it was an easy way to get a foreign visa. He specifically
mentioned both Mukhtaran Mai and Shazia Khalid in this context. Despite
the international and domestic condemnation, President Musharraf has not
apologized for these remarks or withdrawn them.
Sectarian Violence
Sectarian violence continues to increase. Those implicated are rarely prosecuted
and virtually no action has been taken to protect the affected communities.
While estimates suggest that over 4,000 people, largely from the
minority Shi’a Muslim sect, have died in such violence since 1980, the last six
years have witnessed a steep rise in incidents. For example, on May 27, 2005,
eighteen people were killed and dozens injured in a suicide bombing at the
Shi’a Bari Imam shrine near Islamabad, where hundreds had gathered for a religious festival. On May 30, a Shi’a mosque in Karachi was attacked, killing
five worshippers and wounding twenty. In retaliatory violence, a Shi’a mob
burned down a fast food restaurant, killing six employees.
Sectarian violence also increased in the predominantly Shi’a Northern Areas.
In January Agha Ziauddin, a leading Shia cleric, was murdered in the
Himalayan city of Gilgit. At least 15 people died in ensuing sectarian violence,
and tensions have continued to simmer. Gilgit, Skardu, and other
towns in the Northern Areas have remained under intermittent curfew
including for twelve days in October in the aftermath of the kidnapping of a
local Shi’a activist, allegedly by the paramilitary force Pakistan Rangers.
Human rights organizations and independent analysts assert that Pakistan’s
intelligence agencies are complicit in the sectarian violence in the Northern
Areas.
Religious Freedom
Discrimination and persecution on grounds of religion continued in 2005,
and an increasing number of blasphemy cases were registered. As in previous
years, the Ahmadi religious community in particular was the target for arrests
under various provisions of the Blasphemy Law for allegedly contravening
the principles of Islam, and attacked by religious extremists. On October 7
Ahmadi worshippers were attacked in a mosque near Mandi Behauddin in
Punjab. Eight were killed and at least eighteen were injured. Other religious
minorities, including Christians and Hindus, also continue to face discrimination.
“War on Terror”
Since 2001 the conduct of the “war on terror” in Pakistan has involved serious
violations of human rights. Suspects arrested and held on terrorism
charges frequently were detained without charge and subject to trials without
proper judicial process. For example, Zain Afzal and Kashan Afzal, U.S. citizens
of Pakistani origin, were abducted from their home in Karachi in
August 2004 by Pakistani intelligence agents. They were released on April
22, 2005, without having been charged, after Human Rights Watch intervened. During eight months of illegal detention, the two brothers were
repeatedly interrogated and threatened by U.S. FBI agents operating in
Pakistan, and were subjected to torture by the Pakistani security services.
Military operations are ongoing in South Waziristan, adjacent to the Afghan
border, and previously noted problems persist, including collective punishment,
extrajudicial executions, arbitrary detentions, and limited access to
prisoners.
Arbitrary Arrest and Detention of Political Opponents
The government continued to use the National Accountability Bureau and a
host of anti-corruption and sedition laws to jail or threaten political opponents.
Makhdoom Javed Hashmi, of the Alliance for the Restoration of
Democracy, began a twenty-three year sentence for sedition, a charge
brought against him for reading an anti-Musharraf letter to journalists in
April 2004. In April 2005 thousands of opposition Pakistan People’s Party
(PPP) supporters, including several PPP parliamentarians, were arbitrarily
arrested in a countrywide crackdown. Though many of those arrested were
subsequently released without charge, cases against hundreds were filed
under the Anti-Terrorism Act and under Pakistan’s criminal procedure code.
Scores continue to face charges and the fear of re-arrest. On May 11 Shahbaz
Sharif, president of the Pakistan Muslim League (PML-N), was forcibly
deported to Saudi Arabia when he attempted to end three years of involuntary
exile. Prior to his arrival at Lahore Airport, scores of PML-N leaders
and supporters were arrested and released subsequently.
During the summer of 2005, Musharraf presided over a three-phase local
government election marked by brazen intimidation, coercion, and pre-poll
rigging. Some forty people died in election-related violence, making this the
most violent electoral exercise in Pakistan’s recent history. During the campaign,
many opposition candidates faced violence and intimidation at the
hands of the police and civil administration. Independent observers reported
numerous instances of kidnapping, mistreatment, and arbitrary detention of
opposition supporters, as well as pre-election and election day irregularities.
Freedom of Expression
Pakistan observed World Press Freedom Day on May 3, 2005, with arrests
and beatings of journalists in Islamabad and Lahore. Baton-wielding police
violently dispersed a peaceful rally of approximately fifty journalists gathered
at the Parliament building in Islamabad. In Lahore, security forces attacked
approximately 200 journalists as they rallied peacefully at the Punjab governor’s
mansion to press for fairer working conditions.
On May 11, 2005, the BBC’s highly regarded Islamabad correspondent
Zaffar Abbas was detained along with his cameraman as he attempted to
cover the abortive return from exile of PML-N leader Shahbaz Sharif.
Several other journalists were also mistreated in the incident. On July 18
Pakistani military police arrested Swedish citizens Leon and David Flamholc
and Tahir Shah, a British writer of Afghan origin, in Peshawar. The three
documentary filmmakers were illegally held in solitary confinement for fifteen
days and arbitrarily deported on August 3. Rashid Channa, a reporter
with the Dawn group of newspapers, was abducted from his home by plainclothes
personnel on July 24, held illegally for more than 12 hours, and finally
charged with attempted murder, allegedly on the orders of the Sindh
provincial government. “Why are you filing anti-chief minister stories?”
Channa was reportedly asked as he was arrested. He was released after rights
groups intervened.
On March 2, 2005, the BBC World Service was forced to suspend Urdu-language
news programs broadcast to the major cities via the radio station Mast
FM103. On November 14, the same radio station and two satellite television
channels were ordered to cease broadcasting the BBC’s special extended bulletins
on the earthquake. The government refused to comment on the decision.
Attacks on Human Rights Defenders
On May 14, 2005, human rights defenders organized a “mixed marathon,” an
event designed to highlight violence against women and to support their
right of access to public spaces. The marathon was organized by the Human Rights Commission of Pakistan and affiliated NGOs. The event was attacked
by police; Asma Jahangir, the U.N. special rapporteur on freedom of religion
and head of the Human Rights Commission of Pakistan, the country’s largest
such nongovernmental group, was publicly beaten. The police, under orders,
also attempted to strip her naked. Some forty others, including Hina Jilani,
the U.N. special rapporteur on the situation of human rights defenders, were
also beaten and arrested by the provincial police and the federal Intelligence
Bureau. They were released later the same day.
Key International Actors
Pakistan remains heavily dependent on the United States for economic and
military aid. The United States has notably failed to press for human rightsrelated
legal reform in the country, in exchange for Pakistan’s support in the
U.S.-led “war on terror.” For its part, the government of Pakistan has
excused its failure to uphold human rights and the rule of law by citing
domestic political pressure from hard-line religious groups and militant
organizations.
Pakistan has still only signed five international conventions. It has signed neither
the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights nor the
International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights.