 PAKISTAN
 Pakistan is an Islamic republic in which power is shared between the Prime Min-
 ister, as the leader of the National Assembly, and the President. The Chief of Army
 Staff also wields considerable influence on many major policy decisions and is the
 third member of the unofficial "troika" which governs the nation. During 1995
 Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto dominated political policy making, with President
 Farooq Leghari playing a complementary rle. Chief of    y Staff General Abdul
 Waheed consulted closely with the Government but avoided active involvement in
 governing.
 Responsibility for internal security rests primarily with the police, although para-
 military forces, such as the Rangers and Frontier Constabulary, are responsible for
 maintaining law and order in Karachi and frontier areas. Provincial governments
 control the police and paramilitary forces when they are assisting in law and order
 operations. Members of security forces committed numerous abuses in 1995.
 Pakistan is a poor country, with great extremes in the distribution of wealth and
 social stratification. Its per capita income is $450 annually, and its rate of illiteracy
 is extremely high and is increasing among women. Its economy includes both state-
 run and private industries and financial institutions. The Constitution provides for
 the right to private property and the right of private businesses to operate freely
 in most sectors of the economy. The Government continues to pursue economic re-
 forms, emphasizing the privatization of government-owned financial institutions, in-
 dustrial units, andutilities. Cotton, textiles and apparel, rice, and leather products
 are the principal exports.
 Although the Government has publicly pledged to address human rights concerns
 particularly those involving women, child labor, and minority religions, the overall
 human rights situation remains difficult. Government forces, as well as private
 groups including the Mohajir Quami Movement (MQM), were responsible for a large
 number of killings in Karachi. Security forces used arbitrary arrest and detention,
 and tortured or abused prisoners and detainees. The police, investigative and intel-
 ligence agencies, and politically motivated court cases were used to harass and ar-
 rest political opponents of the Government. The judiciary remains subject to influ-
 
 
 1335
 ence through constitutionally permitted transfers of judges and appointment of tem-
 porary judges to the High and Supreme Courts. There was no serious government
 effort to reform the police or judicial systems or to prosecute those responsible for
 abuse. Police continued to conduct illegal searches, and case backlogs led to long
 delays in trials.
 Religious zealots continued to discriminate against and persecute religious minori-
 ties, basing their activities in part on legislation which discriminates against non-
 muslims. The Government made procedural changes which made the registration of
 blasphemy charges more difficult. Nevertheless, new blasphemy charges were
 brought against 10 members of the Ahmadi religious group in 4 separate incidents.
 Religious and ethnic-based rivalries resulted in numerous murders, mosque bomb-
 ings, and civil disturbances. Traditional social and legal constraints kept women in
 a subordinate position in society. They continued to be subjected to abuse, rape, and
 other forms of degradation by agents of the State, their spouses, and members of
 society at large. The Government and employers continued to restrict worker rights
 significantly. The use of child and bonded labor remained widespread, in spite of
 legislation to restrict these practices and the signing of a Memorandum of Under-
 standing on child labor with the international Labor Organization (ILO). Little was
 done to improve basic conditions for children. Female children actually fell further
 behind their male counterparts in such measures as levels of health care and edu-
 cation.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-The number of extrajudicial killings,
 often in the form of deaths in police custody or staged encounters in which the police
 or paramilitary forces shoot and kill the suspects, increased in 1995. Most such
 killings occurred in Sindh province in clashes between the Government and factions
 of the MQM. In trying to restore order in Karachi, the Government regularly used
 excessive force, including torture and alleged encounter killings, against MQM activ-
 izts. The rate of politically motivated murders in Karachi reached an average of 10
 per day in July; by year's end, over 1,800 people had been killed. According to the
 Karachi police, 500 police officers had been suspended for misbehavior as of Septem-
 ber. None were known to have been prosecuted for abuses.
 On January 13, Karachi Airportplice shot and killed two activists of the MQM,
 Haqili faction (MQMJH). MQM        Aar Hussain Group(QM/A) activist Aslam
 Sabzwari died in police custody on July 7, 16 hours after his arrest, according to
 Bpress reprts and the MQM/A. On August 2, police killed MQM/A activist Farcoq
 ada, who independent observers note faced numerous and credible charges of mur-
 der and extortion, and three companions in an alleged encounter near Karachi Air-
 port.
 On December 9, the torture-marked bodies of Nasir and Arif Hussain, reputed rel-
 atives of MQM/A leader Altaf Hussain, were found in a Karachi suburb. The MQMI
 A claims security forces had arrested them prior to their murders. Many observers
 believe the -Government to have been responsible for their murders in retaliation for
 the murder of the brother of the Sindh Chief Minister (see below).
 Police sources have confi-med unofficially that the police do not believe that the
 courts punish repeat criminals, and that encounter killings of criminals are a con-
 scious strategy to deal with recidivists. According to an investigation by the Human
 Rights Commission of Pakistan (HRCP), an independent, non-governmental body,
 Karachi police killed six kidnapers in a staged encounter on January 13. According
 to the investigation, no encounter took place. The police resorted to heavy firing
 afer the six were killed to make it appear that an encounter had taken place. On
 April 17, Karachi police shot and killed Nadeem Riaz, known as "Nadeem Com-
 mando," a wel-known criminal. Police surrounded the house in the East Malir area
 of Karachi where he was hiding and claimed that he was killed during a shootout
 while trying to escae.
 Both main MQMv factions, the MQM/A and the Haqiqi faction, resorted to
 extrajudicial killings and torture of their opponents and targeted police and security
 officials. Although the MQM/A consistently claims that its activists are innocent, un-
 armed victims of ethnic violence, disinterested observers believe that cells of armed
 MQMIA activists are responsible for a considerable amount of Karachi's violence and
 crime. This includes extortion of large sums of money from Mohajir businessmen as
 well as others. In an apparent attempt to inflame public opinion and destabilize the
 situation in Karachi, MQMiA leader Aitaf Hussain used the  as          ape of
 an MQM/A supporter while in custody to call for three "days of mourmng" in Kara-
 chi June 24-26. At least 67 people died in strike-related violence during the protest.
 
 
 1336
 Medical reports on the alleged victim, however, did not substantiate the charges of
 gang rape. The MQM/A enforced numerous other strike calls with violence, resulting
 m the deaths of law enforcement personnel and civilian bystanders.
 Fifteen Punjabi labors were brutally murdered in Karachi November 2 by un-
 known gunmen. On November 23, gunmen carrying AK-47's murdered Syed Ahsan
 Ali Shah, youngr brother of Sinh Chief Minister Abdallah Shah, near his home
 in an MQ    A  ominted area o Karachi. Many observers believe the MQMIA to
 be responsible for this murder. The Government blamed the Haqiqi faction for a
 number of attacks on Karachi police stations, including a November 13 rocket-pro-
 pelled grenade attack on a police complex in which 10 grenades struck the complex,
 mnjuring family members of police officers.
 Ethnic and sectarian tensions continued in 1995 and resulted in a large number
 of deaths. Members of Shi'a and Sunni Muslim organizations targeting rival groups
 set off bombs or made armed attacks on crowded mosques in Karachi. Suni   n-
 men killed 20 worshipers at two Shi'a mosques on February 25 and 26. Reprisal at-
 tacks killed at least 10 Sunnis. In March nine people were killed in sectarian clash-
 es in Punjab. Such violence tapered off by mid-year, partly due to the efforts of the
 Punjab provincial government, working with sectarian groups, to reduce tensions.
 By the end the year, however, apparent sectarian deaths were again on the rise.
 According to police sources and the Citizen Police Liaison Committee (CPLC), on
 the morning of March 10, two activists of the militant Sunni organization Sipah-
 I-Sahaba Pakistan (SSP) were gunned down in the Landhi area of Karachi. That
 afternoon, a powerful bomb explosion outside a Shi'a mosque in Malir district killed
 12 persons, including 8 children. On March 12, assailants entered a building in Ka-
 rachi, gathered seven men from three Shi'a families, and shot them. The assailants,
 who are thought to be members of the SSP or hired killers, were later arrested and
 are being tried for those murders.
 According to Christian activists and the CPLC, Javed Masih, a Christian, died of
 torture during interrogation on August 4. Following a demonstration and public ne-
 gotiations with the police, the three youths arrested along with Javed were released.
 The Government has filed charges against three police officers implicated in this in-
 cident, but the officers have gone into hiding and had not been arrested by year's
 end.
 b. Disappearance.-MQMA Member of the Provincial Assembly (MPA) Qamar
 Mansoor and activist Raees Fatima boarded a train from Karachi to Lahore on June
 4. The couple did not arrive in Lahore and their families accused government law
 enforcement agencies of arresting them and approached the courts to learn their
 whereabouts. According to the Lahore High Court, Mansoor was arrested and is
 being held in jail in Rawalpindi. For several months the Government denied having
 taken Raees Fatima into custody, but in December permitted an MQM/A senator
 to visit Ms. Fatima in Rawalpindi's Adiala jail. Ms. Fatima claimed she had been
 in Government custody since June 4.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 There continued to be credible evidence that police tortured and otherwise mis-
 treated detainees. According to the Lawyers Committee for Human Rights of Paki-
 stan (LCHRP), law enforcement officials tortured to death more than 50 persons.
 On May 29, the press carried photos of four MQMIA activists who were brought to
 the Special Court for the Suppression of Terrorist Activities blindfolded and visibly
 suffering from wounds. According to the press reports, one of the four had a drilled
 left buttock, another had a fractured right leg, a third had an injured left leg and
 hips, and the fourth had torture marks all over his body. The police claimed to have
 arrested them after an encounter on May 27, while the counsel for the accused
 claimed that they were arrested at their homes on May 6. The presiding officer of
 the court ordered the jail authorities to conduct a medical checkup on all four and
 send a report to him. The chief of the MQMIA'S Legal Aid Committee alleged that
 despite the judge's orders, the police took the four to an unidentified police station.
 Several low-ranking police officials were later suspended for bringing the accused
 blindfolded into the court.
 Police and prison officials routinely use force to elicit confessions and compel de-
 tainees to incriminate others; the practice has become standard procedure. Common
 torture methods included: beating, burning with cigarettes, whipping the soles of
 the feet, sexual assault, prolonged isolation, electric shock, denial of food or sleep,
 hanging upside down, forced spreading of the legs, and public humiliation. Some
 magistrates and doctors helped cover up the abuse by issuing investigation and
 medical reports that the victims died of natural causes. The President promulgated
 an ordinance in April that permits confessions or statements against third persons
 obtained during police interrogations in parts of the country declared to be "terrorist
 affected areas" to be used in court. Human rights monitors view this ordinance as
 
 
 1337
 an endorsement of police torture to obtain evidence, while the Government argues
 that the law is currently not applied, because no part of the country has been de-
 clared a terrorist affected area.
 Police frequently use the threat of abuse to extort money from prisoners and their
 families. In some cases, the authorities have detained whole families to force a rel-
 ative who was the subject of an arrest warrant to surrender (see Section 1.d.).
 Despite regulations that prohibit the police from detaining women overnight,
 some women continue to be arbitrarily detained and sexually abused. There are Jew
 policewomen to perform matron duties, despite regulations requiring that police-
 women be present in station houses during the questioning or detention of females.
 The overall failure of successive governments to prosecute and punish the abus-
 ers, however, was the single largest obstacle to ending or even reducing the inci-
 dence of abuse. The authorities sometimes transferred, arrested, or suspended of-
 fending officers, but seldom prosecuted or punished them. Investigating officers gen-
 erally shielded their colleagues. Persons attempting to bring charges against police
 officers were often threatened by other officers and dropped the charges.
 However, the Government took action in some sexual abuse cases. For example,
 according to Christian activists, Razia Masih, a Christian woman from near
 Hyderabad, Sindh, was arrested by police on August 21 on suspicion of theft, al-
 though police searched her home and found no incriminating evidence. Masih al-
 leges that she was repeatedly raped by police officials including a police inspector.
 Atr public intervention by Chritian Sindh MPA's, Masih was released on Septem-
 ber 9 and the police inspector accused of rape was arrested.
 The Government opened additional women's police stations staffed by female per-
 sonnel in Faisalabad, Punjab, and Abbottabad and Saidu Sharif, Northwest Frontier
 province (NWFP). The first women's police station in Rawalpindi was opened in
 1994. The cases registered at the women's police stations involve wife beatings and
 burnings, kidnaping, rape, theft, and domestic disputes. In June an army court sen-
 tenced two soldiers to life in prison, 30 lashes, and expelled them from the army
 for molesting a female minor in Karachi.
 The incidence of rape, torture, and abuse was not restricted to the security forces.
 There were reports that different factions of the MQM tortured and killed members
 of rival groups. For example, according to the HRCP, there were at least seven cases
 where Haqiqi activists raped female activists of the rival MQMIA in Karachi.
 The Hadood Ordinances, promulgated by the central Government in 1979, were
 an attempt to make the Penal Code more Islamic. These ordinances provide harsh
 punishments for violating Islamic law, or Shari'a, including death by stoning for un-
 lawful sexual relations and amputation for some other crimes. In practice, the
 standards of evidence for imposing these punishments are exceptionally high, and
 to date they have not been carried out.
 Nonetheless, these laws have been applied to Muslims and non-Muslims alike and
 weigh most heavily on women. A woman who reports that she has been raped may
 find herself charged with adultery under the Hadood Ordinances. According to a po-
 lice official, in up to 80 percent of rape cases, the victims are pressured to drop rape
 charges because of the threat of Hadood adultery charges being brought against
 them. All consensual extramarital sexual relations are considered violations of the
 Hadood Ordinances. However, according to a lawyer from the HRCP, the Govern-
 ment has brought fewer charges against women under the Hadood Ordinances than
 in the past, and the courts have shown greater leniency toward women in their sen-
 tences and in the granting of bail. Another troubling aspect of the Hadood Ordi-
 nances is the possibility that a person could be tried twice for the same crime, once
 under criminal statutes and once under the Hadood Ordinances.
 In August two Irish nationals were sentenced to five lashes each for hashish
 smuggling under the Haddod Ordinances. The sentence was  irried out, making it
 the first lashing of foreiguers under the Hadood Ordinances in Pakistan.
 There are three classes of prison facilities: Class "C" cells generally hold common
 criminals and those in pretrial detention. Such cells often have dirt floors, no fur-
 nishings, and poor food. The use of handcuffs and fetters is common. Prisoners in
 these cells reportedly suffer the most abuse, such as beatings and being forced to
 kneel for long periods. Conditions in "B" and "A" cells are markedly batter. The au-
 thorities reserve  latter for prominent persons. Esp ally prominent individuals,
 including some political figures, are sometimes held under house arrest and per-
 mitted to receive visitors.
 There were reports that wealthy landlords or political parties operated private
 jails. Many such jails are believed to exist in tribal and feudal areas. Some of the
 prisoners have reportedly been held in them for many years. In Auust, the Govern-
 ment cracked down on supporters of the Tanzeem-I-Ittehad-I-Ulema-I-Qabail
 (TiUQ) Movement, a tribal organization accused of functioning as a parallel govern-
 
 
 1338
 ment in the Khyber Agency by conducting trials, levying fines, imposing punish-
 ments such as public floggings, and operating a private jail. The Government demol-
 ished the TIUQ'S headquarters and the houses-of several key TIUQ agitators. The
 Government released eight TIUQ leaders arrested on weapons charges on the condi-
 tion that the TIUQ quasi-governmental administration be dissolved.
 In late November, a team from the Human Rights Commission of Pakistan raided
 two such private jails in Sanghar, Sindh Province. The HRCP found five chained
 workers in a sugar cane field of a wealthy landlord and another groupwof people
 working in similar conditions in fields owned by a Sindh police official. The HRCP
 action encouraged the Sanghar police to raid another private jail, freeing A.8 pris-
 oners who were working as bonded laborers. According to press reports, although
 the overseers of the plantations were arrested, the landlords themselves avoided
 capture by the authorities.
 a. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The law permits a Deputy Commissioner
 (DC) of a local district to order detention without charge for 30 days of persons sus-
 pected of threatening public order and safety. The DC may renew detention in 30-
 day periods, for a total of 90 days. For other criminal offenses, the police may hold
 a suspect for  24 hours without charge. If the police can provide material proof that
 detention is necessary for an investigation, a court may extend detention for a total
 of 15 days.
 In practice, the authorities do not strictly observe the limits on detention. The po-
 lice are not required to notify anyone when an arrest is made and often hold detain-
 ees without charge until they are challenged by a court. The police sometimes de-
 tain individuals arbitrarily without charge, or on false charges, in order to eyrtort
 payment for their release. Some women continue to be arbitrarily detained and sex-
 ually abused (see Section L.a.). The law stipulates that detainees must be brought
 to trial within 30 days of their arrest. However, in many cases trials do not start
 until about 6 months after the filing of charges.
 The authorities generally permit family members and lawyers to visit inmates.
 However, in some cases the authorities refuse such visits. In the case of politicians
 and party workers charged with various offenses, the authorities incarcerated some
 of them away from their home districts thereby discouraging visits by family mem-
 bers, supporters, and attorneys. MQMIA Senator Zahid Akhtar was arrestedat Ka-
 rachi Airport on May 31 and charged with terrorist activities. He was immediately
 taken to Islamabad, but was held in custody in Peshawar for trial in the Suppres-
 sion of Terrorist Activity Court in Peshawar. The MQMIA claims that the Govern-
 ment has moved several of its detained Sindh MPA'S to locations outside Karachi
 and Sindh.
 The Government uses mass arrests to quell civil unrest. During attempts to re-
 duce crime and violence in Karachi, the MQM/A claimed that police andRangers
 arrested 7,000 Mohajhs in numerous police sweeps. Many of those arrested were not
 suspected of committing a specific crime, and were allegedly held until family mem-
 bers paid police officars a ransom for their release.
 According to the LCHRP, by mid-August the Government had made over 12,000
 arrests on suspicion of terrorist activities countrywide, with 9,200 of those arrests
 in Karachi alone. The LCHRP said 830 MQMIA activists and 189 activists of other
 parties remained in custody in Sindh, and 92 activists of political parties and sectar-
 ian groups remained incarcerated in Punjab.
 The Government selectively used criminal charges and arrest to harass political
 opponents. The Government continued to detain one senator from the Pakistan
 us        ague, Nawaz Sharif Group (PMIJN), who was arrested in 1994. Three
 PML'N members of the National Assembly (MNA) arrested in 1994 were released
 on bail in 1995. The opposition alleged credibly that the Government put political
 pressure on the judiciary to deny or delay bail to the arrested politicians. Three
 MQMIA senators and 11 MQMIA members of the Sindh Provincial Assembly
 (MPA's) arrested in 1994 on criminal charges continued to be denied bail and re-
 mained in custody. In December the courts released on bail one MQMIA Senator.
 The authorities established detention facilities near the Sindh Provincial Assembly
 building to allow jailed MQMIA MPA's to attend sessions, and broaght the detained
 MQMIA Senators to Islamabad to attend Senate sessions. Pakistani courts routinely
 granted bail to others accused of similar offenses.
 Federal Investigative Agency agents arrested 70-year-old Karachi businessman
 Riaz Shaffi in January for alleged business irregularities in connection with his re-
 acquisition of his previously nationalized business. His detention, along with that
 of other Karachi businessmen, was believed to have been politically motivated.
 The Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA) have a separate legal system,
 the Frontier Ci~mes Regulation, which recognizes the doctrine of "collective respon-
 sibility." Under this regulation, the authorities are empowered to detain the fellow
 
 
 1339
 members of a fugitive's tribe, or to blockade the fugitive's village, pending his sur-
 render or punishment by his own tribe in accordance with the local tradition. The
 Government exercised such authority in 1995. For example, on August 12, Frontier
 Troops bulldozed the headquarters of the TIUQ in Rhyber Agency following violent
 TIUQ protests against the arrests of some its leaders.
 The Movement for Enforcement of Islamic Law (TNSM) in the NWFP's Malakand
 Division continued its activities in 1995, although with diminished strength. The
 Government responded forcefully to protests by the Movement's followers, stationing
 more troops in the region, arresting hundreds of activists, and bulldozing houses
 and shops of the Movement's supporters. After urging his supporters not to pay
 taxes as part of a civil disobedience campaign until Shari'a was enforced, the Move-
 ment's leader and many others were arrested in June. Despite the leader's call for
 nonviolent protests, 11 persons died during clashes between the TNSM and Frontier
 Corps troops.
 The Government does not use forced exile.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The Constitution provides for an independent judi-
 ciary. In reality, however, the judiciary is not independent. Through the President's
 power to transfer high court justices and appoint temporary an d hoc justices, the
 executive branch is able to influence the Supreme Court, the provincial  h courts,
 and the lower levels of the judicial system. It has become standard practice to ap-
 pint judges to the high courts and Supreme Court on temporary basis for a period
 of 1 year and later confirm or terminate their appointments after an evaluation of
 their performance. Legal experts say that temporary judges, eager to be confirmed
 following their probationary period, tend to favor the Government's case in their de-
 liberations. Judges in the Special Terrorism Courts are retired jurists who are hired
 on renewable contracts. The desire to maintain their positions has the potential to
 influence their decisions.
 Des pite the Government's promise to strengthen judicial independence, it took
 several measures to influence the court for political reasons. The Supreme Court
 heard the bail application and denied bail to an opposition Member of the National
 Assembly (MNA)in a case where bail would routinely have been granted by a lower
 codrt. Mian Qurban Sadiq Ikram, special judge for the Court of Banking Offenses,
 was removed from the bench on July 31, a day after he granted interim bail to the
 father of opposition leader Nawaz Sharif.
 The Government brought additional criminal cases against the leader of the oppo-
 sition, Nawaz Sharif, members of his family, and his family businesses. The Punjab
 rovincial government in June brought treason charges against Sharif and 17 others
 or their aleged attempt to unseat the province's Chief Minister in 1993. The Gov-
 ernment dropped the treason charges in September following numerous public and
 editorial statements against them, but other charges against the groups remain
 pending. At year's end, these cases were still pending in the court system. The ac-
 cused remained free to conduct opposition political activities.
 The judicial system involves several different court systems with overlapping and
 sometimes competing jurisdictions. There are civil and criminal systems with special
 courts for high-profile cases, as well as the Federal Shara appeals courts for certain
 Hadood offenses. The appeals p  s in the civil system is: civil court, district court,
 high court, and the Supreme Court. In the criminal system, the progression is: mag-
 istrate, sessions court, high court, and Supreme Court.
 The civil judicial system provides for an open trial, cross-examination, representa-
 tion by an attorney, and appeal of sentences Attorneys are appointed for indigents
 only in capital cases. There are no jury trials. Owing to the limited number of
 judges, the heavy backlog of cases, and lengthy court procedures, cases routinely
 drag on for years, although defendants are required to make frequent court appear-
 ances. In bth the Hadood and standard criminal codes, there are bailable and
 nonbailable offenses. According to the Criminal Procedures Code, the accused in
 bailable offenses must be granted bail, and the accused in nonbailable offenses
 should be granted bail if accused of a crime that carries a sentence of less than 10
 years. Bai is set, often purposely, at unreasonably high levels for indigent defend-
 ants.
 The Federal Shari'a Court and the Shari'a Bench of the Supreme Court serve as
 appeals courts for certain convictions in criminal court under the Hadood Ordi-
 nances. The Federal Shari'a Court also may overturn legislation judged to be incon-
 sistent with the tenets of Islam. However, these cases may be appealed to the
 Shari'a Bench of the Supreme Court.
 The judicial process continued to be impeded by bureaucratic infighting, inac-
 tivity, and the overlapping jurisdictions of the different court systems. Scores of po-
 sitions in the lower magistracy remained unfilled. Persons in jail awaiting trial are
 sometimes held for periods longer than the sentence they would receive if convicted.
 
 
 1340
 IThe Government may refer cases involving terrorism-bombings, sabotage, high-
 way robberies, banditry, kidnapping, or similar offenses-to special terrorism courts
 established by the Suppression of Terrorist Activities Act of 1975. Many legal ex-
 perts believe the special courts do not provide for a fair trial. They maintain that
 the short time for investigations and trials detract from the accused's right to pre-
 pare an adequate defense. Some observers maintain that trial procedures have effec-
 tively repudiated the presumption of innocence. They also cite the encroachment by
 federal authorities on the provincial governments' constitutional authority to admin-
 ister justice and the inherent unfairness of parallel courts to which cases may be
 assigned arbitrarily. Moreover, the special courts may deny bail if the judges decide
 that the accused may have reasonably committed an offense.
 Government officials and some attorneys maintain that despite the deficiencies,
 the special courts are necessary because of the judicial backlog. They also maintain
 that the rules of evidence apply in the courts, defendants have the right to counsel,
 and the judges must meet the same standards as those appointed to a high court.
 Defendants also have the right to appeal, but only one appeal is allowed.
 One opposition Assembly member, Shaikh Rashid Ahmad, was convicted in a ter-
 rorism court in February of possession of an unregistered assault rifle. At year's end
 he remained in custody pending legal appeals.
 A 1990 Shari'a court decision resulted in the introduction of the Islamic concepts
 of Qisas-roughly an "eye for an eye"--and Diyat-"blood money"-into the Penal
 Code. The Qisas and Diyat Ordinance allows compensation to be paid to a victim's
 family in lieu of the accused receiving punishment. As a result, wealthy or influen-
 tial persons sometimes escape punishment for such crimes as murder and assault.
 The right to seek pardon or commutation is not available to defendants under the
 Ordinance. The Hadood and Qisas and Diyat ordinances apply to both ordinary
 criminal courts and Shari'a courts. According to Christian activists, if a Muslim
 murders a Christian, he can compensate for the crime by paying the victim's family
 Diyat; however, if a Christian murders a Muslim, he does not have the option of
 paying Diyat and must serve a jail sentence or face the death penalty for his crime.
 Appeals of certain Hadood convictions involving penalties in excess of 2 years' im-
 prisonment are referred exclusively to the Shari'a courts. Cases referred to the Fed-
 eral Shari'a court are heard jointly by Islamic scholars and High Court judges using
 ordinary criminal procedures. Cases referred to the Sharia bench of the Supreme
 Court are heard jointly by Islamic scholars and Supreme Court judges using ordi-
 nary criminal procedures. Judges and attorneys must be Muslim and be familiar
 with Islamic law. Within these limits, defendants in the Shari'a court are entitled
 to the lawyer of their choice. There is a system of bail.
 Under the Hadood Ordinances, evidence is given different weight depending on
 the religion and sex of the witness. A non-Muslim may not be a witness against a
 Muslim but may offer testimony against another non-Muslim. Testimony of females
 is not admissible for the harsher punishments (lashing, amputation, and stoning).
 In cases involving financial matters, the testimony of two women is required for it
 to be admitted as evidence. The evidentiary laws that apply to lesser punishments
 are roughly based on English common law.
 There continued to be charges that magistrates and police, under pressure to
 achieve high conviction rates, persuade detainees to plead guilty without informing
 them of the consequences. Politically powerful persons also attempt to influence
 magistrates' decisions and have used various forms of pressure on the magistrates,
 including the threat to transfer them to other assignments. Magistrates also per-
 form a wide variety of administrative functions for the provincial governments, re-
 ducing the time devoted to judicial duties.
 Administration of justice in the FATA is normally the responsibility of tribal el-
 ders and maliks, or leaders. They may conduct hearings according to Islamic law
 and tribal custom. In such proceedings, the accused have no right to legal represen-
 tation, bail, or appeal. The usual penalties consist of fines, even for murder. How-
 ever, the Government's political agents, who are federal civil servants assigned to
 local governments, oversee such proceedings and may impose prison terms of up to
 14 years.
 In remote areas outside the jurisdiction of federal political, agents, tribal councils
 occasionally levy harsher, unsanctioned punishments including flogging or death by
 shooting or stoning. Paramilitary forces under the direction of the political agents
 frequently perform punitive actions during enforcement operations. For example, in
 raids on criminal activities, the authorities have been known to damage surrounding
 homes as extrajudicial punishment of residents for having tolerated nearby cnmmal
 activity.
 
 
 1341
 There are fewer than 10 known political prisoners. Several are serving sentences
 under the laws concerning the Ahmadi religious sect. Three persons are appealing
 death sentences for blasphemy (see Section 2.c.).
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-By law
 the police must obtain a warrant to search a house but do not need a warrant to
 search a person. However, the police often enter homes without a warrant, and fre-
 quently steal valuables during searches. In the absence of a warrant, a policeman
 is subject to charges of criminal trespass. However, policemen are seldom punished
 for illegal entry._
 The Government maintains several domestic intelligence services which monitor
 politicians, political activists, suspected terrorists, and suspected foreign intelligence
 agents. Credible reports indicate that the authorities commonly resort to wire-
 tapping and occasionally intercept and open mail. On July 1, the Government sus-
 pended cellular phone, card pay phone, and pager services in Karachi and
 Hyderabad. The Government accused the MQMIA and criminals of using these serv-
 ices to commit crimes in Sindh.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of speech
 and the press, and citizens are generally free to discuss public issues. There were
 increased efforts by the Government and private groups to restrict press freedoms,
 but those efforts had little practical effect on press reporting. The Constitution stip-
 ulates the death penalty for anyone who damages the Constitution by any act, in-
 cluding the publication of statements against the spirit of the Constitution. The
 Constitution prohibits the ridicule of Islam, the armedforces, or the judiciary. More-
 over, the Penal Code mandates the death sentence for anyone convicted of blas-
 pheming the Prophet Mohammed (see Section 2.c.). Journalists censor themselves
 on such subjects. Some journalists claim that the competitive nature of Pakistani
 politics helps to ensure press freedom since the media serve as a forum for political
 parties to compete with one another. A Print, Press, and Publications Ordinance re-
 quires the registration of printing presses and newspapers and allows the Govern-
 ment to confiscate newspapers or magazines deemed objectionable. Foreign books
 must pass government censors before being reprinted, although the importation of
 books is freely allowed. Government censors occasionally ban publications, usually
 for objectionable religious content, but for other reasons as well.
 On June 29, the Sindh provincial government suspended the publication of six
 Urdu newspapers for 60 days, accusing them of publishing sensational news items
 prejudicial to the maintenance of public order. Following meetings between the
 Sindh Chief Minister and journalist unions, the bans were lifted a week after being
 imposed.
 A gvernment-owned press trust controls two newspapers, an English-language
 and an Urdu daily. The Ministry of Information controls one of the two main wire
 services; the other is privately owned. The numerous privately owned newspapers
 have a circulation that far exceeds that of the government-owned newspapers. The
 government news aprs and wire services are circumspect in their coverage of the
 news and generly follow the government line.
 Privately owned newspapers freely discuss public policy and criticize the Govern-
 ment. They report remarks made by opposition politicians and their editorials re-
 flect a wide spectrum of views.
 The Government attempts to influence editorial policy at privately-owned news-
 papers by its power to allocate duty free newsprint and its placement of government
 advertising, an important source of newspaper revenue. There are allegations that
 the Government increases the newsprint quota for perceived progovernment papers.
 The Ministry of Information stopped placing advertising in the propposition Urdu
 Daily Khabrain, claiming that it had engaged in irresponsible journalism. There
 continued to be widespread and credible reports of journalists taking bribes from the
 Government or opposition parties in return for favorable coverae.
 During the year, various political parties and police specifically targeted, arrested,
 and harassed newspapers and reporters. Pakistan Peoples Party (PPP) member
 Syed Masroor Ahsan sued Dawn columnist Ardeshir Cowasgee for a November 25
 1994 column criticizing the judiciary. The editor and publisher of Dawn also faced
 charges of contempt over the story. The Supreme Court adjourned the hearing in
 early June; the case was still pending at year's end. In March the office of the Ob-
 server, an Islamabad-based daily, was attacked. In May a Karachi-based reporter,
 known for his stories criticizing the Government, was attacked at his home in Kara-
 chi, where unidentified assailants beat his son and younger brother. In June a jour-
 nalist associated with the Urdu daily Khabrain was severely beaten by the police
 in Multan. Khabrain alleged that he was punished by the police for his association
 
 
 1342
 with a proopposition newspaper and demanded that the Government take action
 against the police official allegedly involved. An HRCP official said that the journal-
 ist had engaged in blackmail. Also in June, rockets were fired on the offices of
 Nawa-e-Waqt and the Nation in Karachi. The Nawa-e-Waqt office had been bombed
 previously, in late February.
 On June 7, the Federal Investigation Agency (FIA) arrested without charge
 Zafaryab Abmad, a free-lance Lahore-based journalist associated with the Bonded
 Labor Liberation Front (BLLF). Ahmad was later charged with sedition and accused
 of working with Indian intelligence to damage Pakistan's carpet industry exports
 through false reporting. After 6 weeks of detention, the Lahore High Court released
 him on interim bail. At year's end, the sedition case was pending in the courts.
 On August 17, Karachi police officers asked monthly magazine Newsline editor,
 Razia Bhatti, to send to the police station a reporter who had written an "unfavor-
 able" story about the Sindh governor. During the next 16 hours, police visited the
 Newsline office and Bhatti's apartment, looking for both Bhatti and the journalist.
 On August 24, a group from the radical Sunni Siph-e-Sahaba (SSP) attacked and
 ransacked the British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC) office in Islamabad and
 physically beat the BBC corresnent and a member of his staff. They were pro-
 testing a BBC documentary on the SSP'S sectarian activities in Pakistan. SSP Chief
 Maulana Zia-ur-Rehman Farooqi publicly claimed responsibility for the incident,
 saying that it was intended as a peaceful protest, not a sacking of the office. The
 Prime Minister publicly deplored the attack and Punjab police arrested Farooqi, but
 later released him.
 The Government owns and operates most radio stations. Private radio stations
 that do not report news operate in the Islamabad, Rawalpindi and Lahore markets.
 The Government also operates all but one semiprivate television station. It strictly
 controls their news broadcasts. However, the semi-private Shalimar Television Net-
 work (STN) provides programs including Cable News Network (CNN) and BBC pro-
 grams, with considerable independence from government oversight. The Govern-
 ment censors segments of CNN and BBC programs considered socially offensive.
 The Ministry of lnformation monitors the advertisements on STN, editing or remov-
 ing those deemed objectionable. Satellite dishes are readily available on the local
 market, and many Pakistanis use them to watch uncensored foreign broadcasts. Ac-
 cess to the Internet became available in Pakistan in 1995, and the Government is
 studying whether-and how-to control the medium.
 Conservative religious and political groups have been active in promoting their
 own cde of social morality. The Shari a Law has bolstered such efforts by placing
 greater pressure on individuals to conform to Islamic sensibilities. Jamaat-I-lIslami's
 student wing, Islani Jamait-I-Tulaba (IJT) threatened citizens planning to hold mu-
 sical or dance parties, especially New Year's Eve parties.
 Literary and creative works remain generally free of censorship. Obscene lit-
 erature, a category broadly defined by the Government, is subject to seizure. Dram-
 as and documentaries on previously taboo subjects, including corruption, social
 privilege, narcotics, violence against women, and female inequality, are frequently
 broadcast on television. However, a religious extremist student goup disrupted a
 musical performance in Multan because the students objected to the style of the fe-
 male singer, who regularly encourages her audience to dance.
 The Government and universities generally respect academic freedom. However,
 the atmosphere of violence and intolerance fostered by student organizations, typi-
 cally tied to political parties, is a threat to academic freedom. On some campuses,
 well-armed groups of students of varying political persuasions clash with and in-
 timidate other students, instructors, and administrators on matters of langag, syl-
 labus, examination policies, doctrine, and dress. In June a group of ma e Punjab
 University students were beaten by IJT activists after ignoring an IJT warning not
 to go on a recreational trip with female classmates.
 Human rights groups remain concerned about the implementation of a 1992 Su-
 prme Court ruling that prohibits student political organizations on campuses.
 While they acknowledge that the ruling led to a reduction of campus violence, they
 question the legality of school officials expelling students for membership in a politi-
 cal organization.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution provides for
 freedom of association subject to restrictions by government ordinance and law.
 There are no banned groups or parties.
 The Government generally permits peaceful assembly. District magistrates occa-
 sionally exercised their power under the Criminal Procedures Code to ban meetings
 of more than four people when demonstrations seemed likely to result in violence.
 This provision was invoked frequently in June during the Islamic month of
 Muharram, when tensions between Sunni and Shi'a Muslims traditionally peak.
 
 
 1343
 
 However, Shi'a were granted licenses to conduct processions on specified routes.
 Shi'a groups, however, protested that they should not be required to obtain licenses
 for holdg Muharram processions. Many observers attributed the relatively peace-
 ful month of Muharram to these measures. The Government usually did not inter-
 fere with large political rallies. However, on several occasions opposition demonstra-
 tors blocking the Main Mall road in Lahore were arrested by the police. All were
 later released.
 Opposition leader Nawaz Sharif and other opposition politicians traveled
 unhindered across the country throughout the year, holding large rallies critical of
 the Government. However, the authorities sometimes prevented leaders of politico-
 religious parties from traveling to certain areas if they believed their presence
 would increase sectarian tensions. Police issued arrest warrants for three prominent
 Christian leaders following a peaceful September protest rally in Islamabad against
 the country's system of separate electorates for minorities (see Section 2.c.).
 c. Freedom of Religion.-Pakistan is an Islamic republic in which 97 percent of
 the people are Muslim. The Constitution requires that laws be consistent with
 Islam. The Government permits Muslims to convert to other faiths but prohibits
 proselytizing among Muslims. According to the Government's Human Rights Cell,
 Islamiyyat (Islamic Studies) is compulsory for all Muslim students in state-run
 schools. Students of other faiths are not required to study Islam, but are not pro-
 vided with parallel studies in their own religion. In practice, however, many non-
 Muslim students are compelled by teachers to complete the Islamiyyat studies.
 Minority religious groups fear that the Shari'a Law and its goal of "Islamizing"
 government and society may further restrict the freedom to practice their religion.
 Discriminatory religious legislation has encouraged an atmosphere of religious intol-
 erance which has led to acts of violence directed at Ahmadis, Christians, Hindus,
 and Zikris.
 A 1974 constitutional amendment declared Ahmadis to be a non-Muslim minority
 because they do not accept Mohammed as the last prophet of Islam. However,
 Ahmadis regard themselves as Muslims and observe many Islamic practices. In
 1984 the Government inserted Section 298(c) into the Penal Code which prohibited
 an Ahmadi from calling himself a Muslim and banned Ahmadis from using Islamic
 terminology. The punishment is up to 3 years' imprisonment and a fire. Since 1984,
 the Government has used this pro-ision to harass Ahmadis.
 The 1993 Supreme Court ruling upholding Section 298(c) emboldened anti-
 Ahmadi groups and resulted in more court cases against Ahmadis. In 1995 cases
 under Section 298(c) were filed against at least 20 Ahmadis. These cases were still
 pending in the courts at year's end. In late February, an Ahmadi was arrested and
 charged under 298(c) for preaching his faith because he was listening to a religious
 cassette in his own shop. He was released from prison on bail in late March, but
 his case remains pending in the courts. Also in late March, six Ahmadis were
 charged under 298(c) for publishing invitation cards with Islamic epithets.
 In April a crowd attacked three Ahmadis visiting a village north of Peshawar,
 killing one and injuring a second. The Ahmadis had travelled tothe village to post
 bail for a recent convert who was in protective custody after being arrested for of-
 fenses against Islam. A local mullah (religious leader) had issued a fatwa accusing
 the convert of apostasy and condemning him to death for renouncing Islam. The
 convert had been arrested in April under sections 107 and 151 of the C mal Pro-
 cedures Code to prevent the breach of peace, even though he had sought police pro-
 tection because of threats to his life. The convert was ater charged under sections
 295(a) and 298() of the Penal Code. In late July, the charges under 295(a) and
 298(c) were lifted and the convert subsequently released. A murder case was reg-
 istered against all known members of the mob as no specific individual was identi"-
 fied as the culprit.
 Ahmadis are not allowed to be buried in Muslim graveyards. In 1995, the bodies
 of 15 Ahmadis buried in Muslim graveyards were allegedly exhumed. A group of
 mullahs, supported by the local Assistant Commissioner of Liaqatpur, in October or-
 dered that the body of an Amadi woman be removed from th  e common cemetery
 in the town. The body was exhumed and reburied in land owned by the Ahmadis.
 Eleven Anmadi mosques remained sealed, and four Ahmadi mosues are occa)ied
 by other Muslim sects. The Government classifies Abmadis as non-Muslims on
 their passports. This has led the authorities in Saudi Arabia to prevent Ahmadis
 from making the Muslim reigous pilgrimage to Mecca. Christians are also subject
 to harassment by the authorities, notably including the blasphemy laws and dif-
 ficulty in obtaining permission to build churches.
 In 1986 the Government inserted Section 295(e) into the Penal Code which stipu-
 lates the death penalty for blaspheming the Prophet Mohammed. This provision has
 been used by litigants against Ahmadis, Christians, and even Muslims.
 
 
 1344
 According to the HRCP, the Government made unofficial changes to the proce-
 dures for filing formal blasphemy chares. Magistrates are now required to inves-
 tigate allegations of blasphemy to see whether they are credible before filing formal
 charges. Despite administrative changes in filing ]lasphemy charges, new charges
 were brought against 10 Ahmadis in 1995 in four separate incidents. Five Ahmadis
 in Khairpur district Sindh, were charged under both blasphemy and anti-Ahmadi
 laws for displaying banners carrying verses of the Koran during a rally of Ahmadi
 youth. Another Ahmadi in Hafiz ad, Punjab was charged with blasphemy in Octo-
 9r for preaching his faith. In March two other Ahmadis were implicated under
 blasphemy and anti-Ahmadi laws in Sanghar, Sindh, for translating the Quran into
 Sindhi. At year's end, all of these individuals were free on bail and awaiting or un-
 dergoing trial. In November blasphemy charges were brought against two Ahmadis
 in Larkana, Sindh. The Larkana sessions court judge rejected their bail requests
 and the pair remained in jail.
 Since 1986 at least 100 blasphemy cases have been registered against Ahmadis,
 with no convictions. In the same period, at least nine blasphemy cases have been
 brought against Christians and nine against Muslims. Some of these cases contin-
 ued in the courts.
 In early February, a Lahore sessions court found two Christians, Salamat and
 Rehmat Masih, guilty of blasphemy and sentenced them to death. On February 23
 however, the Lahore High Court acquitted them of blasphemy when the court found
 that insufficient evidence for conviction was presented at the original trial. Salamat
 and Rehmat Masih subsequently emigrated with the assistance of the Government.
 Anwar Yaqub Masih, a Christian arrested in 1993 on the charge of uttering "blas-
 phemous phrases against the Prophet Mohammed," has served 2 years in the
 Faisalabad District Prison awaiting the conclusion of his trial. Following the Feb-
 ruary acquittal of Salamat and Rehmat Masih by the High Court, SSP activists an-
 nounced that "as the courts were not likely to punish blasphemers" they would
 themselves kill Anwar Masih. In March following defense counsel Asma Jehangir's
 application for transfer of the case from Samundri to Faisalabad, the Lahore High
 urt ordered the staying of the proceedings at Samundri until further notice.
 Anwar Masih remains in prison.
 In April a woman was accused of blasphemy for the first time. A Christian teach-
 er in a girls school in Muzaffafgarh district Punjab, 32-year-old Catherine Shaheen,
 was accused by her colleagues and some local residents of "insulting the Prophet
 Mohammed" and preaching Christianity. An inquiry conducted by the HRCP con-
 cluded that she had not committed blasphemy but was a victim of professional jeal-
 ousy and personal animosity. A formal inquiry report was submitted to the local
 magistrate to determine whether formal charges of blasphemy should be filed.
 Human rights activists believe that the inquiry report favors Shaheen's case. Stu-
 dents belonging to a local religious political party and local mullahs are leading a
 campaign against Ms. Shaheen. Six of them are reported to have taken an oath to
 kill her. Since the case started, Shaheen has been transferred to another area. Ac-
 cording to the HRCP, the Education Department has decided on its own initiative
 not to pay her salary.
 in January 2 Shias in Peshawar were convicted of blasphemy and sentenced to
 death for asking a local printer to produce 10,000 copies of a handbill containing
 a claimed pictorial representation of the Prophet Mohammad. Their appeal is pend-
 ing before the Peshawar High Court.
 Mohammad Arshad Javaid of Bahawalpur, a 37-year-old Muslim who is report-
 edly mentally unsound and was convicted of blasphemy in 1994 remains in prison
 pending appeal to the High Court.
 Badshah Khn, a Muslim from Narowal District, Punjab, was accused by relatives
 in March of writing blasphemous words on a wall. Khan immediately petitioned the
 Lahore High Court, stating that he was being implicated in a false blasphemy case
 because of a property dispute with the complainants. The High Court has directed
 the palice to submit a complete investigation report to the Court, and no formal
 blasphemy charges have yet been filed.
 Following an August 11 rally in protest of the country's system of separate elec-
 torates for minorities, well-known Christian leaders Bishop John Joseph, Chaudhry
 Cecil, and Clement Shabaz Bhatti were charged with promotion of discord between
 religious groups. They were granted pre-arrest bail.
 Wen such religious cases are brought to court, extremists often pack the court-
 room and make public threats against an acquittal. As a result, judges and mag-
 istrates often continue trials indefinitely, and the accused is burdened with further
 legal costs and repeated court appearances.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-Most citizens enjoy freedom of movement within the country and to
 
 
 1345
 travel abroad, but the Government occasionally prohibits movement of persons with-
 in Pakistan through "externment orders" when it believes their presence will lead
 to a threat to public order. Travel to Israel is legally prohibited. Government em-
 ployees must obtain "no objection certificates" before traveling abroad. Students are
 also required to have these certificates from their institutions. Citizens have and
 regularly exercise the right to emigrate. Exit control lists, however, are used to pre-
 vent the departure of wanted criminals. The Government increasingly included busi-
 nessmen, journalists, and  litical figures on the exit control list as a form of politi-
 cal harassment. No judiciaaction is required to add a name to the exit control list,
 and there is no judicial recourse or formal appeal mechanism if one's name is added.
 In 1995 several industrialists were prevented from leaving the country, allegedly be-
 cause of political sympathies for opposition leader Nawaz Sharif. Nawaz Sharifs fa-
 ther was also stopped at the airport for several hours before special permission was
 granted by the Interior Ministry for him to leave. Despite specific permission from
 the Government, a groups of MQMIA members negotiating with the Government
 was once prevented from traveling to London for consultations with MQMIA leader
 Altaf Hussain.
 On numerous occasions, opposition political parties effectively prevented free
 movement within the country by calling strikes in Karachi and other cities of Sindh
 province and enforcing those strike calls with violence and the threat of violence.
 MQM/A activists ransacked businesses which remained open and attacked motorists
 and pedestrians found on the street. Largely out of fear of MQMIA sponsored vio-
 lence, ordinary citizens were prevented from leaving their homes to go to work,
 schools, and the market.
 The Government cooperates with the United Nations High Commissioner for Ref-
 ugees (UNHCR) and other humanitarian organizations in assisting refugees. There
 were no reports of forced expulsion of those having a valid claim to refugee status.
 According to the UNHCR, approximately 885,000 registered Afghan refugees re-
 mained in Pakistan at the end of the year. A total of 144,000 Afghan refugees were
 repatriated in the first 10 months of 1995, 75,000 of those assisted by the UNHCR.
 Since 1988 over 2.4 million Afghans have repatriated from Pakistan.
 Afghan refugees in Pakistan have limited access to legal protection and depend
 on the ability of the UNHCR and leaders of their groups to resolve disputes among
 themselves and with Pakistani society. There were credible reports that in the wake
 of the sacking of the Pakistani Embassy in Kabul, the bombing of the Egyptian Em-
 bassy in Islamabad, and a large bomb blast in Peshawar in December, policed har-
 assed undocumented refugees in Islamabad, Peshwar, and Rawalapindi. Afghan
 men and boys were reportedly stopped, and police reportedly extorted money for
 their failure to possess valid travel documents. Police- also frequently prevent Af-
 ghan nationals from entering these cities. Most able-bodied male refugees have
 found at least intermittent employment but are not covered by labor laws. Women
 and girls obtained increasingly better education and health care as NGO's provided
 increased services.
 The "repatriation" of Biharis continued to be a contentious issue. The Biharis are
 Urdu-speaking people from the Indian state of Bihar who went to East Pakistan-
 now Bangladeshl-at the time of partition in 1947. Since 1971, when Bangladesh be-
 came mdependent, approximately 250,000 Biharis have been in refugee camps in
 Bangladesh. The repatriation of these people is tied to Pakistan's various ethnic
 problems. While theIMohajir community-descendents of Muslims who emigrated to
 present-day Pakistan from India during partition-supports repatriation, the Sindhi
 community opposes the move. In 1993 the Government flew 342 Biharis to Pakistan
 and placed them in temporary housing in central Punjab. No further repatriation
 occurred in 1995.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens have the right and the ability to change their government peacefully.
 With certain exceptions, citizens aged 21 and over have the right to vote. However,
 several million bonded laborers and nomads may not vote because the National
 Election Commission has ruled that they do not "ordinarily reside in an electoral
 area, nor do they own or possess a dwelling or immovable property in that area."
 Political parties have been allowed to operate freely since the full lifting of martial
 law in 1988. Unregistered political parties are permitted to participate in elections.
 Members of the national and provincial assemblies are directly elected.
 The Constitution requires that the President and Prime Minister be Muslims.
 Members of minority religious groups may not vote in Muslim constituencies; they
 cast their ballots for candidates running for special at-large seats reserved for them
 in the national and provincial assemblies. Most Ahmadis, disputing their designa-
 
 
 1346
 tion as non-Muslims, have refused to vote for such representatives. Christians and
 Hindus note that this system marginalizes religious minorities by allowing the Mus-
 lim candidates to ignore them as a voting block. As a result, areas where minorities
 predominate receive significantly less government development and assistance
 funds. Local government officials are also directly elected. However, local govern-
 ment bodies were dissolved in 1993 and new elections have not been held. In the
 meantime, provincial and federal officials are responsible for local government.
 The Government refused to present in the National Assembly four PMIfN MNA'S,
 and in the Senate one PMLN Senator, who are detained on criminal charges. The
 four MNA'S and the Senator were unable to participate in parliamentary debate,
 committee meetings, or otherwise carry out their duties as public representatives,
 although they remain full members o the National Assemb   or Senate. The Gov-
 ernment did, by contrast, continue to p resent in the Senate 3 MQMA Senators, and
 in the Sindh Provincial Assembly 11 MQMIA MPA's, despite their continued deten-
 tion on criminal charges.
 The more than 2 million Pashtun people living in the FATA do not vote for their
 National Assembly representatives and have no representation in the assembly of
 the Northwest Frontier province. In keeping with local traditions, FATA's National
 Assembly members are elected by tribal leaders, or maliks, who are appointed in
 the Governor's name by the central Government's political agents. Many people liv-
 ing in this area have expressed dissatisfaction at having no vote. However, the ma-
 jority of Pashtun people live outside the FATA and, while retaining their tribal iden-
 tity, are fully integrated into politics and society.
 Because of a longstanding territorial dispute with India, the political status of the
 Northern Areas-Hunza, Gilgit, and Baltistan-is not resolved. As a result, more
 than 1 million inhabitants of the Northern Areas are not covered under any con-
 stitution and have no representation in the federal legislature. The area is adminis-
 tered by an appointed civil servant. While there is an elected Northern Areas Coun-
 cil, this body serves in an advisory capacity the Federal Govenment and has no
 authority to change laws or raise and spend revenue.
 Although women participate in government, they are underrepresented in political
 life at all levels. Ouy 4 women-including the current Prime Minister-hold seats
 in the 217-member National Assembly. While women participate in large numbers
 in elections, some women are dissuaded from in electn elections by family, and reli-
 gious and social customs in rural areas.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 There are several domestic human rights organizations, and new human rights
 and legal aid groups continue to form. These groups are generally free to operate
 without government restriction. The Government has provided protection to human
 rights lawyers defending accused blasphemers following threats and attacks on the
 lawyers by religious activists.
 International human rights organizations have been permitted to visit Pakistan
 and travel freely. The Government has not always been responsive to foreign NGO's,
 however.
 The Government Human Rights Cell established branch offices in Karachi, La-
 hore, and Peshawar. The Cell brought attention to the problem of spousal abuse by
 arranging visits by the Prime Minister to hospitalized abuse victims and began a
 television and radio campaign to educate the public on human rights issues.
 The Government established in November a new Ministry of Human Rights. How-
 ever, by year's end, the Ministry had not found a centralized home and the Govern-
 ment had not yet staffed all of its positions.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution guarantees equality before the law to all Pakistanis and broadly
 prohibits discrimination based on race, religion, caste, residence, or place of birth.
 In practice, however, there is significant discrimination based on these factors.
 In July the Federal Government instituted a tribunal for the disadvanta ged,
 headed by a retired judge of the Supreme Court and including two retired judges
 of the High Court and three citizens. The tribunal, vested with the powers of a High
 Court, will make rulings on complaints of violation of the constitutional rights of
 women, children, and minorities. The tribunal will also be authorized to undertake
 investigative action on its own initiative.
 Women.-Domestic violence is a serious problem. The Ministry of Women's Devel-
 opment estimates that 80 percent of women are victims of domestic violence. The
 press continued to draw attention to deaths of married women in which they are
 
 
 1347
 killed by relatives in dowiy or other family-related disputes. Most of the victims are
 burned to death, allegedy in kitchen stove accidents. The police rarely visit the
 scene of the crime or conduct investigations to determine how the woman was
 burned. An exception was the case of   at Iqbal, who died of severe burns to her
 entire body. The magistrate ordered that her body be exhumed and called for a new
 investigation of her death, after he accused the police of gross negligence in the ini-
 tial investigation.
 In another case, an 18-year-old girl died of burns which her family claimed she
 received while making tea. An investigation by the Progressive Women's Association
 (PWA-an NGO that deals with domestic and social violence against women) found
 that she had been tied up by her brothers and doused with kerosene. The brothers
 are in jail but had not been convicted as of year's end. Approximately 92 burn cases
 had been reported at the Rawalpindi General Hospital during the year, according
 to the PWA. There were no convictions in any burn cases in 1995. Increased media
 coverage of cases of wife burnings, spousal abuse and murder, and rape cases has
 helped to raise awareness about violence against women. Several human rights ac-
 tivists have commented that a few years ago it was considered taboo even to discuss
 the problem of rape, whereas now rape cases are reported frequently in local news-
 papers and magazines. The Ministry of Women's Development ran a commercial on
 spousal abuse on the state-owned television network. As part of her effort to high-
 light the problem of violence against women, the Prime Minister in June made a
 public hospital visit to a burn victim whose husband had thrown kerosene on her
 and then lit a match. Her husband was arrested and the Government paid the vic-
 tim's hospital expenses.
 While abusive spouses may be charged for assault, cases are rarely filed. Police
 usually return battered wives to their abusive husbands. Women are reluctant to
 file charges because of societal roles that make women economically and psycho-
 logically dependent on their husbands and male relatives as well as the social stig-
 ma of divorce. Rlelatives are also reluctant to report cases of abuse in order to pro-
 tect the reputation of the family.
 Rape is a widespread problem. However, it is estimated that less than one-third
 of all rapes are reported to the police. In 1995 2,488 cases of rape were regtered
 with the Punjab police. Many more instances are believed to have occurred, t, be-
 cause of societal and family pressure, were not reported. Women also are reluctant
 to file rape charges because they then open themselves up to charges of adultery
 under the Hadood Ordinances. Marital rape is not a crime, and the rape of another
 man's wife is a common method of revenge in rural and tribal areas.
 Traffickers i     enen bought or lured euneds of women from Bangladesh with
 promises of a better life. They transported the women across India and placed them
 with families as domestic servants or as prostitutes in brothels. The authorities de-
 tained some of the women for prostitution under the Hadood Ordinances. Few are
 able or willing to return to Bangladesh. Many are released into the custody of their
 exploiters, who set them to work as prostitutes again. Efforts to repatriate
 Bangiadeshis in 1995 were mostly unsuccessful.
 There are an increasing number of reports of women killed or mutilated by male
 relatives who suspect them of adultery. Few such cases are investigated seriously.
 An article in the magazine Newsline alleged that hundreds of men and women from
 Baluchistan and rural areas of Sindh and Punjab provinces are killed annually for
 illicit sexual relations. While th ttradition of such killing applies equally to offend-
 ing men and women, women are more likely to be killed than men.
 There are significant barriers to the advancement of women, begnning at birth.
 In general, female children are less valued and cared for than malie children. Ac-
 cording to a United Nations study, girls receive less nourishment, health care, and
 education than boys. According to the Government, only 23.5 percent of the females
 over 10 years old are literate, compared with 48.9 percent for males; the level of
 literacy among females is declining. Only 12 percent of women use family planning
 methods. As a result, the fertility rate is six children per woman. In rural areas,
 women in small farm families generally work alongside men in the fields. However,
 they remain subordinate to men and suffer discrimination in education, employ-
 ment, and legal rights.
 Human rights monitors and women's groups feared that the Shari'a Law would
 have a harmful effect on the rights of women and minorities. However, the Law
 states that women's and minority rights procted under the Constitution would not
 be affeted. The Law's im pact on these groupsthas been limited because the Govern-
 ment has not passed enblig legislation. Nonetheless, the Law reinforces popular
 attitudes and perceptions, andcontributes to an atmosphere in which discriminatory
 treatment of women and non-Muslims is more readily accepted.
 
 
 1343
 
 Some Islamic leaders continue to stress a conservative interpretation of Islamic
 injunctions to justify discrimination against women. Many citizens interpret the Ko-
 ran's injunctions on modesty to mean that women should remain either at home or
 veiled. It remains accepted practice to assign women subordinate roles in the civil,
 political, and managerial hierarchies.
 Both civil and religious laws protect women's rights in cases of divorce, but, as
 in the case of inheritance laws, many women are unaware of them, and often the
 laws are not observed. In inheritance cases women generally do not receive--or are
 pressed to surrender-their due share of the inheritance. In rural areas, the practice
 of a woman "marrying the Koran" is still widely accepted if her family cannot ar-
 range a suitable marriage or wants to keep the family wealth intact. A woman mar-
 ried to the Koran is forbidden to have any contact with males over 14 years of age,
 including her immediate family members. The Government's Council of Islamic Ide-
 ology (CII) condemned the practice as un-Islamic, but the CII ruling is not legally
 binding. Press reports indicate that the practice of buying and selling brides still
 takes place in parts of NWFP and the Punjab.
 In 1992 the Supreme Court invalidated the requirement that a husband must give
 written notice of a divorce to a local union council. The husband's statement, with
 or without witnesses, is the defining legal step. The woman, lacking written proof
 of divorce, remains legally and socia y vulnerable. Human rights organizations ex-
 pressed concern that a woman could be charged with adultery if her former spouse
 were to deny having divorced her.
 There are also limits on the admissibility and value of women's testimony in court
 (see Section i.e.).
 Although a small number of women study and teach in universities, postgraduate
 employment opportunities remain largely limited to teaching, medical services, and
 the law. Nevertheless, an increasing number of women are entering the commercial
 and public sectors. Karachi lawyers estimate that the number of female judges in
 civil courts there has increased to about 30 percent of the total. There are reports
 that women who apply to professional olleges face discrimination. Women may now
 participate in international athletic competition, although few do.
 Women's organizations operate primarily in urban centers. Many concentrate on
 educating women about existing legal rights. Other gups concentrate on providing
 legal aid to poor women in prison who may not be able to afford an attorney.
 According to an independent observer, the Government through 1995 had trained
 and deployed over 20,000 female rural health workers. The Government hopes to
 train another 10,000 in 1996 with the goal of having a total of 100,000 by 1998.
 The Government also produced television documentaries on women in development
 and family planning, and promoted population services in advertisements and by
 enlisting the support of religious leaders. Pakistan hosted the first Muslim Women
 Parliamentarians Conference in August.
 In August the Cabinet approved ratification with reservations of the Convention
 on Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW), declaring
 that the Constitution would not be bound by Paragraph 1 of Article 29 and Para-
 graph 2 of Article 28.
 The Ministry of Women's Development worked closely with the NGO community
 in preparation for the 1995 Beijing Conference on Women. Several different NGO's
 focusing on women's issues contributed to Pakistan's Country Report on the Status
 of Women prepared for the conference. The Prime Minster delivered a keynote ad-
 dress at the Beijing Conference emphasizing the importance for women of education,
 financial independence and a strong family.
 Children.-Legal rights for children are theoretically protected by numerous laws
 which incorporate elements of the U.N. Convention on the Rights of the Child. How-
 ever, the Government frequently fails to enforce these laws. Federal law allows but
 does not require, offenders under the age of 14 to be placed in reform schools; how-
 ever, no such facilities exist. There is only one jail in each province for convicted
 prisoners under age 21. A 1994 United Nations report estimated that there are 250
 children under the age of 14 in prison at any time. Although Punjab and Sindh
 provinces have laws mandating special judicial procedures or child offenders, in
 practice, children and adults are essentially treated equally. Very young children ac-
 company their convicted mothers to jail.
 There is no federal law on compulsory education, and neither the federal or pro-
 vincial governments provide sufficient resources to assure universal education. Gov-
 erment prvision ofhelth care is somewhat better-especially with the program
 deploying rural health workers-but health care services inmost areas remain woe-
 fully inadequate. Many children begin working at a very early age. At the age of
 5 or 6, female children are often responsible for younger siblings. Childen are some-
 times kidnapped to be used as forced labor, for ransom, or to seek revenge against
 
 
 1349
 
 an enemy. The HRCP reported an average of 400 kidnappings of children per month
 inPunjab province alone in 1993. The HRCP also reported that half of the 4,000
 rapes that were registered in 1993 were of minors or teenagers. Child prostitution
 involving boys and girls is widely known to exist but is rarely discussed. The Gov-
 ernment does little to deter it.
 People With Disabilities.-There are no laws requiring equal accessibility to public
 buildings for disabled persons. However, the Human Rights Cell requested all city
 administrations to incorporate facilities for the disabled-including wheelchair ac-
 cess ramps and elevators-in local building codes.
 Religious Minorities.-Among religious minorities, there is a well-founded belief
 that the authorities afford them less legal protection than they afford Muslim citi-
 zens. Members of religious minorities are subject to violence and harassment. In
 April one Ahmadi was killed and another was injured by an angry crowd in a village
 north of Peshawar (see Section 2.c.). Ahmadis are often targets of violence, often in-
 stigated by local religious leaders. Two Ahmadis charged under 298(c) were sched-
 uled to receive confirmation of their bail applications in late January. The court ses-
 sion was postponed because a large group of armed mullahs stormed the court
 premises. The mullahs reportedly a ducted and beat one of the Ahmadis. The police
 refused to register a complaint against the mullahs over the beating. Asma
 Jehangir, defense lawyer for the Masiha and others accused of blasphemy, was har-
 assed by militant Muslim group members during the course of the Masih trial. Her
 car was damaged outside the Lahore High Court and she received death threats.
 In October her Lahore home was broken into by armed men who attempted to take
 members of her family hostage. The assailants were driven off in a gun battle with
 security guards.
 Religious minority groups also experiene onsiderable discrimination in employ-
 ment and education; the laws facilitate discrimination in employment based on reli-
 gion. In Pakistan's early years, minorities were able to rise to the senior ranks of
 the military and civil service. Today, many are unable to rise above mid-level ranks.
 Because of the lack of educational opportunities for some religious minority groups,
 discrimination in employment is believed to be increasingly prevalent. There are
 also restrictions on testimony in court by non-Muslims (see Section i.e.).
 Christians in particular have difficulty finding jobs above those of menial labor.
 Many Christians continue to express the fear of forced marriages between Muslim
 males and Christian women, although the practice is relatively rare. Christians are
 among the least educated citizens. According to one Christian rights activist, only
 8 percent of Christian males and 6 percent of Christian females are literate.
 Ahmadis suffer from harassment and discrimination and have limited chances for
 advancement into management levels in government service. Even the rumor that
 someone may be an Ahmadi or have Ahmadi relatives can stifle opportunities for
 employment or promotion. Young Ahmadis and their parents complain of increasing
 difficulty in gaining admittance to good colleges, forcing many children to go over-
 seas for higher education.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The Industrial Relations Ordinance of 1969 (IRO)
 enunciates the right of industrial workers to form trade unions but is subject to
 major restrictions in some employment areas. In practice, labor laws place signifi-
 cant constraints on the formation of industrial unions and their ability to function
 effectively. For example, the law prohibits workers in export processing zones
 (EPZ's) from forming trade unions. The Essential Services Maintenance Act of 1952
 (ESA) covers sectors associated with "the administration of the State," i.e., govern-
 ment services and state enterprises, such as oil and gas production, electricity gen-
 eration and transmission, the state-owned airline, and ports. Workers in these sec-
 tors are allowed to form unions. However, the ESA sharply restricts normal union
 activities, usually prohibiting, for example, the right to strike in affected organiza-
 tions. In response to international criticism, the Government took steps in 1995 to
 limit application of the ESA.
 Union members make up only about 13 percent of the industrial labor force and
 10 percent of the total estimated work force. Contract labor continues to flourish,
 undercutting the power of the unions and exploiting workers willing to work on tern-
 orary contracts. These workers receive fewer benefits and have no job security.
 There is no prvision in the law granting the right of association to agricultural
 workers.
 A celebrated case that remained unresolved in 1995 involved the protracted strug-
 gle to form a union by workers employed by Daewoo Corporation to build a highway
 between Lahore and Islamabad. Following a court decision to allow the workers to
 register their union, the Punjab provincialgovernment initially appealed this ruling
 
 
 1350
 in the provincial Labor Court, but dropped dropped its appeal against the workers
 in April. However, Daewoo then lodged its own appeal, and the case remains in liti-
 gation. Among other things, Daewoo objects to the fact that most of the proposed
 union's leaders are no longer Daewoo employees.
 Legally required conciliation proceedings and cooling-off periods constrain the
 right to strike, as does the Government's authority to ban any strike that may cause
 "serious hardship to the community" or prejudice to the national interest. The Gov-
 ernment may also ban a strike that has continued for 30 days.
 Strikes are rare. When they occur, they are usually illegal and short. The Govern-
 ment regards as illegal any strike conducted by workers who are not members of
 a legally registered union. Police do not hesitate to crack down on worker dem-
 onstrations. The law prohibits employers from seeking retribution against leaders
 of a legal strike and stipulates criminal penalties for offenders. The courts may im-
 p risn employers for violating this prohibition but they are more likely to fine them.
 The law does not protect leaders of illegal strikes.
 Unions may belong to federations. There are seven major federations which are
 free to affiliate with international federations and confederations. The Government
 permits trade unions all across the political spectrum. While many unions remain
 aoof from party plitics, the most powerful are those associated with political par-
 ties. After the PP P came to power in 1988, it successfully organized trade unions
 under the banner of the People's Lab or Bureau (PLB). The PLB's main competitors
 are the Jamaat-i-Islami's National Labor Federation and the MQM-backed labor
 unions.
 The International Labor Organization (ILO) has stated that current Pakistani law
 and practice violate the Government's commitments under ILO Convention 87. The
 ILO has urged the Government to lift prohibitions against union activity in EPZ's
 and with respect to teachers, radio, television, railway, forestry, hospital, and other
 government employees, as well as to rescind the existing ban on strikes. The ILO
 also expressed concern about the practice of artificial promotions that exclude work-
 ers from the purview of the Industrial Relations Ordinance and stated that
 nonapplication of labor laws in proposed new "Special Industrial Zones" would be
 a violation of Convention 111. In response to a government request, the ILO has
 provided technical assistance to help bring the country's labor laws into conformity
 with the world body's conventions.
 In 1994 a government task force on labor prepared a report recommending im-
 provements on worker rights problems, but as of year's end the Cabinet had not ap-
 proved its proposals.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The right of industrial work-
 ers to organize and freely elect representatives to act as collective bargaining agents
 is established in law. The IRO prohibits antiunion discrimination by employers. If
 found g:uilty of antiunion discrimination, employers are required to reinstate work-
 ers fired for union activities.
 In general, legally constituted unions have the right to bargain collectively. How-
 ever, the many restrictions on forming unions (see Section 6.a.) preclude collective
 bargaining by large sections of the labor force, e.g., agricultural workers, who are
 not guaranteed the right to strike, bargain collectively, or make demands on em-
 ployers.
 The ESA also restricts collective bargaining. For each industry subject to the ESA,
 the Government must make a finding, renewable every 6 months, on the limits of
 union activity. In cases in which the Government prohibits collective bargaining,
 special wage boards decide wage levels.
 These boards are established at the provincial level and are comprised of rep-
 resentatives from industry, labor, and the provincial labor ministry, which provides
 the chairman. The chairman may name additional industry and labor representa-
 tives to the board. Despite the presence of the labor representatives, unions are gen-
 erally dissatisfied with the boards' findings. Disputes are adjudicated before the.Na-
 tional Industrial Relations Commission. A worker's right to quit may also be cur-
 tailed under the ESA. Dismissed workers have no recourse to the labor courts. Most
 unions call for the abolition of the ESA.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The Constitution and the law pro-
 hibit forced labor. However, critics argue that the ESA's limitation on some worker
 rights constitutes a form of compulsory labor. The Government informed the ILO's
 Committee on the Application of Standards in 1990 that amendments were under
 consideration to rectify the problem. However, the Government has taken no further
 action.
 Illegal bonded labor is widespread. Bonded labor is common in the brick, glass,
 and fishing industries and is found among agricultural and construction workers in
 
 
 1351
 rural areas. Conservative estimates put the figure of bonded workers at several mil-
 lion.
 The Bonded Labor System (Abolition) Act adopted in 1992, outlawed bonded
 labor, canceled all existing bonded debts, and forbade lawsuits for the recovery of
 existing debts. However, the provincial governments, which are responsible for en-
 forcing the law, have failed to establish enforcement mechanisms. Hence, the -law
 is largely ineffective. Lacking employment alternatives, many workers have volun-
 tarily returned to bonded labor.
 In June escaped victims and HRCP activists disclosed that 35 families comprising
 more than 100 persons, including women and children, were being held in bondage
 by a landowner near Umerkot in southern Sindh. They said that some 22 years ago
 the landlord gave a loan of 500 rupees to each of the peasants which over the years
 accumulated to 50,000 to 60,000 rupees each. HRCP and the escaped peasants con-
 tended that the landlord exerted such control over local police that their investiga-
 tion resulted in a report claiming that the peasants were happy. Escaped peasants
 have taken refuge with the Bonded Labor Liberation Front and charged that their
 female relatives still in bondage were constantly being raped by the landlord, his
 sons, and their henchmen. The landlord told HRCP that the escaped peasants owed
 him 500,000 rupees and that they were being held hostage by BLLF, which he
 claims asked for 200 000 rupees to release them. The landlord said that until the
 escapees are returned to him, he cannot release their families.
 In November 82 bonded workers were freed from 3 private prisons in Sindh where
 they were made to work harvesting sugar cane, some in chains. One of the landlords
 charged in these cases was deputy superintendent of police in Sindh.
 d. Minimurn Ae for Employment of Children.-Child labor is common and results
 from a combination of severe poverty, employer greed, and inadequate enforcement
 of laws intended to control it. The Government acknowledges that violations of ex-
 isting laws are common but claims that the responsible provincial authorities are
 strengthening enforcement.
 A k ey factor is the absence of any federal law on ompulsory primary education.
 One provincial government, in Punjab, has passed such a law but, because of fund-
 ing constraints, the law has not yet been implemented. Among other things, the
 province would have to hire some 40,000 new teachers to carry out this program.
 Unofficial estimates indicate that workers under 18 years old make up one-third
 of the total labor force. While much child labor is in the traditional framework of
 family farming or small business, the employment of children in larger industries
 and, according to labor activists, in state-sponsored training programs, is also wide-
 spread. Child labor is widely employed in the carpet industry, much of which is fam-
 il-y-run. Children have also been employed in other export industries, such as tex-
 tiles, leather tanning, surgical instruments, and sporting goods, though the extent
 is unclear.
 In June 1994, the Government signed a Memorandum of Understanding with the
 ILO on cooperation toward elimination of child labor. The two sides are conducting
 a nationwide survey to develop an accurate assessment of the scale of child labor.
 The Government has also announced its intention to establish a pilot program of
 35 rehabilitation centers for former child laborers and is seeking funding for this
 progrm
 TheApril murder near Lahore of Ibal Masih, a young activist of the BLLF, drew
 international attention. The 3LLF alleged that the murder had been engineered by
 carpet manufacturers, who reportedly blamed Masih for contributing to the indus-
 try's poor international image. According to a preliminary investigation conducted
 by the authorities and the HRCP, however, the murder was unrelated to Masih's
 labor activism and did not involve carpet manufacturers. The accused murderer, al-
 leged eyewitnesses, the victim's family, and others involved have changed their sto-
 ries about the case several times. A federal tribunal headed by a High Court judge
 investigated the case and determined that the carpet industry "has no role or in-
 volvement" in the case. The tribunal noted, however, that the alleged killer's retrac-
 tion of his earlier confession created some complications necessitating further inves-
 tigation.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-Labor regulations are governed by federal stat-
 utes applicable throughout the country. The monthly minimum wage is approxi-
 mately $44 (1,500 rupees). Although this wage provides a meager subsistence living
 for a small family, the minimum wage affects only a small part of the work force,
 and most families are large.
 The law, applicable nationally, provides for a maximum workweek of 54 hours,
 rest periods during the workday, and paid annual holidays. These regulations do not
 apply to agricultural workers, workers in factories with fewer than 10 employees,
 and to the small "contract groups," which are subdivisions within factories of 10 or
 
 
 1352
 fewer workers. Many workers are unaware of the regulations protecting their rights
 because of their lack of education.
 The provinces have been ineffective in enforcing labor regulations, because of lim-
 ited resources, corruption, and inadequate regulatory structures. In general, health
 and safety standards are poor. Although organized abor presses for improvements,
 the Government has done little and wea ly enforces existing legal protections.
 Workers cannot remove themselves from dangerous work conditions without risking
 loss of employment.
