 PAKISTAN
 Democracy and respect for human rights advanced significantly
 in Pakistan in 1986. Martial law courts were abolished,
 martial law lifted, the 1973 Constitution and fundamental
 rights restored, Parliament's independence asserted, and
 political life and political parties revived. Although the
 judiciary is prohibited from reviewing decisions of the
 martial law period, the Government agreed to consider
 legislation that would allow persons alleging abuse of their
 rights during the martial law era to seek redress. There was
 a revival of vigorous political activity, including a
 parliamentary opposition group, as well as parties which
 boycotted the 1985 elections. Pakistan's sociopolitical
 cohesion is fragile, however, and Prime Minister Mohammad Khan
 Junejo and the Chief Ministers of Pakistan's provincial
 governments implemented a tough crackdown in August 1986,
 alleging that opposition activities commemorating Independence
 Day threatened law and order. Members of religious
 minorities, particularly Ahmadis, continue to face
 discrimination and are the occasional targets of mob
 violence. Women have reserved positions in political life,
 but both social and legal constraints continue to inhibit full
 equality with men.
 Pakistan ended 7 years of martial law and a 20-year-old state
 of emergency on December 30, 1985. During 1986, the nation
 was administered by a civilian parliamentary government,
 although President Zia Ul-Haq retains substantial powers. The
 Government is headed by Prime Minister Junejo and a cabinet of
 National Assembly members and Senators, who won nonparty
 elections (in which candidates ran for office as individuals
 and were not identified by party affiliation on the ballot) in
 February 1985. In the provinces, parallel parliamentary
 assemblies, also elected in 1985, were in place. Although
 most opposition political leaders called for a boycott of the
 elections, outside observers considered that the elections
 were clean, with voter participation generally exceeding 55
 percent.
 Legislation passed in December 1985 authorized Junejo to
 revive the Pakistan Muslim League (PML) under his own
 leadership in February 1986. Progovernment PML groups quickly
 formed in the National Assembly and in provincial assemblies,
 giving the PML comfortable majorities in all houses.
 President Zia ul-Haq, who came to power in a 1977 coup, won a
 5-year term as President in a controversial referendum held in
 December 1984. In addition to the powers of the presidency,
 Zia retains the position of Chief of Army Staff and wields
 substantial residual powers under the Constitution.
 The extraparliamentary opposition, especially the coalition
 known as the Movement for the Restoration of Democracy (MRD),
 which boycotted the 1985 elections, continues to challenge the
 legality of the present Government. State security agencies
 closely monitor opposition activities, but interfere only when
 ordered to do so by the Government, and then only in situations
 where violence is expected or has occurred.
 During the 1970's, the government of Zulfikar Ali Bhutto
 vigorously expanded the state sector of the economy. General
 Zia has been more supportive of private business activities
 and has encouraged economic growth. Private entrepreneurship
 is now flourishing in the small industrial sector. Pakistan
 continues to make impressive economic gains, even though
 long-term growth is limited by a poor educational system,
 
 
 1266
 PAKISTAN
 widespread and growing illiteracy, limited resources, and a
 continuing bias, among officials, against an expanded private
 sector.
 The Soviet invasion of Afghanistan continues to have a major
 impact on Pakistan. Pakistan provides refuge to nearly 3
 million Afghans and is the target of an intense campaign of
 Soviet-inspired disinformation, sabotage, and subversion. In
 1986 dozens died in explosions throughout the Northwest
 Frontier Province--most believed to be the work of agents of
 the Kabul regime. Soviet and Afghan government forces have
 frequently shelled and bombed Pakistan border areas, killing
 more than 100 people through midyear.
 Against the backdrop of a long history of human rights abuses,
 under both civilian and military rule, the last 2 years have
 shown major improvement. In 1985 the first parliamentary
 elections in more than a decade were held, although opposition
 parties disputed their legitimacy, and on December 30 martial
 law was lifted.   Political debate was more open than at any
 time in the last 15 years. Many observers claimed that for
 the first time since the 1950's, political gatherings and
 activities were freely held. However, exceptions were made if
 the Government believed an event had the potential to become
 violent.
 Upon coming to office in March 1985, Prime Minister Junejo
 vowed that he would not stop opposition Pakistan People's
 Party (PPP) leader Benazir Bhutto, or other opponents, from
 peacefully challenging his rule. Bhutto was allowed to return
 to Pakistan in April 1986, and Junejo kept his pledge as she
 toured Pakistan to address large rallies and to demand early
 elections. However, when leaders of Junejo's Muslim League
 and the opposition alliance MRD announced plans for rival
 Independence Day rallies in Lahore in August, Junejo cancelled
 the PML rally and asked the MRD--of which Bhutto's PPP is the
 largest component--to postpone its own. He cited concern for
 public safety and the sanctity of Independence Day as the
 reasons for his action. The MRD claimed that the Prime
 Minister's action arose from the Government's realization of
 how little support it had and refused to reschedule its
 rally. Provincial authorities then banned the planned
 gatherings; when the MRD defied the ban, violence ensued in
 Lahore, Karachi, and much of rural Sind, resulting in at least
 37 deaths and continuing sporadically in the southern part of
 the country for several weeks. The Government detained
 Benazir Bhutto, other MRD leaders, and several thousand
 supporters, most of whom were released within 30 days.
 There have also been temporary bans on large gatherings after
 outbreaks of sectarian and ethnic violence. In December the
 Government banned public gatherings and imposed curfews after
 vicious ethnic fighting broke out between Pathans and Mohajirs
 (Muslim emigrants from India and their descendants) in Karachi
 and Hyderabad. Rioting erupted after law enforcement officials
 targeted arms and narcotics smuggling rings in Pathan areas of
 Karachi for a cleanup campaign. In the Government's effort to
 restore law and order, thousands of troops were deployed and
 given "shoot on sight" orders for curfew breakers. During the
 conflict, more than 900 people were arrested, and approximately
 180 were killed.
 
 
 1267
 PAKISTAN
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 There was no evidence of government or government-instigated
 political killings. However, according to government figures,
 some 37 people--including 10 law enforcement officers--died
 during the August violence between government forces and MRD
 and other political elements. The Government asserts that all
 those civilians killed by security forces were committing acts
 of violence or subversion, e.g., attacking police or railroad
 stations; the MRD charges, however, that many of those killed
 were victims of unwarranted use of force by the Government.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no reports of government-instigated
 disappearances. Kidnapings by highwaymen, usually for ransom,
 increased, particularly in rural Sind and in semiautonomous
 tribal areas.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 There was no evidence that political detainees were tortured
 in 1986, although there were reports that some persons who
 resisted arrest were "abused" by the police. A few MRD
 supporters were forced to march naked through the streets
 following violence in Lahore on Independence Day. Reportedly,
 some detainees were held in fetters--a practice usually
 reserved for capital offenders.
 Physical abuse of those charged with ordinary crimes is
 common. As in other South Asian countries, police in Pakistan
 are ill-trained, poorly paid, and rarely held accountable--
 factors which encourage both corruption and abuse of authority.
 Police and jailers use "third degree" methods, and frequently
 employ the threat of abuse to extort money from prisoners and
 their families. The local press regularly reports the deaths
 of prisoners while in police custody. While the Government
 responds to highly publicized allegations of mistreatment, it
 has failed to institute systematic reforms.
 The prisons are overcrowded, reflecting Pakistan's lack of
 resources and the low priority given prison reform. The
 Karachi Central Jail, built to house 930 persons, currently
 holds 3,000 prisoners under "normal" conditions. In the Dadu
 District Jail, prisoners sleep in shifts because there is not
 enough room for all to lie down at the same time.
 Three classes of prison facilities exist. Class "C" cells,
 which generally hold common criminals, suspected terrorists,
 and low-level political workers, usually have dirt floors, no
 furnishings, and poor quality food. The use of handcuffs and
 fetters is common in "C" cells. Prisoners in these cells
 reportedly suffer the most abuse, such as beatings and being
 forced to kneel for long periods. Political detainees and
 foreign prisoners usually are held in class "B" cells, which
 provide better treatment, less crowded conditions, and better
 food. Only prominent persons receive class "A" accommodations,
 which can include air conditioning and private servants.
 Pakistan human rights activists and opposition politicians
 
 
 1268
 PAKISTAN
 acknowledge that treatment of political prisoners generally
 has improved since the lifting of martial law.
 There have been cases reported of sane persons being committed
 to mental institutions through inadequate judicial oversight.
 These cases reflect inefficiency rather than a government
 program to use psychiatric institutions as a form of
 punishment.
 The Government's 1979 Hadood Ordinances prescribe traditional
 Islamic punishments for theft, adultery, and consumption of
 alcohol and drugs. Penalties include flogging, stoning, and
 amputation. But before a court may order stoning or
 amputation, strict rules of evidence must be satisfied;
 stoning or amputation sentences by lower courts have not been
 upheld on review, and none was carried out in 1986. In the
 one reported 1986 case in which a lower court sentenced a
 person to death by stoning for adultery, the Federal Shariat
 Court overturned the penalty because the accused had retracted
 her confession. In 1986 there were occasional floggings of
 persons convicted of sexual assault, adultery, drinking
 alcohol, possession of narcotics, and robbery.
 In February 1986, the Punjab authorities closed the notorious
 "subjail" of the Lahore Fort, where torture and other such
 forms of interrogation allegedly had been used to get
 confessions from suspected criminals and political opponents.
 The jail's closure was viewed as an important symbolic gesture
 toward ending abuses of the martial law and previous eras.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Pakistan law permits detention under court order for 30 days
 of persons suspected of threatening public order and safety.
 Such court orders are renewable for 30 days at a time, up to a
 total of 90 days, if the Government can demonstrate to the
 court that the detainee does in fact threaten public safety.
 Pakistan governments have frequently resorted to this privision
 to forestall perceived opposition threats by taking political
 leaders out of circulation.
 In August the Government detained PPP leader Benazir Bhutto,
 many of the leaders of the other MRD parties, and several
 thousand supporters. The arrests and detentions followed no
 standard pattern. Some persons were served properly executed
 detention orders, while others were arrested on what appeared
 to be blank orders or were not served until several days after
 being taken into custody. All opposition leaders and most
 followers arrested in August were released within a month of
 their arrest. As in the past, senior politicians were often
 placed under house arrest. Some were released after the courts
 had ruled their detention invalid, and others on the initiative
 of the administration. PPP/MRD officials say that at the end
 of 1986 about 100 activists remained in jail. All appear to be
 persons charged with criminal offenses who are unable to afford
 bail--bail being permissible under civil law.
 The provincial government in Sind exercised preventive
 detention provisions in the civil code in connection with a
 campaign to deal with the activities of "dacoit" gangs (armed
 bandit groups). According to some reports, as many as 400
 persons were detained on suspicion of harboring or otherwise
 encouraging "dacoity." In Punjab the provincial government
 also briefly detained religious leaders and workers it
 suspected of attempting to incite sectarian hatred after
 
 
 1269
 PAKISTAN
 Sunni-Shia sectarian violence erupted in various parts of the
 province in September.
 In November in reaction to severe rioting in Karachi and
 Hyderabad between the Pathan and Mohajir (refugee) communities,
 Sind authorities detained the leader of a Mohajir party whom
 they charge instigated the violence. The Sind government also
 arrested the leaders of the Sind Baluch Pushtoon Front, a party
 that advocates replacing Pakistan's Constitution with a
 confederal structure. They were accused of subverting the
 Constitution by disrupting the territorial integrity of
 Pakistan, the unity of the people, and the peace, particularly
 in Sind province. There have not yet been any prosecutions.
 Former detainees claim that prisoners under preventive
 detention frequently have been held incommunicado. There is
 no evidence that the Government uses forced labor.
 During 1986 two prominent Sindhi political leaders and a
 Karachi University professor, detained without being charged
 during the martial law era, were released after the civilian
 judiciary, which previously had been barred from reviewing
 their detention, found insufficient evidence to hold them.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Martial law courts were abolished with the lifting of martial
 law on December 30, 1985. During the martial law era, several
 independent-minded judges were forced out of office. But
 since the lifting of martial law no clear-cut cases of
 official pressure on the judiciary have been reported. The
 pace of justice, however, is slow due to the limited number of
 judicial benches, the heavy backlog of cases, and outdated
 court procedures.
 The civil judicial system provides for an open trial,
 cross-examination, representation by an attorney--with court
 appointment of an attorney for indigents in capital cases--
 and appeal of sentences. Judges at the trial level are drawn
 from the judicial services, and all judges can be removed for
 malfeasance by the executive. The Appellate Courts are
 staffed with judges from the provincial higher courts, and
 there have been efforts to improve the procedures and the
 availability of High Court benches in the provinces.
 The special Shariat (Islamic) Courts operate similarly to
 ordinary civilian courts. They try offenses under the Hadood
 Ordinances, which apply only in certain areas of law. Cases
 referred to the Shariat Courts are heard by judges from the
 civilian court system who usually employ ordinary criminal
 procedures, but both judges and attorneys must be familiar
 with Islamic law. Defendants in the Shariat Courts are
 entitled to bail and lawyers of their choice.
 In 1986 death sentences were handed down against four Ahmadi
 defendants convicted in 1985 in two controversial murder
 cases. As was the practice in many martial law court trials,
 rules of evidence and procedure were irregularly applied, and
 the defense was severely circumscribed. Lawyers for those
 convicted assert that in the Sukkur bombing case the conviction
 of the two defendants sentenced to death was invalid because
 their link to the deaths of the victims was not established.
 In the Sahiwal case, the defense lawyers aver that one
 defendant acted in self-defense against a mob, while the other
 was not present at the scene. Citing serious procedural
 
 
 1270
 PAKISTAN
 defects in the trials, lawyers in the two cases have appealed
 to President Zia, who is reviewing the cases.
 Prior to the lifting of martial law in 1985, the martial law
 courts hastily tried large numbers of cases in an effort to
 clear their dockets, and the Parliament passed a constitutional
 amendment which withdrew from the civilian judiciary the right
 to review the actions of martial law authorities and courts.
 Attorneys for persons sentenced by martial law courts have
 challenged this amendment, arguing that it conflicts with
 other constitutional guarantees of fundamental rights. The
 Supreme Court has not made a final ruling, but lower courts
 have decided that this amendment denies them jurisdiction.
 In October the Justice Minister announced that the Cabinet had
 under consideration legislation that would permit martial law
 sentences to be appealed. He did not elaborate the provisions
 of the prospective legislation, but noted that it would be
 presented in the National Assembly after approval by the
 Cabinet.
 The Federal Government has announced that no political
 prisoners are being held in the country, i.e., no prisoners
 are being held who have not been charged with criminal
 offenses. In September the Political Prisoners Relief and
 Release Committee (PPRRC) stated that there were 197 political
 prisoners in Pakistan, down from 237 at the beginning of the
 year. The difference between these two positions turns on the
 definition of what constitutes a political prisoner. The
 PPRRC, a human rights group affiliated with the opposition
 MRD, citing Pakistan law, defines a political prisoner as one
 who commits-an illegal act--but not an act defined as
 terrorism--for a political motive. All the prisoners listed
 by the PPRRC were arrested and convicted during the martial
 law period.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Decisions about occupation, education, place of residence, and
 family size are made without official interference. Although
 police must obtain a warrant before entering a private home,
 authorities frequently ignore such legal requirements in
 dealing with political opponents and suspected bandits,
 particularly in parts of Sind, where the Government in 1986
 engaged in several major antibandit campaigns.
 The Pakistan People's Party (PPP) has charged that security
 forces in Sind destroyed houses during the MRD agitation in
 August. The PPP asserts it has made a video tape which
 depicts the destruction in one such village. However, an
 independent human rights organization, which inspected the
 same village in October, interviewed villagers, and made its
 own video tape, concluded that the PPP allegations were
 fabricated.
 Pakistan traditionally has maintained a domestic intelligence
 service to monitor political activists, suspected terrorists,
 and foreign intelligence agents. Informed sources maintain
 that wiretapping is used against opposition politicians and
 that their mail is occasionally intercepted and opened. On
 some occasions, political opponents of the Government are
 questioned about their meetings with foreign diplomats.
 
 
 1271
 PAKISTAN
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 The Government owns and operates the radio and television
 stations and strictly controls the news they carry. A
 government-owned press trust controls four of the larger
 newspapers and one of the two national wire services. All are
 circumspect in their coverage of the news but the
 government-owned newspapers now cover the opposition. The
 other newspapers and magazines are privately owned.
 Continuing a trend begun in 1985, there is relatively free
 discussion of government policies and criticism of the
 Government, especially in the privately owned papers. In
 addition to more or less unfettered reporting of statements
 made by legislators, the private press extensively covers
 remarks critical of the Government made by opposition
 politicians. For instance, independent newspapers and
 magazines criticized a presidential order blocking a challenge
 by the parliamentary opposition to the Prime Minister's right
 to sit in Parliament. They also took issue with Prime Minister
 Junejo's actions before and during the August controversy,
 arising out of the Government's efforts to prevent the MRD
 parties from holding Independence Day rallies.
 In 1986 the National Assembly passed legislation repealing a
 portion of the Penal Code dealing with defamation. The
 section forbade the publishers of "books, newspapers, and
 newssheets" to print any information which might harm the
 reputation of any person, even if that information were true.
 A restrictive "press and publication ordinance," originally
 promulgated in 1963, is still in force, but the Junejo
 Government is committed to its repeal. Under the ordinance,
 official permission for establishing and operating a printing
 business may be denied or withdrawn if the authorities conclude
 that the publisher is likely to prejudice the glory of Islam,
 national integrity and security, friendly relations with
 foreign countries, public order, decency, or morality. The
 ordinance is so broad that the Government could stop
 publication of almost anything it deemed objectionable; it was
 most frequently applied in 1986 against radical sectarian
 weeklies charged with promoting religious hatred.
 Newspapers are cautious about questioning the actions of
 President Zia and, to a lesser extent, prominent religious
 leaders. Also, a long-ingrained caution compels them to tread
 lightly in reporting on national security issues, including
 the budget or the actions of the military.
 Academic freedom is not explicitly denied, but the authorities
 have immense powers, in view of the preponderance of state-run
 institutions of learning, to circumscribe the actions of those
 regarded as troublesome. In 1986 a professor at one university
 was removed for writing a paper alleged to be blasphemous, and
 other faculty members have resigned because of religious
 pressure.
 Another serious threat to academic freedom is the atmosphere
 of violence and intolerance among the student body. At most
 large universities, well-armed groups of students--spanning
 the political spectrum from the Islamic right through various
 ethnic persuasions to the radical left--clash frequently and
 
 
 .1272
 PAKISTAN
 are successful in intimidating other students and instructors
 on matters of language, syllabus, doctrine, and dress.
 Even though student unions are officially banned, student
 organizations are not. University authorities are powerless
 or hesitant to crack down, and educational institutions have
 been frequently closed because of student violence.
 Literary and creative works remained generally free of
 censorship in 1986, but authors and publishers tend to avoid
 controversial political themes. Obscene literature is subject
 to seizure, and government authorities frequently ban or
 confiscate indigenous books and magazines dealing with
 sensitive political topics, e.g., provincial separatism.
 Foreign publications critical of the Government occasionally
 are seized, and some have been banned. No effort was made by
 the Government in 1986 to restrict foreign journalists' access,
 including those who followed Benazir Bhutto's travels across
 Pakistan, or to jam foreign radio or television broadcasts.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Government authorities generally respected the right of
 peaceful assembly in 1986. Political leaders of all stripes
 were usually able to travel freely and address large rallies,
 often emphasizing antigovernment themes. However, there were
 exceptions to this policy in connection with the holding of
 meetings which the Government believed might result in
 violence.
 The labor movement is reawakening after the period of martial
 law, and unions covering the entire political spectrum have
 been permitted to exist; most union federations hold moderate
 views, and thus far labor unrest has been scant. Under laws
 going back to the premartial law period of the early 1970's,
 workers in individual factories remain legally free to form
 labor unions, negotiate wage and working conditions in most
 areas of the economy, and elect collective bargaining agents--
 although the law precludes industry-wide bargaining. Most
 unions are small, and labor organizers assert that Pakistan
 labor law-encourages the fragmentation of organized labor.
 Only about 7 percent of the labor force is unionized; most
 Pakistanis work in small, nonunion shops or in agriculture.
 Under Pakistan's labor law, nonunion workers can be signed to
 short-term contracts. Many labor law welfare provisions
 covering social security, retirement, and benefits do not
 apply to such employees. Pakistan unions complain that the
 widespread use of contract employees circumvents freedom of
 association by allowing employers to fire unionized labor in
 favor of easily intimidated nonunionized "contract employees."
 The issue has been referred to the International Labor
 Organization (ILO), and the Government is cooperating with the
 ILO investigation. Prime Minister Junejo's Pakistan Muslim
 League has pledged to amend labor laws to end or restrain the
 practice, but no legislation has yet been introduced.
 The right to strike was restored with the end of martial law.
 In 1986 there were occasional strikes, and little evidence of
 government interference with them. By law, a strike cannot be
 called until a labor dispute is submitted to arbitration, then
 to the labor court, and an "intent to strike" notice filed
 with the Labor Ministry. Labor leaders claim these
 requirements infringe upon the right to strike, but there is
 little indication that unions initiating strikes without
 
 
 1273
 PAKISTAN
 following this procedure have been treated harshly.
 Government employees and laborers in designated essential
 services are forbidden to organize and to strike.
 Theoretically, the act covers all employees in utilities,
 hospitals, firefighting, sanitation, and the police. In 1983
 it was extended to cover Pakistan International Airways (PIA),
 the nationalized airline, which has had a strong history of
 militant and highly political, antigovernment unionism.
 No mediation or arbitration procedure exists to cover workers
 excluded from unionization under the Essential Services Act.
 The Government proposes to remedy this by amending the act to
 empower the head of the National Industrial Relations Board to
 arbitrate disputes. In 1986 provincial government clerks, who
 are covered by the Act, engaged in a wildcat strike which
 resulted in government recognition of some striker demands.
 There was no retaliation against the strike leaders.
 Some unions in Pakistan historically have had strong links to
 political parties; the independence movement spawned parallel
 labor structures which successive political parties have sought
 to adopt or maintain. The PPP has a Labour Bureau and has
 expressed its intent to form a Peoples Labour Federation. The
 right-wing National Labour Federation is associated with the
 rightist/fundamentalist Islamic Jamaat-e-Islami.
 Pakistan's moderate labor federations are permitted to
 associate with the ILO, the International Confederation of
 Free Trade Unions, and counterparts in other countries.
 Extreme left-wing unions generally have had their contacts
 with outside bodies curtailed. In the past they have been
 prevented from associating with the World Federation of Trade
 Unions (WFTU) and their leaders have had their foreign travel
 restricted. In 1986, however, a Pakistan labor delegation was
 able to attend a WFTU function in East Berlin.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Pakistan is an Islamic Republic. Its 1973 Constitution
 requires all law to be consistent with "Islamic ideology."
 Under the Constitution, the president and prime minister must
 be Muslims. However, minority religious groups--Ahmadis,
 Hindus, Christians, and Parsis (Zoroastrians)--have held high
 office and are active in the political and social life of the
 country. They do not vote in Muslim constituencies, but rather
 must seek office and cast their ballots in at-large
 constituencies reserved for them in the National and Provincial
 Assemblies. (Ahmadis, disputing their minority status and
 claiming to be Muslims, have refused to exercise these
 options.) Each community is governed by its own codes in
 family and property matters, and members of minority groups
 may join any political party.
 Generally, minorities can practice their own religion openly,
 maintain links with their coreligionists in other countries,
 and travel for religious purposes. Foreign clergy may enter
 the country to serve congregations. Conversions are permitted,
 but the Government prohibits proselytizing among Muslims and
 has refused to renew the residence permits of some foreign
 missionaries who have ignored this ban. In October Parliament
 passed legislation making blaspheming the Prophet Muhammad a
 capital offense, but thus far no one has been brought to trial
 under this act. There were scattered acts of violence against
 Hindus and Christians, but these were not sanctioned by the
 Government.
 
 
 1274
 PAKISTAN
 The Ahmadi Sect, which considers itself Muslim despite
 theological divergences from traditional Islam, has
 historically been the object of popular prejudice and
 discrimination; anti-Ahmadi riots in 1953, in fact, helped
 spark the imposition of Pakistan's first martial law. In 1974
 the Zulfikar Ali Bhutto regime, with the support of all
 parties, sponsored a constitutional amendment declaring the
 Ahmadis a non-Muslim minority. In April 1984, the Government
 issued a follow-up ordinance which bans the Ahmadis from using
 Muslim terminology or proselytizing; violators can be subject
 to prosecution.
 Ahmadis assert that they are indeed Muslims, and many members
 of the sect were detained in 1986 for wearing badges bearing
 the Islamic profession of faith. Most were released, but
 several were tried, convicted,. and received prison sentences.
 Ahmadi places of worship, which may not legally be called
 mosques, were also the object of mob attack, with little or no
 action by local authorities to uphold the law. Ahmadis charge
 that police colluded in some attacks. In Sind, several Ahmadis
 were murdered by unknown assailants, and Ahmadi spokesmen
 assert that the Government has not made a real effort to
 apprehend the murderers. (The case of four Ahmadis under
 sentence of death is discussed in Section i.e.)
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Pakistanis generally have freedom of movement within the
 country. However, the Government occasionally bans individual
 political leaders from traveling to certain provinces for a
 specified time through use of an "externment" notice,
 preventing entry; in August, PPP leader Benazir Bhutto was
 prevented from going to Lahore for the planned Independence
 Day rally.
 Pakistanis are generally free also to travel abroad. However,
 travel to Israel and South Africa is prohibited, travel to the
 Soviet Union and Eastern Europe is restricted, and the
 passports of opposition party leaders occasionally limit
 travel to one or a few countries.
 Pakistanis must obtain a "no-objection" certificate--usually a
 check covering payment of taxes or other obligations--prior to
 departing the country. These are issued routinely, but
 occasionally opposition politicians have complained of undue
 delays. In November 1986, authorities refused a leader of the
 Sind Baluch Pukhtoon Front permission to leave the country.
 The right'of citizens to return to Pakistan is recognized.
 Nearly 3 million Afghans have fled to Pakistan as a result of
 the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan. The Government administers
 and supports over 300 Afghan refugee camps, and bears the
 inland transport cost of relief supplies provided by various
 donors. The movement and employment of Afghans in Pakistan
 generally is not restricted. Afghans may reside outside the
 refugee camps, but leaving the camps frequently results in a
 loss of government assistance.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 A martial law regime led by General Zia Ul-Haq governed
 Pakistan from July 1977 to December 30, 1985. Zia interpreted
 the results of a referendum held in December 1984 as an
 
 
 1275
 PAKISTAN
 endorsement of his rule and in March 1985 was sworn in for a
 5-year term as President. In February 1985, the Government
 held nonparty elections for a national and four provincial
 assemblies. Protesting the nonparty format, most of the
 opposition parties called for a boycott of the polls.
 Individual party members stood for election on a nonparty
 basis, however, and the voters ignored the boycott call. The
 turnout (53 percent for the National Assembly and 58 percent
 for the Provincial Assemblies) more than matched historic
 norms, and many observers concede that there was little fraud.
 In May 1985, Mohammad Khan Junejo was nominated Prime Minister
 by President Zia and confirmed by a vote of confidence in the
 National Assembly. He heads the Government and is assisted by
 a Cabinet composed of members of Parliament. Similarly, the
 provincial governments are headed by Chief Ministers, also
 drawn from the Pakistan Muslim League, which has majorities in
 all assemblies. They too are assisted by cabinets composed of
 their fellow legislators. Pakistan is a member of the
 International Parliamentary Union.
 Members of the legislative assemblies have immunity for
 actions and speech in those chambers but no general immunity.
 Two members were arrested in 1986; one for inciting to riot
 farmers resisting the destruction of opium fields, the other
 for possessing explosives. The second c-ase had political
 overtones. This delegate represented Karachi's Bihari refugee
 community and was demanding that the Government more swiftly
 repatriate Biharis still in Bangladesh and help them resettle
 in Pakistan. His arrest occurred during a period of
 anti-Bihari rioting.
 With the endof martial law, restrictions on the formation of
 parties were lifted. A majority of members in the National
 Assembly joined together to reestablish the Pakistan Muslim.
 League, and elected Prime Minister Junejo as. party chairman.
 Several religious parties have small representations in
 Parliament. The remaining members are independents.
 Underthe Political Parties Act amended by Parliament in 1986,
 members of the national and provincial assemblies who have
 designated a party affiliation cannot switch to another party
 without resigning their seat. This provision has been
 criticized as unconstitutional and is being challenged in
 court.
 Political parties may operate without registering with the
 Government, but they must register with the Election Commission
 in order to participate in elections. This includes making
 financial records available for scrutiny and holding internal
 party elections. Although they have submitted their accounts,
 the PPP and a number of the other extraparliamentary opposition
 parties have declined to register, asserting that these
 provisions could be manipulated to suppress or impair their
 parties.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 Domestic human rights organizations, including those affiliated
 with opposition parties, operate free of official harassment,
 and their reports receive extensive coverage in the privately
 owned press. The press has also satirized police brutality,
 including alleged maltreatment of opposition politicians.
 
 
 1276
 PAKISTAN
 "Pakistan has allowed visits by individuals affiliated with
 Amnesty International, the Lawyers Committee for Human Rights,
 .Freedom House, and other international human rights
 organizations, but has not facilitated their investigations
 nor responded to critical reports they have issued.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 Twenty seats in the National Assembly are reserved for women,
 and two women were elected to nonreserved seats in 1985 in
 their own right. Islamic traditionalists, however, still
 exert a powerful influence on Pakistan social norms. It is
 accepted practice to assign women a subordinate role in terms
 of civil, political, and individual rights. Many Pakistanis
 interpret the Koran's injunctions on modesty to mean that
 women should remain either at home or behind the veil.
 These attitudes have contributed to an officially reported
 adult female literacy rate of only 16 percent, compared to 36
 percent for males (1985 estimates, which are generally regarded
 as high by informed observers). The primary school enrollment
 ratio was only 33 percent for girls as compared to 64 percent
 for boys. The ratio of men to women in secondary educational
 institutions, according to 1983 Pakistan statistics, was better
 than five to one. Eight times as many men as women work
 outside the home, and those women who do work or attend school
 usually do so in separate facilities.
 Urban women are represented in the universities, but
 postgraduate employment opportunities remain largely limited
 to teaching, medical services, and the law, with a small number
 of women entering the  ommercial and public sector. The
 Government's policy of "Islamization" has reversed some of the
 social and legal gains made by women in past years. Women may
 not participate in international athletic competition, and, as
 part of a drive to promote wearing traditional garb by both
 men and women, the Government determines appropriate dress for
 women employees appearing in public on television, in the print
 media, and as airline stewardesses.
 While several members of minorities are prominent within the
 National Assembly or public life, reports of discrimination
 against minority groups in the areas of employment and
 education appear well founded. In 1986 there were scattered
 acts of mob violence against Ahmadis, Hindus, and Christians.
 These were not sanctioned by government authorities, which
 acted to suppress the outbursts and punish the perpetrators.
 Officially designated as "non-Muslims," Ahmadis are subject to
 widespread discrimination and harassment and have limited
 chances for advancement in the public sector. Reportedly,
 government offices have distributed circulars requesting the
 names of Ahmadi employees, and some persons have been expelled
 from the military because of their membership in the sect.
 Ahmadi youth complain of increasing difficulty in gaining
 admittance to good colleges. (See also Section 2.c.)
 An element in all cases of discrimination is the fact that
 socially prominent Pakistanis suffer less at the hands of
 officialdom than those less well-off, partly because of their
 ability to return favors or offer inducements to appropriate
 civil servants and partly because of the general deference
 still accorded social "betters" in Pakistan society. Although
 the original caste distinctions common to South Asian societies
 
 
 -1277
 PAKISTAN
 have no legally binding force, clan affiliations and ethnic
 identities, which in some ways parallel the old caste system,
 still help or hinder those seeking education, employment,
 justice, and public office.
 CONDITIONS OF LABOR
 Pakistan law sets minimum wages for skilled and unskilled
 labor. Comprehensive health and safety legislation provides
 for inspection of the workplace to insure compliance with
 health, safety, and workmen's compensation regulations.
 Although not widely observed, the law requires that no adult
 shall work more than 9 hours without payment of overtime, and
 that no worker shall work more than 10 hours overtime per week.
 Child labor is widespread in Pakistan, despite laws stating
 that the employment of children under the age of 15 is illegal,
 and that those between 15 and 17 may not work more than 5 hours
 per day. The Government has had institutions in place to
 administer these labor regulations since independence.
 Nevertheless, lack of resources, indifference, corruption, and
 illiteracy hamper the application of labor legislation.
 Noncompliance is widespread, and punishments for infractions
 are rarely meted out.
 
 
 1278
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OP DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: PAKISTAN
 1984     1985     1986
 ----------i--i--l----ll-i---l---l----------------il-i--i--
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL...       307.4    339.2    266.8
 LOANS ..............  .... 122.5   139.1     71.0
 GRANTS ................. 184.9     200.1    195.8
 A.AID ....................   225.0    250.0    263.4
 LOANS ..............       75.0     83.0     71.0
 GRANTS ..............     150.0    167.0    192.4
 (SEC.SUPP.ASSIST.) ..       225.0    200.0    239.3
 B.FOOD FOR PEACE .......       79.0     86.2      0.0
 LOANS ..............    ... 47.5    56.1      0.0
 GRANTS ................   31.5     30.1      0.0
 TITLE  I-T3TAL ..........   .  47.5     56.1      0.0
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS .....       47.5     56.1      0.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR .....        0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE Il-TOTAL .........       31.5     30.1      0.0
 E.RELIEF.EC.DEV & WFP.        31.5     30.1      0.0
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY .....        0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST,..         3.4      3.0      3.4
 .LOANS .................    0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............        3.4      3.0      3.4
 PEA:E CORPS.....         0.0      0.0      0.0
 NARCOTICS ........        3.4      3.0      3.4
 OTHER ..............      0.0      0.0      0.0
 II.NIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL,,.       300.8    326.0    311.9
 LOANS ..............  .... 300.0   325.0    311.0
 GRANTS ................    0.8      1.0      0.9
 A.MAP GRANTS                   0.0      0.0      0.0
 3.CREDIT FINANCIIG..       300.0    325.0    311.0
 C.INTL MILEOTRN$ ....        0.8      1.0      0.9
 O.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK...         0.0      0.0      0.0
 !.OTHER  GRANTS ........       0.0      0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. & MIL...       608.2    665.2    578.7
 LOANS ..............  .... 422.5   464.1    382.0
 GRANTS .............      185.7    201.1    196.7
 OTIER US LOANS ..........66.9            0.0      0.0
 EK-IM BANK LOANS.......        66.9      0.0      0.0
 ALL OTHER .................    0.0      0.0      0.0
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1984     1985     1986     1946-86
 TOTAL ........   656.0   1101.2   1267,1   7742.3
 IBRO             131.5    433.0    473.0   2043.3
 IFC               25.3     39.9      7.2    248.7
 IOA              174.5    245.3    177.2   2400..0
 lOB                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 A03              312.1    375.0    609.7   2755.3
 AFOB               0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 UNDP              12.6      8.0      0.0    149.9
 OT4ER-UN           0.0      0.0      0.0    145.1
 EEC                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 
 
 1279
