Pakistan
Pakistan had a turbulent year in 2012, with the judicial ouster of Prime Minister
Yusuf Raza Gilani, attacks on civilians by militant groups, growing electricity
shortages, rising food and fuel prices, and continuing political dominance of the
military, which operates with almost complete impunity. Religious minorities
continued to face insecurity and persecution as the government failed to provide
protection to those threatened or to hold extremists accountable. Islamist
militant groups continued to target and kill Shia Muslims—particularly from the
Hazara community—with impunity. In September, the southwestern province of
Balochistan experienced massive flooding for the third year running, displacing
some 700,000 people.
Ongoing rights concerns included the breakdown of law enforcement in the face
of terror attacks, continuing abuses across Balochistan, ongoing torture and illtreatment
of criminal suspects, and unresolved enforced disappearances of terrorism
suspects and opponents of the military. Abuses by Pakistani police,
including extrajudicial killings, also continued to be reported throughout the
country in 2012.
Relations between Pakistan and the United States —Pakistan’s most significant
ally and its largest donor of development and military aid—remained tense for
much of the year due to the “Salala Attack” in November 2011, in which US
forces killed 24 Pakistani soldiers during a military operation near the Afghan
border.
Sectarian Attacks
In 2012, at least 325 members of the Shia Muslim population were killed in targeted
attacks that took place across Pakistan. In Balochistan province, over 100
were killed, most of them from the Hazara community. On August 16, gunmen
ambushed four buses passing through the Babusar Top area of Mansehra district
in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa province. The attackers forced all the passengers to
disembark, checked their national identity cards, and summarily executed 22
travelers whom they identified as belonging to the Shia community. A
spokesman for the Tehrik-e-Taliban Pakistan, the Pakistani Taliban, claimed responsibility. On August 30, gunmen shot dead Zulfiqar Naqvi, a Shia judge, in
Quetta, Balochistan’s capital. In two separate attacks on September 1, 2012,
gunmen attacked and killed eight Hazara Shia in Quetta.
Sunni militant groups, including those with known links to the Pakistani military,
its intelligence agencies, and affiliated paramilitaries—such as the ostensibly
banned Lashkar-e Jhangvi—operated with widespread impunity across
Pakistan, as law enforcement officials effectively turned a blind eye to attacks.
Students and teachers were regularly attacked by militant groups. On October 9,
2012, gunmen shot Malala Yousafzai, a 15-year-old student and outspoken
advocate for children’s right to education, in the head and neck leaving her in
critical condition. The Tehreek-e-Taliban Pakistan claimed responsibility for the
attack in the Swat Valley. The attack on Yousafzai garnered condemnation from
across the political spectrum in Pakistan. Militant Islamist groups also attacked
more than 100 schools, and rebuilding is slow.
Religious Minorities and Women
Abuses under the country’s abusive blasphemy law continued as dozens were
charged in 2012 and at least 16 people remained on death row for blasphemy,
while another 20 served life sentences. Aasia Bibi, a Christian from Punjab
province, who in 2010 became the first woman in the country’s history to be
sentenced to death for blasphemy, continued to languish in prison. In July 2012,
police arrested a man who appeared to suffer from a mental disability for
allegedly burning the Quran. A mob organized by local clerics demanded that
the man be handed to them, attacked the police station, pulled the victim out,
and burned him alive.
On August 17, Islamabad police took into custody Rimsha Masih, a 14-year-old
Christian girl from a poor Islamabad suburb with a “significantly lower mental
age,” who was accused of burning pages filled with Quranic passages. Police
had to beat back a mob demanding that it be handed the girl so that it could kill
her. Threats against the local Christian community forced some 400 families to
flee their homes. But Islamist groups who support the blasphemy law took a significantly
different position, demanding a full investigation. The accuser, local cleric Khalid Chishti, was himself arrested for fabricating evidence in order to rid
the neighbourhood of Christians. On September 23, police officials stated they
had found no evidence against Rimsha Masih, who was released and given
state protection at an undisclosed location.
Members of the Ahmadi religious community continued to be a major target for
blasphemy prosecutions and subjected to specific anti-Ahmadi laws across
Pakistan. They faced increasing social discrimination as militant groups used
provisions of the law to prevent Ahmadis from “posing as Muslims,” forced the
demolition of Ahmadi mosques in Lahore, barred Ahmadis from using their
mosques in Rawalpindi, and vandalized Ahmadi graves across Punjab province.
In most instances, Punjab provincial officials supported militants’ demands
instead of protecting Ahmadis and their mosques and graveyards.
Violence against women and girls—including rape, “honor” killings, acid
attacks, domestic violence, and forced marriage—remained a serious problem.
Intimidation and threats against women and girls out in public increased in
major cities in 2012.
Freedom of Expression
At least eight journalists were killed in Pakistan during the year, including four
in May alone. On May 9 and 10 respectively, Tariq Kamal and Aurangzeb Tunio
were killed. On May 18, the bullet-riddled body of Express News correspondent
Razzaq Gul was found dumped in a deserted area near Turbat in Balochistan
province. Security agencies are suspected of involvement in his killing. On May
28, Abdul Qadir Hajizai was shot dead in Balochistan by armed men on a motorbike.
The Baloch Liberation Front reportedly claimed responsibility for his
killing. No one was held accountable in any of these cases.
A climate of fear impeded media coverage of the state security forces and militant
groups. Journalists rarely reported on human rights abuses by the military
in counterterrorism operations, and the Taliban and other armed groups regularly
threatened media outlets over their coverage.
In June, gunmen shot at the building of Aaj TV, a private Urdu-language news
channel, wounding two guards. The Pakistani Taliban claimed responsibility and threatened such attacks would continue if media outlets did not reflect the
Taliban’s priorities and positions in coverage. However, as has been the case
since the return to civilian rule in 2008, journalists vocally critical of the government
experienced less interference from elected officials than in previous years.
Judicial Activism and Independence
Pakistan’s judiciary continued to assert its independence from the government
in 2012. In December 2011, the judiciary began controversial hearings into the
so-called “Memogate” scandal investigating Husain Haqqani, Pakistan’s former
ambassador to the US on charges that he attempted to conspire against
Pakistan’s military in collusion with the US. The court notably failed to investigate
allegations from the same source that the head of the country’s dreaded
Inter-Services Intelligence (ISI) had conspired to oust the elected government.
In June, the Supreme Court controversially fired Prime Minister Yusuf Raza Gilani
for refusing to sign a letter to Switzerland asking for an investigation into corruption
allegations against President Asif Zardari.
Despite the adoption of a National Judicial Policy in 2009, access to justice
remained abysmal and courts remained rife with corruption and incompetence.
Case backlogs remain huge at all levels. The judiciary’s use of suo motu proceedings—
acting on its own motions—was considered so excessive that the
International Commission of Jurists raised concerns about it.
While the Supreme Court was active in raising the issue of government abuses
in Balochistan, no high-level military officials were held accountable for them.
As has been the case since Pakistan’s independent judiciary was restored to
office in 2009, Chief Justice Iftikhar Chaudhry and the provincial high courts
muzzled media criticism of the judiciary in 2012 through threats of contempt of
court proceedings. In October, both the Lahore and Islamabad high courts effectively
barred media from criticizing the judiciary or giving airtime to critics in the
aftermath of a multi-million dollar corruption scandal involving Arsalan Iftikhar,
the son of the Supreme Court chief justice.
Balochistan
The human rights crisis continued to worsen in the mineral-rich province of
Balochistan. Human Rights Watch recorded continued enforced disappearances
and killings of suspected Baloch militants and opposition activists by the military,
intelligence agencies, and the paramilitary Frontier Corps. Baloch nationalists
and other militant groups also stepped up attacks on non-Baloch civilians.
Pakistan’s military continued to publicly resist government reconciliation efforts
and attempts to locate ethnic Baloch who had been subject to “disappearances.”
Pakistan’s government appeared powerless to rein in the military’s
abuses. As a result, large numbers of Hazara community members sought asylum
abroad.
Militant Attacks and Counterterrorism
Suicide bombings, armed attacks, and killings by the Taliban, al Qaeda, and
their affiliates continued in 2012, targeting politicians, journalists, religious
minorities, and government security personnel. Many of these attacks were
claimed by groups such as the Haqqani network, the Lashkar-e-Jhangvi, and
other al Qaeda affiliates.
Security forces routinely violated basic rights in the course of counterterrorism
operations. Suspects were frequently detained without charge or were convicted
without a fair trial. Thousands of suspected members of al Qaeda, the Taliban,
and other armed groups—who were rounded up in a nationwide crackdown that
began in 2009 in Swat and the Federally Administered Tribal Areas—remained in
illegal military detention; few were prosecuted or produced before the courts.
The army continued to deny lawyers, relatives, independent monitors, and
humanitarian agency staff access to persons detained during military operations.
Terrorism suspects, particularly in the Swat Valley, reportedly died inexplicably
of “natural causes.” However, lack of access to the detainees made independent
verification of the cause of death impossible.
Aerial drone strikes by the US on suspected members of al Qaeda and the
Taliban in northern Pakistan continued in 2012, with some 44 strikes taking
place through early November. As in previous years, these strikes were often accompanied by claims from Pakistanis of large numbers of civilian casualties,
although lack of access to the conflict areas largely prevented independent verification.
Human Rights Defenders
Community-based human rights activists faced increased threats. In June, Asma
Jahangir, the country’s most prominent human rights defender, alleged that she
had discovered that an assassination attempt was being planned against her
from “the highest levels of the security establishment.” In the preceding
months, Jahangir had been at odds with the Pakistani military in a series of
high-profile standoffs, including over the military’s policies in Balochistan and
elsewhere.
Key International Actors
The US remained the largest donor of development and military aid to Pakistan,
but relations remained abysmal through much of 2012. The US rejected apologizing
for the “Salala Attack,” prompting Pakistan to ban the movement of NATO
supplies to Afghanistan through Pakistan. The routes were only reopened in July
after the US offered a formulation of regret that Pakistan found acceptable.
Major areas of bilateral tension remained, particularly Pakistan’s alleged persistent
support for the Haqqani network, a militant group that US officials
accused of targeting US troops in Afghanistan. In September, the US declared
the Haqqani network a terrorist body.
Pakistan and China continued to deepen extensive economic and political ties.
Historically tense relations between Pakistan and nuclear rival India showed
marked improvement in 2012. In September, the two countries signed landmark
trade and travel agreements.
The United Nations Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances
(WGEID) visited Pakistan in September and reported in preliminary findings that
there is “acknowledgment that enforced disappearances have occurred and still
occur in the country.”
