PAKISTAN
The primary message of this year's generally accurate report on Pakistan appears in the introduction, which states that the "Bhutto Government has made progress in some aspects of human rights, although problem areas remain." The report's cautious approach — recognizing that the transition from the government of General Zia-ul-Haq to that of Benazir Bhutto did not signify the end of the country's serious human rights problems -- is welcome. However, the report contains significant understatements and omissions. And it does not recognize that since an initial flurry of reformist measures adopted shortly after taking office, the Bhutto government has taken few steps to address human rights concerns.
The report conclusively states that under the Bhutto government "the review of martial law cases and the release of political prisoners has been largely completed." This point is widely debated in Pakistan, in part because it is often difficult to differentiate between martial law detainees who are political prisoners and those held for criminal reasons. The report's statement that the estimates of total martial law prisoners still in detention varied from 15 to 200 reflects the range of opinion, but the estimates of human rights monitors in Pakistan and abroad is at the higher end. (In a May 1990 report. Amnesty International placed the number of martial law convicts at more than 500.)
The report should have been more forthright in acknowledging the concerns of human rights monitors and opposition parties that the Bhutto government generally released only those prisoners who were loyal to the ruling Pakistan People's Party (PPP), while hundreds of non-PPP activists arrested prior to 1989 -- many sentenced by special military courts for the same offenses as the PPP supporters -- remain in prison. There are also believed to be some martial law prisoners from the PPP still in detention.
While the reporting on police abuses has improved from past reports, the State Department still fails to attribute responsibility for the actions of police to the government, whether federal or provincial. The police have used excessive force in a number of situations and have demonstrated partisan behavior during ethnic clashes. Among the incidents the report would have done well to cite are the following: In November, a peaceful procession of teachers in Muzaffarabad was prevented from proceeding by police, who then tear-gassed and baton-charged the crowd. In Lahore in January, the
162
Pakistan
police used force to break up a peaceful demonstration by female students who were protesting Punjab's discriminatory medical school admissions policy. The discussion of the demonstration in Islamabad in February protesting The Satanic Verses fails to note that the police were widely held responsible for initiating the violence. A judicial inquiry called by the federal government had not released its findings by the end of the year. Nor is there mention of claims repeatedly made by the Mohajir Qaumi Movement (MQM) that the PPP launched a "harassment campaign" against members of the MQM after the MQM broke a 10-month political alliance with Prime Minister Bhutto and supported the opposition's no-confidence motion. PPP members have made similar charges of harassment against the Punjab provincial government, controlled by the Islamic Democratic Alliance.
The introduction to the report states that the "military has continued to speak out in support of Pakistan's emerging democracy," neglecting to add that the military remains a major player in Pakistani politics. Implicitly recognizing this, the report later notes that several domestic intelligence services still monitor political activists. The very fact that military pronouncements in support of democracy and on other issues receive considerable media coverage is evidence of the continued impact of the military on political matters, including human rights.
The section on trials contains significant omissions. It should have noted that judicial independence was sharply undermined during the Zia years — for instance, all judges had to swear loyalty to the martial law government — and that the restoration of the judiciary's credibility remains a matter of concern. There is a good description of the procedures followed by the "speedy trial" courts, but as in past years the State Department is unwilling to criticize these courts, which consistently violate due process rights. The report presents the views of both the government and critics of these courts and treats these views as if they were equally valid.
Also omitted are a number of ongoing problems facing the criminal justice system. Magistrates and police under pressure to achieve a high number and percentage of convictions have reportedly persuaded persons in custody to plead guilty without informing them of the consequences. Bail in many cases is no longer given as a matter of right although it is provided by law. Police routinely ignore legal requirements in certain types of cases. For example, the Hudood Ordinances require that to file a charge of zina (extra-marital sexual relations), there be four witnesses. But according to a Pakistani
163
Pakistan
human rights group, there are no eyewitnesses in 90% of the zina cases prosecuted. Also, Section 54 of the Criminal Court Procedure permits police to lock up any citizen for 24 hours for investigative purposes; in practice, once someone is arrested, he or she can remain detained for months.
In the section on freedom of speech and press, there is no mention of the detention of Iqbal Khawja, a reporter for Dawn, for allegedly misquoting the Sindh chief minister about a controversial dam project. Nor is there a reference to the government's refusal to issue a new visa to Christina Lamb, a reporter for the Financial Times, for reporting an alleged coup attempt against the government. In Sukkur, actors were arrested on two occasions for performing in a play critical of the military.
The discussion of discrimination against women only skims the surface of the numerous incidents involving discrimination against and abuse of women, and does not provide the State Department's own view of these issues. The report should have noted the failure of the government to introduce legislation that would repeal or amend the Hudood Ordinances or to take concrete steps towards improving the situation of women prisoners. Nor was there mention of continuing discrimination against women who apply to professional colleges.
While the report presents accurate accounts of the most serious instances of violence against the Ahmadiya community in 1989, it ignores public statements by government officials that served to fuel such violence. The State Department should have reported that the government has not disavowed anti-Ahmadiya statements by the Minister for Religious and Minority Affairs, Bahadur Khan, and other government officials in the press and on state radio.
Although discussed in the Bangladesh report, the section on discrimination should have mentioned the Biharis, an ethnic minority in Bangladesh who have sought to immigrate to Pakistan. Originally from the Indian state of Bihar, the Biharis migrated to East Pakistan in 1947; since the 1971 war they have languished in refugee camps in Bangladesh, seeking assistance to go to Pakistan. When Prime Minister Bhutto took office, she raised the issue of repatriation of the Biharis. However, the issue was dropped under pressure from some Sindhi nationalist groups who oppose repatriation on the grounds thatthe influx of a large group of non-Sindhis to Sindh would be at the expense of the Sindhi population.
164
