 PAKISTAN
 Throughout its three decades of independence, Pakistan has
 been preoccupied with a search for its national identity,
 and Pakistanis only rarely have enjoyed the full exercise
 of basic civil and political rights. The social, political,
 economic and regional differences which characterize
 Pakistan's diverse society have led frequently to in-
 stability and associated deterioration in the human rights
 environment. As a result, Pakistan has been governed by
 authoritarian or martial law regimes for about twenty of
 its thirty-three years.
 Pakistan's third extended experience with martial law began
 with the ouster of former Prime Minister Bhutto by the army
 led by Chief of Staff General Mohammed Zia-ul-Haq in July
 1977. The Martial Law Administration (MLA) -- with General
 Zia now serving as President and Chief Martial Law Adminis-
 trator as well as Chief of the Army staff -- continued during
 1980 with alternating periods of increased restrictions on
 political activities and relatively greater liberalization.
 At the end of 1980, Pakistan's 1973 constitution remains in
 effect but with significant portions dealing with civil and
 political rights suspended or so amended as to deny rights
 previously guaranteed. No general elections have been
 scheduled, political parties remain "dissolved," censorship
 (of domestic news in particular) is heavy, and the juris-
 diction of the civilian judiciary has been further
 curtailed.
 Pakistani society is Islamic and traditional, largely rural
 and poor. Development is slow-paced and often related only
 indirectly to basic human needs. The government's current
 reform efforts are aimed at making Pakistani laws and
 customs consistent with Islamic precepts. Some innovations,
 such as distribution of compulsory "Zakat" (a tax levied on
 savings accounts), are claimed to be directly beneficial to
 the poor.
 Pakistan is providing generous humanitarian assistance to
 over one million Afghan refugees who have fled the Soviet
 occupation of their homeland. The presence of this large
 and growing number of displaced persons, largely concen-
 trated in Pakistan's Northwest Frontier Province and in
 Baluchistan, creates a serious economic burden on a
 country as poor as    Pakistan. It also contributes to
 social tensions resulting from competition with the local
 population for scarce resources. Pakistan's own large
 contribution to the relief effort is supplemented by an
 international program equivalent to $100 million in 1980
 under the auspices of the United Nations High Commissioner
 for Refugees.
 President Zia indicated in late September that there have
 been over 200 violations of Pakistani air space from Afghan-
 istan since the Soviet invasion of that country. Three
 armed attacks killed two Pakistan soldiers and wounded
 three civilians. Pakistan also is concerned that agents of
 the Kabul regime may be seeking to infiltrate the various
 
 
 1070
 Afghan resistance groups which have organized themselves in
 Pakistan, making possible. acts of sabotage
 and subversion.
 Restrictions on dissent and individual freedoms have grown
 during the past year, while citizens' rights have diminished.
 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, including Freedom
 from
 a. Torture
 The 1973 constitution bans torture. During 1980, there have
 been five alleged cases in which prisoners have died as a
 result of rough treatment and brutality, particularly beat-
 ings, while in custody of police or military authorities.
 In two of the more prominent cases, the government ordered
 immediate investigations. One of these cases involved a
 merchant from the town of Quetta, who reportedly died as a
 result of injuries received while being taken to a local
 police station. Four policemen were arrested and jailed as
 a result of the incident, but the resolution of their cases is
 not known.
 In another case, a student leader from Sind Province allegedly
 died from torture while being interrogated by military
 authorities. No family member was present at the post mortem
 which concluded that the student had died of natural causes.
 The family's request for an independent post mortem was
 denied.
 In one case, in which a former prisoner, after his release
 from custody, claimed he had been tortured and is suing for
 damages. There may have been other cases not resulting in
 death which did not gain sufficient notoriety to become
 publicly known.
 b. Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment
 President Zia and the Pakistan government have endorsed the
 establishment of punishments as codified under the Sharia,
 the traditional Islamic code. Floggings of offenders have
 been ordered, but are carried out infrequently in public.
 In the key Punjab Province floggings have decreased
 considerably. The few announced sentences of amputation
 have not been carried out.
 There are three classes of facilities for prisoners: "A",
 "B", and "C". "C" is designated for ordinary criminals and
 prisoners. Depending on means and social/political status,
 a prisoner may be given improved treatment, including less
 crowded cells and better food. Only a few of the most
 prominent individuals receive "A" class accommodations.
 c. Disappearances
 Given the press censorship which exists in Pakistan,
 arrests frequently are not reported, particularly if they
 
 
 1071
 involve individuals who are not socially or politically
 prominent. However, there are no known reports during 1980
 that individuals have "disappeared" as a result of actions
 taken by security authorities.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest and Imprisonment
 Since independence -- and before -- Pakistan has had legisla-
 tion authorizing preventive detention. Martial Law Order
 No. 12 of July 1979 authorizes limited detention of persons
 who might act in a manner "prejudicial" to the regime.
 Under this authority, there has been a substantial number
 of detentions during the year (without charge or trial) of
 various political figures. Often arrested for expressing
 anti-regime sentiments in public, including speaking at
 private receptions, most of those detained are held for
 relatively short periods of time, ranging from a few days
 to a few weeks. Based on available data, it is reliably
 estimated that there are at least 200 persons now incar-
 cerated solely for broadly defined political reasons.
 A few of these are in the Punjab or the Northwest Frontier
 Provinces, but most are being held in the Sind Province.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 There are three judicial systems currently operating in
 Pakistan: a civilian judiciary based on Anglo-Saxon Law,
 Shariat benches operating under Islamic laws and military
 tribunals. In addition, the former Attorney General, Yahya
 Bakhtiar, is being tried by a "special court" under a law
 specifically created for this case, on charges that he
 rigged the 1977 elections.
 In May 1980, the jurisdiction of the civilian judiciary was
 further eroded when a martial law decree denied the high
 courts power to review decisions of military tribunals and
 actions of the martial law authorities. The provincial high
 courts are divided in their views as to whether this action
 by the central government was within its authority. The
 Supreme Court has yet to declare itself on the issue.
 Primarily at stake are writs based on constitutional issues.
 Military courts are authorized to try virtually every
 criminal case in Pakistan. The right of counsel is a
 routine part of proceedings at both general and special
 courts martial although there are reports that defense
 counsels have on occasion been barred. Defendants are not
 always accorded privacy to consult with their counsel.
 There appear to be differences from province to province in
 the current operations of the martial law courts. In the
 Punjab, for example, they have become relatively inactive;
 special military tribunals have virtually ceased to function
 and most cases are being tried in civil courts. In Sind,
 however, both the special courts and summary military
 tribunals continue to be active, alongside a civil court
 system.
 
 
 1072
 f. Invasion of the Home
 Police are required to obtain a warrant before entering a
 residence, and they generally respect the inviolability
 of the home.
 2. Government Policies Relating to the Fulfillment of Such
 Vital Needs as Food, Shelter, Health Care and Education
 Pakistan ranks among the world's poorer countries with a
 per capita GNP of $230 annually, a literacy rate of 21
 percent, a high infant mortality rate, considerable under-
 employment, and relatively low standards in education and
 social welfare. Pakistan has a population growth rate of 3.0
 percent, one of the highest in the developing world.
 While the government attempts to meet the basic human
 needs, budgetary resources are insufficient to cover the
 normal range of social services. There also are substantial
 disparities in living conditions experienced in urban
 areas as opposed to those of the countryside, where most of
 Pakistan's 84 million people live. A number of foreign-
 supported projects for housing, .electrification, education
 and health in rural areas are underway.
 There has been a recent upturn in the economy. Two good
 wheat crops have resulted in more abundant food supplies,
 but there is a lack of variety in daily diets and protein
 consumption is inadequate.
 Pakistan's traditional society -- largely rural -- resists
 change and the government's most determined efforts produce
 improvements only slowly. The government, in 1980, increased
 the budgetary share alloted to health, housing and education
 to about four percent of the regular budget. -(Additionally
 about nine percent of the federal annual development plan
 is devoted to outlays in the social sector).
 Pakistan's constitution obliges the state to provide employ-
 ment -- with humane working conditions -- for all citizens.
 But in practice, Pakistan's labor force is underemployed
 and often works in substandard environments. Pakistan is
 a labor surplus country and tens of thousands of Pakistani
 workers have migrated to the Middle East and Persian Gulf.
 This migration has raised wage rates in some domestic
 trades, especially construction. Also, it has created
 remittances to dependent family members who have been able
 to increase their standard of living. Remittances probably
 will exceed $2 billion this year, with some additional
 funds entering the country through unofficial channels.
 The government lacks sufficient resources to mount an
 adequate housing program capable of meeting a growing demand
 and has a deficit of over one million housing units in urban
 
 
 1073
 areas with, perhaps, three times as many units needed
 in rural areas. This serious housing shortage is made
 acute by shortages of both manpower and materials,
 especially cement, and rapidly expanding costs in the
 construction industry.
 The government lately has encouraged greater private sector
 involvement in development. However, private investors,
 mindful of the policies of the previous government, remain
 fearful of nationalization and are reluctant to commit
 themselves to projects which require amortization over
 several years. The government, on the other hand, recently
 has considered divestiture (partially or wholly) of
 nationalized enterprises, principally those engaged in
 processing agricultural products.
 3.   Respect for Civil and Political Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech, Press, Religion and Assembly
 The Martial Law Administration's tolerance of dissent has
 varied since it come to power in mid-1977. Limitations on
 political activities and expression which were instituted
 in the first year of the Zia government were liberalized
 somewhat in 1978 and in the months immediately preceding the
 elections scheduled for November 1979. However, when
 general elections were postponed on October 16, 1979, strict
 censorship was reintroduced and several opposition newspapers
 were closed. Amnesty International reported at least 300
 political arrests at the time; more than 100 of these were
 released by the end of 1979 and others in this group were
 freed in 1980. There have, however, been subsequent political
 arrests--and releases. During 1980, there were two periods
 (May and August) of greater restrictions on political
 activities, apparently related to government concerns that
 some opposition politicians had exceeded permissable bounds
 of criticism. Most of those arrested were released after
 short periods. Asghar Khan, head of one opposition party,
 Tehrik-I-Istiqlal, is a notable exception. He remained under
 detention in late 1980 as did the Pakistan Peoples Party's
 Sami Munir and two other party members who were sentenced to
 imprisonment at hard labor for statements uttered at a
 private gathering.
 Extensive censorship continues, particularly on domestic
 events, although criticial news items occasionally do
 appear. Besides a range of registration requirements, the
 MLA has appointed local censors who review all publications.
 Foreign publications come into the country more or less
 freely but are read by only a small percentage of the
 public. A much larger portion of the public listens to
 foreign radio broadcasts which frequently cover --
 critically -- domestic developments not reported in the
 
 
 1074
 Pakistani press. Although political parties are illegal,
 reporting on party or individual politician's activities is
 common.
 While criticism of the government bureaucracy is permitted,
 articles which defame the MLA or the Chief Martial Law
 Administrator, General Zia, are prohibited. Local bodies --
 popularly elected on a non-party basis -- frequently do
 criticize the performance of the bureaucracy in localities
 and, occasionally, the newspapers report such criticism.
 Censorship has, however, instilled self-restraint on the
 part of reporters and editors who do not wish to risk jail
 or shutdown of their publications or punitive restrictions.
 One well-known Pakistani journalist,a correspondent for
 the Far Eastern Economic Review, was sentenced to a
 year's hard labor on November 29, 1979. The government
 had accused him of violating martial law regulations
 prohibiting articles -- such as those he wrote on Baluch-
 istan province -- which it claimed promoted hatred between
 different provinces or groups in Pakistan and disaffection
 from the MLA. He was released in March 1980 after several
 interested governments and international organizations
 expressed concern. He has left the country.
 Pakistani society traditionally assigns to women a sub-
 ordinate role. The All-Pakistan Women's Federation
 represents women but has little real influence with the
 government. Seats have been reserved for women in the local
 and municipal councils first elected in 1979. At year's end,
 a corrtroversy- over the protection of women's rights in
 divorce and family matters was still alive. The law ministry
 determimed that the current relevant ordinance, which
 provides some protection to wives from unilateral divorce
 actions by their husbands, violated Islamic precepts.
 Minority religious groups and their adherents are denied
 certain rights enjoyed by the majority Muslims, but were
 allowed to participate in the 1979 local elections, in which
 certain seats were reserved for them. Christians, Parsis,
 Hindus and others including followers of the Ahmadiya sect,
 are considered.to be minorities whose members cannot be
 elected as President or Prime Minister. (Although the
 Ahmadiyas consider themselves Muslims, the government does
 mot, because they are unable torcertify they believe Mohammed
 was the last prophet.)
 Restrictions exist on the right of assembly, although
 politicians are permitted to meet privately. Two major
 demonstrations by Pakistani lawyers in June (Lahore) and
 August (Karachi) to protest constitutional changes by the
 martial law regime were broken up by police, although the
 lawyers had earlier been permitted to meet in conventions.
 About 85 lawyers were taken into custody in Lahore but were
 promptly released.
 
 
 1075
 The government announced that fifteen lawyers held after the
 Karachi protest were released after slightly more than a
 month and charges of taking out an illegal procession were
 dropped (some sources claim that more than twice that number
 were arrested but all were subsequently freed).
 The year's largest demonstration involved thousands of Shias
 who beseiged Islamabad in early July to protest the "Zakat"
 and "Ushr" (religious tax) ordinance as contrary to their
 religious doctrine. Several Shias and policemen were killed
 or injured in the ensuing violence. No one was arrested and
 the government eventually compromised with the Shia leader-
 ship over their objections to the ordinance.
 b. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration and Repatriation
 Restrictions on travel are enforced mainly against opposition
 leaders and their families. These include tight control of
 passports and refusal to authorize adequate foreign exchange
 for such purposes as study abroad for the children of
 opposition leaders.
 A 1978 martial law regulation imposes a penalty of up to
 14 years imprisonment and confiscation of property for
 persons failing to appear before a military or civilian
 court. This provision appears to have been aimed at
 prominent politicians who have fled the country. The
 regulation makes it difficult for others to leave.
 Within the country, there is general freedom of movement for
 citizens, but a few -- including the widow and
 daughter of late Prime Minister Bhutto -- are banned from
 certain areas of the country when their presence is deemed
 prejudicial to the interests of the government.
 Pakistani workers are free to emigrate in order to work
 abroad. The government frequently assists them to do so and
 accepts them upon their return. President Zia has encouraged
 Pakistanis to return home, even if they have since acquired
 a foreign nationality.
 Pakistan currently is providing refuge for over one million
 Afghans and humanitarian assistance is supplemented by an
 international relief program organized by the United Nations
 High Commission for Refugees. Included among these refugees
 are many who have genuine fears for their lives were they
 forced to return to Afghanistan. Pakistan has welcomed them
 despite the economic burden and social strains which the
 presence of such a large number of displaced persons has
 created.
 c. Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 All political parties were legally dissolved by President Zia
 in October 1979 when he announced indefinite postponement of
 the scheduled general elections. On the question of holding
 future general elections, he frequently says that "elections
 
 
 1076
 are not an end in themselves" and that insuring the
 selection of moral and pious Muslims is a more important
 goal. The governmentin fact, continues to recognize
 the existence of the political parties, but does not
 permit them to hold public meetings or rallies.
 Pakistanis are able to discuss politics in restricted
 forums. Foreign contacts with Pakistani politicans are
 generally free, but on occasion, they are monitored by
 security authorities. Some elected officials have found
 that oppositionist political-activity can cost them their
 jobs or lead to other unfortunate consequences. Thus,
 in terms of Pakistan's traditional political parties,
 and under the Martial Law Administration, political
 participation today is limited.
 President Zia, whose regime otherwise-has circumscribed
 political activities, encouraged public participation in
 government at the grass-roots level by conducting non-
 party elections through universal suffrage to fill seats
 on local and municipal councils ("local bodies") through-
 out the country in September 1979.
 The local bodies elected were the first in fifteen years.
 They have an uneasy partnership with the Pakistani civil
 service (which traditionally has made most local decisions)
 but seem to be establishing themselves as functional
 institutions in the country. The performance of the local
 bodies varies, but in some areas they exercise independent
 control over collecting and disbursing tax revenues.
 4.   Government Attitude and Record Regarding International
 and Non-governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The Human Rights Society of Pakistan is the major human
 rights organization in the country but does not appear to
 have been active in 1980. Its activities have not been
 directly impeded by the government. Political parties have
 organized "legal aid bureaus" and provide free legal ser-
 vices to members placed under arrest.
 Amnesty International has a resident Pakistani representative.
 AI's last mission to Pakistan was in February 1979 to attend
 the Supreme Court's hearing on the appeal of former Prime.
 Minister Bhutto.
 In September 1980, Amnesty International expressed deep cocern over five
 cases in which prisoners allegedly died after torture and
 over flogging, which was inflicted on 76 people in the first
 seven months of 1980. AI urged clemency for prisoners
 sentenced to execution, and called on President Zia to
 restore the right of civil high courts to hear appeals from
 political prisoners detained or convicted by military
 courts. The government acknowledged that it had received
 one complaint of death after torture, that two political
 prisoners were being detained, and stated that both flogging
 and the death penalty are provisions of Pakistani law.
 
 
 1077
 There is no confirmation of the alleged floggings of
 prisoners incarcerated purely for political reasons,
 although there are unconfirmed reports that those
 who are not socially prominent have been subjected to
 such treatment.
 
 
 1078
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 CU.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: PAKISTAN
 1978     1979     1980
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL...        77.8      50.4     58.6
 LOANS..............       75.8      45.2     47.5
 GRANTS.............          2.0      b.2     11.1
 AAIO ...............           20.1      9.1      0.0
 LOANS..............         19.4      7.2      0.0
 GRANTS .............         0.7      1.9      0.0
 (SECSUPPASSIST.)..          0.0      0.0       0.0
 B.FOOD FOR PEACEE.....          57.7     41.2     58.1
 LOANS ..............        56.4     38.0     47.5
 GRANTS.............          1.3      3.2     10.6
 TITLE I-TOTAL..........         56.4     38.0     47.5
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS ....         56.4     38.0     47.5
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR..,,           0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE II-TOTAL  .;;;:            1.3      3.2     19.6
 E.RELIEF.EC.OEV & UFP           1.3      3.2     1D.6
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY ..           0.0      0.6      0.0
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST ..          Q.0      0.1      0.5
 LOANS ..............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS.............          0.0      0.1      0.5
 CONTR. TO IFI....          0.0     00       0.0
 PEACE CORPS......          0.0      0.0      0.0
 OTHER..............    .   0.0      0.1      0.5
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL...          0.6      0.5      0.0
 LOANS..............          0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS.............        0.6        0..,     0.0
 A.MAP GRANTS ........           0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.CREDIT SALES-FS..            0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.INTL MILEDTRNG....          0.6      0.5      0.0
 D.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK..          0.0       0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTST.....          0.0      0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. & NIL...        78.4     50.9     68.6
 LOANS...............       75.8      45.2     47.5
 GRANTS,....... .....       2.6       5.7     11.1
 OTHER US LOANS...........       25.5      25.9      0.0
 EX-IN BANK LOANS  ...         25.5      25.9      0.0
 ALL OTHER..............          0.0      0.0      0.0
 ASSISTANCE FRON INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1978     1979     1980     1946-80
 ----------------------------------------------------
 TOTAL.........   342.9    270.8     349.3   3078.0
 IBRD               0.1      0.0       0.0    769.2
 IFC                0.0     33.4       6.6     62.8
 IDA              177.5    109.0     165.0   1200.1
 IDB                0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 ADS              160.5     92.1     169.9    872.1
 AFDB               0.0       0.0      0.0      0.0
 UNDP               4.8      12.3      7.8     94.0
 OTHER-UN           0.0     24.0       0.0     79.8
 EEC                0.0       0.0      0.0      0.0
 
 
 1079
