 The Constitution provides for a representative democracy, with
 direct popular election of the president and legislature, an
 independent judiciary, and a broad range of civil and
 individual rights, but in practice Panama was ruled during
 most of 1989 by a military dictatorship under General Manuel
 Antonio Noriega, the Commander of the Panama Defense Forces
 (PDF). On December 19, Guillermo Endara, who was widely
 credited with having won elections in May that were
 subsequently annulled at Noriega's behest, was sworn in as
 President. The Noriega regime was ousted by U.S. forces that
 entered Panama an December 20 to protect U.S. lives, ensure
 U.S. ability to meet its obligations under the Panama Canal
 Treaties, help restore democracy to Panama, and bring Noriega
 to justice on narcotics-related charges in the United States.
 Under the Noriega dictatorship, Panama's security and police
 institutions both fell under the PDF, which was composed of
 Army, Navy, Air Force, and police components consisting of
 approximately 15,000 members, all responsible to the PDF
 Commander. One of the Endara Government's first acts was to
 disband the PDF and replace it with a new organization, the
 Panamanian Public Force (FPP), under direct civilian
 authority. Although the precise structure and
 responsibilities of the FPP were still being worked out in
 early 1990, the Panamanian Government indicated that the FPP
 would be a national police organization, with a national air
 service and a national maritime service established as
 separate entities.
 The continuing political crisis throughout 1989 had a deep
 impact on Panama's service-oriented economy, which is
 sensitive to public and international confidence. Panama's
 gross domestic product dropped by 20 percent in 1988 and an
 additional drop was projected for 1989.
 Human rights under the military dictatorship steadily
 deteriorated throughout 1989. Elections were annulled,
 protest brutally repressed, and an unconstitutional regime
 that ruled by decree was installed. A rebellion led by PDF
 officers failed and many participants were tortured, killed,
 or imprisoned. The Noriega dictatorship closed all the
 country's opposition media, took over two television stations,
 and intimidated a third. The Inter-American Commission on
 Human Rights (IACHR) concluded in its 1989 report that
 Noriega's de facto regime violated the rights to humane
 treatment, personal liberty, movement and residence, and
 thought and expression. On the most basic level, the report
 stated that the Noriega provisional government was "devoid of
 constitutional legitimacy." Upon taking office, President
 Endara made the observance of human rights, the correction of
 prior human rights abuses, and the prosecution of human rights
 violators matters of the highest priority for his
 administration.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing
 The Panamanian Human Rights Committee (CPDH) confirmed a
 number of killings in connection with the May 1989 elections,
 including Nicolas Van Kleef, a Dutch priest killed on election
 day and Alexis Guerra, an opposition vice presidential
 
 
 684
 candidate's bodyguard, killed during a political rally on
 May 10. According to CPDH lawyers, the regime made no effort
 to investigate these deaths. Relatives or organizations
 representing the victims tried to'pursue their rights through
 the Noriega-controlled courts, but without success. The new
 Attorney General named by President Endara immediately began
 investigating human rights abuses, with over 50 cases being
 handled as of early January 1990.
 On August 3, eyewitnesses reported, that in reaction to a
 large demonstration the PDF illegally entered the University
 of Panama campus and deliberately shot to death a student,
 Luis Antonio Gonzalez Santamaria, with birdshot at point-blank
 range.. Gonzalez apparently was picked at random for execution
 to deter protests on the campus. Two other students were
 reported wounded in the attack.
 After the October 3 military uprising, there were reports that
 rebel soldiers who led the effort to oust General Noriega were
 alive when they laid down their arms. The Noriega regime
 later announced that 10 of them had been killed in the
 fighting. The new Attorney General announced that his
 office's investigation had found evidence that Major Giroldi
 Vera, who led the coup attempt, had been shot to death in jail
 the day after he was placed in'detention.
 Officials of human rights groups and the Catholic Church
 indicated that from 90 to as many as 233 military personnel
 may have been summarily executed after the military rebellion
 on October 3. Many are believed to have been tortured before
 death. Bodies returned to families reportedly had multiple
 fractures, cuts, evidence of severe beatings, and bullet
 wounds inflicted at point-blank range.
 b. Disappearance
 People in Panama seldom disappeared permanently under the
 Noriega regime, although there were a few cases in past
 years. CPDH lists only two persons who are believed to have
 disappeared, of whom only one is thought to have political
 implications. By the end of 1989, a University of Panama
 student rights group began circulating names and pictures of
 several persons thought to have disappeared.
 Throughout the year, the Noriega regime arrested and held
 incommunicado a number of political opponents. Information on
 the whereabouts of many of these detainees was kept from
 family members and lawyers, and habeas corpus applications and
 appeals for the protection of constitutional rights were
 ignored.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 General mistreatment, physical and mental abuse, and outright
 torture at the hands of the PDF was common in 1989. After
 both the May 7 elections and the October 3 rebellion, many
 Panamanians reported waves of deaths, arrests, detentions, and
 torture by members of the PDF or paramilitary groups under
 their control. Victims commonly reported that they were
 robbed, held in extended solitary confinement, often in cells
 too small to permit standing up or lying down and filthy with
 human excrement, and denied the opportunity to bathe. They
 were frequently stripped naked and exposed alternately to cold
 and heat, or deprived of food, sleep, and medical treatment.
 
 
 685
 PANAMA
 Other forms of severe abuse reportedly included using electric
 shocks to various parts of the body; handcuffing arms into
 extremely painful postures; burning the feet or buttocks with
 heaters, cigarettes, or branding irons; threatening homosexual
 rape; threatening death by holding a gun to the head; and
 employing vicious beatings.
 Less commonly, victims charged that they were forced to listen
 to or witness the torture of others, including relatives, to
 be tortured in front of relatives, to sit naked on blocks of
 ice, to have fingernails or toenails extracted, and to suffer
 male and female rape. Victims also had fingers or other
 appendages amputated, or were cut with razor blades (in one
 case the word "yanqui" was carved on a victim). There was a
 report that four rebel military personnel were stuffed alive
 into body bags and placed in freezing morgue lockers until
 they died of suffocation or cold. During public
 demonstrations, common PDF tactics included the use of
 birdshot, rubber truncheons, water cannons using water laced
 with acid, and tear gas. Many of these charges were covered
 in the IACHR report.
 After the May elections, opposition legislative candidate
 Olimpo Saenz was arrested and taken to Carcel Modelo prison in
 Panama City, where for 8 hours he was suspended by his
 handcuffed wrists from the rim of a basketball hoop, with his
 toes barely touching the ground and his neck wrapped tightly
 in an American flag. He was beaten repeatedly with rubber
 hoses, and his screams were reported from nearby apartment
 buildings. He suffered a similar, second round of beatings
 the following day, in which he was forced to remain standing
 during the duration of the torture which lasted 14 hours.
 This treatment resulted in internal injuries and his
 subsequent hospitalization.
 On October 3 Christian Democrat Raul Ossa, a former
 legislator, was incarcerated and physically and
 psychologically tortured for 6 days. He was denied food and
 sleep, punched, beaten, and continuously interrogated.
 Another Christian Democratic activist, Gustavo Cedeno, was
 abducted, interrogated, and beaten on December 5 and 6 before
 he was released.
 Prison conditions under the Noriega regime were generally
 inadequate and in some cases constituted cruel or inhuman
 treatment. Most prisoners in Panama City's Carcel Modelo
 prison had no beds, only blankets, and one U.S. citizen
 imprisoned there contracted tuberculosis from poor nutrition,
 unsanitary conditions, and the lack of beds. Prisoners at
 Carcel Modelo reported that they could hear the screams of
 persons who were being tortured or beaten. Conditions at the
 prison on the Island of Coiba were believed to be so bad that
 threats of being sent there were often used to subdue
 prisoners in other facilities. The Endara Government has
 publicly declared its intention to reform Panama's prison
 system.
 d.   Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 The Constitution establishes the right of a detainee to a
 judicial determination of the legality of the detention and
 requires a warrant for arrest, except in cases of persons
 arrested during the commission of a crime. A suspect may not
 legally be detained for more than 24 hours without being
 charged and brought before a magistrate. Police are required
 to inform accused persons immediately of the reason for their
 
 
 686
 PANAMA
 detention. After being charged with a criminal offense, an
 accused person may be held until authorities conduct an
 investigation and bring the case to trial.
 In practice, the Noriega regime routinely disregarded
 constitutional requirements and due process for persons
 incarcerated for political offenses. Frequently, prisoners
 were moved from one place of.detention to another while
 authorities were denying to attorneys and family members that
 the detainees were in custody. A favorite tactic was to have
 night courts impose lengthy, "noncommutable" sentences
 (criminal sentences are otherwise routinely commuted for good
 behavior), For example, in several cases a year-long,
 noncommutable sentence was imposed for the distribution of
 opposition newsletters. In many cases, prisoners were never
 charged and had to file a writ of habeas corpus, which can
 take as long as 6 weeks to process and was regularly ignored
 by PDF authorities.
 The judicial system suffered from a chronic backlog under the
 Noriega regime, resulting in as many as 3 years' incarceration
 of prisoners awaiting trial. Such prisoners constitute a
 large portion of the prison population. Time spent in jail
 awaiting trial counts toward completion of the final sentence
 for those convicted.
 In 1989, by conservative estimates, 300 Panamanians went into
 exile and three times as many were incarcerated (military
 prisoners are included in the estimate). Approximately 300
 persons were jailed during the elections in May, and another
 100 civilians were incarcerated thereafter. In the wake of
 the October 3 military insurrection, reported estimates of PDF
 personnel arrested and incarcerated varied from 200 to 600.
 The persons who went into exile in 1989 included three key
 opposition figures: Aristides de Icaza, owner and director of
 Radio Exitosa radio network; Jose del Carmen Serracin, of the
 opposition Authentic Panamenista Party (PPA); and newspaper
 publisher Jaime Padilla Beliz. (All three returned to Panama
 after December 20.) The Noriega regime attempted to deport
 two members of the Catholic clergy: Spanish priest Jose
 Majadas and Peruvian nun Elsa Maria Schaus, the principal of a
 Catholic school (who was actually forced to leave Panama for a
 few days). In both cases, public pressure resulted in the
 return of the clergy to their communities.
 During 1989 the PDF was involved in hundreds of incidents of
 harassment of U.S. military personnel and dependents in
 Panama, often culminating in illegal detentions and denial of
 due process under the Panamanian Constitution and the Panama
 Canal Treaty. A U.S. citizen and military dependent, Kurt
 Muse, was arrested in April, subjected to sleep deprivation,
 intimidation, and interrogation, and held without charge in
 solitary confinement until December 20, when he was freed by
 U.S. forces. Another American citizen, Leonard Accles, was
 also held W4ithout charge in similar "preventive detention" for
 over a year, with lengthy periods of solitary confinement,
 until after the U.S. intervention when he was released. He
 was physically and psychologically abused when arrested, and
 consular access was denied for long periods.
 With regard to forced or compulsory labor, see Section 6.c.
 
 
 687
 PANAMA
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The Constitution provides that persons charged with crimes are
 presumed innocent until proven guilty and have the right to
 counsel. The local bar association and National University
 law school offer legal counsel at nominal fees. The
 Government provides public defenders for indigent defendants,
 but only after the pretrial phase. A new judicial code, which
 became effective April 1, 1987, provides for public trials
 based on oral testimony and argument. However, most trial
 procedures are still conducted with written presentations by
 the prosecution and defense without the presence of the
 accused. The documents produced are available for examination
 by both sides. In general, the burden of proof rests on the
 prosecution. The right to appeal a verdict is available to
 the prosecution and the defense.
 The Constitution provides a number of safeguards designed to
 maintain the independence of the judiciary: the Supreme Court
 is chartered to uphold the Constitution and laws; magistrates
 are barred from simultaneously holding other public office or
 otherwise participating in politics; Supreme Court
 magistrates, who are nominated by the President and ratified
 by the Legislative Assembly, nominate all-lower court judges.
 The Attorney General, appointed by the President and confirmed
 by the Legislative Assembly, appoints Superior Court District
 Attorneys, who in turn nominate Circuit District Attorneys. A
 system of magistrates, named by mayors, deals with a high
 volume of minor civil and criminal cases. Magistrates are
 empowered to impose fines of less than $600 and to order
 detentions of up to 1 year, and their decisions can be
 appealed only to the mayor and not to any judicial official.
 However, the Constitution's provisions for an independent
 judicial system were largely ignored by the Noriega regime.
 The most serious obstacle to obtaining a free and fair trial
 lay in the interference of the PDF. The military not only
 meddled with the outcome of specific trials, but in practice
 appointed judges and transferred or dismissed those who did
 not respond to PDF directives. This influence extended to all
 levels of the court system.
 In June the CPDH asserted that the Noriega regime had violated
 many provisions of the country's legal code by its practices
 of holding mass trials without due process, refusal to
 recognize habeas corpus writs, detention and sentencing of
 persons without charges, sentencing of minors as adults, and
 rejecting or ignoring evidence offered in defense of accused
 persons.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 There were credible charges that the Noriega regime routinely
 tampered with mail and that telephone calls were extensively
 monitored. The CPDH reported that one regime official
 publicly admitted this in a radio interview. Under the
 Constitution, judicial warrants must be issued before
 officials may enter homes. However, warrants to search homes
 of regime opponents were freely granted to the PDF by the
 PDF-controlled courts. The military and paramilitary forces
 also frequently searched homes, destroyed or removed private
 property, and detained persons found on the premises without
 appropriate warrants or court orders.
 
 
 688
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 The Constitution provides for freedom of speech and press, and
 in the past Panama traditionally enjoyed free media which
 engaged in spirited and open criticism of the Government. The
 Noriega regime responded to the ongoing political crisis by
 subjugating the media, both electronic and print, either to
 complete regime control or severe self-censorship. All
 opposition media were closed in February 1988. At that time,
 the regime also eliminated local distribution of foreign news
 publications.
 In 1989 the Noriega regime further tightened control of the
 media by prohibiting opposition newsletters, closing a
 semi-independent radio network, and attempting to curb the
 international press. By December 19, there remained only one
 nonregime radio program of news commentary, and it stayed on
 the air by never criticizing the military. In November an
 earlier prohibition against live call-ins for radio news
 commentary programs was extended to sports and general
 entertainment programs as well.. Many Panamanians listened to
 frequently jammed Radio Impacto, which broadcast news and
 anti-Noriega information from Costa Rica, and to the Voice of
 America. Any Panamanian caught with a copy of the Tropic
 Times, the English-language newspaper of the U.S. Southern
 Command, was subject to a $300 fine. Regime commentators
 launched a campaign of personal attacks against some
 Panamanian journalists who worked for international wire
 services or otherwise tried to maintain some objectivity in
 reporting.
 Before and during the May elections, foreign journalists were
 allowed to come to Panama, but 10 of them were expelled
 immediately afterward. Also during the elections, Panamanian
 cameraman Fernando Arauz was severely wounded when he was
 reportedly shot in the chest by armed government supporters.
 French journalist Bertrand de la Grange, a Le Monde reporter,
 was hit in the waist by birdshot fired by a soldier.
 The Endara Government has declared its full commitment to
 freedom of the press. Since it assumed power on December 20,
 three newspapers, (La Prensa, El Siglo, and El Panama America)
 which had been banned by the Noriega regime, have reappeared
 and are being operated by their rightful owners. A fourth
 paper, Critica Libre, has been returned to its rightful
 owner. Soon after the December 20 U.S. military intervention,
 the owner of television channel 4 took possession of that
 station's facilities and began broadcasting freely. The
 Endara Government has taken possession of a number of radio
 stations that had been confiscated by the Noriega regime for
 distribution to Noriegals followers, pending investigations to
 determine the rightful owners. Former Noriega supporter Tomas
 Altamirano'"Fito" Duque continues freely to publish his
 newspaper,'La Estrella de Panama.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 The Constitution provides for the right of peaceful assembly,
 but the Noriega regime continued to interfere with this right
 on a systematic basis. Harassment--including attacks on
 demonstrators by brutal paramilitary squads and random
 detentions--was used to disrupt protests or even peaceful
 assemblies. In 1988 the PDF formed "dignity
 
 
 689
 PANAMA
 battalions"--paramilitary groups of civilians, PDF members,
 unemployed persons, released criminals, and government
 employees charged with political or publicity functions. The
 dignity battalions received small arms and other military
 training from the PDF. In 1989 the PDF increasingly used
 these groups to harass political opponents and public
 demonstrators and to commit other human rights abuses. For
 example, dignity battalions participated in the attack against
 opposition political candidates at the Santa Ana Plaza on May
 10, where at least one opposition supporter died and many
 people--including an opposition candidate for vice
 president--were bloodied and injured in events covered by the
 world media. The PDF also responded to peaceful protests with
 the use of tear gas, baton charges, birdshot, and water
 cannons using water mixed with acid.
 Meetings of professional, social, and civic groups were
 severely restricted by the Noriega dictatorship in 1989. A
 1988 decree prohibited nonprofit groups (which range from
 charities and church organizations to civic clubs such as the
 Lions) from supporting or engaging in any activity the regime
 considered threatening to the security of the State. On
 October 5, 1989, Noriega announced so-called war laws, which
 forbade political gatherings by any civic organization and
 eliminated all jovernment employee associations that
 functioned like unions. (Unions legally registered with the
 Government were exempted from this law. An exception was also
 made for the public employee umbrella group FENASEP, which has
 a history of government control.) With an elaborate system of
 informants in the student and teacher ranks, frequent school
 closings, and repeated arrests, antiregime student leaders
 were effectively intimidated.
 The Endara Government, in response to the breakdown in public
 order immediately following the December 20 U.S. intervention,
 declared a temporary curfew from 11:00 p.m. to 5:00 a.m. The
 new Government stressed that the curfew was temporary and was
 designed to protect lives and property in an uncertain
 security situation.
 For a discussion of freedom of association as it applies to
 labor unions, see Section 6.a.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 The Constitution provides for religious freedom, and there is
 no state religion. Although Roman Catholicism is predominant,
 there are no restrictions on the free exercise of religious
 beliefs, including proselytizing. The Catholic Church took a
 strong anti-Noriega moral position, and its leadership was
 attacked sharply by the Noriega-regime press. Priests (many
 of whom are foreigners) were threatened with expulsion to
 deter them from speaking out against the Noriega regime.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 The Constitution permits Panamanians to move freely within the
 country and to emigrate. However, freedom of movement was
 curtailed severely in the days before and after the May
 elections. PDF members manning checkpoints searched vehicles
 and asked for passenger identification. Election observers
 were frequently escorted away from the interior of the
 country. In one case, their airplane was confiscated, and the
 observers had to return to the capital by road. The
 
 
 690
 authorities interfered with and detained opposition leaders
 attempting to visit constituencies in the interior.
 Following the December 20 military action, U.S. forces
 temporarily blocked certain roads and established a number of
 vehicular and pedestrian checkpoints. The Endara Government
 worked with U.S. military authorities to remove obstacles when
 no longer needed and to replace U.S. troops with FPP personnel
 at the few checkpoints that remained as of January 15, 1990.
 Panama has accepted refugees of widely differing ideological
 persuasions, and hundreds of displaced persons and exiles from
 other countries reside in the country.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 In early 1989, faced with approaching elections, the Noriega
 regime launched a wave of repression, closed most opposition
 media, limited the opposition's access to the media, and
 attempted to keep the foreign press out of Panama. Although
 some opposition rallies were permitted, free campaigning was
 clearly restricted. Despite massive regime fraud, the Civic
 Democratic Opposition Alliance (ADOC) won the election by a
 three-to-one margin, according to independent observers,
 including the Catholic Church. The Catholic hierarchy, an
 international observer delegation led by former President
 Jimmy Carter, and the official U.S. delegation headed by
 Congressman John Murtha (D-PA) denounced the electoral fraud.
 After the elections, in which vote counters were attacked and
 four people were murdered, many opposition candidates and
 participants were forced into hiding and exile or were
 arrested and tortured. On May 10, the winning opposition
 slate leaders were publicly beaten, and one was hospitalized.
 One of their bodyguards was killed and another wounded. The
 CPDH reported that by June 1 over 140 persons had been
 detained in postelection roundups of political opponents.
 The May 1989 elections removed any remaining pretense of
 quasi-legal civilian government. Provisional President
 Francisco Rodriguez was installed by General Noriega on
 September 1 as the regime's chief executive. New elections,
 although alluded to by the regime, were not scheduled. On the
 civilian side, the PDF wielded its control in part through the
 governing Democratic Revolutionary Party (PRD). Although the
 legislature was disbanded in September, the PRD continued to
 play an important role because its members filled most key
 positions in the Government.
 On October 3, a group of PDF officers led an uixsuccessful
 attempt to overthrow the Noriega regime. Thereafter, Noriega
 and his loyalists reportedly killed as many as 90 PDF
 personnel and arrested or dismissed several hundred others for
 their alleged involvement in the rebellion.
 On December 20, the ADOC candidates for President (Guillermo
 Endara), First Vice President (Ricardo Arias Calderon), and
 Second Vice President (Guillermo "Billy" Ford) took their
 oaths of office. The Electoral Tribunal announced that its
 annulment of the May 7 election had been coerced by General
 Noriega and the PDF, and issued a new decision recognizing the
 victory of the ADOC candidates. As of January 15, 1990, the
 Electoral Tribunal was engaged in issuing the official
 election results of the May 7 legislative elections. Most
 
 
 691
 PANAM
 legislative races were expected to have clear winners. In
 cases where doubt existed, new elections were to be held.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The IACHR in November issued a severely critical report on
 human rights violations in Panama, calling on the Noriega
 regime to restore political rights, return to constitutional
 order, stop all violence against the civilian population,
 release political prisoners, authorize the return of exiles,
 and open the media.
 Other international human rights groups were critical of
 Panama, but during the past year, only the IACHR visited the
 country and carried out an investigation. The IACHR
 delegation visited prisons and spoke with political opponents
 but was prevented by the regime from visiting the opposition
 newspaper La Prensa. The International Committee of the Red
 Cross requested but was denied access to political prisoners
 in 1989.
 Several private human rights groups operate in Panama,
 including one organized by students at the University of
 Panama. Since the political crisis began in June 1987, these
 groups have collected data about individual cases of abuse,
 acted as advocates for detainees, observed opposition
 demonstrations, and voiced concern about human rights
 violations. Toward the end of 1989, many of these human
 rights activists were harassed and arrested by the Noriega
 regime. Two private groups that are generally respected both
 within and outside Panama are the CPDH and the Center for
 Investigation of Human Rights and Juridical Assistance of
 Panama.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 The Constitution prohibits discrimination on the basis of
 race, birth out of wedlock, social class, sex, religion, or
 political views. Owing to traditional bias and general
 economic conditions, Panamanian women generally do not enjoy
 the same economic opportunities as men. Panamanian law does
 not recognize community property, and divorced or deserted
 women are often left destitute. Although the Constitution
 mandates equal pay for equal work, wages paid to women are
 lower than those for equivalent work performed by men and
 increase at a slower rate.
 According to local officials of the Catholic Church, violence
 against women and children in the family is a serious problem;
 however, there are few published statistics. A 1985-86 study
 funded jointly by the Government and the University of Panama
 entitled "Exploratory Study on the Physical Mistreatment of
 the Panamanian Woman," by Dr. Carmen Anthony and Gladys
 Miller, used data gathered from hospitals. The study
 concluded that the problem was serious and needed to be
 addressed by the Government and social agencies. Both the
 Catholic Church and the Ministry of Social Welfare have
 programs directed at the problem. Church officials state that
 their program mainly serves poorer women because upper-class
 women tend to seek private medical assistance.
 
 
 692
 Panama is a racially mixed country. The traditional monopoly
 of power by persons of European descent effectively ended with
 the ouster of the civilian government by the military in
 1968. People of mixed race are active politically and are
 represented in senior civilian positions in the executive
 branch and in the PDF.
 The law does not discriminate against any social, religious,
 or cultural group. However, naturalized citizens may not hold
 certain categories of elected office, and the Constitution
 reserves retail trade to native Panamanians.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a: The Right of Association
 Historically, Panamanian workers enjoyed a wide range of
 benefits under the law. Thd rights to organize labor unions
 and to strike were generally unrestricted in the private
 sector as well as in certain public sector agencies specified
 by law. Elections within Panamanian labor organizations, as
 well as employer and professional associations, were generally
 democratic and free from government interference. These
 organizations were unrestricted in their right to affiliate
 with international bodies, and their members freely
 participated in political parties and other aspects of
 Panamanian political life. However, the political crisis has
 had a severe negative impact on workers, rights in Panama.
 Workers have been fired, arrested, and jailed for exercising
 their labor rights. The Noriega regime effectively controlled
 almost all labor organizations and leaders. Within this
 constraint, workers remained generally free to join the union
 of their choice.
 Four decree laws handed down in October gave the Noriega
 regime added power to dismiss public employees, suspend the
 award of legally mandated bonuses, hire and fire free of
 traditional restraints, and regulate employee meetings. The
 regime subsequently used all of this authority.
 Most public-sector employees are forbidden to form unions or
 to strike. The "war laws" enacted by the Noriegaregime in
 1989 abolished public employee representative associations,
 which functioned like unions. Only the regime-controlled
 public employee umbrella association, the Federation of Public
 Sector Employees (FENASEP), was granted an exemption. Legally
 registered unions also were exempted from these laws.
 In an October speech to labor leaders, Noriega told them that
 they no longer had the right to strike. This was echoed by
 then Government and Justice Minister Renato Pereira in an
 October 1989 television address, when he said that "it is no
 longer legally possible to declare a strike." No major strikes
 occurred in 1989.
 The Endara Government has indicated its receptivity to labor
 concerns, including revising labor decrees and laws. Exiled
 labor leader Isaac Rodriguez returned to Panama soon after
 December 20 and has led labor efforts to persuade the new
 administration to rescind the Noriega regime's antilabor
 provisions.
 In its 1989 report, the International Labor Organization (ILO)
 Committee of Experts (COE) reiterated its observation that
 certain provisions of the law do not conform with Convention
 
 
 693
 PANAM
 87 on Freedom of Association, including: a requirement of 50
 workers (or 10 employers) in order to form a union (or
 employer organization); prohibition of more than one union in
 an enterprise; a requirement that 75 percent of the members of
 a union be Panamanian; automatic removal from office of union
 officials dismissed from their employment; extensive powers of
 the authorities over records and accounts of unions; and the
 exclusion of public employees from the labor code and,
 consequently, from the right to organize and bargain. The
 committee urged the Noriega regime to bring its legislation
 into compliance.
 A complaint filed by the International Confederation of Free
 Trade Unions, and the World Confederation of Labor and its
 regional organization for Latin America, the Confederation of
 Latin American Workers, allege that the Noriega regime
 arrested 4 trade union officials and 50 members of the Water
 and Electrical Workers Union, searched and closed the union's
 offices and confiscated its funds, and arbitrarily discharged
 50 trade union officials and 350 workers. At its May-June
 1989 session, the ILO Committee on Freedom of Association
 asked the Noriega regime to supply details of the judgments
 and the status of the cases against the union officials and
 workers and urged the regime to reply to the other allegations
 in the immediate future.
 In June 1989, the ILO Conference Committee on the Application
 of Conventions and Recommendations considered the same issues
 regarding Panamanian labor law that were addressed by the COE
 and repeated its request that Panamanian law and practice be
 brought into conformance with the Convention.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 Denial of the right to organize in two important private
 sector areas, the Colon Free Zone and offshore banking, has
 long prompted concern among labor leaders. In other areas,
 the Noriega regime selectively denied, or interfered with,
 this right. During 1988 and 1989, the Noriega regime
 succeeded in illegally gaining control of the elections and
 the leadership of the largest private sector labor central,
 the Confederation of Republic of Panama Workers (CTRP). The
 right to bargain was in jeopardy in those cases in which the
 Noriega regime perceived that its economic or national
 interests were at stake. Labor leaders charge that the regime
 used the Ministry of Labor to protect extensive economic
 interests of regime members in violation of the labor code.
 c. Prohibition Against Forced or Compulsory Labor
 Panama has an extensive labor code, which prohibits forced or
 compulsory labor. There was no forced labor in Panama in 1989.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 The law prohibits work by children under 14 years of age or
 under the age of 15 if the child has not completed primary
 school. Both hazardous and night work are prohibited for
 persons under age 18. Children between ages 12 and 14 may
 perform farm or domestic labor as long as the work is light
 and does not interfere with schooling. However, in the
 deteriorating economic climate, some children worked in
 violation of the existing law.
 
 
 694
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 Panama has a comprehensive labor code, which in theory gives
 extensive rights and benefits to-workers. The maximum legal
 workweek is 48 hours. The law has established a minimum wage
 for most work categories and requires that substantial bonuses
 be paid for overtime. According to Panamanian labor leaders,
 the minimum wage is sufficient to provide at least a minimally
 decent standard of living for a worker and his family.
 Although changes in the labor code in 1986 released employers
 from the obligation to pay certain bonuses and overtime
 premiums, employers still are required by law to provide
 workers with compensation adequate for a decent standard of
 living. The economic downturn resulting from the political
 turmoil since mid-1987 has caused many employers to reduce
 work hours or employee pay in order to stay in business, and
 many workers accepted the nonenforcement of certain labor code
 provisions to prevent a permanent loss of their jobs.
 The labor code details numerous health and safety standards
 for all places of employment. Female employees are entitled
 to receive 12 weeks' mandatory maternity leave and the right
 to return to their jobs. The Ministry of Labor and Social
 Welfare is responsible for ensuring compliance with these
 regulations, but too few inspectors and widespread corrupt
 practices have hampered strict enforcement of the labor code.
 
 
 695
