 PANAMA
 Panama is a representative democracy with an elected executive composed of a
 president and two vice presidents, an elected 72-member legislature, and an ap-
 pointed judiciary. President Ernesto Perez Balladares, elected in May 1994 at the
 head of a multiparty coalition, is Panama's chief executive.
 Panama has had no military forces since 1989. The Legislative Assembly amended
 the Constitution in 1994 to abolish a standing military. The amendment contains
 a provision for forming a "temporary" force under certain national security cir-
 cumstances. The Panamanian National Police (PNP), under the Ministry of Govern-
 ment and Justice, are responsible for law enforcement. The Judicial Technical Police
 (PTJ), under the Public Ministry, perform criminal investigations. Credible reports
 of corruption at many levels of both police forces contributed to some police dismis-
 sals. Both police forces are responsive to civilian authority and are headed by ap-
 pointed civilian directors.
 The service-oriented economy uses the U.S. dollar as currency although it is called
 the Balboa. The gross domestic product grew an estimated 2.3 percent in 1995, less
 than in recent years, but still the sixth consecutive year of growth. Poverty is perva-
 sive with great and increasing income disparities between rich and poor and with
 continued high unemployment and underemployment, which together may affect 50
 percent of the population.
 Principal human rights abuses continued to be prolonged pretrial detention; an
 inefficient and often corrupt criminal justice system, undermined by low wages, poor
 working conditions, and in part by international narcotics traffickers; and over-
 crowded, decrepit prisons. The Government's assignment of a former human rights
 offender and intelligence official under ex-dictator General Noriega as deputy direc-
 tor of a major prison further undermined public faith in the prison system's humane
 treatment of prisoners and detainees. Although the police generally performed in a
 professional and restrained manner, several cases involving excessive use of force
 occurred in May, June, and July. Violence against women remained a serious prob-
 lem compounded by society's unwillingness to recognize it.
 The Government continued to prosecute some persons responsible for abuses com-
 mitted during the 21 years of dictatorship from 1968 to 1989. Few of these 1995
 prosecutions resulted in convictions. Several notable homicide cases ended in acquit-
 tals, leading many to criticize the jury trial system and question the Government's
 abilityto deliver justice for past human rights violations. In September the first
 Vice President, acting in his legal capacity as President while Perez Balladares was
 on an overseas tour, pardoned 139 citizens, some of whom had committed common
 crimes during the Noriega era.
 In August the Legislature enacted several revisions to the Labor Code in an effort
 to make the generally labor-favorable legal system more neutral. Moderate labor or-
 ganizations influenced the revisions through negotiations. Just prior to the new
 
 
 law's passage, militant labor groups organized a mAjor strike that turned violent but
 was eventually resolved.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no reports of political or
 other extrajudicial killings. One labor union claims that police used excessive force
 and killed one demonstrator during the violence that accompanied the August labor
 strike. The Government denies the charge and there is no credible evidence that
 this death, or any of the other three strike-related deaths, could be attributed to
 police action.
 A presidential decree regulates the use of force by members of law enforcement
 organizations. For the first time since the PTJ was created in 1990, the Government
 tried a PTJ agent for the use of deadly force in a 1992 shooting incident. In July
 a jury found the officer not guilty.
 The Attorney General's Office ordered the prosecution of a police sergeant for the
 March 1994 lethal use of force against 22-year-old Jose Ayala lbarra. The former
 sergeant remained in pretrial detention.
 In July two officers killed a fellow off-duty police officer when they encountered
 him in a bar and tried to detain him after accusing him of being "impertinent" to
 them. He resisted and, during the ensuing melee, shot one of the two arresting offi-
 cers before being mortally wounded hinself. As of late December, the police were
 still investigating the incident.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution prohibits use of measures which could damage the physical, men-
 tal, or moral integrity of prisoners or detainees. In April police arrested four mem-
 bers of the special police investigations unit after fellow police members caught
 them robbing two tourists. They later arrested several Customs officials for conspir-
 acy in connection with the case after determining these Customs officials had in-
 formed the special-investigations members of the large amount of cash the two tour-
 ists had declared upon arrival at Panama City's international airport.
 The PTJ and the PNP have offies of professional responsibiity that act as inter-
 nal affairs organs to hold officers accountable for their actions. Both have staffs of
 independent investigators and administrative authority to open internal investiga-
 tions which, upon completion, go to their respective inspectors general for submis-
 sion to review boards. The review boards, in turn, recommend to the service's direc-
 tor the appropriate action; the service director has the final authority to determine
 the disposition of each case. Penalties may include reduction in rank, dismissal,
 and, in severe cases, criminal prosecution. The PTJ investigated 110 cases of all cat-
 egories of misconduct; since September 1994 it dismissed approximately 200 officials
 for their actions and forwarded 13 cases for possible prosecution in the courts. Simi-
 larly, the PNP investigated over 400 of the more than 600 cases of all categories
 of misconduct opened from January to November. Since August 1994 the PNP for-
 warded five cases to the courts for possible action. Allegations of misconduct are
 confirmed in 65 percent of the cases investigated.
 Although the police generally performed in a professional and restrained manner,
 several cases involving excessive use of force occurred in May, June, and July, chief-
 ly because of poor officer leadership and faulty civilian oversight. In September the
 PTJ suspended three detectives for having physically abused a detainee. Prosecution
 of the three was pending while PTJ authorities investigate the case. Anecdotal evi-
 dence suggests police still use physical violence to control detainees, particularly
 dun   initial arrest, interrogation, and holding  hes        lice Commisioner
 publicy apologized for police misconduct at a JulH es.athe Pol Comsin      e
 vowed to redouble efforts to cleanse the police f Legrsltv Assmbl y    i
 Prison conditions throughout the country remain deplorable and a threat to pris-
 oners' health. Most prisons were built in the 1950's or before and are dilapidated;
 medical care is inadequate; and escape attempts are frequent. There were credible
 reports of corruption and abuse of prisoners by guards. The National Corrections
 Department (D NC) has authority to discipline prison guards with either penal or
 civil sanctions, depending on the severity of the abuse. In practice, however, few
 prisoners or detainees have sought redress for alleged abuse by prison guards.
 In April the prison system conducted its first prison census since the 1930's. In
 Modelo prison alone the Government discovered it was detaining or holding as sen-
 tened prisoners 135 more inmates than its records had indicated. The Government
 admitted that it did not know the corresponding judicial status of its inmates and
 detainees. The census also revealed that because of nonexistent internal controls,
 
 
 490
 as many as 10 inmates had hired other inmates approaching release to assume their
 identities and complete their remaining sentences.
 The census revealed that Modelo and Colon Prisons had prison populations more
 than three times their designed capacities. Conditions in Modelo are reportedly so
 overcrowded that prisoners have to sling their hammocks up in the bathrooms, and
 in the main gallery hammocks are stacked five high. Panama's bishops issued a
 communique recommending the closing of Modelo prison which they termed "medie-
 val" and recommended expediting the trial process.
 As of November, the 1,000-bed La Joya facility, which still lacks furniture, suffi-
 cient potable water, and a trained administrative staff, housed approximately 788
 inmates and detainees. Prisoners were transferred gradually from Modelo to La
 Joya. The assi    nt in January of former 1970's human rights violator and
 Noriega-era intelligence official Fitz Gibson as deputy director of aJoya was a set-
 back. However, Gibson was on extended leave at the end of the year and there were
 indications he would not return to any position in the Department of Corrections.
 New legislation aimed at relieving overcrowding by speeding the pace of prosecu-
 tion went into effect on July 1, but at year's end resulted in no appreciable improve-
 ment in either case processing or prison overcrowding. A new case tracking system
 has, however, shown a decrease in case delays in the courts and with the prosecu-
 tors in the Public Ministry.
 With the exception of the small civil corrections staff at La Joya prison, the DNC
 depends on PNP personnel, who are not properly trained, to supply its guard force.
 Although the guard response to the riots at Modelo prison in 1995 was generally
 restrained and~ appropriate, in some cases uards used exessive force and random,
 close-quarters employment of tear gas against inmates. The first class of approxi-
 mately 140 corrections officers is undergoing training at the PNP Police Academy.
 Conditions on Coiba Island Penal Colony continued to be deplorable. Approxi-
 mately 70 percent of the 277 prisoners await trial, and from all accounts the miajor-
 ity will have served almost two-thirds of their potential sentences before reaching
 trial. Prisoners and detainees reportedly suffer greatly from malnutrition and short-
 ages of potable water, and medical care is practically nonexistent. Coiba has a civil-
 ian administrator, but its guard force still consists of police guards instead of civil-
 ian correctional officers. Geographic isolation, plus lack of communications, has sep-
 arated detainees from their attorneys and caused many to miss trials. Escapes from
 Coiba are common. The Government did not send any new prisoners to Coiba as
 a preliminary step to closing it.
 Conditions at women's prisons were somewhat better. In 1995 the Government
 closed the isolation cells formerly used for punishment and expanded the trades-
 based rehabilitation program. Still, there were credible allegations that guards and
 staff at the Women's Rehabilitation Center (CFR) sexually abused female detainees
 and convicts. Female prisoners, especially those in the primary detention area, re-
 portedly suffered from overcrowding and poor medical care. The Government took
 no action to investigate these allegations. There was also no progress in the prosecu-
 tion of the former CFR director, due to a lack of evidence.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The Constitution stipulates that arrests
 must be carried out with a warrant issued by the relevant authorities, except when
 the officer apprehends a person during the commission of a crime. The law requires
 the arresting officer to inform the detainee immediately of the reasons for arrest or
 detention and of the right to immediate legal counsel, to be provided by the State
 for the indigent.
 In response to the outbreak of violence during the August strikes, the Government
 arrested and imprisoned hundreds of strikers based on hasty, quasi-trial judicial
 procedures administered by local misdemeanor judges (corregidors) and without ade-
 quate defense representation. Authorities released all the detainees after 5 days, ex-
 cept for a handful who were held pending charges. These were extraordinary meas-
 ures to deal with an extraordinary situation, but the Government clearly violated
 the detainees' rights to due process in an effort to project a tough stance in the con-
 frontation.
 The Constitution also provides for judicial review of the legality of detention and
 mandates the immediate release of any person detained or arrested illegally. The
 law prohibits police from detaining suspects for more than 24 hours without bring-
 ing them before a competent authority. In practice, the authorities often violated the
 24-hour time limit by several days. The preliminary investigation phase often lasts
 from 2 to 4 months, due to extensions granted by the Public Ministry and additional
 communications with the court. While the Public Ministry can legally grant exten-
 sions up to 14 months in most cases, it often allows case processing to exceed the
 approved extensions, leaving the accused incommunicado in detention. Insufficient
 resources, and a slow, inadequate notification phase exacerbate the problem.
 
 
 491
 Extended pretrial detention continued to be one of Panama's most serious human
 rights problems, although the percentage of defendants detained past legally re-
 quired trial deadlines decreased from 1994. The elaborate notification _phase in
 criminal cases continues to be one of the chief factors contributing to long case
 delays. According to government statistics, pretrial detainees composed approxi-
 mately 78 percent of the prison population. Almost 25 percent of the total prison
 population is under detention beyond legally permissible time limits. According to
 public defenders, the average period of pretrial custody for a defendant was approxi-
 mately 16 months; pretrial detention in excess of the maximum sentence for the al-
 leged crime was common. A legal mechanism exists to hold the Government ac-
 countable in cases where a detainee spends a significant amount of time incarcer-
 ated only to be found not guilty. Although the redress procedure is not excessively
 complicated, few former detainees have sought redress for their time in detention.
 The Constitution prohibits exile, and there were no reports of forced exile.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-he President appoints nine Supreme Court mag-
 istrates to 10-year terms, subject to Legislative Assembly confirmation. The Su-
 preme Court magistrates appoint appellate (superior) court judges, who, in turn, ap-
 point circuit and municipal court judges in their respective jurisdictions. The Attor-
 ney General, who heads the Public Ministry jointly with the Solicitor General, ap-
 points the superior and circuit level prosecutors.
 At the local level, mayors appoint administrative judges who exercise jurisdiction
 over minor civil and criminal cases in which they may impose fines or sentences of
 up to 1 year. This system has serious shortcomings. For example, defendants lack
 adequate procedural safeguards, the officials need not be (and normally are not) at-
 torneys, and some engage in corrupt practices. In reality, appeal procedures are
 nonexistent. More affluent defendants tend to pay fines while poorer defendants go
 to 'ail, one of the chief factors leading to current prison overcrowding.
 C     Constitution provides that persons charged with crimes have the right to
 counsel and are presumed innocent until proven guilty. If not under pretrial deten-
 tion, the accused may be present with counsel during the investigative phase of the
 proceeding. Judges can order the presence of pretrial detainees for the rendering of
 statements amplifications, or confrontation of witnesses. Trial proceedings are con-
 ducted orally with the accused present. The Constitution establishes trial by jury
 in some circumstances, primarily in capital and serious felony cases; by law, how-
 ever, jury trials are not an option in most cases.
 The Constitution obliges the Government to provide public defenders for the indi-
 gent. Although many public defenders are still not appointed until after the inves-
 tigative phase of the case, many more public defenders than in past years were as-
 signed to cases prior to commencement of the investigative phase, increasing the de-
 fense's opportunity to present evidence. Public defenders' caseloads remained stag-
 gering, numbering hundreds of cases per attorney and seriously undermining the
 quality of representation. At the same time, reliable reports suggest an increased
 number of acquittals as a result of the work of public defenders.
 Trial activity was not only hampered by budgetary shortfalls, the judicial system
 was also uandercut by narcotics related judicial corruption. In July the Attorney Gen-
 eral dismissed a judge because of her alleged improper return of seized funds to a
 Colombian narcotics trafficker. The Attorney General is also investigating other ju-
 dicial branch and Justice Ministry officials on similar grounds.
 The judicial system continued to prosecute those responsible for human rights and
 other abuses committed during the Noriega period. The Government brought to
 trial, convicted, or sentenced several notorious defendants, but juries found most not
 guilty. For example, despite eyewitnesses convincing autopsy reports, and video
 footage of the attack, in March a jury found Noriega-era, ex-military sergeant,
 Oliverio "Gonzalito" Gonzalez, not guilty in the 1989 street killing of a prominent
 opposition leader's bodyguard. In July a jury found Manuel Antonio Noriega and
 three of six codefendants innocent o murder in the infamous 1989 Albrook Mas-
 sacre case (during which a number of officers and enlisted men were summarily exe-
 cuted without trial for attempting to overthrow the dictator), choosing to find guilty
 of murder only those three defendants tried in absentia. This surprising outcome,
 coupled with the earlier public disappointment from the not guilty verdict in the
 March "Gonzalito" case, prompted high-level government leaders, including the At-
 torney General and the Supreme Court Chief Magistrate, to join public calls for jury
 trial reform.
 There were no reports of political prisoners, although acting President Thomas
 Gabriel Altamirano Duque issued 139 pardons in September claiming that some of
 the individuals pardoned were political detainees. Included in the list of 139 was
 Marcos Justine, who had served under Noriega as the last Chief of Staff of the Pan-
 ama Defense Forces, and was accused of grand embezzlement.
 
 
 492
 
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Constitution provides for the inviolability of the home and communications. The au-
 thorities _may not examine personal documents, monitor communications, or enter
 and search private residences except by written order. However, there were credible
 complaints that the Police failed to follow legal requirements for arrest and search
 warrants and instead conducted indis&riminate searches of entire apartment build-
 ings or housing complexes. Police involvement in crime rings also blurred distinc-
 tions between improper searches and attempted theft.
 Despite the view of some that the Constitution prohibits all wiretapping, the Gov-
 ernment maintains that wiretapping with judicial branch approval is legal. Under
 the guidelines established by new antinarcotics legislation passed in July 1994, the
 Public Ministry may engage in undercover operations incuding "videotaping and
 recording of conversations." The Supreme Court will ultimately have to decide
 whether wiretapping is constitutional and, if so, under what circumstances.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of speech
 and press and the Government generally respects these rights in practice. Five na-
 tional daily newspapers, 3 commercial television stations, 2 educational television
 stations, and over 95 radio stations provide a broad choice of informational sources;
 all are privately or institutionally owned. While many media outlets took identifi-
 able editorial positions, the media carried a wide variety of political commentaries
 and other perspectives, both local and foreign. Panamanian and foreign journalists
 worked and traveled freely throughout the country, and the population had access
 to foreign media.
 There were a few cases of government harassment of journalists, such as barring
 individual journalists from covering government events and pressure on the man-
 agement of certain television stations to modify their programming. The Govern-
 ment has legal authority to place both direct and indirect restrictions on the media,
 and use of informal pressure on the media was common. Most media censor them-
 selves, a practice deeply ingrained in a close-knit society, whose leadership is built
 on interlocking family, marital, and commercial ties.
 The Government stopped advertising in La Estrella de Panama newspaper in May
 shortly before First Vice President Tomas Altamirano Duque was replaced as direc-
 tor of the daily. According to management of La Estrella, this put the newspaper
 in financial difficulty. During its assembly in October, the Inter-American Press So-
 ciety (SIP) accused the Government of violating the liberty of the press and practic-
 ing economic harassment against La Estrella. An SIP delegation visited Panama in
 mid-December to urge fair treatment; the delegation was received by the President
 who restated government commitment to freedom of the press. The President filed
 a libel suit in-November against La Estrella in response to an editorial which was
 mildly critical of the Government, but dropped the suit a few weeks later.
 A special executive branch authority has discretionary powers to administer the
 libel laws which provide for fines and up to 2 years in prison. Opinions, comments,
 or criticism of government officials acting in their official capacity are specifically
 exempted from libel prosecution, but a section of the law allows for the immediate
 discipline of Journalists who show "disrespect" for the office of certain government
 officials. While this section of the law was not used during the year, its existence
 inhibits some writers' self-expression.
 Current press laws allow for the establishment of a censorship board. There were
 no reports of the board taking any restrictive actions in 1995.
 The law provides for academic freedom, which was freely exercised in both public
 and private universities.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution provides for
 the rights of peaceful assembly and association, and the Government generally re-
 spects these rights. No authorization is needed for outdoor assembly, although prior
 notification for administrative purposes is required. Citizens have the right to form
 associations and professional or civic groups without government interference. They
 may form and organize political parties as the like, though parties must meet
 membership and organizational standards in order to gain official recognition and
 participate in national campaigns.
 During August trade umons and other citizens gathered and marched to protest
 proposed labor reforms. There were no reported instances of inappropriate govern-
 ment action against such marches. Police arrests and efforts to disperse marching
 strikers generally were limited to instances in which strikers sought to close roads
 and attacked monitoring police units with rocks and Molotov cocktails.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for freedom of religion, and the
 Government respects this right in practice. Clerics are constitutionally prohibited
 
 
 493
 from holding public office, except as related to social assistance, education, or sci-
 entific research.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Constitution provides for these rikts, and the Government re-
 spects them in practice. A 9 p.m. curfew for minors under 18 years of age in Pan-
 ama province, imposed in 1992, remained in effect although police enforced it un-
 evenly, mainly in high.crime areas. There were no cases of forcible repatriation of
 refugees or asylees.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 The Constitution provides for a representative democracy with direct popular elec-
 tion by secret ballot of the President, two Vice Presidents, legislators, andla rep-
 resentatives every 5 years. The independent National Electoral Tribunal arranges
 and supervises elections. The Government respected the rights of its citizens to join
 any political party, propagate their views, and vote for candidates of their choice.
 There are no legal barriers to participation by women or people of African, Asian,
 or indigenous descent, but in fact their presence in senior leadership positions in
 government or political parties is not proportionate to their numbers %ithin society.
 However, representatives of these groups are increasingly visible in midlevel politi-
 cal and governmental positions. In 1994 a woman ran for President and finished
 second with over 28 percent of the vote. The Legislative Assembly's 1994-95 presi-
 dent was a woman; the Panama provincial Governor and Panama City's mayor are
 both women. Women hold 5 of 72 Legislative Assembly seats and 3 of 11 Cabinet
 positions.
 The Government provides semiautonomous status to several indigenous groups in
 their homelands, including the San Blas, Madugandi, and Darien Embra-Wounaan
 reserves. The San Bias groups have two representatives in the Legislative Assem-
 bly, proportionate to their share of the population. Locally, the reserve is governed
 by tribal chiefs, who meet in a general congress twice a year. Neither the
 Maugandi nor the Embera-Wounaan reserve has its own dedicated legislators, but
 each has a separate Governor.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Human rights organizations, including both religious and secular groups, gen-
 erally operafed without governmental restrictions. These organizations carried out
 a full range of activities, including investigations and dissemination of their find-
 i      uan rights advocates generally had free access to government officials
 w ie investigating complaints. A U.N. team investigating housing displacement
 traveled freely thr6ughout Panama.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution prohibits discrimination on the basis of race, birth status, social
 class, sex, religion, or political views. Nevertheless, Panamanian society, particu-
 larly its upper class, still harbors many prejudices based primarily on race, sex, and
 social status.
 Women.-Domestic violence against women continued to be a serious problem. In
 January local justices in San Miguelito, a densely populated suburb of Panama City,
 estimated that they process almost 30 domestic violence cases a day; formal statis-
 tics indicated that they judged 517 domestic violence cases during a 2-month period
 in 1994. These statistics probably underestimate the problem A late-1993 report by
 the reputable Center for the Development of the Woman estimated that victims re-
 port as few as 20 percent of sexual assaults to judicial or law enforcement authori-
 ties. The Foundation for the Promotion of the Woman, among other women's advo-
 cacy groups and government agencies, operated programs to assist victims of such
 abuse. The Government ratified the Inter-American Convention on the Prevention,
 Punishment, and Eradication of Violence against Women in July.
 Women generally do not enjoy the same economic opportunities as men. Until
 1995, the law didnot recognize property in common, and divorced or deserted
 women are often left destitute. The new Fa y Code promulgated in April recog-
 nizes for the first time joint or common property in marriages. However, the Gov-
 ernment has not committed sufficient funding to provide enough judges and admin-
 istrative resources to enforce the new Code's provisions.
 The Constitution mandates equal pay for equal work, but wages paid to women
 are often lower than those for equivalent work performed by men and increase at
 a slower rate. A 1994 U.N. report noted that women occupy only 4 percent of the
 managerial positions in Panama. Although statistics are lacking, there are credible
 
 
 494
 
 reports of sexual harassment, firings for iregnancy, and hiring practices based on
 age and 'attractiveness."
 A number of private women's rights groups, including groups for indigenous
 women, concentrate on disseminating information about women's rights, countering
 domestic abuse, enhancing employment and other skills, and pressing for legal re-
 forms. Indigenous women vocally criticized male government administrators and
 politicians or overlooking indigenous women's rights.
 In May the Perez Balladares Administration created a National Council of the
 Woman to administer an Executi-e Office of Women's Affairs in the Labor and So-
 cial Welfare Ministry. It is unclear whether this new office will subsume the Wom-
 en's Department created in July 1993 by the Labor and Social Welfare Ministry.
 The Government gave that office little funding, and it has been relatively ineffec-
 tive.
 In addition to domestic violence, sexual harassment is a serious threat to the
 equal status of women in Panamanian society. A reliable report from the Latin-
 Ainerican Committee for the Defense of Women revealed in 1995 that up to 70 per-
 cent of female government employees had been sexually harassed in the workplace;
 42 percent by their immediate supervisors and 18 percent by even more senior su-
 pervisors. In March the Legislative Assembly failed to approve a sexual harassment
 bill that would "prevent, prohibit, penalize, and eradicate sexual harassment in the
 workplace and educational sector." Officials relieved several academics and adminis-
 trators of their positions at the University of Panama for sexual harassment.
 Children.-The Tutelar de Menores, a juvenile authority with additional adminis-
 trative roles, plays a role in the protection and care of minors, hut the Government
 has no specific office charged with protecting children's rights. A women's advocacy
 group reported in 1994 that 72 percent of children are born from nonstable short-
 term relationships. Many children suffer from malnutrition, neglect, and inadequate
 medical care. Juvenile courts report a high incidence of juvenile delinquency in
 major urban areas. The new Family Code paed juvenile court authority, including
 rehabilitation programs, orphan care authority, and juvenile detention authority
 under the Supreme Court. It also clarified reporting authority and strengthened
 preventive protection powers in suspected juvenile-abuse cases. While it also aimed
 to create a mechanism to record and report suspected domestic violence cases in-
 volving minors, budgetary shortfalls hampered the new bureaucracy's efforts to im-
 plement the reportng program.
 People With Diabilitie.-The Workers with Disabilities Office of the Department
 of Labor and Social Welfare is responsible for government policy and support for
 citizens with disabilities and for placing qualified disabled workers with employers.
 The office was in charge of implementing a June 1993 executive order which pro-
 vided employers with tax incentives for hliring people with disabilities but has had
 only minimal success. Although some public buildings and retail stores have access
 ramps for disabled people, no law or regulation compels the installation of ramps
 or other easy-access features in public or private buildings. It is not likely that the
 Government will fund construction or modification projects providing access for the
 disabled in a significant way, and members of this group willremain disadvantaged.
 Indigenous Peop/e.-Indignous people number approximately 194,000 (8 percent
 of the population) and theoretically have the same political and legal rights as other
 citizens. The Constitution protects the ethnic identity and native languages of indig-
 enous people, requiring the Government to provide bilingual literacy programs in
 indigenous communities. Indigenous people have legal rights and take part in deci-
 sions affecting their lands, cultures, traditions, and the allocation of natural re-
 sources. The Family Code recognizes traditional indigenous cultural marriage rites
 as the equivalent of a civil ceremony. The Ministry of Government and Justice
 maintains a Directorate of Indigenous Policy. The Legislative Assembly also has an
 indigenous affairs commission to address charges that the Government has ne-
 glected indigenous needs.
 Despite legal protection and formal equality, indigenous people generally endure
 relatively higher levels of poverty, disease, malnutritlon, and illiteracy than the rest
 of the population. Discrimination is widespread. Since indigenous populations infre-
 quently master Spanish well enough to use appropriate legal terminology, they often
 have difficulty understanding their rights under the Legal Code and defending
 themselves in court.
 Panama's indigenous population, particularly Ngobe-Bugle, has grown increas-
 ingly vocal in requesting that the Government grant them more autonomy by creat-
 ing more indigenous reserves or exanding existing ones. A general standoff has ex-
 isted between Government and indinous reserve status negotiators. Ngobe-Bugle
 groups complained that private landholders restricted access to claimed tribal lands.
 The Government supported the landholders' claims that legal leases were still in ef-
 
 
 fect based on prior indigenous members' sales of the property to private individuals.
 The Ngobe-Bugle perception that talks had stalemated led to a brief, yet nasty con-
 frontation in Veraguas Province in April. Although the police used tear gas to dis-
 perse Ngobe-Bugle tribal members armed with machetes, they acted in a restrained
 fashion. However, the Government's subsequent summary arrest and arbitrary
 transfer and detention of several tribal members including a minor, raised ques-
 tions of a lack of justice for marginalized social groups. Indigenous leaders de-
 nounced the Government's treatment of the Ngobe-Bugle and raised the matter with
 the United Nations Indigenous Groups' Commission in Geneva. The Commission
 has yet to take action on the complaint.
 National/Racial/Ethnic Minorities.-The law prohibits discrimination against
 any social, religious, or cultural group; however, naturalized citizens may not hold
 certain categones of elective o ice. Anecdotal evidence indicates that a constitu-
 tional provision reserving retail trade to Panamanian citizens originally was di-
 rected at Chinese immigrants, but Government officials have stated that it serves
 as a barrier to keep foreign retail chains from operating in Panama. The measure
 is not enforced in practice, however. Chinese, Middle Eastern, and Indian residents
 as well as Panamanians of Chinese and Indian descent, operate much of the retail
 tradeparticularly in urban areas.
 Leaders of the over 100,000-member East Asian and South Asian communities
 credibly claimed that Panamanian elites treat Panamanian-resident Chinese and In-
 dians as well as Panamanian citizens of Asian origin as second-class citizens.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Associaton.-Private sector workers have the right to form and
 join unions of their choice, subject to registration by the Government. A Labor Code
 reform package signed on August 14 significantly increased workers' ability to es-
 tablish unions. The reforms streamline the accreditation and registration process for
 unions, reduce the minimum size from 50 to 40 workers and cut the Government's
 required response time on applications from 2 months to 15 days. In the event the
 Government does not respond within this time frame, the union will automatically
 be recognized and accorded all rights and privileges under the law.
 Neither the Government nor the political parties control or financially support
 any unions. This was demonstrated when virtually all unions struck-with the nota-
 ble exception of the transportation workers--for at least a brief period against the
 Government's Labor Code reform proposals. During debate on the Labor Code, mili-
 tant labor unions took to the streets to agitate against its passage. Confrontation
 ensued between the police and workers that resulted in numerous injuries to both
 sides and over 400 workers arrested. Most of them were released after a few days.
 According to Ministry of Labor statistics, approximately 10 percent of the total
 employed labor force is organized. There are 257 active unions, grouped under 6
 confederations and 48 federations representing approximately 73,300 members in
 the private sector. Union organizations at every level may and do affiliate with
 international bodies.
 The Civil Service Law of June 20, 1994, permits most government workers to form
 public employee associations and federations and establishes their right to represent
 members in collective bargaining with their respective agencies. It also provides
 most workers with the right to strike, except for certain government workers in
 areas vital to public welfare and security, such as the police and health workirs and
 those employed by the U.S. military forces and the Panama Canal Commission.
 Public sector workers are lobbying the Government to have their associations ac-
 corded formal "union" status.
 The new Labor Code addressed some longstanding concerns of the International
 Labor Organization (ILO). The Code no longer makes labor leaders automatically in-
 eligible to keep their union positions if they are fired from their jobs.
 There were many private sector strikes; the most significant by a coalition of 49
 unions led by the construction workers and banana workers against the Govern-
 ment's labor reform proposals. Most national confederations briefly joined this coali-
 tion to add pressure on the Government to adopt more labor-friendiy legislation.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The Labor Code provides
 most workers with the right to organize and bargain collectively, and unions widely
 exercise it. The law protects union workers from antiunion discrimination and re-
 employers to reinstate workers fired for union activities. The Ministry of
 =r has mechanisms to resolve complaints against antiunion employers. The new
 Civil Service Law allows most public employees to organize and bargain collectively
 and grants them a limited right to strike. The Labor Code establishes a conciliation
 board in the Ministry of Labor to resolve labor complaints and provides a procedure
 for arbitration.
 
 
 Employers commonly hire temporary workers to circumvent onerous labor code re-
 quirements for permanent workers; such temporary workers receive neither pen-
 sions nor other benefits. The practice of blank contracts is, according to union
 sources, becoming more widespread. The new labor legislation addresses this prob-
 lem by requiring all companies to submit copies of all labor contracts for permanent
 workers to the Labor Ministry and by requiring the Labor Ministry to conduct peri-
 odic inspections of companies' work forces and review all contracts to ensure that
 they are in order. The new Code also authorizes the Labor Ministry to levy fines
 against companies not in compliance with the law.
 Labor law applies equally to export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The Labor Code prohibits forced
 or compulsory labor, and neither practice was reported.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The Labor Code prohibits the em-
 ployment of children under 14 years of age as well as those under 15 if the child
 has not completed primary school; children under 16 cannot work overtime; those
 under 18 cannot perform night work. Children between the ages of 12 and 15 may
 perform farm or domestic labor as long as the work is light and does not interfere
 with the child's schooling. The Ministry of Labor enforces these provisions in re-
 sponse to complaints and may order the termination of unauthorized employment.
 The Government has not enforced child labor provisions in rural areas, claiming in-
 sufficient staff. Accord to a recent ILO report, 11,600 children between the ages of
 10 and 14 are in the labor force-primarily in farm or domestic labor.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The Labor Code establishes a standard work
 week of 48 hours and provides for at least one 24-hour rest period weekly. It also
 establishes minimum-wage rates for specific regions and for most categories of labor.
 The minimum wage, last increased in January 1993, is $1.00 per hour in the dis-
 tricts of Panama, Colon, and San Miguelito, and for workers in financial services.
 It is not enough to support a family above the poverty level in the relatively high-
 cost economy. Most workers formally employed in urban areas earn the minimum
 wage or above, but most workers in the large informal sector earn below the mini-
 mum wage. Unions have repeatedly alleged that contractors operating in the Pan-
 ama Canal area pay less than the required minimum wage. The Minestry of Labor
 does not adequately enforce minimum wage law, due to insufficient personnel and
 financial resources.
 The Government sets and enforces occupational health and safety standards. An
 occupational health section in the Social Security System is responsible for conduct-
 ing periodic inspections of especially hazardous employment sites, such as those in
 the construction industry, as well as inspecting health and safety standards in re-
 sponse to union or worker requests. The law protects from dismissal workers who
 file requests for health and safety inspections. Workers also have the right to re-
 move themselves from situations that present an immediate health or safety hazard
 without jeopardizing their employment. They are generally not allowed to do so if
 the threat is not immediate, but may request a health and safety inspection to de-
 termine the extent and nature of the hazard. The Ministry of Labor is responsible
 for enforcing health and safety violations and generally does so. The standards are
 fairly encompassing and gnerally emphasize safety over long-term health hazards,
 according to organized labor sources. Health problems, however, continue in the ba-
 nana industry as well as the cement and milling industries.
