Panama
The State Department's 1992 report on the Republic of Panama provides a more balanced report than in previous years but is not without problems. The report includes, for the most part, accurate descriptions of some of the prominent human rights issues in Panama, unlike in previous years' reports when the State Department showed a limited willingness to criticize the Panamanian government in some key areas. In all too many other cases, however, the State Department is still reluctant to directly criticize the current government. As in prior years, the report often simply refers to a problem, such as with police, and then blunts its criticisms by immediately listing the government's attempts to remedy the situation. The report then either fails to comment on the effectiveness (or lack thereof) of those steps, or even overstates their impact. In other areas of the report, such as worker rights, freedom of the press and the casualties from the U.S. invasion, the State Department criticizes the government indirectly, or attributes the criticisms to other sources, but then fails to offer its own opinion as to whether it finds such criticisms credible. This style of reporting is a subtle but significant reflection of the State Department's political bias toward the Panamanian government.
The report also contains some significant omissions. Problems with corruption in and the effectiveness of the police force, persistent turmoil in the Attorney General's office, and continuing allegations of wiretapping by the government all receive inadequate attention. In other
sections, the State Department fails to acknowledge the public debate over certain human rights issues, which in itself is misleading.
For example, the very first paragraph of the report begins with a brief description of the framework of government in Panama, describing it as a democratically elected multiparty coalition. This paragraph is not qualified in any way, giving the impression that democracy is solidified in Panama with the current government enjoying the popular support of its people. This paragraph ignores, however, the widespread perception in Panama that the current government was "installed" by the U.S. government and its ongoing survival is completely dependent on it. This perception is rooted in the fact that although the current Endara government won an overwhelming majority in an election under Noriega, the Endara government was actually installed by the United States, on the eve of the U.S. invasion, at a U.S. military installation, and in 1991 required the assistance of U.S. troops to put down a military uprising. The report's failure to mention these facts, or to mention the ongoing debate about the continued legitimacy of the Endara government, is itself misleading.
This type of misleading description, although minor, casts doubt on the rest of the report which is, on balance, more comprehensive and even-handed than in prior years.
The section of the report which shows the greatest improvement from prior years is that concerning the prob-
285
Panama
lems of prolonged preliminary and pretrial detention. The report not only correctly describes this as "one of Panama's most serious human rights problems," it also provides a fairly accurate description of the problems, particularly the high level of pretrial detainees, the lack of sufficient numbers of public defenders to represent that population, and the fact that many of the pretrial detainees have already been imprisoned for longer than the maximum sentence for the crime charged. In a significant departure from last year's report, the State Department directly criticizes the Panamanian government for taking no meaningful action during the year to correct these problems. The report also acknowledges that the percentage of pretrial detainees in the prison population did not decrease during the past year. This type of frank criticism of the Endara government is unfortunately still the exception in this year's report.
However, even this section of the report has shortcomings. The Attorney General's office, which is responsible for investigating and bringing to trial this extensive pretrial detainee population, has been plagued by allegations of corruption, bribery and money laundering. On October 26, criminal charges were filed against Attorney General Rogilia Cruz, alleging that he unlawfully released drug money from a frozen bank account. In addition, there were credible allegations that the Attorney General had sought to dismiss aides who are potential witnesses against him, or who are investigating other charges of drug trafficking. The Attorney General stepped down later in the year. Although the resulting turmoil in the Attorney General's office has hindered the effectiveness of that office and
further retarded efforts to reform this troubled area of Panama's government, the report is silent on these topics.
The report also fails to discuss other problems with the judicial system in Panama, including the shortage of experienced judges, prosecutors and other court personnel, and the absence of adequate training to correct these deficiencies. Many of these problems could be alleviated if the Panamanian government devoted more resources to these areas, and the report should so indicate. In addition, decisions by the judiciary are too often subject to political pressures. For example, when a former Attorney General under Noriega was released from prison by a judge, pressure from President Endara and the press resulted in his rearrest, and the dismissal of the judge who originally released him.
The report's description of the problems with the Panamanian penal system, which it also acknowledges is one of the areas of greatest concern, is also more comprehensive than in prior years. To its credit, the report does accurately describe the almost catastrophic state of the prison system in Panama, including the dilapidated facilities, inadequate medical care, chronic overcrowding, and widespread violence. And, in contrast to prior years, the report has given the reader some perspective of the magnitude of the overcrowding by listing the number of prisoners one of the prisons now holds and comparing it to the number it was originally designed to accommodate.
In a significant departure from the reporting in prior years, the State Department, after describing efforts to alleviate
286
Panama
the overcrowding, candidly observes that "overcrowding of Panamanian prisons worsened in 1992," and acknowledges that the government's progress in this area has been "slow." However, the report should be more direct in pointing out that the lack of progress in this area is once again directly attributable to the Endara government's unwillingness to devote the necessary funds to correct these problems.
One shortcoming of this section of the report is that it still attempts to deflect criticism from the government for the prison system's problems. For example, the report tempers its criticism of the reported abuses by guards at Cioba Island by stating that the "greatest danger to inmates comes from rival bands. . . ." While that fact may be true, the report fails to acknowledge that the government has the ultimate responsibility for ensuring and maintaining the physical safety and well-being of the prison population. The Panamanian government has done far less than it should in that regard and the report should so indicate.
The report also attempts to temper its criticism of abuse by prison guards by immediately stating that the government's policy was to "investigate charges of torture and punish persons found responsible." There is no discussion of the implementation of those policies, giving the misleading impression that progress is taking place. Nor is there any mention of the fact that the number of guards who have been suspended or dismissed for abusing or torturing prisoners is far fewer than the number of reported cases of such abuse. Even fewer guards have formal charges brought against them.
The section of the report on the Panamanian police force reflects the same problems and biases. While acknowledging that there have been incidents of police brutality, the report then immediately points to the steps allegedly taken to address those issues but fails to comment on their effectiveness. By simply listing those reforms, the report once again gives the misleading impression that progress has been achieved.
For example, the report refers to the training police receive on human rights issues but does not mention that the police only spend a total of three weeks at the police academy. Human rights groups argue, with good reason, that three weeks are inadequate to properly train and discipline a police force. In addition, the report refers to various disciplinary proceedings against officers accused of abuse but fails to mention that while there have been many cases of reported abuse, examples of officers actually prosecuted are still rare.
Unfortunately, many other problems with the police forces in Panama receive little mention in the report. There is simply no discussion in the report that the Fuerza Pública, which replaced Noriega's Panamanian Defense Forces, still faces serious problems with a lack of professionalism and independence and widespread corruption. Low pay, few benefits and lack of effective leadership have invited corruption and absenteeism and also affected morale, performance and readiness. Many of these problems are the direct result of the Panamanian government's failure to devote adequate resources to the police to address these issues. Although these issues are the
287
Panama
source of considerable debate in Panama and have contributed to the general perception that the police cannot adequately protect its citizens, the report is silent on these topics.
The report also fails to adequately address the government's lack of significant progress in investigating those suspected of past human rights abuses. This omission is a departure from prior years' reports which acknowledged the government's slow progress in this area. While this year's report does list the Noriega-era officials who were charged or tried during 1992, simply listing those cases is misleading since the number of officials who have been charged and tried remains small when compared to the number of reported abuses. There were thousands of denuncias filed against former government officials and the military after the invasion. The Endara government has done far less than it should have to bring former members of the Noriega government who committed human rights violations to justice, and the report should so indicate. The lack of established guidelines or procedures to investigate and prosecute the abuses of the Noriega government deserves mention in the report.
In several other parts of the report, the State Department avoids directly and meaningfully criticizing the Panamanian government by attributing the criticism to other sources. This style of reporting is most prominent in the sections covering worker rights and freedom of speech and press. For example, the section on worker rights tells us that the "International Labour Organization had pointed out that the Labor Code's exclusion of public
servants from the right to organize and bargain collectively violates Convention 87 on freedom of association." The report does not offer the State Department's view on that issue. Similarly, when discussing Law 25 of 1990, which was used by the Endara government to dismiss hundreds of public employees in 1990, the report states that the "ILO . . . reiterated in 1992 its observation that Law 25 had greatly prejudiced the right of association for public employees, including the use of strikes, and that it was intended to legitimize the dismissal of a large number of such employees without providing for judicial appeal against such decisions." Again, the report fails to give the State Department's view of this issue. This section also gives only fleeting reference to the hundreds of workers who were fired in 1990 through the use of Law 25; only 25 workers have been reinstated.
This same style of reporting is present in the section covering freedom of speech and the press. While the report does indicate that a reporter for El Siglo, Bias Julio Rodriguez, was arrested and detained by the Attorney General's office for showing "disrespect" to the Attorney General, the State Department leaves criticism of the incident to others, observing only that the Panamanian Committee for Human Rights and the National Journalist's Association condemned that arrest. The State Department's failure to directly criticize the government on this issue is more striking because this incident proved to be a harbinger of further restrictions on the press. In early 1993, the offices of Ei Siglo were closed by the government.
288
Panama
The section of the report on freedom of peaceful assembly states that "[t]he constitution provides the rights of peaceful assembly and association, and the government generally respected these rights." The report then gives no examples of when those rights were not respected, giving the misleading impression that such rights are absolute in Panama. Omitted from the report is any mention that protests by groups in the Colon province and the Chorrillo district of Panama City were met by both birdshot and tear gas from the police. Nor is it mentioned that several leaders of the groups who organized these protests were arrested and detained.
The report also fails to mention that Judicial Technical Police entered and searched the home of the leader of the Democratic Revolutionary Party (PRD), one of the opposition parties in Panama.
This same type of omission exists in the section on arbitrary interference with privacy. While the report states that the "Constitution provides for the inviolability of the home and communications," the Endara government in fact admitted last year to carrying on a wiretapping campaign and even claimed that the wiretapping was authorized by the constitution. Allegations of wiretapping by several government agencies persisted this year as well, but the report makes no mention of it.
While the report mentions the issue of Panamanian civilian deaths from the U.S. invasion, it does so almost in passing, limiting its focus almost exclusively to the number of deaths. The circumstances under which these civilians died.
and the military's unwillingness to identify and separately bury those casualties, is an equally important topic, but one which has once again received little mention in the report. As with last year's report, the State Department simply states that "some groups" continued to press for further investigation into the deaths and for identification for their families, without giving its opinion on the necessity for such investigation, or criticizing the lack of significant progress in resolving these issues.
Finally, in the section on respect for political rights, the report states, almost in passing, that while there are "no legal bars to participation by women or people of African, Asian, or indigenous descent . . . in fact few of them are found in senior leadership positions in government or political parties, owing to traditional patterns." (Emphasis added.) While a seemingly harmless statement, it is really quite misleading when viewed in terms of the United States' historic role in Panamanian politics. The United States has had a direct role in supporting and bolstering, both financially and militarily, the political parties and leaders in power in Panama. It has been this political oligarchy, supported by the United States, which has excluded those groups and led, in part, to the "traditional patterns" referred to in the report.
289
