 PANAMA
 Panama is a representative democracy with an elected executive composed of a
 president and two vice presidents, an elected 72-member legislature, and an ap-
 pointed judiciary. President Ernesto Perez Balladares took office on September 1 at
 the head of a multiparty coalition. He was elected in May in elections conducted
 under the auspices of the independent Electoral Tribunal. International observers
 described the elections as free, fair, and violence-free.
 Panama has had no military forces since 1989. The Legislature approved a con-
 stitutional amendment October 4 to abolish a standing military. The amendment
 went into effect October 24 and contains a provision for forming a "temporary" force
 under certain national security circumstances. The Panamanian National Police
 (PNP) under the Ministry of Government and Justice are responsible for law en-
 forcement. The Judicial Technical Police (PTJ) perform criminal investigations; the
 PTJ is under the Public Ministry, headed by the Attorney General. There continued
 to be credible reports of abuse of detainees and prisoners by members of both police
 forces.
 Panama has a free enterprise, service-oriented economy which uses the U.S. dol-
 lar. It grew at least 5 percent in real terms in 1994, the fifth consecutive year of
 growth. Poverty is pervasive, however, with great income disparities between rich
 and poor, and continued high unemployment and underemployment.
 Principal human rights abuses continued to be prolonged pretrial detention, an
 inefficient and often corrupt criminal justice system, and overcrowded, oppressive
 prisons. There were also three extrajudicial killings in January. Violence against
 women remained serious, a problem compounded by socio-cultural factors that in-
 hibited recognition and treatment. The Government continued to prosecute some of
 those responsible for abuses committed during the 21 years of dictatorship from
 1968 to 1989. For example, in May a court sentenced three former National Guards-
 men to 15-year prison terms for the 1971 kidnaping and murder of Hector Gallego,
 an activist Roman Catholic priest.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no reports of political
 killings perpetrated by government agents.
 A presidential decree regulates the use of force by members of law enforcement
 organizations. The authorities are investigating three unrelated incidents in Janu-
 ary in which seven different PTJ agents may have violated this decree by using
 deadly force to stop fleeing suspects. After an independent investigation, a review
 board relieved two of these officers from duty, administratively reassigned two oth-
 ers pending outcome of internal investigations, and referred two officers to the PTJ's
 legaladvisor for consideration of criminal prosecution. The seventh officer was in
 PTJ custody awaiting trial at year's end.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated abductions or
 disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution prohibits use of measures which could damage the physical, men-
 tal, or moral integrity of prisoners or detainees. There were no substantiated reports
 of torture of either prisoners or detainees during 1994. Anecdotal evidence suggests
 police still use physical violence to control detainees, particularly during initial ar-
 rest and holding hases.
 The PTJ and the PNP have offices of professional responsibility that act as inter-
 nal affairs organs to hold officers accountable for their actions. Both have staffs of
 
 
 independent investigators and administrative authority to open internal investiga-
 tions which, upon completion, go to their respective inspectors general for submis-
 sion to review boards. The review boards, in turn, recommend to the service's direc-
 tor the appropriate action; the service director has the final authority to determine
 the disposition of each case. Penalties can include reduction in rank, dismissal, and,
 in severe cases, criminal prosecution. As of December, the PTJ had investigated 153
 cases of all categories of misconduct; it dismissed at least 52 officials for their ac-
 tions and forwarded 16 cases for possible prosecution in the courts. Similarly, as of
 December, the PNP had investigated 967 cases of all categories of misconduct; it im-
 posed administrative sanctions on 157 officials for their actions and forwarded at
 least 46 cases for possible criminal prosecution.
 Due to a growing number of use-of-force complaints lodged against the PTJ, the
 Supreme Court, in collaboration with the Attorney General, named a commission in
 March to revise training procedures, including firearms instruction, for PTJ person-
 nel. As part of a 3-week orientation course, the PNP provided 20 hours of instruc-
 tion to mcoming recruits on laws and procedures to protect the human rights and
 legal guarantees of citizens. Future PTJ police cadets are to receive human rights
 instruction as part of their basic training.
 Prison conditions throughout Panama remained deplorable and threatening to
 prisoners' health. Most prisons were built in the 1950's and are dilapidated; medical
 care is inadequate; and escape attempts were frequent. There were credible reports
 of corruption by guards, as well as abuse of prisoners. The National Corrections Ad-
 ministration has authority to discipline prison guards for abuse of detainees or pris-
 oners with either penal or civil sanctions, depending on the severity of the aiuse.
 In practice, however, few prisoners or detainees have used these measures to seek
 redress for alleged abuse by prison guards.
 In order to relieve overcrowding, the legislature passed a bill on December 21
 which would quicken the pace of prosecution, thereby reducing the number of pre-
 trial detainees. The Ministry of Government and Justice has als begun a program
 of conditional release of certain categories of prisoners. Neither of these measures
 has yet had a significant effect in reducing overcrowding.
 In March prisoners at the David public jail in western Chiriqui province held a
 hunger strike to protest the lack of prison space and the slow movement of their
 cases in the judicial system. The strlke quickly spread to the public jail in Colon
 and to Panama City's notorious Modelo prison, provoking hunger strikes at both fa-
 cilities. The Government promised to have qualified personnel visit the prisons at
 least once a month to check on the welfare of both detainees and prisoners. It also
 promised to quicken the ace of risoner transfer to the new 1,000-bedLa Joya fa-
 cility, even though it stil lacked-basic amenities, such as furniture, sufficient pota-
 ble water, and a trained administrative staff.
 The Government has made only limited efforts to comply with these promises. It
 did arrest the Modelo Prison Director on December 15 on charges of corruption.
 However, the prison overcrowding that caused the earlier hunger strikes still per-
 sists. Although the National Corrections Department depends on PNP personnel,
 who are not properly trained, to supply its guard force, the guard responseinthe
 riots at Mode o prison in March and again in December was restrained and appro-
 priate.
 The authorities transferred administration of La Joya prison to trained correc-
 tional officers. For the first time, prison administrators also classified inmates, a
 process intended to determine the appropriate security level needed for prisoners
 while also separating them from pretrial detainees. Although this was a significant
 step forward, the La Joya prison hiouses only a small fraction of the total prison po-
 ulation. All other prisons use PNP guards and intermingle convicted prisoners wit
 pretrial detainees.
 Conditions on Coiba Island Penal Colony continued to be deplorable. Approxi-
 matly 75 percent of the 550 prisoners still on Coiba await trial, and the majority
 will have served almost two-thirds of their potential sentences before reaching trial.
 Despite a plan to transfer prisoners to other detention facilities, Coiba continued to
 receive new prisoners from other prisons as part of an effort to defuse the violence
 caused by overcrowding. Prisoners and detainees reportedly suffer greatly from mal-
 nutrition and shortages of potable water. Medical care is practically nonexistent. Re-
 versing a decision late in the Endara administration to place Coiba under police con-
 trol, the new Government named a civilian administrator for Coiba. The guard
 force, however, continued to consist of police guards instead of civilian correctional
 officers. Geographic isolation, plus lack of mail and communications, separated de-
 tainees from their attorneys and caused many to miss trials.
 Conditions at women's prisons were better than those at men's prisons. Still,
 there were credible allegations that guards and staff at the Women's Rehabilitation
 
 
 468
 Center (CFR) sexually abused female detainees and convicts. Female prisoners also
 reportedly suffered from overcrowding and poor medical care. Guards and adminis-
 trators allegedly trafficked in telephone access, medicine, and personal hygiene
 items. A human rights group credibly charged in July that the prison administra-
 tion intentionally turned a blind eye toward such activities by guards and staff. This
 led to the investigation and temporary removal from office of the CFR director in
 July. The Perez Ralladares Government named a permanent administrator in Sep-
 tember.
 d. Arbitrar Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The Constitution stipulates that arrests
 must be carried out with a warrant issued by the relevant authorities, except when
 a person is apprehended during the commission of a crime. The law requires the
 arresting officer to inform the detainee immediately of the reasons for arrest or de-
 tention and of the right to immediate legal counsel, to be provided by the State for
 the indigent. There were charges of arbitrary detentions by the new Government
 during a September operation dubbed uenergy and courtesy that featured   lice
 roundups of street criminals in heavily populated areas of Panama City and Colon.
 The PNP suspended four officers for excessive use of force in this operation but
 found no grounds for the arbitrary detention charges. Human rights groups con-
 firmed that there had been few instances of police abuse in the operation.
 The Constitution provides for judicial review of the legality of detention and man-
 dates the immediate release of any person detained or arrested'ilgly The law
 prohibits police from detaining suspects for more than 24 hours without bringing
 them before a competent authority. In practice, the authorities rarely met legally
 mandated time lmts and often violated the 24-hour time limit for detention by sev-
 eral days: The preliminary investigation phase often lasts from 2 to 4 months, due
 to extensions granted by the Public Minmsty and additional communications with
 the ourt. Whil    e e  ePubic Ministry can legally grant extensions up to 14 months
 in most cases, it often allows case prcessing to exceed the approved extensions,
 leaving the accused in incommunicadlo detention. This problem is exacerbated by an
 inefficient case tracking system and a slow, inflexible notification phase.
 Extended pretrial detention of those charged continued to be one of Panama's
 most serious human rights problems. According to government statistics, pretrial
 detainees comprised 79 percent of the prison population as of August, about the
 same proportion reported in July 1993. Analysis of these statistics indicates almost
 25 percent of the total prison population is under detention beyond legally rmis-
 sible time limits. According to public defenders, the average period of pretrial us-
 tody for a defendant was approximately 16 months; pretrial detention in excess of
 the maximum sentence for the alleged crime was common. A legal mechanism exists
 to hold the Government accountabe in cases where a detainee spends a significant
 amount of time incarcerated only to be found innocent. Although the redress proce-
 dure is not excessively complicated, few former detainees seek redress for their time
 in detention.
 The Constitution prohibits exile, and there were no reports of forced exile in 1994.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The President appnts nine Supreme Court mag-
 istrates to 10-year terms, subject to Legislative Asembly conirm~ation. The Su-
 preme Court magistrates appoint appellate court judges  who, in turn, appoint cir-
 cuit and municipal court judges in their respective jurisictios. The Attorney Gen-
 eral, who heads the Public Ministry jointly with the Solicitr General, appoints the
 superior and district attorneys.
 Atthe local level, municipal mayors appoint administrative judges similar to jus-
 tices of the peace. These justices exercise jurisdiction over minor civil and criminal
 cases in which they may impose fines or sentences of up to 1 year. This system has
 serious shortcomings: Defendants lack adequate procedural safeguards, the officials
 need not be (and normally are not) attorneys, and some allegedly engage in corrupt
 practices. In practice, appeal procedures are nonexistent, More affluent defendants
 tend to pay fines while poorer defendants go to jail, one of the chief factors leading
 to current prison overcrowding.
 The Constitution provides that persons charged with crimes have the right to
 counsel and are presumed innocent until proven guilty. If not under pretrial deten-
 tion, the accused may be present with counsel during the investigative phase of the
 proceeding. Judges can order the presence ofpretrial detainees or the rendering of
 statements, amplifications, or confrontation of witnesses. Trial proceedings are con-
 ducted orally with the accused present. The Constitution establishes trial by jury
 in some circumstances; by law, however, jury trials are not an option in mot cases.
 The Constitution obliges the Government to provide public defenders for the indi-
 gont. Although many public defenders are stilld ppointed after the investigative
 phase of the case, many more public defenders than in past years were assigned
 to cases prior to commencement of the investigative phase, increasing the defenses
 
 
 opportunity to present evidence. Public defenders' caseloads remained staggering,
 numbering hundreds of cases per attorney and seriously undermining the quality
 of representation.
 Panama continued to hold political prisoners in 1994. Eduardo Herrera Hassan,
 an ex-member of the former Panama Defense Forces (PDF) who became director of
 the National Police force and reportedly attempted to foment action against the
 Endara Government in December 1990, was held without charges until he received
 a presidential pardon in September. In addition to Herrera, the Government has
 held an additional 30 to 50 persons in pretrial detention since December 1990, for
 offenses related to the coup attempt. The presidential amnesty of September 23 re-
 leased some of these prisoners, but many remain in extralegal detention.
 The judicial system continued to prosecute those responsible for human rights and
 other abuses committed during the Noiega period. The Government brought to
 trial, convicted, or sentenced a number of the most notorious defendants. In January
 courts sentenced former Panamanian Defense Force (PDF) members Felipe
 Camargo, Luis Cordoba, and Nivaldo Madrinan to 5-year terms in prison for the
 1988 illegal arrest and torture of Eduardo Sanchez Pena, an anti-Noriega activist.
 In May Madrinan, former head of the National Investigation Directorate (DENI), re-
 ceived an additional 5-year prison term for his role in the 1971 murder of Colombian
 priest Hector Gallego. In September the courts found six ex-PDF members, includ-
 ing Camargo, guilty of human rights violations against anti-Norega activists
 Alberto Conte and Leonardo Figueroa, as well as former anti-Noriega coup partici-
 pant Milton Castillo. Over 25 cases are pending against ex-PDF major Felipe
 Camargo (convicted of human rights abuses both in 1992 and 1994). Ex-PDF major
 Luis "Papo" Cordoba and It. Colonel Madrinan, both defendants in the Spadafora
 trial, were also scheduled to stand trial for the 1985 kidnaping and torture of Dr.
 Mauro Zuniga, president of the National Civic Coordination, an organization op-
 posed to the Noriega regime.
 In June President Endara granted individual pardons to over 500 Noriega-era offi-
 cials and politicians who had committed "political" crimes, i.e., support for anti-
 democratic policies. On September 23, President Balladares granted amnesty to 216
 persons whom he described as having been convicted or detained for crimes of a po-
 litical nature. He granted conditional release to 46 more detainees. The amnesty in-
 cluded five of the six suspects in the slayings of US. citizen Raymond Dragseth and
 US. Embassy employee Fernando Braithwaite, civilians the PDF executed during
 Operation Just Cause in 1989. This left only 1 of the original 23 defendants charged
 with either homicide, kidnaping, or conspiracy to stand trial in connection with
 these brutal killings.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Constitution provides for the inviolability of the home and communications. The au-
 thorities may not examine personal documents, monitor communications, or enter
 and search private residences except by written order. However, there were credible
 complaints that PTJ agents failed to follow legal requirements for arrest and search
 warrants and instead conducted indiscriminate searches of entire apartment build-
 ings or housing complexes. Such complaints continued during the first months of the
 Perez Balladares Government.
 Despite the view of some that the Constitutionprhibits all wiretapping, the Gov-
 ernment maintains that wiretapping with judicial branch approval is legal. Under
 the guidelines established by new antinarcotics legislation passed in July, the Public
 Ministry may engage in undercover operations, including the use of "videotaping
 and recording of conversations.' The Supreme Court will ultimately have to decide
 whether wiretapping is constitutional and, if so, under what circumstances.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-Panamanians generally enjoy freedom of speech
 and press as provided for in the Constitution. Six national daily newspapers, 3 com-
 mercial television stations, 2 educational television stations, and over 95 radio sta-
 tions provide a broad choice of informational sources; all are privately or institution-
 ally owned. While many media outlets took identifiable editorial positions, the
 media carried a wide variety of political commentaries and other perspectives, both
 local and foreign. Panamanian and foreign journalists worked and traveled freely
 throughout the contry, and the population had access to foreign media.
 There were no substantiated cases of Government harassment of journalists. The
 Government has legal authority to place both direct and indirect restrictions on the
 media but took no such actions in 1994. This election year was characterized by a
 high level of official tolerance of the media, which openly reported on candidates and
 their platforms.
 
 
 Libel is a criminal offense subject to fines and up to 2 years in prison. Opinions,
 comments, or criticism of government officials acting in their official capacity are
 specifically exempted from libel prosecution, but a section of the law allows for the
 immediate discipline of journalists who show "disrespect' for the office of certain
 government officials. The Government did not use the antilibel provisions of the law
 to restrict freedom of the press, but the existence of the law may inhibit some writ-
 ers' self-expression.
 President Balladares took steps to abolish certain laws which restrict freedom of
 the press. The media opposed these steps since complete abolition of the laws would
 also end many press privileges. Among these laws is one which establishes a censor-
 ship board. There were no reports of the board taking any restrictive actions in
 1994.
 The law provides for academic freedom, which was freely exercised in public as
 well as private universities.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution provides the
 rights of peaceful assembly and association, and the Government generally respects
 these rights. No authorization is needed for outdoor assembly although prior notifi-
 cation for administrative purposes is required. Panamanians have the right to form
 associations and professional or civic groups without government interference. They
 may form and organize political parties as they like, though parties must meet
 membership and organizational standards in order to gain official recognition and
 participate in national campaigns.
 During the 1994 election campaign, citizens frequently gathered and marched to
 protest as well as to support government policies. There were no reported instances
 of inappropriate government action against such marches.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for religious freedom. All reli-
 gious groups are free to worship and to proselytize without government restriction
 or interference. Clerics are constitutionally prohibited from holding public office, ex-
 cept as related to social assistance, education, or scientific research.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Constitution grants Panamanians the right to move freely within
 the country and to depart and return freely. These rights are respected in practice.
 There were no cases of forcible repatriation of refugees or asylees. A 9 p.m. curfew
 for minors under 18 years of age in Panama province, imposed in 1992, remained
 in effect although it was enforced mainly in high-crime areas.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 The Constitution provides for a representative democracy with direct popular elec-
 tion by secret ballot of the president, two vice presidents, legislators, and local rep-
 resentatives every 5 years. The independent National Electoral Tribunal arranges
 and supervises elections. Panamanians enjoy the right to join any political party,
 to propagate their views, and to vote for candidates of their choice without govern-
 ment interference. The Government respected these rights throughout the year. The
 Electoral Tribunal implemented the June 1993 electoral reforms during the 1994
 campaign, resulting in a transparently free national election.
 There are no legal barriers to participation by women or people of African, Asian,
 or indigenous descent, but in fact their presence in senior leadership positions in
 government or political parties is not yet proportionate to their numbers within soci-
 ety. However, representatives of these groups are increasingly visible in midlevel po-
 litical and governmental positions. The Government provides semiautonomous sta-
 tus to the San Blas reserve, populated mainly by indigenous Kuna Indians. San
 Blas has two representatives in the Legislative Assembly, proportionate to its popu-
 lation. Locally, the reserve is governed by tribal chiefs, who meet in a general con-
 gress twice a year.
 A woman ran for president and finished second with over 28 percent of the vote.
 The newly elected President of the Legislative Assembly is a woman, and Panama
 City residents elected a woman as mayor. However, women held only 5 of 72 Legis-
 lative Assembly seats and 3 of 11 Cabinet positions.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Panamanian human rights organizations, including both church and secular
 groups, generally operated without governmental restrictions. These organizations
 carried out a full range of activities, including investigations and dissemination of
 findings. Human rights advocates generally had free access to government officials
 while investigating complaints. The Government did not favor an investigation by
 the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights in response to a complaint filed
 
 
 471
 about Operation Just Cause, but it did not obstruct inquiries related to the inves-
 tigation.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Rac  Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution prohibits discrimination on the basis of race, illegitimacy, social
 class, sex, religion, or political views.
 Women.-Women generally do not enjoy the same economic opportunities as men.
 The law does not recognize property in common, and divorced or deserted women
 are often left destitute. However, the Legislative Assembly approved a new Family
 Code in April which will recognize joint or common property in marriages. The new
 Code will take effect in early 1995 after the executive branch identifies the financial
 resources necessary to fund additional tribunals and related activities.
 Although the Constitution mandates equal pay for equal work, wages paid to
 women are often lower than those for equivalent work performed by men and in-
 crease at a slower rate. A United Nations report published in August noted that
 women occupy only 4 percent of the managerial positions in Panama. Although sta-
 tistics are lacking, there are credible reports of sexual harassment, firings for preg-
 nancy, and hiring practices based on age and "attractiveness.!
 Domestic violence against women continued to be a serious problem. A late-1993
 report by the reputable Center for the Development of the Woman estimated that
 victims report as few as 20 percent of the sexual assaults committed against women
 in San Miguelito and Panama City-two of the most densely populated areas in the
 country-to law enforcement authorities. The Foundation or the Promotion of the
 Woman released an informal study that stated that the emergency room of the larg-
 est public hospital in Panama City treated 1,222 domestic violence victims during
 1993. As of September, that foundation itself assisted almost 400 victims of domes-
 tic violence or abuse. Other private groups and government agencies also operated
 programs to assist victims of such abuse. The Government acknowledged the seri-
 ousness of violence directed against women by signing the Inter-American Conven-
 tion on the Prevention, Punishment, and Eradication of Violence against Women.
 A number of private women's rights groups, including groups for indigenous
 women, concentrate on disseminating information about women's rights, countering
 domestic abuse, enhancing employment and other skills, and pressing for legal re-
 forms. Indigenous women vocally criticized male government administrators and
 poiticians for overlooking indigenous women's rights. In response to pressure by
 women's organizations, the Government created a Women's Department at the Min-
 istry of Labor in July 1993 to report on abuses in the workplace as well as larger
 social issues. The office, however, was given little funding and has been relatively
 ineffective.
 Children.-The Tutelar de Menores, a quasi-judicial authority with additional ad-
 ministrative roles, plays a role in the protection and care of minors, but the Govern-
 ment has no specific office charged with protecting children's rights. A women's ad-
 vocacy group reported that 72 percent of children are born from nonstable, short-
 term relationships. Many children suffer from malnutrition, neglect, and inadequate
 medical care. Juvenile courts report a high incidence of juvenile delinquency in
 major urban areas. The new Family Code calls for restructuring the underfunded
 and overtasked * venile court authority that includes a rehabilitation program, an
 orphan care authority, and a juvenile detention authority. It also clarifies reporting
 authority and strengthens preventive protection powers in suspected juvenile abuse
 cases. It would also create a mechanism to record and report suspected domestic vio-
 lence cases involving minors.
 Indigenous People.-Panama's indigenous population of approximately 194,000 (8
 percent of the population) theoretically has all the same political rights as other citi-
 zens. The Constitution protects the ethnic identity and native languages of indige-
 nous people, requiring the Government to provide bilingual literacy programs in in-
 digenous communities. The Ministry of Government and Justice maintains a Direc-
 torate of Indigenous Policy. The Legislative Assembly in November created an indig-
 enous affairs commission to address charges that the central Government has ne-
 gected indigenous needs. Despite legal protection and formal equality, indigenous
 people generally endured relatively higher levels of poverty, disease, malnutrition,
 and illiteracy than the rest of the population. In practice, language problems also
 weaken the formal prtections offered by the law. Since indigenous populations in-
 frequently master Spanish well enough to use appropriate legal terminology, they
 often have difficulty in understanding their rights under the Legal Code. This lan-
 guage barrier also hamstrings efforts by indigenous people to defend themselves in
 court.
 
 
 Panama's indigenous population, particularly the Embers, Choco, and Ngobe-
 Bugle, has grown increasingly vocal in requesting the Government to create more
 indigenous reserves. Indigenous people began to organize themselves but, despite a
 November 1993 convention for national coordination of indigenous peoples, met only
 limited success in lobbying the Government to protect their rights. The Government
 did grant the Embera tribes in Darien semiautonomous reserve status. The Presi-
 dent appoints a governor who administers two nearby administrative areas in con-
 junction with tribal advisory councils. Medical care and potable water supplies on
 the reserves remain inadequate. Ngobe-Bugle groups complained that private land-
 holders restricted access to tribal lands. The Government supported the landholders'
 claims that legal leases were still in effect.
 Indigenous people have legal rights and take part in decisions affecting their
 lands, cultures, traditions, and the allocation of natural resources. Durin the 1994
 presidential elections, the Coordinator for Indigenous Peoples--an umbrella organi-
 zation promoting indigenous rights-called upon indigenous peoples not to vote for
 any presidential candidates until the Government met demands for a Ngobe-Bugle
 reserve and development funds for indigenous organizations. Ultimately, however,
 few refrained from voting. The new Family Code recognizes traditional indigenous
 cultural marriage rites as the equivalent of a civil ceremony.
 National/Racial/Ethnic Minorities.-The law does not discriminate against any
 social, religious, or cultural group; however, naturalized citizens may not hold cer-
 tain categories of elective office. While anecdo  evidence indicates that a constitu-
 tional provision reserving retail trade to Panamanian citizens originally was di-
 rected at Chinese immigrants, government officials have stated that it serves as a
 barrier to keep foreign retail chains from operating in Panama. The measure is not
 enforced in practice, however. Chinese and Indian residents of Panama, as well as
 Panamanians of Chinese and Indian descent, operate much of the retail trade, par-
 ticularly in urban areas.
 Leaders of the over 100,000-member East Asian and South Asian communities
 credibly claimed that Panamanian society at large treats Panamanian-resident Chi-
 nese and Indians as well as Panamanian citizens of Asian origin as second-class citi-
 zens.
 People With Disabilities.-Government policy and support for citizens with disabil-
 ities is the responsibility of the Workers with Disabilities Office of the Department
 of Labor and Social Welfare. Created in 1980, it is responsible for placing qualified
 disabled workers with employers. The office was in charge of implementing a June
 1993 executive order which provided employers with tax incentives for hiring people
 with disabilities. As of September, 89 employers had hired a total of only 166 dis-
 abled employees under this program. Although some public buildings and retail
 stores have access ramps for disabled people, no law or regulation compels the use
 of ramps or other easy-access features in public or private buildings.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-Private sector workers have the right to form and
 join unions of their choice, subject to registration by the Government. However,
 unions have criticized government requirements for registration, including the mini-
 mum number of workers necessary for union formation (currently 51). With a large
 percentage of small shops and businesses having fewer than the required number
 of employees to meet registration requirements, many in the work force cannot orga-
 nize. In addition, organized labor has complained that the Government has rejected
 efforts over the past 20 years to organize in several "strategic sectors" such as bank-
 ing and the Colon Free Zone.
 According to Ministry of Labor statistics, approximately 10 percent of the total
 employed labor force is organized. There are 256 active unions, grouped under 6
 confederations and 48 federations representing approximately 79,000 members in
 the private sector. Although the new Perez Baladares Government has closer ties
 with organized labor than did the Endara administration, neither the Government
 nor the political parties control or financially support any unions. Union organiza-
 tions at every level may and do affiliate with international bodies.
 The new Civil Service Law of June 20 permits most government workers to form
 public employee associations and federations and established their right to rep-
 resent members in collective bargaining with their respective agencies. It also pro-
 vides most workers the right to strike, except for certain government workers in
 areas vital to public welfare and security, such as the police and health workers and
 those employed by the U.S. military forces and the Panama Canal Commission. It
 is too early to determine if the new Civil Service Law will meet, in practice, inter-
 nationally recognized labor standards. Unionized employees of formerly private and
 
 
 473
 telephone companies retain their original right to strike when certain reasonable
 criteria are met.
 The International Labor Organization (ILO) Committee on Freedom of Association
 (CPA) reiterated in November 1993 its conclusion that the large-scale dismissal of
 trade union leaders and workers in the public sector under Law 25 of 1990 was a
 serious violation of the right to organize. Even though the Panamanian Supreme
 Court ruled that the dismissal of 120 of the 145 afected workers was legal (the
 other 25 were reinstated), the CFA again requested the Government to reinstate the
 greatest possible number of dismissed workers and union leaders. The new Perez
 Balladares Government began reinstating the workers, roughly half of whom have
 reportedly returned to work.
 There were a number of private sector strikes in 1994 and, despite the prohibition
 on striking by public sector employees, several public sector strikes.
 b.The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectivey.-The law affords most workers
 the right to organize and bargain ollectively, and unions widely exercised it-104
 collective bargaining agreements were cncluded in 1993. The law protects union
 workers from antiunion discrimination and requires employers to reinstate workers
 fired for union activities. The Mstr of     r has mechanisms to resolve com-
 plaints against antinion employers. The new Civil Service Law allows most public
 ployees to organize and bargan ollectively and grants them a limited right to
 str~e. The Labor Code estabishes aconciliation board in the Ministry of Labor to
 resolve labor complaints and provides a mechanism for arbitration once conciliation
 procedures have been terminated.
 There is an increasingly common practice of employing temporary workers in
 order to circumvent what are perceived by employers as onerous Labor Code re-
 quirements for permanent workers. One owner or a construction firm has noted that
 up to 35 percent of workers on some of his projects are employed on temporary con-
 tracts. These workers were discharged just short of the time necessary for them to
 be granted permanent status and then rehired in other job categories, thereby cir-
 cumventing the Labor Code. None of these temporary workers received pension or
 other benefits. The practice of blank contracts is, according to union sources, becom-
 ing more widespread.
 Labor law is equally applicable to export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The Labor Code prohibits forced
 or compulsory labor, and neither practice was reported.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The Labor Code prohibits the em-
 ploymnt of children under 14 years of age as well as those under 15 if the child
 has not completed primary school; children under 16 cannot work overtime; those
 under 18 cannot perform night work. Children between the ages of 12 and 15 may
 perform farm or domestic labor as long as the work is light and does not interfere
 with the child's schooling. The Ministry of Labor enforces these provisions in re-
 sponse to complaints and may order the termination of unauthorized employment.
 The Government has not enforced child labor provisions adequately in the rural in-
 terior of the country, claiming insufficient staffto monitor abuses. Accord to a recent
 ILO report, 11,600 children between the ages of 10 and 14 are in the labor force-
 primarily in farm or domestic labor.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The Labor Code establishes a standard work-
 week of 48 hours and provides for at least one 24-hour rest period. It also estab-
 lishes minimum wage rates for specific regions and for most categories of labor. The
 minimum wage, last increased in January 1993, is $0.94 per hour in the districts
 of Panama, Colon, and San Miguelito, and for workers in financial services. It is
 not enough to support a family above the poverty level in Panama's relatively high-
 cost economy. Most Panamanian workers employed in urban areas earn the mini-
 mum wage or above, but most workers in the large informal sector earn below the
 minimum wage. Unions have repeatedly alleged that contractors operating in the
 Canal area pay less than the required minimum wage. The Ministry of Labor does
 not always enforce the minimum wage, due to insufficient human and financial re-
 sources.
 The Government sets and enforces occupational health and safety standards. An
 occupational health section in the Social Security System is responsible for conduct-
 ing periodic inspections of especially hazardous employment sites, such as those in
 the construction industry, as well as inspecting health and safety standards in re-
 sponse to union or worker requests. The law protects workers who file requests for
 health and safety inspections from dismissal. They also have the right to remove
 themselves from situations that present an immediate health or safety hazard with-
 out jeopardizing their employment. They are generally not allowed to do so if the
 threat is not immediate but may request a health and safety inspection to deter-
 mine the extent and nature of the hazard. The Ministry of Labor is responsible for
 
 
 enforcing health and safety violations and generally does so. The standards are fair-
 ly encompassing and generally emphasize safety over long-term health hazards, ac-
 cording to organized labor sources. Health issues, however, continue in the banana
 sector as well as the cement and milling industries.
