 PANAMA
 Panama is a representative democracy with an elected executive composed of a
 president and two vice presidents, an elected 72-member legislature, and an ap-
 pointed judicia.y. President Ernesto Perez Balladares, elected in May 1994, is the
 chief executive. The judiciary is independent, but subject to corruption and political
 manipulation.
 Panama has had no military forces since 1989. In 1994 a constitutional amend-
 ment formally abolished a standing military, although it contained a provision for
 the temporary formation of a "special police force" to protect the borders in case of
 a "threat of external aggression." The Panamanian National Police (PNP), under the
 Ministry of Government and Justice, are responsible for law enforcement. The Judi-
 cial Technical Police (PTJ), under the judicial branch's Public Ministry, perform
 criminal investigations in support of public prosecutors. National Maritime Service
 and National Air Service forces also perform police functions along the coasts and
 at the international airport, respectively. Credible reports of corruption within both
 the PNP and PTJ contributed to some police dismissals. Police forces respond to ci-
 vilian authority, have civilian directors, and have internal review procedures to deal
 with police misconduct. There were reports of instances of abuse by some members
 of the security forces.
 The service-oriented economy uses the U.S. dollar as currency, called the Balboa.
 Gross domestic product grew by 2.5 percent in real terms in 1996, and its growth
 was projected to reach 3.5 percent in 1997. The Ministry of Economic Planning ex-
 pects accelerating growth through the year 2000 as the effects of economic liberal-
 ization and the Panama Canal transfer become evident. Poverty persists, with large
 disparities between rich and poor, and income distribution remains skewed. Unem-
 ployment is estimated at 14 percent.
 The Government generally respected the human rights of its citizens, but there
 continued to be serious problems in several areas. Police and prison guards used ex-
 cessive force against detainees and prisoners. Despite some modest improvements,
 overall prison conditions remained poor, with frequent outbreaks of internal prison
 
 
 violence. Prisoners were subject to prolonged pretrial detention; the criminal justice
 system was inefficient and often corrupt. In one high-profile case, Gerardo Gonzalez,
 president of the governing party, used improper influence to compromise the impar-
 tiality of trial proceedings against a former director of the PTJ, Jaime Aba, in
 order to affect the outcome of the separate trial of Gonzalez's son on murder
 charges. There were instances of illegal searches and political pressure on the
 media. The Government was severely criticized when it refused to renew the work
 permit of a prominent foreign journalist. The United Nations High Commissioner
 or Refugees protested government repatriation in April of 200 Colombians, some of
 whom entered Panama fleeing violence in border areas. Discrimination against
 women persists, and indigenous people are severely disadvantaged. Violence against
 women remained a serious problem. Worker rights are limited in export processing
 zones. The Government continued to prosecute a small number of officials respon-
 sible for abuses during the years of dictatorship from 1968 to 1989. The legislature
 created the office of human rights ombudsman in December 1996 and elected the
 first incumbent in a fair and open process. After an initial delay in receiving funds,
 the ombudsman's office was expected to open in January 1998.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no reports of political
 killings.
 The authorities dismissed three PNP guards and ordered them to stand trial for
 the beating death of detainee Jose Luis Alvarado at the Tinajitas prison. After Alva-
 rado got into an argument with the guards on the evening of March 6, witnesses
 reported that the officers handcuffed him to a chain link fence and beat him for sev-
 eral hours until he died.
 The PNP initiated an investigation into the shooting death of Ngobe-Bugle tribe
 member Juan Santos Chobra during a June 17 confrontation between squatters and
 police officers attempting to remove them from private land. According to the PNP,
 a police officer fired in self-defense when Chobra attacked him with a machete; pro-
 testers said that the 65-year-old Chobra was a victim of police aggression. In retalia-
 tion, the protesters overpowered a second PNP officer, bound and tortured him for
 several hours, and wounded him in the head with a machete before he could be res-
 cued.
 On August 3, a jury convicted a former PTJ agent of murder in the January 19,
 1994, shooting death of university student Erick Eloy Diaz. The agent shot Diaz
 during a traffic stop. On March 3, a jury convicted two former members of the public
 security forces for the robbery and murder of two Colombian drug traffickers in No-
 vember 1991.
 The Government continued to prosecute a small number of officials for abuses
 committed during the years of dictatorship, from 1968 to 1989. In February a judge
 sentenced former Panamanian Defense Forces (PDF) captain Jorge Eliecer Bernal
 and two other men to 20 years' imprisonment for the 1987 murder of businessman
 Manuel Lopez Vasquez. On February 21, Peru extradited to Panama ex-PDF major
 Heraclides Sucre, who was previously convicted in absentia and sentenced to 20
 years' imprisonment for his role in the 1989 executions of 11 PDF participants in
 an abortive -cou attempt against then-PDF Commander General Manuel Noriega.
 A jury on Marc% 2 acquitted five former PDF officers for the kidnaping and at-
 tempted murder of opposition activist Mauro Zuniga in 1985, despite Zuniga having
 personally identified his attackers at the trial.
 In November a jury acquitted Pedro Miguel Gonzalez, son of Legislative Assembly
 president Gerardo Gonzalez (also president of the ruling Democratic Revolutionary
 Party-PRD), and two other defendants, Amado Sanchez Ortega and Roberto
 Garrido, who were accused of the politically motivated 1992 killing of U.S. service-
 man corporal Zak Hernandez and intent to kill U.S. army sergeant Ronald Terrell
 Marshall. Gonzalez was freed; Sanchez must still serve a 7-year prison term for a
 prior murder conviction; and Garrido had still not been located at year's end. Gon-
 zalez was acquitted despite clear evidence of his guilt and in the wake of improper
 actions by his father in this case and a separate case against a police official, Jaime
 Abad (see Section i.e.). Gonzalez's trial was subject to political interference, manip-
 ulation, and intimidation of the judge and jury.
 In what was presented as an effort to remedy the slow pace of criminal justice
 proceedings, the ruling party attempted to modify a judicial reform bill sent to the
 Legislative Assembly by the Attorney General. PRD legislators inserted a "veiled
 amnesty" clause, which would have closed all criminal cases open more than 5 years
 without the accused being brought to trial. The reform would have freed human
 
 
 rights violators, common criminals, and even suspected murderers, and would have
 ended proceedings against numerous fugitives from justice (such as Roberto
 Garrido). Both the Attorney General and the secretary general of the Supreme
 Court denounced the modified bill as unconstitutional, and the PRD subsequently
 withdrew it from consideration as the Assembly session concluded in June.
 Several Colombians residing in Panama were reportedly executed in the Darien
 region by Colombian paramilitary forces during cross-border incursions in April and
 June. The paramilitary forces accused the victims of being sympathizers of a Colom-
 bian guerrilla movement. Panamanian authorities have made no arrests in connec-
 tion with the killings, but temporarily reinforced PNP units in the Darien following
 the June incident. There were reports of similar incidents in November; reputed Co-
 lombian guerrillas or members of a paramilitary force killed a police officer and ter-
 rorized a small town for several hours.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 A Colombian paramilitary group in June reportedly kidnaped two Colombians
 who had sought refuge in the Darien community of Yape. Darien business owner
 Antonio Ramos, kidnaped in August 1996 by Colombian guerrillas, was released
 unharmed in May after his family paid an unspecified ransom. Panamanian au-
 thorities state that they are hampered in enforcing the law in Darien by the region's
 remoteness, general lawlessness, and insufficient resources for the police.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution prohibits use of measures that could harm the physical, mental,
 or moral integrity of prisoners or detainees. The public security forces generally per-
 formed in a professional and restrained manner, although there were reports of ex-
 cesive use of force or inhuman punishment, particularly against prison inmates.
 There also were reports that police used physical violence to control detainees dur-
 ing the initial arrest, interrogation, and holding phases.
 On June 3 President Perez Balladares signed a new Organic Law for the National
 Police, passed by the Legislative Assembly in April. The new law supersedes the old
 "Law 20,* dating from the Noriega era, and a 1990 presidential decree as the legal
 basis for the existence and operations of the PNP. The law includes specific guide-
 lines for PNP use of force, including deadly force; sets up norms for selection and
 promotion of officers, contributing to PNP professionalization; and seeks to
 depoliticize the PNP by prohibiting officers' participation in certain political activi-
 ties. It requires that police officers respect human rights, and prohibits instigation
 or tolerance of torture, cruelty, or other inhuman or degrading behavior. The law
 stipulates that the PNP director must be a civilian "noncareerist," while the deputy
 director must be chosen from among career police ranks.
 Corruption among police officers continued to be a problem, but PNP and PTJ di-
 rectors enforced strict disciplinary measures against officers shown to be involved
 in illicit activities. They arrested a PTJ documents expert in July as part of a medi-
 cal diploma falsification ring and fired six other PTJ agents in April for connections
 to organized crime. Three PNP officers were dismissed in February for robbery, and
 PNP director Sosa admitted in February that some members of the transit police
 regularly extort bribes from motorists. In February the authorities formally charged
 seven former PTJ agents with the August 1995 kidnaping and robbery of a Colon
 Free Zone merchant.
 The PTJ and the PNP have offices of professional responsibility that act as inter-
 nal affairs organs to hold officers accountable for their actions. Both have staffs of
 independent investigators and administrative authority to open internal investiga-
 tions which, upon completion, go to their respective inspectors general for submis-
 sion to review boards. The review boards, in turn, recommend to the service's direc-
 tor the appropriate action; the director has the final authority to determine the dis-
 position of each case. Penalties include reduction in rank, dismissal, and in severe
 cases, criminal prosecution. Through July the PNP opened 324 investigations into
 alleged misconduct by police; of the 202 investigations completed, 11 resulted in dis-
 missals, 10 in other disciplinary action, and 9 in reprimands. The other cases were
 either dismissed administratively or resolved in favor of the investigated officer.
 Despite efforts to introduce some prison reforms, prison conditions throughout the
 country remained extremely poor and a threat to prisoners' health. Most prisons are
 dilapidated and overcrowded. Medical screening and care is inadequate, with tuber-
 culosis and other communicable diseases common among the prison population. Fre-
 quent prison riots and gang battles injured or killed numerous inmates. Guards
 often used buckshot and tear gas, fired at close range, to quell disturbances or halt
 escape attempts. Riots were particularly common and severe at La Joya prison,
 where -rost high-risk inmates from the old La Modelo prison were transferred in
 late 1996. In February the Government announced plans to build a new 1,000-in-
 mate facility for medium- and maximum-security inmates adjacent to La Joys.
 
 
 604
 Mounting frustration with La Joya's security problems prompted the National De-
 partment of Corrections (DNC) to fire the prison director in July and place the dep-
 uty director on indefinite administrative leave. Vice Minister of Government and
 Justice Martin Torrijos said that the riots were not the DNC's fault, but were due
 to overcrowding caused by the slow pace of moving criminal cases through the
 courts.
 The authorities took strong disciplinary measures against some officers implicated
 in abuses. The Government fired three PNP guards and initiated criminal proceed-
 ings against them for the March beating death of Jose Luis Alvarado at Tinajitas
 rison (see Section La.). The Government dismissed six civilian guards from the
 4C and opened a criminal investigation after the guards severely heat inmate
 Carlos Cisneros at La Joya prison April 7. The Attorney General's office announced
 in March that it would ask the courts to summon to trial 11 former PNP guards
 for the July 27, 1996 mass beating of inmates at La Modelo prison. The incident,
 which was filmed by a television news crew and broadcast nationwide, prompted the
 Government to evacuate La Modelo and demolish it in December 1996.
 In other prison beating incidents, the authorities publicly denied charges of exces-
 sive use of force. At E Renacer prison on March 2, PNP guards recaptured two pris-
 oners after an abortive escape attempt. The guards reportedly stripped the two men,
 chained them to a fence, and beat them. Witnesses asserted that the naked men
 were left chained and repeatedly doused with cold water by guards overnight. PNP
 director Jose Luis Sosa publicly denied that the beating had occurred. DNCO authori-
 ties claimed to have investigated the incident and turned the report over to the At-
 torney General's office, but the Attorney General said his office could not find the
 report in question. The PNP lieutenant in command of the El Renacer guard force,
 however, was subsequently transferred.
 Tn a July 31 incident at La Joyita prison, a large group of foreign inmates alleged
 that they were attacked by guards while staging a peaceful hunger strike to protest
 prison conditions. According to the inmates, the guards hit and kicked them, and
 set attack dogs on them while they were seated and handcuffed. Diplomatic officials
 observed numerous severe bruises and bite marks on the prisoners. A PNP spokes-
 man insisted that the prisoners had attacked the guards.
 The DNC largely depends on PNP officers, inadequately trained for prison duty,
 to supply its gurd force. Civilian correction officers or "custodians" handie inmates
 within La Joyt, El Renacer, and the central women's prison (which uses only female
 guards). The DNC has authority to discipline prison guards with criminal or civil
 sanctions. Five DNC custodians were arrested in March after investigators accused
 them of complicity in the escape from La Joya of ai notorious Mexican drug traf-
 ficker. Following the beating death of Jose Luis Alvarado (see Section 1.c.), legisla-
 tor Denis Arce of the Assembly's human rights commission formally proposed cre-
 ation of a permanent bureau within the PNP to traiin    ii human rights is-
 SUES.
 At the new La Joyita facility for minimum-security inmates, the DNC inaugurated
 several new prisoner work and rehabilitation programs, including a bakery, brick-
 making facility, a      l      Nral cultivation. However, these programs employed
 less than 20 percent of  Joia's 1,233 inmates, including only 2 of more than 300
 foreign inmates. Foreign financial assistance allowed the DNC to initiate a program
 of medical screening for all new inmates, but did not include improved regular care
 for the existing inmate population.
 Following instances of hostage-taking in September, the President ordered the
 PNP to replace the DNC and take control of two of the largest prisons, La Joya and
 La Joyita. Despite pro tests from human rights groups and opposition parties that
 replacing the D     biC with the polie was a return to bad former practice, the Govern-
 ment justified the policy by displaying over 2,000 knives allegedly confiscated from
 prisoners. Following the P  takeover att  two prisons, inmates' visitation rights
 were seriously limited, along with the right to receive gifts from visitors. Overall
 conditions in the prisons did not change substantially.
 The number of trained DNC guards in other national prisons is inadequate to en-
 sure proper security, given the iarg number of prisoners and generally overcrowded
 conditions. The PNP personnel assigned to La Joya and La Joyita have no formal
 training as prison guards. The first formal training class of approximately 140 cor-
 rections officers graduated from the PNP Police Academy. In its 1996 budget re-
 quest, the DNC asked for funding for 277 new guard positions, but none were ap-
 proved. Effective prison management also is hamperedby the lack of consistent na-
 tional operating guidelines; individual prison directors are free to establish their
 own procedures without effective central control or oversight. Given the high turn-
 over rate among directors, this system leads to internal administrative confusion
 and increases directors' susceptibility to corruption and abuse of authority.
 
 
 605
 The prison situation in Colon remained grim, as did conditions on Coiba Island
 Penal Colony. In an effort to alleviate problems in La Joya and La Joyita, the au-
 thorities transferred many prisoners to Coiba. Many of them have not yet been
 tried, and the distance from their legal counsel is a serious problem. Prisoners suffer
 from malnutrition and shortages of potable water, and medical care is practically
 nonexistent. Coiba has a civilian administrator, but its guard force still consists of
 police guards instead of civilian corrections officers. Geographic isolation and lack
 of communications have separated detainees from their attorneys and caused many
 to miss trials. Escapes from Coiba are reported common. Althouqh the Government
 began reducing the number of prisoners at Coiba prior to closing it, the recent influx
 caused the inmate population to once again increase. The Government acknowledges
 it must keep Coiba open, but as yet has made no provisions to upgrade or maintain
 the facility.
 Conditions at women's prisons in Panama City and Chiriqui province and at the
 Juvenile Detention Center were noticeably better than at adult male prisons. Even
 so, female prisoners, especially those in the primary detention area, reportedly suf-
 fered from overcrowding, poor medical care, and lack of basic supplies for personal
 hygieene.
 The Government generally allows prison visits by independent human rights mon-
 itors.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The Constitution stipulates that arrests
 must be carried out with a warrant issued by the appropriate authorities, and the
 Government generally respected this provision. Exceptions are permitted when an
 officer apprehends a person during the commission of a crime, or when disrespect
 by the individual toward the officer prevents the officer from carrying out his duty.
 The law requires the arresting officer to inform the detainee immediately of the rea-
 sons for arrest or detention and of the right to immediate legal ounsel, to be pro-
 vided by the State for the indigent.
 The Constitution also provides for judicial review of the legality of detention and
 mandates the immediate release of any person detained or arrested illegally. The
 Constitution prohibits police from detaining suspects for more than 24 hours with-
 out bringing them before a competent judicial authority. Inpractice, the authorities
 often violated the 24-hour time limit by several days. Under law the preliminary
 investigation phase may last 8 days to 2 months, and the follow-on investigation
 phase another 2 to 4 months, depending on the number of suspects. Extensions of
 these limits are frequently granted by the courts, leavingthe accused in detention
 for a        tong period without having been formally charged.
 Extnded pretrial detention continued as one of the most serious human rights
 problems, in part a consequence of the elaborate notification phase in criminal
 cases. Many legal authorities (including court officials) criticized judges for excessive
 use of this measure. According to DNC statistics, pretrial detainees composed ap-
 proximately 65 percent of the prison population as of July, down from 71 percent
 i 1996 and 78 percent in 1995. The average period of pretrial custody was 16
 months; pretrial detention in excess of the maximum sentence for the alleged crime
 was common. A legal mechanism exists to hold the Government financially account-
 able in cases where a detainee spends more than 1 year in jail but subsequently
 has all charges dismissed at a preliminary hearing. The dismissal must be either
 because the act of which the  e     was accused is not ruled a crime or because
 there is no evidence to link the suspect to the crime. Although this redress proce-
 dure is not complicated, few former detainees have employed it.
 In November the Legislative Assembly passed a law intended to relieve pressure
 on the clogged prison system by limiting pretrial detention. The new law requires
 judicial authorities to replace pretrial detention with an alternative measure, such
 as house arrest, for prisoners whose time in jail awaiting trial exceeds the minimum
 for the crimes they allegedly committed.
 InMrhSupreme Court magistrate Aura de Villalaz stated that the use of pre-
 ventive detention should be reserved only for the most dangerous suspects. With
 broad public and media perception of judicial corruption, however, judges are afraid
 to impose bail or release suspects on their own recognizance; judges apparently fear
 being subjected to accusations of corruption or of" endangering public safety. In June
 Supreme Court secretary general Caros Cuestas said that the systematic applica-
 tion of preventive detention reflected a "repressive judicial culture."
 The Constitutionsprohibits exile; there were no reports of forced exile
 e. Denial of Fair Public TriaL-The Constitution provides for an independent judi-
 ciary; however, the judiciary is susceptible to corruption and outside influence, in-
 cluding from other branches of government. The President appoints nine Supreme
 Court magistrates to 10-year terms, subject to Legislative Assembly confirmation.
 The Supreme Court magistrates appoint appellate (Superior Tribunal) judges, who,
 
 
 in turn, appoint circuit and municipal court~ jdges in their respective jurisdictions.
 The Attorney General, who heads the Public Ministry jointly with the Solicitor Gen-
 eral, appoints the superior and circuit-lvel prosecutors. Appointments are supposed
 to be madeunder a merit-based system, but the top-down appointment system lends
 itself to political tinkering and undue interference by higher-level judges in lower-
 level cases in which they have no jurisdiction.
 At the local level, mayors appoint administrative judges who exercise jurisdiction
 over minor civil and criminal cases in which they may impose fines or sentences of
 up to 1 year. This system has serious shortcomings: defendants lack adequate proce-
 dural safeguards, officials need not be (and normally are not) attorneys, and some
 engage in corrupt practices. In reality, appeal procedures are nonexistent. More af-
 fluent defendants tend to pay fines while poorer defendants go to jail, one of the
 chief factors leading to prison overcrowding.
 The Constitution provides that persons charged with crimes have the right to
 counsel, to be presumed innocent until proven guilty, to refrain from incriminating
 themselves or close relatives, and to be tried only once for a given offense. If not
 under pretrial detention, the accused may be present with counsel during the inves-
 tigative phase of the proceeding. Judges can order the presence of pretrial detainees
 for the rendering or amplification of statements, or for confronting witnesses. Trials
 are conducted orally with the accused present, but with little new evidence pre-
 sented beyond that in the case file compiled by the public prosecutor. The Constitu-
 tion and the Criminal Procedure Code provife for trial by jury at the defendant's
 election, but only in criminal cases where at least one of the charges is murder.
 The Constitution obliges the Government to provide public defenders for the indi-
 gent. However, many public defenders are not appointed until after the investigative
 phase of the case, a serious disadvantage for the defendant since it is during this
 stage that the prosecutor produces and evaluates the bulk of the evidence and de-
 cides whether to recommend trial or the dismissal of charges. Public defenders' case-
 loads remained staggering, averaging 410 cases per attorney in 1995. Only one new
 pubic defender has been hired since 1992, making a total of 36 nationwide, while
 the caseload increased 74 percent since then. Thisheavy workload undermined the
 uality of representation, with many prisoners meeting their public defender for the
 first time on the day of trial.
 The right to a fair and independent trial was seriously compromised in the case
 of Jaime Abad, former director of the PTJ. Based on dubious evidence, PRD presi-
 dent Gerardo Gonzalez accused Abad of hiding or manipulating ballistics test re-
 suits in the investigation of Gonzalez's son, Pedro Miguel, for the 1992 murder of
 U.S. serviceman Zak Hernandez (see Section 1.a.). While Abad was originally
 charged with a misdemeanor, the charges against him were increased to felony
 counts by the judge at his preliminary hearing on January 15 after Gonzalez clos-
 eted himself with the judge in her chambers for 50 minutes prior to the hearing.
 Despite a constitutional provision for presumption of innocence, the judge publicly
 stated prior to the preliminary hearing that the articles of the Penal Code Abad was
 charged with violating "contain the conduct carried out by Abad." In the months
 leading up to his trial, Abad and his attorneys were subjected to repeated telephone
 threats and harassment, which the Government did not investigate. Concerned for
 his the safety of his attorneys, Abad released them just prior to his trial and was
 consequently represented by an ill-prepared public defender.
 Durng Abad's trial in June, there were strong suggestions of collusion between
 the judge, the government prosecutor, and the independent prosecutor hired by Gon-
 zalez (all with close personal ties to the PRD). The judge summoned all witnesses
 requested by the prosecution, while denying all but one of those requested by Abad;
 that defense witness received a threatening visit at home from a prosecution wit-
 ness and subsequently declined to testify. In reviewing the case, the local Center
 for Human Rights Investigation and Legal Assistance (CIDHS) stated in a press re-
 lease that "Jaime Abad. . . faces a judicial process in which there are clear indica-
 tors that it has been the subject of manipulation by interests of dubious origin." The
 CIDHS further concluded that Gonzalez used and abused his political power to ma-
 nipulate the judicial process against Abad in order to help his son Pedro Miguel
 Gonzalez. The trial concluded on June 25. In August Abad's employer was harassed
 when a story about the case appeared in a foreign newspaper. The employer, faced
 with continuing government harassment, dismissed Abad. In November the judge
 in the Abad case, the same judge who presided over the Gonzalez trial, excused her-
 self from the case and a new judge was assigned. On December 15, the new judge
 found Abad guilty and sentenced him to 3 years in prison, but reduced the sentence
 to a $1,500 fine. Abad said that he would refuse to pay the fine.
 A small number of lower court judges were disciplined during the year on charges
 of corruption or administrative irregularities. In May Attorney General Jose A.
 
 
 607
 Sossa asked Supreme Court president Arturo Hoyos to investigate four judges for
 possible corruption, after the judges dismissed charges in cases that the Attorney
 General's office had asked -be brought to trial. Hoyos declined to investigate the
 judges, saying that the Attorney General had failed to provide sufficient evidence
 of wrongdoing to warrant a formal inquiry. Attorney General Sossa also denounced
 trial lawyers for filing spurious motions and failing to show up for hearings in order
 intentionally to delay criminal proceedings against their clients.
 There was no progress in resolving the impeachment case against former Supreme
 Court magistrate Jose Manuel Faundes. The Legislative Assembly conducted im-
 peachment proceedings against Faundes in late 1996 on charges that he abused his
 authority and accepted cash payments in exchange for lenient sentencing and treat-
 ment of certain prisoners, including narcotics traffickers. However, the Assembly
 could not muster the two-thirds majority vote constitutionally required for impeach-
 ment. As a result, ruling party legislators asked the Supreme Court to declare the
 two-thirds clause unconstitutional in order to be able to impeach Faundes by a sim-
 ple majority vote. All nine sitting Supreme Court magistrates subsequently recused
 themselves from the case, leaving the decision in the hands of their alternates who
 have given no indication of when they will render a decision. In late 1997, some of
 the alternate judges recused themselves as well. Government opponents accused the
 President of unduly influencing the Supreme Court in this case.
 There were no reports of political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Constitution provides for the inviolability of the home, private papers, and tele-
 phonic communications. The authorities may not enter private residences except
 with the owner's permission, or by written order from the appropriate authority for
 specific purposes. These may include entry to assist the victims of crime or disaster,
 or to conduct lawful health and safety inspections. The authorities may not examine
 orivate papers and correspondence, except as properly authorized by competent
 legal authority and in the presence of the owner, a family member, or two neigh-
 bors. The Government generally respected these rights. Iiowever, there were com-
 plaints that in some cases police failed to follow legal requirements and conducted
 unauthorized searches of private residences.
 Although the Constitution prohibits all wiretapping, the Government maintains
 that wiretapping with judicial approval is legal. Under the guidelines established
 by antinarcotics legislation passed in July 1994, the Public Ministry may engage im
 undercover operations, including "videotaping and recording of conversations and
 telephonic communications." The Supreme Court has not issued a definitive ruling
 on whether wiretapping is constitutional and, if so, under what circumstances.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speeh and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of speech
 and of the press, and the Government generally respects these rights in practice.
 However, in a case that provoked a wave of domestic and international criticism,
 the Government tried to expel Peruvian journalist Gustavo Gorriti, associate editor
 of the daily newspaper La Prensa. In August the Labor Minister refused to renew
 Gorriti's work permit, citing a 1978 law that requires directors and deputy directors
 of media outlets to be Panamanian citizens. According to media representatives, the
 Government's true motive for expelling Gorriti was the embarrassment that his in-
 vestigative reports caused relatives and close associates of President Perz
 Balladares.
 The decision to expel Gorriti was denounced by local and international media and
 human rights organizations, prominent authors John L Carre and Mario Vargas
 Llosa, and the new human rights ombudsman, Italo Antinori. All condemned the
 move as an attack on the freedom of the press and called on the President to reverse
 the decision to deport Gorriti. On August 18, the Inter-American Commission on
 Human Rights (LACHIR) issued a request for precautionary measures calling on the
 Government to suspWnd deportation proceedings against Gorriti until the IACHR
 could rule on the full complaint. The Government suspended its September deporta-
 tion order pending court resolution of legal appeals by La Prensa. In October the
 Government areced to allow Gorriti to remain in the country and promised to seek
 revocation of the 1978 law; La Prensa agreed to change Gorriti's title. At year's end,
 however, the 1978 law remained in effect.
 There is an active and often adversarial press and a broad range of electronic and
 print media outlets, including foreign television and radio broadcasts, cable stations,
 and newspapers. Six national daily newspapers, 3 commercial television stations, 2
 educational television stations, and over 95 radio stations provide a broad choice of
 informational sources; all are privately or institutionally owned. While many media
 outlets took identifiable editorial positions, the media carried a wide variety of polit-
 
 
 608
 ical commentaries and other perspectives, both local and foreign. There was, how-
 ever, a noticeable trend toward concentration of control of television outlets in the
 hands of close relatives and associates of the President. The President's cousin, pre-
 vious owner of one of the three commercial television stations, acquired contro of
 a second, and also bought a majority stake in the principal cable television provider.
 The latter acquisition coincided with a sudden decision by the Government to cancel
 a previously granted operating concession to a foreign firm to offer cable service.
 Panamanian and foreign journalists worked and traveled freely throughout the
 country. An employee of the Attorney General's office was administratively sanc-
 tioned in February after he hit and kicked two television cameramen attempting to
 film a news story. Also in February, the president of the Panamanian Society of
 Journalists accused police agents of intimidation tactics when the agents took photo-
 graphs of journalists emerging from a press conference called by lawyers represent-
 ing a prominent Colombian drug trafficking suspect. PNP Director Sosa later in-
 sisted that the incident never occurred. In August the Government brought to trial
 a former PNP officer accused of attacking and injuring a television cameraman, and
 damaging his equipment, when the cameraman tried to film a police operation in
 1993.
 Under "gag laws" dating from the military dictatorship, the Government has legal
 authority to prosecute media owners and reporters for criminal libel and calumny.
 A special executive branch authority has discretionary powers to administer the
 libel laws, which provide for fines and up to 2 years in prison. Under the statute,
 opinions, comments, or criticism of government officials acting in their official capac-
 ity are specifically exempted from libel prosecution, but a section of the law allows
 for the immediate discipline of journalists who show "disrespect" for the office of cer-
 tain government officials. This law was not employed during 1997.
 During the year numerous groups representing press interests called on the Gov-
 ernment to eliminate the gag laws as inconsistent with democratic freedom of ex-
 pression. Addressing the Inter-American Press Association meeting, President Perez
 Balladares said that the rspect of sending a journalist to jail for carrying out his
 proper social role was madmissible." The President said that his Government
 would guarantee freedom of expression, and promised to introduce legislation to de-
 criminalize the libel and calumny clauses of the gag laws. However, no such action
 was initiated in the legislative session.
 In March a superior court turned down an appeal by President Perez Balladares
 contesting an October 1996 lower court ruling that absolved an associate director
 of La Prensa of libel charges. The President originally brought the charges over re-
 marks in a November 1993 column about PRD party leaders including Perez
 Balladares. In February a superior court upheld the right of La Prensa employees
 to sue the Government for civil damages stemming from the forced closure of the
 newspaper by the Norie a regime fromFebruary 1988 to December 1989.
 The press laws provide for the establishment of a censorship board. There were
 no reports that the board took any formal restrictive actions, although its director,
 Eurindia Cordoba de Rodriguez, publicly warned in July that the board was mon-
 itoring radio transmissions and could fime stations that violate norms against vul-
 garity and profanity.
 The law provides for academic freedom, which was generally respected in both
 public and private universities. However, in July officials at the University of Pan-
 ama took steps to silence two prominent professors who publicly alleged corrupt
 practices at the university and called on the national comptroller's office to conduct
 an audit. One of the professors also denounced intimidating pressure tactics by the
 university administration to oblige employees to back efforts by the university rector
 to get himself reelected. University officials initiated disciplinary proceedings
 against the two professors that could lead to their expulsion, under provisions of the
 university code of ethics which prohibits employees from making "insulting" or "de-
 structive" criticisms to the press. In a letter to the university rector, published in
 local media, Human Rights Watch/Americas protested the alleged persecution of the
 two professors and admonished the rector to suspend the disciplinary actions imme-
 diately. New human rights ombudsman Italo Antinori also denounced the measures
 as a clear attack on academic freedom.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution provides for
 the right of peaceful assembly. The Government generally respects this right in
 practice. No authorization is needed for outdoor assembly, although prior notifica-
 tion for administrative purposes is required.
 Overall, police response to public protests proved restrained and professional, de-
 site what was frequently great provocation from unruly and violent demonstrators.
 olice showed restraint while monitoring very large protest marches during the year
 by civil servants and teachers. Academic authorities temporarily closed several high
 
 
 609
 schools after protesting students closed major streets and vandalized public prop-
 erty. Numerous gups criticized the police for excessive use of force on August 13,
 when police used rubber bullets and tear gas to break up a protest in front of the
 U.S. embassy after protesters began throwing objects at the building. One protester
 had a finger severed by a rubber bullet; the police claimed that the protester had
 grabbed the muzzle of a policeman's weapon just as it discharged.
 The Constitution provides for the right of association, and the Government gen-
 erally respects this right in practice. Citizens have the right to form associations
 and professional or civic groups. They may form and organize political parties freely,
 although new parties must meet strict membership and organizational standards in
 order to gain official recognition and participate in national campaigns.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution, although recognizing Catholicism as
 "the religion of the majority of Panamanians," provides for free exercise of all reli-
 gious beliefs, provided that "Christian morality and public order" are respected. The
 Government imposes no limitations in practice, and there is a broad diversity of reli-
 gions. The Constitution prohibits clerics from holding public office, except as related
 to social assistance, education, or scientific research.
 In February the Government filed criminal chares against a pastor and 20 other
 local members of the US.-based "Children of God sect on charges of physical and
 sexual abuse of sect members' children. Also in February the generacongss of
 Kuna Yala, governing body of Kuna indigenous tribes in the region of San Blas,
 passed a resolution affirming the official status of traditional beliefs and prohibiting
 the entrance of new religious sects beyond those already established in the area.
 Government officials discounted the resolution, and said that it was uinconstitu-
 tional and would not be enforced.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation-The Constitution provides for these rights, and the Government re-
 spects them in practice. The Government enforced exit permit requirements for for-
 eigners who overstayed their initial visas. A 9:00 p.m. curfew for minors under 18
 years of age in the Panama City and San Mignelito districts of Panama province,
 imposed in 1992, remained in effect. Police enforcement of the curfew was uneven,
 with strictest compliance focused on high-crime areas.
 Panama is a member of the 1951 U.N. Convention Relating to the Status of Refu-
 gees and its 1967 Protocol and is a party to the 1984 Cartagena Declaration. In
 April the Government provided first asylum (including food, clothing, and medical
 care) to approximately 200 Colombians who had entered the Darien region fleeing
 violene by paramilitary and guerrilla goups in their home regions. Representatives
 of the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), concerned about the repatri-
 ation of a previous group of Colombians in November 1996, arrived in Panama in
 response to the situation. They received assurances from the Minister of Govern-
 ment and Justice that noprecipitous action would be taken to return the Colom-
 bians, and that the UNHCRwould have access to them. Shortly thereafter, however,
 the Government repatriated the Colombians in conjunction with the Government of
 Colombia, and the UNHCR was not permitted to interview group members prior to
 the Government's action. The Government maintained that the repatriation was
 completely voluntary. A UNHCR representative was later able to locate and inter-
 view some Colombians who fled into the jungle to escape the repatriation, -as well
 as PNP officers who assisted in the operation. Based on those interviews, the
 UNUCH determined that the repatriation was a forcible return, and U.N. High
 Commissioner Sadako Ogata sent a formal protest letter to President Perez
 alladares. Several UNHCR member countries also protested on UNHCR's behalf,
 and the Government's action was criticized by Human Rights Watch and Amnesty
 International.
 The Government maintains that did nothing improper in repatriating the Co-
 lombians. The Government insists that it is qualified on its own to determine who
 is entitled to refugee status and that the 1951 Convention and the 1967 Protocol
 were not applicable because the Colombians were not fleeing persecution by their
 government. The Government also rejected the applicability of the 1984 Cartagena
 Declaration, asserting that it is not a formal treaty and therefore does not have the
 force of law. The Government said that it did not consider that a situation of gener-
 alized violence existed in Colombia from which displaced persons were fleeing. Fol-
 lowing the April repatriation, the UNHCR entered into discussions with the Govern-
 ment to draft a contingency plan for the possible future entry of large groups of Co-
 lombians. As of mid-August, UNHC R representatives reported that they had ad-
 vanced on some points in their talks with the Government, but that significant dif-
 ferences remain over the legal framework for UNHCR involvement.
 
 
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens have this right and last exercised it in the 1994 general elections. The
 Constitution provides for a representative democracy with direct popular election by
 secret ballot of the President, two vice presidents, legislators, and local representa-
 tives every 5 years. While the Constitution provides for independent legislative and
 judicial branches, in practice the executive dominates. The independent National
 Electoral Tribunal arranges and supervises elections. The Government respected the
 rights of its citizens to join any political party, propagate their views, and vote for
 candidates of their choice.
 During the year, the governing party launched an effort to amend the Constitu-
 tion to allow reelection of the President to a second consecutive term. In November
 the Legislative Assembly approved a draft amendment permitting reelection; the
 amendment must be approved again by the next session of the legislature, which
 commences in March 1998, and then by a popular referendum.
 There are no legal barriers to participation by women, members of minorities, or
 persons of indigenous descent, but they are generally underrepresented in govern-
 ment and politics. Women hold 5 of 72 Legislative Assembly seats and 1 of 11 cabi-
 net positions. The mayor of Panama City is a woman, as are the provincial gov-
 ernors of Panama, Herrera, and Colon provinces, and the leader of the major opposi-
 tion party.
 The Government provides semi-autonomous status to several indigenous groups
 in their homelands, including the Kuna Yala, Ngobe-Bugle, Madugandi, and
 Embera-Wounaan reserves. The Kuna Yala of San Bias have two representatives in
 the Legislative Assembly, proportionate to their share of the population.
 Locally, each reserve is governed by tribal chiefs, who meet in a general congress
 at regular intervals. Neither the Madugandi nor the Embera-Wounaan reserve has
 its own dedicated legislators, but each has a separate governor. The large Ngobe-
 Bugle reserve, created in March, will ultimately lead to the election of new legisla-
 tors from the area when district realignments are completed.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Human rights organizations, including both religious and secular groups, operated
 without government restrictions. These organizations carried out a full range of ac-
 tivities, including investigations and dissemination of their findings. Organizations
 generally had access to government officials while conducting investigations, al-
 though UNHCR representatives complained after the April repatriation of Colom-
 bians that government officials outside of ONPAR (the Government's refugee agen-
 cy) initially refused to meet with them. Criticism of government actions by inter-
 national organizations were widely reported by the media.
 On February 5, President Perez Balladares signed into law the bill creating the
 new office of "Defender-of the People" (Human Rights Ombudsman). Despite opposi-
 tion concerns about a change in selection procedures from the original bill, the Leg-
 islative Assembly on June 27 electd politically independent constitutional law
 scholar Italo Antinori as the frst ombudsman; human rights groups acknowledged
 that the Assembly carried out the selection and voting procedures in a free and fair
 fashion. Antinori s candidacy gained broad multipartisan support, which the Presi-
 dent characterized at Antinori's swearing-in as strengthening the institution and
 dissipating any doubts about its viability."
 The ombudsman has broad powers to investigate complaints of human rights
 abuses and publicize findings, but no coercive authority, depending instead on moral
 suasion. The initial 6 months of his term were to be a "start-up" period to organize
 the office and hire personnel. However, in a speech on August 12, Antinori said that
 he was already receiving over 100 calls a day with complaints. Antinori expressed
 frustration that, despite guarantees in the ombudsman legislation of an adequate
 operating budget, the Government had not provided the new institution with fund-
 ing. Antinori charged that the Government had tried to "fence him in" through eco-
 nomic pressures. Government spokesmen attributed the lack of funding to the of-
 fice's creation in the middle of the fiscal year. After considerable adverse publicity,
 the Government provided funds for the office, which was expected to open in Janu-
 ary 1998.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution prohibits either special privileges or discrimination on the basis
 of race, birth status, social class, sex, religion, or political views. Nevertheless, soci-
 ety still harbors many prejudices based primarily on social status. Cases of discrimi-
 
 
 611
 nation are difficult to prove, and legal remedies for victims are complicated, time-
 consuming, and costly.
 Women.-Domestic violence against women continued to be a serious problem,
 and local justices processed thousands of domestic violence cases. The Center for the
 Development of the Woman estimated that victims report as few as 20 percent of
 sexual assaults to judicial or law enforcement authorities. The Foundation for the
 Promotion of the Woman, among other women's advocacy gups and government
 agencies, operated programs to assist victims of abuse, and to educate women on
 their legal rights. The 1995 Family Code criminalizes family violence, including psy-
 chological, physical, or sexual abuse.
 In addition to domestic violence, sexual harassment is a serious threat to the
 equal status of women in society. According to a report by the Latin American Com-
 mittee for the Defense of Women, in 1995 about 70 percent of female government
 employees reported having endured sexual harassment in the workplace, 42 percent
 by their immediate supervisors and 18 percent by even more senior supervisors.
 Since a bill to criminanze sexual harassment faiedrt pass the legiature i 199,
 no further legislation has been introduced. The Government fired one of Panama's
 representatives to the Central American Parliament in March after a female sec-
 retary accused him of sexual harassment and abuse. The Government acted after
 the presidency of the Parliamen  t a formal complaint regarding the representa-
 tive s conduct.
 The 1995 Family Code recognizes joint or common prpery in marriages. Insuffi-
 cient resources, however, hampered government efforts efectively to enforce the
 Coes Cohseion  mandates equal pay for men and women in equivalent jobs, but
 wages pald to women are often lower and increase at a slower rate. Although statis-
 tics are lacking, there are credible reports of hiring practices based on age and
 "attractiveness. Following layoffs at the Social Security Administration in Ap, a
 group of female doctors accused administrators of discriminating agaist pregnant
 employees by not renewing their work contracts. Social security officials said that
 the nonrenewals were due to regular personnel reductions, but the employees
 claimed that they were singled out-bcause administrators believed that the women
 had gotten pregnant to avoid being laid off.
 A number of private women's rights groups, including groups for indigenous
 women, concentrate on disseminating information about women's rights, countering
 domestic abuse, enhancing employment and other skills, and pressing forlegal re-
 forms. The Foundation for the  rmotion of the Woman said that it provided coun-
 seling assistance to 555 women in 1995 (latest data available), principally in the
 areas of legal advie, alimony, physical abuse, and family disputes. p
 Children.-bMinors (under 18 years of age) represent 48 prcent of the population.
 Education of children is compulsory through the equivalent of ninth grade. The Gov-
 ernment furnishes basic health care for children through local clinics run by the
 Ministry of Health; a central children's hospital in Panama City operates on govern-
 ment funds as well as private donations.
 The Superior Tribunal for Minors and Superior Tribunal for Families are judicial
 authorities charged with overseeing the protection and care of minors. The overn-
 ment has no specific office charged with protecting children's rights, although the
 office of the First Lady has assumed an advocacy role on some children's issues. In
 March the First Lady's office, in conjunction with the Ministry of Education, signed
 an agreement with the United Nations Children's Fund to sponsor new education
 rOgrams for street children and school dropouts. Many children continue to suffer
 frm malnutrition, neglect, and inadequate medical care. Malnourishment is lowest
 in urban areas, and highest among rural indigenous groups.
 Juvenile courts report a high incidence of juvenile delinquency in major urban
 areas. The authorities particul[arly report an increase in crimes attributed to juve-
 nile gangs, including drug trafficking, armed robberies, kidnapings, car thefts, and
 murders. Following two highly publicized murders of taxi drivers by juveniles in
 April and May, President Perez Balladares said that minors who commit serious
 crimes should be tried as adults. A PRD legislator introduced a bill in May to reform
 the Family Code to allow serious juvenile offenders to be tried and punished as
 adults. Children's advocacy groups, including the Catholic Church and the First
 Lady's office, openly opposed the measure. No action has been taken on the bill by
 the legislature.
 People With Disabilities.-The Workers with Disabilities Office of the Department
 of Labor and Social Welfare is responsible for government policy and support for
 citizens with disabilities and for placing qualified disabled workers with employers.
 The office was in charge of implementing a June 1993 executive order that provided
 employers with tax incentives for hiring people with disabilities but has had only
 
 
 612
 minimal success. Although some public buildings and retail stores have access
 ramps for disabled people, no law or regulation compels the installation of facili-
 tated access features in public or private buildings.
 Indigenous People.-Indigenous people number approximately 194,000 (8 percent
 of the population) and have the same political and legal rights as other citizens. The
 Constitution protects the ethnic identity and native languages of indigenous people,
 requiring the Government to provide bilingual literacy programs in indigenous com-
 munities. Indigenous people have legal rights and take part in decisions affecting
 their lands, cultures, traditions, and the allocation of natural resources. The Family
 Code recognizes traditional indigenous cultural marriage rites as the equivalent of
 a civil ceremony. The Ministry of Government and Justice maintains a Directorate
 of Indigenous Policy. The Legislative Assembly also has an Indigenous Affairs Com-
 mission to address charges that the Government has neglected indigenous needs.
 Despite legal protection and formal equality, indigenous people generally endure rel-
 atively higer levels of poverty, disease, malnutrition, and illiteracy than the rest
 of the population. Discrimination, although generally not overt, is widespread.
 Since rural indigenous populations infrequently master Spanish well enough to
 use appropriate legal terminology, they often have difficulty understanding their
 rights under the law and defending themselves in court. The indigenous population
 has grown increasingly vocal in requesting that the Government grant it more au-
 tonomy by creating more indigenous reserves or expanding existing ones. In re-
 sponse to demandsby the Ngobe-Bugle indigenous tribes (among the most vocal and
 numerically the country's largest) for increased autonomy, the President on March
 7 signed a bill creating a "comarca," or semiautonomous reserve, for the groups. The
 694,000-hectare reserve (9 percent of the national territory), stretching across por-
 tions of three provinces, had been demanded by the Ngobe-Bugle during more than
 two decades of appeals and protest marches.
 While some indigenous leaders expressed satisfaction with creation of the reserve,
 others complained that the Government had pushed through the enabling legisla-
 tion without consulting tribal authorities, and had ignored key indigenous demands.
 A key point of contention remains the disposition of private mining concessions on
 lands within the new reserve. Indigenous leaders wanted formal demarcation of the
 reserve to give them veto power over mining concessions granted by the Govern-
 ment. The new law cites the Constitution as allocating exclusive control of sub-
 surface mineral deposits to the State. Ngobe-Bugle activists vowed to continue pro-
 testing further mineral exploitation in their territory. Tribal leaders also complained
 in July that mayors of towns located within the new limits of the reserve are refus-
 ing to respect tribal laws and decisions by tribal councils. The Government began
 the process of demarcating electoral districts within the new reserve to allow resi-
 dents to participate in the 1999 elections. The Government expected to complete the
 demarcation process in January 1998.
 Police clashed in June with Ngobe-Bugle squatters on private property in Bocas
 del Toro province. The indigenous residents, who had lived in the area for over 20
 years, resisted police attempts to evict them after the property was sold to a new
 owner. In a violent confrontation on ,June 17, police shot and killed one protester
 and several others were slightly injured in the melee (see Section L.a.). Protesters
 temporarily captured and tortured one PNP officer. The Government subsequently
 purchased 40 hectares of land nearby on which to resettle the protesters and agreed
 to provide the community with a school, health clinic, and access to potable water
 and electricity.
 National/Racial/Ethnic Minorities.-The law prohibits discrimination against
 any social, religious, or cultural group; however, naturalized citizens may not hold
 certain categories of elective office. There is some evidence that a constitutional pro-
 vision reserving retail trade to Panamanian citizens originally was directed at Chi-
 nese immigrants, but government officials have stated that it serves as a barrier
 to prevent foreign retail chains from operating in the country. The measure is not
 enforced in practice, however. Chinese, Middle Eastern, and Indian residents, as
 well as citizens of Chinese and Indian descent, operate much of the retail trade, par-
 ticularly in urban areas. Leaders of the over 100,000-member East Asian and South
 Asian communities credibly claimed that Panamanian elites treat Panamanian-resi-
 dent Chinese and Indians as well as citizens of Asian origin as second-class citizens.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-Private sector workers have the right to form and
 join unions of their choice, subject to registration by the Government. A labor code
 reform package signed in 1995 significantly increased workers' ability to establish
 unions. The reforms streamline the accreditation and registration process for
 unions, reduce the minimum size from 50 to 40 workers, and cut the Government's
 
 
 required response time on applications from 2 months to 15 days. In the event the
 Government does not respond within this time frame, the union automatically gains
 recognition and is accorded all rights and privileges under the law.
 According to Ministry of Labr statistics, approximately 10 percent of the total
 employed labor force is organized. There are 257 active unions, grouped under 6
 onfederations and 48 federations representing approximately 73,300 members in
 the private sector. Neither the Government nor the political parties control or finan-
 cialy support unions.
 The 1994 Civil Service Law permits most government workers to form public em-
 ployee associations and federations and establishes their right to rep resent members
 m collective bargaining with their respective agencies. It also provides most workers
 with the right to strike, except for certain government workers in areas vital to pub-
 lic welfare and security, such as the police and health workers and those employed
 by the US. military forces and the Panama Canal Commission. The Government
 fired striking air-traffic controllers in late 1996, citing labor law *provisions defining
 essential services. The fired controllers sought redress but were never reinstated in
 their jobs. Public sector workers are lobbying the Government to have their associa-
 tions accorded formal "union" status.
 The new Labor Code addressed some longstanding concerns of the International
 Labor Organization (ILO). The code no longer makes labor leaders automatically in-
 eligible to keep their union positions if they are fired from their jobs.
 Union organizations at every level may and do affiliate with international bodies.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The Labor Code provides
 moost workers with the right to organize and bargain ollectively, and unions widely
 exercise it. The law protects union workers from antiunion discrimination and re-
 quires employers to reinstate workers fired for union activities. The Ministry of
 or has mechanisms to resolve complaints against antinion employers. The Cil
 Servie Law allows moost public employees to organize and bargain collectively and
 grants them a limited right to strike. The Labor Code establishes a conciliation
 board in the Ministry of Labor to resolve labor complaints and provides a procedure
 for arbitration. Using the provisions of the law, labor and management of one of the
 largest employers, the Chiriqui Land Company, were able to avert a general strike.
 Employers commonly hire temporary workers to circumvent onerous labor code re-
 quirements for permanent workers; such temporary workers receive neither pen-
 sions nor other benefits. The practice of blank contracts is, according to union
 sources, becoming more widespread. The new labor legislation addresses this prob-
 lem by requiring all companies to submit copies of all labor contracts for permanent
 workers to the Labor Ministry and by requiring the Labor Ministry to conduct peri-
 odic inspections of companies' work forces and review all contracts to ensure that
 they are in order. The new code also authorizes the Labor Ministry to levy fines
 against companies not in compliance with the law.
 In January and February 1996, the Government issued cabinet decrees governing
 labor relations in export processing zones (EPZ's) as a means of attracting invest-
 ment into areas vacated under the terms of the Panama Canal Treaty. The original
 decree limited a broad swath of labor rights, including the right to strike and to bar-
 gain collectively. The second decree modified the first and restored most worker
 rights in EPZ's. However, it provides for collective bargaining with "representatives
 of employees" but makes no specific mention of trade unions; it requires mandatory
 arbitration of disputes; and allows for participation in the tripartite (government,
 labor, and industry) arbitration commission by an unrepresentative worker delegate.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The Labor Code prohibits forced
 or compulsory labor, including that performed by children, and neither practice was
 reported.
 d. Status of Child Labor Practices and Minimum Age for Employment.-The
 Labor Code prohibits the employment of children under 14 years of age as well as
 those under 15 years if the child has not completed primary school, children under
 age 16 cannot work overtime; those under 18 years cannot perform night work. Chil-
 dren between the ages of 12 and 15 may perform farm or domestic labor as long
 as the work is light and does not interfere with the child's schooling. The Ministry
 of Labor enforces these provisions in response to complaints and may order the ter-
 mination of unauthorized employment. The law prohiits forced or bonded labor by
 children, and the Government enforces this provision (see Section 1.c.). However,
 the Government does not enforce other child labor provisions in rural areas, claim-
 ing insufficient staff. According to an ILO report, 11,600 children between the ages
 of 10 and 14 are in the labor force-primarily in farm or domestic labor.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The Labor Code establishes a standard work-
 week of 48 hours and provides for at least one 24-hour rest period weekly. It also
 establishes minimum wage rates for specific regions and for most categories of labor.
 
 
 The minimum wage, last increased in January 1993, is $1.00 per hour in the dis-
 tricts of Panama, Colon, and San Miguelito, and for workers in financial services.
 It is not enough to support a worker and family above the poverty level in the rel-
 atively high-cost economy. Most workers formally employed in urban areas earn the
 minimum wage or above. Most workers in the large informal sector earn below the
 minimum wage. Unions have repeatedly alleged that contractors operating in the
 Panama Canal area pay less than the required minimum wage. The Ministry of
 Labor does not adequately enforce the minimum wage law, due to insufficient per-
 sonnel and financial resources.
 The Government sets and enforces occupational health and safety standards. An
 occupational health section in the social security system is responsible for conduct-
 ig periodic inspections of especially hazardous employment sites, such as those in
 the construction industry, as well as inspecting health and safety standards in re-
 sponse to union or worker requests. The law protects from dismissal workers who
 file requests for health and safety inspections. Workers also have the right to re-
 move themselves from situations that present an immediate health or safety hazard
 without jeopardizing their employment. They are generally not allowed to do so if
 the threat is not immediate, but may request a health and safety inspection to de-
 termine the extent and nature of the hazard. The Ministry of Labor is responsible
 for enforcing health and safety standards and generally does so. The standards are
 fairly encompassing and generally emphasize safety over long-term health hazards,
 according to organized labor sources. Health problems, however, continue in the ba-
 nana industry as well as in the cement and milling industries.
