PANAMA
The State Department's 1991 report on the Republic of Panama accurately points out many of the accomplishments of the current government in the area of human rights, particularly compared to the dismal record of the Noriega government. The report also touches upon most of the prominent human right issues in Panama. However, the State Department is reluctant to directly criticize the current government when addressing some of the country's most pressing human rights concerns. Too often when the report refers to a problem, such as with the penal and judicial systems, it blunts its criticism by immediately listing the government's attempts to remedy the situation, and then fails to either comment on the effectiveness of those steps, or overstates their impact. In other areas, such as worker rights and the unanswered questions about casualties from the 1989 U.S. invasion, the report criticizes indirectly, or attributes criticisms to other sources, but then fails to offer its own opinion as to whether it finds those criticisms credible. This contrasts with the style of reporting in the overwhelming majority of other country entries.
The report also presents an overly optimistic, and at times misleading, picture of the current government's efforts and willingness to address many areas of human rights concerns. The report states in its introduction that "[t]he Government continued in 1991 to stress respect for human rights, to strengthen institutional protections, and to attempt to rectify the abuses and civic and economic distortions ensuing from 21 years of dictatorship." That statement is only partially true. While the current Endara government represents a marked, and even dramatic, improvement over the Noriega government's human rights record, in all too many areas the government has failed to effectively address human rights concerns, and to devote adequate resources to reform. Funding for the judicial and penal systems, widely acknowledged as two of the country's most pressing human rights concerns, has barely risen above the levels of 1989. Progress on investigations of those accused of past human rights violations has been slow, with little apparent strategy or commitment by the Endara government to correct the problem.
258
Panama
Also misleading is the report's pronouncement that "the government was sensitive to allegations of human rights abuses and endeavored to investigate the charges." That sensitivity was often only prompted from external pressures from the press or international community. For example, while the report indicates that the government granted safe passage to former officials who claimed asylum in embassies, it only did so after considerable pressure was brought to bear from the international community. The government has, at times, even hindered efforts at reform, such as when it suppressed a legislative investigation into allegations of wiretapping by former members of the Noriega government, and when it initially suppressed reports of abuse by prison guards at the Coiba Island prison.
The report's tendency to overstate, or even misstate, governmental efforts at reform is best typified by the section of the report on Panama's judicial and penal systems, the two areas the report cites as the country's "principal human rights concerns." To its credit, the report accurately points to many, though not all, of the many critical problems facing Panama's judicial system, such as "extended preliminary and pretrial detention," which has resulted in many prisoners having been held for longer than the maximum period to punish their crimes. However, the report tempers its criticism by immediately listing several steps taken by the Endara government to address those problems and then concludes that, "[a]s a result, the proportion of prisoners held for pretrial detention fell from 92 percent in August 1990 to 79.4 percent in June 1991."
In reality, those purported reforms have had no discernible impact on the judicial backlog and the related problems of the Panamanian judicial system. While there has been a decline in the percentage of pretrial detainees, as the report indicates, the actual number of pretrial detainees in custody for more than two years actually has increased slightly. The government's plan to identify and process the cases of those held longest in prison without trial has had no discernible impact. The "legislation" referred to in the report to permit alternatives to pretrial detention, known as Law No. 3, appears only to have been
259
Panama
invoked by a small number of former officials of the Noriega government and not by the general prison population.
While the report states that the Constitution guarantees public defenders for the indigent, it notes, almost in passing, that "this guarantee was in practice routinely ignored." Once again, this criticism is immediately followed in the report by the statistic that the government hired 15 new public defenders in 1991. This statistic is misleading because even with those 15 new public defenders there are still five fewer than required by law and far fewer than actually needed to serve the thousands of prisoners who lack effective representation.
Unfortunately, other problems with the Panamanian judicial system receive little mention in the report. There is no reference to the lack of adequate court facilities, many of which were destroyed during the U.S. invasion. Nor is it mentioned that the Attorney General's office, which is solely responsible for investigating and bringing to trial the extensive pretrial detainee population, was rocked with dissension and upheaval during the year. In addition, because many of the judges who held posts under the Noriega government either resigned or were purged, almost all of their replacements lack judicial experience.
While the report mentions the system of judges known as corregidores, a topic raised in last year's critique of the 1990 report, the report avoids any direct criticism of this system. Instead, it states that the corregidores system of judges "has been harshly criticized by the legal community because these officials need not be (and normally are not) attorneys, operate outside the jurisdictional control of the courts, and some allegedly engage in corrupt practices." No State Department view is given on this issue, thereby avoiding any direct criticism of the Endara government's reform efforts in this area.
The report's treatment of another area of "principal human rights concern" -- the Panamanian penal system - reflects similar problems and biases. To its credit, the report refers to several incidents of violence and abuse by prison guards, especially at Coiba Island prison. The report also attempts to describe the state of the prison system in Panama,
260
Panama
a system plagued by overcrowding, violence and subhuman conditions. The description of conditions is accurate, although far too general. Additional information would have better served to emphasize the severity of the problem. For example, while the report notes that the prison system holds approximately 3,700 prisoners, it should have indicated, for purposes of perspective, that the prisons were only constructed to accommodate a maximum of 1,600 prisoners.
In addition, the report once again tempers its criticism of the penal system by immediately listing various reform efforts undertaken by the government to address those problems. Yet, the report fails to evaluate what effect, if any, those reform efforts have had on the system. This approach is troubling because by simply listing those reforms the report gives the impression of progress, where none apparently has taken place. Panama's prisons remain seriously overcrowded, its inmates ill-fed and the conditions violent. The report fails to mention that no new prison has been built in Panama in the last 40 years. While the report lists as one of the reforms, "action to construct a new Prison," in fact, die government slashed proposed funding for a new prison, leaving barely enough funds available to purchase a new site.
The report's discussion of the progress of investigations of those suspected of past human rights violations, including investigations of former officials of the Noriega government, while acknowledging problems, again avoids directly and meaningfully criticizing the current government's shortcomings in this area. Instead, the report states that "various local and international human rights organizations called for the intensified investigation and prosecution of alleged Noriega-era human rights abuses and other crimes." The most the report does offer is the statement that progress in these investigations and judicial proceedings is continuing at "a slow pace." That statement is then immediately tempered by various statistics which give a misleading picture of the government's efforts in this area. For example, while the report refers to "80 criminal investigations" initiated against former members of the Noriega government, that number is far less than the number of reported human rights violations during that regime. There were tiiousands of denuncias filed against military and other officials since the invasion, and
261
Panama
abuses by the former regime were both widespread and well publicized. Moreover, of the 80 investigations reported, it is likely that few will ever result in an indictment or trial.
The fact is that the Endara government has done far less than it should have to bring former members of the Noriega regime who committed human rights violations to justice, and the report should so indicate. The report makes no mention that the government has failed to empanel a special tribunal or investigatory body to look into and prosecute these past violations. There are no established guidelines or procedures for determining who should be investigated and brought to trial first from the ranks of members of the Noriega regime who are suspected of committing human rights violations. Also absent from the report is any mention of the fact that former members of the Noriega regime have been receiving preferential treatment in prison, which has intensified the perception in Panama that these individuals will never ultimately be brought to justice.
The report avoids any direct criticism of the Panamanian government on the topic of worker rights. The report tells us that the International Labor Organization has condemned Panamanian laws that restrict workers' right to strike and collective bargain, and that "organized labor maintains that changes in labor law and practice begun in 1990 violate the right of free association." However, the report does not offer its own view on these issues. Similarly, in discussing what is known as Law 25, which enabled the Panamanian government to dismiss hundreds of state workers in late 1990 for participating in a march and general strike, the report also fails to render an opinion. Instead, it states that "[ojrganized labor characterizes the government's dismissal of several hundred workers under this law as a violation of the right of association."
The report's discussion of civil liberties accurately points out that respect for civil liberties in Panama has improved dramatically since the end of the Noriega government. However, the report gives the impression that respect for these freedoms is nearly absolute. Omitted is any mention that student protests in mid-1991 in various high schools
262
Panama
and universities were met witli tear gas and birdshot from the police. Also omitted are references to several incidents of press censorship of foreign publications. On several occasions publications critical of the government were seized by authorities at the airport and prevented from being distributed in Panama.
There are several other omissions in the report. The report fails to mention, no less criticize, certain institutions in the current Panamanian government which appear to be continuing, or have the potential to continue, the human rights violations of die Noriega era. One such group is the Institutional Protection Service (IPS), a shadowy paramilitary arm of the President's office run by Menalco Solis, a former Noriega minister and ally. The IPS, which was created by President Endara, has been reported by America's Watch to have between 600 and 900 heavily armed members who do not wear uniforms or badges and who have no clearly defined chain of command. The IPS is believed to be carrying on a wiretapping program similar to that of Noriega's G-2 intelligence service, a charge that President Endara has not denied.
While the report indicates that it "was reported in the press" in March that wiretapping was being conducted by another organization run by Menalco Solis, the Council on Public Security and National Defense, it fails to give its own opinion as to whether this allegation is credible. Given the magnitude of Washington's role in Panama, especially in the installation of the government in power, the State Department has the resources available to it to determine whether this allegation is true. Equally important, the report fails to mention that President Endara personally persuaded legislators to abandon plans to hold hearings on the propriety of this wiretapping.
Another disappointing aspect of the report is its failure to comment on concerns raised in last year's critique regarding the leadership, composition and training of the Panamanian Fuerza Pública, commonly known as the Public Force or PPF. This institution, which is the police force that replaced Noriega's Panamanian Defense Forces (PDF), has caused concern among a number of human rights groups. The reason for the concern is that the PPF is primarily composed of
263
Panama
former officers of PDF. While the government apparently has purged many of the former high level officers of the PDF, and politically motivated abuses appear rare, especially in comparison to the PDF, there have been incidents of corruption and lawlessness: theft and destruction of property in Chirique province and a bank robbery in Panama City. The report is regrettably silent on those incidents, as it is on the disruptions that have rocked the leadership of the PPF. There have been six different leaders of the PPF in the last two years.
While this year's report mentions the issue of Panamanian civilian deaths resulting from the U.S. invasion, an issue also raised in last year's critique, it does so almost in passing, again without any direct criticism of the Panamanian government or the United States military. While the report tells us that the Inter-American Human Rights Commission "recommended a thorough investigation and compensation for relatives of noncombatant victims," there is no further discussion of this issue. Although the report refers to the issue of the number of civilian casualties from the invasion ~ a legitimate topic and one that has been the source of a great deal of controversy ~ its exclusive focus on this statistic obscures other equally important issues. The circumstances under which these civilians died is just as important as the number of deaths. The questions surrounding the conduct of the U.S. military during the invasion, what attempts were made to avoid civilian casualties, and the military's obligation to collect, identify and separately bury these casualties once again receives no mention in the report.
264
