 PANAMA
 Panama's current constitution was promulgated in 1972
 during the ten years of military rule under General Omar
 Torrijos. Head of government from 1968 to 1978, Torrijos
 yielded official power to a civilian President elected
 in 1978. As commander of the national guard, he continues
 to retain substantial political authority. Partisan
 political activities were renewed with the election of
 one-third of the National Legislative council in 1980.
 General elections are scheduled for 1984. The 1980 elec-
 tions, while criticized for administrative defects and
 shortcomings, were free from significant fraud. The
 government has reiterated its intention that popular
 election of the next president and vice President will
 occur in 1984.
 Within the economic constraints of limited resources
 and a sizeable public debt, Panama in 1980 continued
 health care, education, and housing programs for the
 poorer members of its population.
 The government actively supported human rights in the
 international arena and maintained good relations with
 the Inter- American Human Rights Commission (IAHRC) which
 issued favorable reports on Panama in 1978 and 1979.
 In his October 1980 State of the Union address, President
 Royo renewed the government's pledge, 'to defend those
 principles which are dedicated to the full development
 of the rights of man in effective conditions of Liberty,
 Justice and Peace."
 A weak area in Panama's human rights performance has
 been its detention and judicial processing of common
 criminals. In October 1980, the attorney general ordered
 prison directors to cease holding, for more than 24 hours,
 any person improperly or inadequately charged. The attorney
 g eneral's measures and sharp criticism of 'arbitrary
 and illegal" acts of, some lower courts may help resolve
 one of the major concerns of the IAHRC about the human
 rights sitpation in the country.
 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Torture
 Article 24 of the constitution prohibits self-incrimination,
 and implicitly, the use of torture. During 1980 there
 were alleged instances of physical abuse of suspected
 criminals and of physical threats towards suspects.
 While some of these allegations were credible, they were
 isolated and do not indicate that torture or cruel treatment
 of detained persons is a widespread practice.
 b. Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment
 The constitution limits criminal punishment to fines
 and/or prison terms of up to 20 years. There is no death
 penalty in Panama. Hard labor may be imposed, but the
 
 
 500
 constitution prohibits measures that harm the physical,
 mental or moral integrity of persons under detention.
 Although there may be exceptions, thisprohibition is
 normally observed.
 Panama's roughly two thousand prisoners experience overcrowd-
 ing and poor living conditions which result from a lack
 of economic resources rather than government policy or
 an intent to degrade prisoners. Government officials
 recognize the problem and are looking for ways to improve
 prison conditions. The removal of minors from the Carcel
 Modelo Prison, as recommended by the Lawyers' Organization,
 will help reduce the number of detainees, and the transfer
 of Gamboa Prison, formerly a United States prison in
 the Panama Canal area, to government jurisdiction will
 increase slightly available detention space. A prison
 reform commission which was named in 1979 has been inactive.
 Government policy proscribes discriminatory treatment
 of prisoners on the basis of class, race, sex or religion.
 People under detention who are well off economically
 can obtain help (food, etc.) from their own resources
 and from friends and relatives just as they may secure
 a better defense lawyer.
 c. Disappearances
 There have been no cases of summary executions or of
 the "disappearance' of apprehended persons. There are
 no quasi- official or extra-legal security forces in
 Panama. The constitution provides for habeas corpus
 and requires warrants for arrests (an exception is allowed
 for those seized while committing crimes).
 d. Arbitrary Arrest and Imprisonment
 Leading members of the Panamanian legal profession have
 noted cases of illegal detention in the Panama City jail.
 The instances involve sentencing of minors (12 to 15
 cases) by courts which do not have jurisdiction over
 such cases. The same lawyers consider it probable that
 another group of prisoners may have been sentenced arbi-
 trarily and without the due process required by Panamanian
 law. They point out that sentences of up to one year
 are sometimes handed down in "night court" sessions by
 judges who decide lesser criminal cases in a summary
 manner, leaving the accused no time to consult an attorney
 before sentence is passed. They further state that although
 sentences of more than 60 days should be referred auto-
 matically to the Consultations and Appeals Commission,
 this process has not been followed in practice.
 These lawyers expect the government will take corrective
 action when such irregularities are called officially
 to its attention. For example, the Panamanian Attorney
 General, in an October 9, 1980, press interview, sharply
 criticized "violation' of the constitutional prohibition
 against holding persons more than 24 hours. He blamed
 district officials with judicial powers, as well as some
 mayors and night court judges, for "flagrant violations
 of the 24-hour rule." He added that in Panama many persons
 are detained without proper orders or a trial for periods
 exceeding the possible sentences for their alleged crimes.
 He has ordered prison directors to assure that these
 practices are ended.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The administrative code mandates trials to be oral and
 public and gives the accused the right to be present.
 Nevertheless, in most criminal cases the court process
 consists of written presentation by the prosecution and
 defense without the presence of the accused. The documents
 produced are available for examination by both sides.
 According to authorities the burden of proof rests on
 the prosecutor, and the right to appeal both the charges
 and sentence is available to the prosecution as well
 as the defense. Panamanian police must bring charges
 against the accused at the time he is summoned, and the
 failure to make such charges personally to the accused
 has led to invalidation of a sentence.
 Legal cases are pursued on the working assumption that
 the Supreme Court will uphold the constitution and the
 laws. While magist-rates and judges are legally independent,
 the judiciary continues to appear susceptible to the
 influence of the executive branch. The military intelligence
 branch of the national guard, has de facto right of review
 of all aspects of procedure.
 There is no military jurisdiction over civilians in Panama.
 The national guard has a code of military justice, and
 its members also are subject to civil law.
 The major cause for concern about denial of a fair public
 trial in Panama's judicial system centers on its "night
 courts." The 1979 IAHRC Report on Panama called for
 "elimination of existing night court procedures which
 allow persons to be sentenced to prison, terms without
 any real opportunity to prepare their defense."
 Although the administrative code empowers the accused
 to name a representative, there is no public defender
 system in Panama. -The local legal association is concerned
 over the general issue of inadequate defense and is studying
 the possibility of establishing a public defender system.
 f. Invasion of the Home
 Under the constitution, judicial warrants must be issued
 before officials can enter homes. There were no allega-
 tions of violations of this guarantee during 1980.
 2. Government Policies Relating to the Fulfillment of
 Such Vital Needs as Food, Shelter, Health Care and
 Education
 Government projects are aimed at giving each person access
 to the nation's limited resources. The national development
 plan stresses a higher rate of growth and a wider, more
 equitable distribution of the benefits of this growth.
 The government has expanded and extended education and
 health programs into the countryside and poorer urban
 neighborhoods, invested large sums in infrastructure
 projects (roads, electricity, telecommunications, water
 system, etc.), and improved national socio-economic integra-
 tion through greater attention to provincial population
 centers.
 Between 1968 and 1978 the death rate (per thousand) dropped
 from 7.0 to 4.4 and infant mortality (per thousand) from
 39.6 to 24.8; the population with access to potable water
 
 
 502
 rose from 66.4 percent to 82.7 percent, while the population
 with access to sanitary facilities increased from 74.7
 percent to 89.2 percent. The birth rate (per thousand)
 decreased from 38.9 to 28.9; annual population growth
 rate dropped from 3.3 percent to 2.4 percent; and illiteracy
 fell from 21.7 percent to 17.8 percent.
 The constitution states that economic activities primarily
 fall within the private sector but authorizes the state
 to orient, direct, regulate, replace or create economic
 activities to increase the nation's wealth and to assure
 benefits of the economy for the greatest possible number
 of people. Private property is respected in law and
 practice, and citizens, without regard to sex, social
 origin, birth, race, religion or political opinion, have
 a right to own property, as well as to avail themselves
 of any economic benefits, programs, or services of the
 state.
 Recent economic performance has yielded mixed results.
 Per capita gross domestic product is a relatively high
 $1,264; the 1979 annual rate of inflation rose from 7
 percent to 14 percent; the annual real rate of economic
 growth almost doubled from 1978 to nearly five percent.
 Recorded unemployment in 1978 was 8.1 percent, but accurate
 figures are not available and some Panamanian government
 estimates place current unemployment at 12 percent while
 other sources claim it may have reached 17 percent.
 An estimated 39 percent of the population lives under
 conditions of poverty, that is, with an incopme barely
 adequate to provide for a family's basic needs. Of this
 group, approximately half (or 20 percent of the country's
 population) lives in serious or extreme poverty (i.e.,
 unable to provide for basic necessities). Although a
 larger percentage of the poor is to be found in rural
 areas, the trend toward an urbanized society indicates
 that within five to ten years, Panama's poor population
 may be split evenly between the urban and rural areas.
 Although figures for earlier periods are not available,
 it can be assumed that current poverty figures represent
 a significant improvement over the situation a decade
 ago. Further, because of the availability of a variety
 of public services (e.g., health clinics, school and
 maternal/child feeding programs), even the poorest fami-
 lies have a cushion which makes their economic situation
 less unbearable. In 1975, there was one physician per
 1,333 persons. Current statistics on hospital beds per
 person are not available. Reduction of infant mortality
 as well as the drop in the general death rate and other
 indices suggest improvement in the area of public health.
 Panama's social system and legal code accord equal treatment
 to women and to men. The constitution prohibits discri-
 mination on the basis of race, birth, social class, sex,
 religion or political ideas. The constitution also requires
 equal pay for equal work without distinction based on
 sex. The constitution gives pregnant employees 12 weeks
 mandatory maternity leave and the right to return to
 their jobs. Property rights, citizenship, public education,
 suffrage and office holding are rights of all Panamanians
 without regard to sex. The formation of political parties
 based on sexual discrimination is specifically prohibited,
 as are parties founded on racial or religious bias.
 
 
 503
 In practice, the safeguards expressed in the constitution
 are not enjoyed by women. Panamanian women enjoy a high
 level of social freedom; many are active in business,
 government, and academia. However, women in general
 still do not share the same opportunities for individual
 and collective advancement that are available to men.
 From 1974 through 1978, the country experienced a severe
 recession, causing widespread unemployment and underemploy-
 ment, both of which have been especially high for women.
 The government estimated in 1977 that 14 percent of the
 female work force was unemployed and 44 percent was under-
 employed, with the comparable figures for men being 10
 percent and 18 percent, respectively. Opportunities
 for non-farm employment in rural areas for women are
 minimal, causing many to migrate to the cities, especially
 to the metropolitan corridor. Female employment in urban
 Panama is concentrated in the service sector, where wages
 are generally lower; wages paid to women are both lower
 than those for males and increase at a much slower rate.
 Comparatively fewer women participate in the labor force
 than men, and their participation seems to fluctuate
 as the job market expands and contracts. Government
 statistics showed that in 1978 women made up about 29
 percent of the economically active work force.
 3. Respect for Civil and Political Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech, Press, Religion and Assembly
 The constitution guarantees freedom of speech, press
 and other forms of communication without censorship.
 However, actions against a person's reputation, against
 security of society, public security, or public order,
 are penalized by law, and media controls are still utilized
 when the Panamanian authorities believe this to be neces-
 sary.
 There was no censorship of foreign or domestic books
 or works of art during 1980 nor interference with academic
 inquiry in the natural or social sciences. Views of
 opponents of the present government are circulated widely
 by press, radio and public speeches, including criticisms
 of the actions taken by Panamanian officials such as
 the rresident, the commander of the national guard, cabinet
 members, legislators, and other government officials.
 The new opposition newspaper, La Prensa, opened August
 Ist, 1980 after a full year of planning and construction.
 The paper claims a circulation of about 20,000, and carries
 considerable advertising. It set up operation free of
 harassment and continues to circulate unimpeded. The
 much smaller daily opposition tabloid Ya, celebrated
 its first anniversary in June 1980.
 The government has taken several punitive measures against
 individual journalists. In December 1979, a radio commen-
 tator was severely beaten by police during a demonstration
 against Panama's granting asylum to the Shah of Iran.
 In March 1980, the broadcasting licenses of four radio
 commentators were suspended indefinitely for what the
 government termed slanderous and contentious reporting.
 They have not been renewed. Three of these journalists
 now work for an opposition newspaper.
 The government also summarily deported an American correspon-
 dent of a United States radio network, claiming that
 
 
 she had intentionally misquoted Panama's president; she
 was allowed back in the country only after she had sent
 the president a written public apology.
 Later in 1980, the Panamanian Board of Journalists (the
 governing body of the Association of Professional Jour-
 nalists) threatened to revoke the Panamanian press cre-
 dentials of a foreign journalist unless he publicly cor-
 rected what the Board considered to be erroneous statements
 in a story published in a local paper.
 Press stories and radio and television programs critical
 of government policies and programs are common. The
 government controls directly three of the six Spanish-
 language dailies, and the director and deputy director
 of the independent La Estrella are high-level government
 officials. The opposition papers Ya and La Prensa have
 not been subjected to any direct or-indirect government
 censorship or influence.
 Panama's constitution guarantees the right of peaceful
 assembly without arms and for a legitimate purpose.
 Authorities legally can take steps to prevent the exercise
 of this right if it interferes with traffic, threatens
 public order, or violates the rights of third parties.
 Demonstrations constitutionally require 24-hour advance
 notice to the authorities, but this advance notice appears
 not to have been given, in some cases. Freedom of assembly
 has been practiced by groups of various ideological back-
 grounds as well as by professional organizations. When
 violence and property destruction have occured, police
 have intervened and restored order usually without charges
 of brutality. Professional, social or political groups,
 as well as trade unions, meet without interference.
 The trade union movement in Panama represents ideological
 as well as apolitical, labor organizations. Union elections
 are democratic, fair, and free from government interference.
 Consultation with unions about government policies (particu-
 larly employment issues) is institutionalized through
 a national commission representative of major labor organiza-
 tions. Government, private sector, and trade union consul-
 tations increased during 1980. Both collective bargainin4
 and strikes are constitutionally guaranteed rights of
 workers, although government regulations restrict or
 forbid this right for certain government employees.
 Workers in the Colon Free Zone, as well as the Bank Worker's
 Union, affiliated with the moderate and democratic Confedera-
 tion of Panamanian Workers, have not been granted legal
 recognition. The government has agreed to undertake
 a review of this situation in order to propose special
 legislation allowing worker organizations subject to
 special limits in these enterprises. Panama has a moderately
 progressive labor code, and union rights generally are
 respected in practice.
 The constitution recognizes that most Panamanians are "
 Catholic, but guarantees religious freedom to all in
 law and in practice. Persons in Panama appear to be
 neither favored nor disadvantaged because of their religious
 beliefs.
 b. Freedom of Movement within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration and Repatriation
 
 
 505
 The constitution permits Panamanians to move freely within
 the country and to emigrate and this is honored in practice.
 It also prohibits exile, although some instances have
 occured in the past. Many civilian exiles have returned
 without being subjected to physical or economic harassment.
 A few military exiles remain abroad and allege that they
 could not return without provoking government reprisals.
 The government's attitude towards the return of former
 officers has not been tested.
 Panama has accepted political refugees of widely differing
 ideological persuasions. However, the government, pleading
 insufficient resources to meet satisfactorily the needs
 of its own citizens, has participated only minimally
 in refugee resettlement programs. In the absence of
 evidence of past political persecution,'the Panamanian
 government has not recognized the right of asylum for
 Cuban seamen who jump ship in Panama. In 1980, the govern-
 ment repatriated against their will several Cuban seamen
 who jumped ship in Panama.
 c. Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 There were no elections in Panama between 1968 and 1972,
 and political parties were not permitted to participate
 in elections as organizations until this year. The govern-
 ment is carrying out a program of return to full democratic
 processes culminating in general elections in 1984.
 An important step in this process was the legalization
 of political garties in 1978. A ban on political parties,
 not strictly enforced, has been in effect since 1969.
 The recognition of opposition political parties legitimized
 political ckiticism of the government by opposition parties
 and represented an advance for free speech and free assembly
 as well as allowing increased participation by citizens
 in the political process. However, article 2 of the
 1972 constitution continues to empower the national guard
 to play an active role in the political life of the country.
 The 505 members of the national assembly are elected
 by secret, popular vote in municipal elections. The
 assembly provides an institutional channel to voice par-
 ticular local concerns to the national government. The
 National Legislative Council, chosen by the assembly
 from its membership, has expanded moderately the influence
 of the legislative branch on executive decisions. The
 National Legislative Council, which originally had 37
 appointed members, was increased in size to 56 in September
 1980 when 19 new members were elected by a direct popular
 vote in which political parties and independent candidates
 took part. The partial elections were given close attention
 by high level officials of the government. The government's
 official party, the Partido Revolucionario Democratico,
 campaigned for all 19 legislative council positions.
 Two opposition parties, the Christian Democrats and the
 Liberal Party as well as another pro-government party,
 Frente Amplio Popular, presented candidates, and other
 independent candidates participated. The Panamenista
 Party of ex-President Arnulfo Arias, as well as several
 smaller political parties, refused to take part in the
 elections which they characterized as fraudulent and
 without meaning. Voting is not compulsory in Panama
 and an opposition group called FRENO, made up of parties
 opposed to the partial elections, urged voters to abstain.
 
 
 506
 Observers from Central and South America and the United
 States were present at the elections by invitation of
 the government. The government party (PRD) won 10 of
 the 19 seats. Five opposition candidates were elected
 from the Liberal Party, two from the Christian Democrats,
 and two independents. The elections demonstrated the
 government's willingness to accept public criticism and
 its ability to run limited open and fair elections.
 Government-regulated facilities (radio, TV and press,
 as well as some transportation) were provided for all
 candidates; and the campaign, with minor exceptions,
 was free from repression or interference. Over sixty
 percent of the eligible voters cast ballots in the election.
 Many candidates, opposition leaders, as well as pro-govern-
 ment party officials complained of long delays in opening
 the polls and the inability of many potential voters
 to establish their eligibility because of faulty election
 lists. The president noted the importance of correcting
 these deficiencies in his October 11 address to the national
 assembly.
 Apart from political party organizations, there are several
 political pressure groups, such as businessmen's associa-
 tions, organizations of parents of schoolchildren, unions,
 etc. These groups operate openly and exert some influence
 on government policies. The schoolteacher Strike and
 the supporting demonstration in October 1979 brought
 about the abolition of the government's educational reform
 program and forced a reconsideration of the Basic Education
 Law by a broader based commission. Union pressure has
 similarily led to reconsideration of the current labor
 relations law.
 4. Government Attitude and Record Regarding International
 and Non-governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The government has espoused human rights causes in the
 Organization of American States (OAS), United Nations,
 and elsewhere, voted for investigations, and in 1977
 invited the Inter- American Human Rights Commission to
 investigate conditions in Panama. As noted previously,
 the IAHRC visited and reported on Panama in 1978. In
 1979 the IAHRC was invited to revisit Panama. The IAHRC
 expressed satisfaction at the government's receptive
 attitude and commended its efforts to improve Panama's
 human rights situation. While urging more change and
 noting some irregularities and limitations, the IAHRC
 in 1979 recorded a gradual and steady progress in Panama's
 observance of human rights. Amnesty International did
 not mention Panama in either its 1979 or 1980 reports.
 A human rights committee was formed in Panama in 1978.
 Relatively inactive in 1980, its members have suffered
 no government harassment.
 Panama is an active participant in international and
 regional human rights bodies. President Royo signed
 the Code of Conduct of Riobamba on September 11, 1980.
 Panama has been outspokenly critical of human rights
 violations by the Garcia Meza regime which staged a military
 coup in July, 1980 in Bolivia, and has objected to the
 violation of human rights in El Salvador. The government
 has repeatedly condemned the Soviet occupation of Afghanistan
 and the detention of United States hostages in Iran.
 In his address to the inaugural session of the national
 
 
 507
 assembly on October 11, 1980, President Royo reasserted
 Panama's respect for the rights of countries to manage
 their internal affairs. However, he added, "the atrocious
 violations of human rights systematically taking place
 in certain countries transcend the plane of internal
 affairs, impacting on other States, especially those
 of us who are signatories of international accords on
 these matters."
 
 
 508
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: PANAMA
 1978     1979      1980
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL..         23.1      21.2     2.0
 LOANS..............         20.0      16.0      0.0
 GRANTS..............3.1                5.2      2.0
 A.AID ................ .        21.3     19.9       1.0
 LOANS..............         20.0      16.0      0.0
 GRANTS,... ...,..          1.3       3.9      1.0
 (SEC.SUPPASSIST.).           0.0       0.0      0.0
 BO.FOOD FOR PEACEE....            1.3      1.1      1.0
 LOANS..............          0.0       0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ...........           1.3      1.1      100
 TITLE I-TOTAL .....               0.0      0.0      0.0
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS   .           0.0      0.0      0.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR       0....     .0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE I-TOTAL .....             1.3      1.1      1.0
 E.RELIEF.EC.DEV & WFP.           0.0      0.0      0.1
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY,....           1.3      1.1      0.9
 C.OTHER ECON, ASSIST...           0.5      0.2      00
 LOANS..............          0.0       0.0      0.0
 GRANTS.............           0.5      0.2      0.0
 CONTR. TO IFI...           0.0       0.0      0.0
 PEACE CORPS,.....          0.0       0.0      0.0
 OTHER............          0.5       0.2      0.0
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL,..           0.5      1.4      0.3
 LOANS..........               0.0      1.0      0.0
 GRANTS.........               0.5      0.4      0.3
 A.HAP GRANTS..........           0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.CREDIT SALES-FS....           0.0      1.0      0.0
 C.INTL MILED.TRNG...,           0.5      0.4      0.3
 D.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK...           0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS .....            0.0      0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. & NIL...         23.6      22.6      2.3
 LOANS..............     . 20.0       17.0      0.0
 GRANTS.............          3.6       5.6      2.3
 OTHER US LOANS,.........           0.0      3.7      0.0
 EX-IM BANK LOANS ....            0.0      3.6      0.0
 ALL OTHER ..............          0.0      0.1      0.0
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1978     1979      1980     1946-80
 ------------      --------------- !;9--------------
 TOTAL............22.5       68.2     149.9    734.0
 IBRD               12.0     34.0      58.0    313.2
 IFC                 3.8      3.0       0.0      8.3
 IDA                 0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 IDB                 5.4     29.0      91.4    386.1
 ADB                 0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 AFDB                0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 UNDP                1.3      1.7       0.5     22.1
 OTHER-UN            0.0      0.5       0.0      4.3
 EEC                 0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 
 
 509
