 PANAMA
 Panama is a representative democracy with an elected executive composed of a
 president and two vice presidents, an elected 72-member legislature, and an ap-
 pointed judiciary. President Ernesto Perez Balladares, elected in May 1994, is the
 chief executive. In an August referendum, citizens rejected the President~s proposal
 to amend the Constitution to allow reelection of a president to a second term. Al-
 though the Constitution provides for an independent judiciary, the judicial system
 is subject to corruption and political manipulation.
 
 
 Panama has had no military forces since 1989. In 1990 the Government created
 the Panamanian Public Forces, which consist of the Panamanian National Police
 (PNP), the National Maritime Service (SMN), the National Air Service (SAN), and
 the Institutional Protection Service (SPI). In 1994 a constitutional amendment for-
 mally prohibited the establishment of a permanent military, although it contains a
 provision for the temporary formation of a "special police force" to protect the bor-
 ders in case of a "threat of external aggression." The Ministry of Government and
 Justice oversees the PNP, SMN, and SAN, while the Ministry of the Presidency su-
 pervises the SPI. The PNP are responsible for law enforcement. The Judicial Tech-
 nical Police (PTJ) perform criminal investigations in support of public prosecutors.
 In December a law changed the PTJ, formerly under the judicial branch's Public
 Ministry, into a semiautonomous body with leadership appointed by the Supreme
 Court. Credible reports of corruption within both the PNP and PTJ contributed to
 some police dismissals. Police forces res pond to civilian authority, have civilian di-
 rectors, and have internal review procedures to deal with police misconduct. There
 were reports of instances of abuse by some members of the security forces.
 The service-oriented economy uses the U.S. dollar as currency, called the Balboa.
 Gross domestic product grew by 4.4 percent in real terms in 1997, and its growth
 was projected to be below 4 percent in 1998. The Ministry of Economic Planning
 expects accelerating growth through the year 2000 as the effects of economic liberal-
 ization and the Panama Canal transfer become evident Poverty persists and income
 distribution remains skewed, with large disparities between rich and poor. Unem-
 ployment is estimated at 14 percent.
 The Government generally respected the human rights of its citizens, but there
 continued to be serious problems in several areas. Police and prison guards on occa-
 sion used excessive force against detainees and prisoners. Despite some modest im-
 provements, overall prison conditions remained poor, with occasional outbreaks of
 internal prison violence. Prisoners were subject to prolonged pretrial detention. The
 judiciary was subject to political manipulation, and the criminal justice system was
 inefficient and often corrupt. There were instances of illegal searches and political
 pressure on the media. Violence against women remained a serious problem, and
 discrimination against women persisted. Worker rights are limited in export proc-
 essing zones. The Government continued to prosecute a small number of officials re-
 sponsible for abuses during the years of dictatorship from 1968 to 1989. The legisla-
 ture created the office of Human Rights Ombudsman in December 1996, but ini-
 tially did not provide funding, and the office did not open until January, when it
 began to handle cases. However, in February the Supreme Court stripped the Om-
 budsman of his authority to investigate human rights violations involving the ad-
 ministration of justice.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no reports of political
 killings.
 A PNP officer was accused of the shotgun killing of detainee Arnulfo Stone at the
 Public Prison in Colon. The officer was transferred to administrative duties pending
 an investigation. According to other prisoners present at the time of the shooting,
 Stone refused the officer's demand to stop singing and, after a verbal altercation,
 the officer shot Stone at point blank range with his shotgun. According to the ac-
 cused officer, the shooting was accidental.
 A Public Ministry investigation concluded in August that three PNP guards ac-
 cused of the March 1997 beating death of detainee Jose Luis Alvarado at the
 Tinajitas prison should stand trial. The guards remain separated from the PNP
 pending the outcome of the trial.
 There was no further action in the PNP investigation into the June 1997 shooting
 death of Ngobe-Bugle tribe member Juan Santos Chobra.
 The Government continued to prosecute a small number of officials for abuses
 committed during the years of dictatorship, from 1968 to 1989.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution prohibits use of measures that could harm the physical, mental,
 or moral integrity of prisoners or detainees. Although the public security forces gen-
 erally performed in a professional and restrained manner, there were some reports
 of excessive use of force or inhuman punishment, particularly against prison in-
 mates (see Section L.a.). There also were reports that police used physical violence
 and psychological threats to control detainees during the initial arrest, interroga-
 tion, and holding phases.
 
 
 718
 The legislation providing the legal basis for the PNP, promulgated in June 1997,
 includes specific guidelines for use of force, including deadly force; requires that po-
 lice officers respect human rights; and prohibits instigation or tolerance of torture,
 cruelty, or other inhuman or degrading behavior. However, there is no follow-on
 training in the use of force provided to the PNP.
 The PTJ and the PNP have offices of professional responsibility that act as inter-
 nal affairs organs to hold officers accountable for their actions. Both have staffs of
 independent investigators as well as administrative authority to open internal in-
 vestigations. In both organizations, a defined legal process is followed where, upon
 completion of the process, the respective director has the final authority to deter-
 mine the disposition of each case. Penalties include reduction in rank, dismissal,
 and in severe cases, criminal prosecution.
 Corruption among police officers continues to be a problem, but in some cases,
 PNP and PTJ directors enforced strict disciplinary measures against officers shown
 to be involved in illicit activities. However, both organizations only react to egre-
 gious abuses, due to a lack of staff, independence, and institutional priority. The au-
 thorities fired four PNP officers in August for allegedly shooting a 16-year-old girl
 in Santiago for no apparent reason, leaving her bleeding at the scene. According to
 witnesses, the officers were drunk.
 There were several instances in which police responded with force to demonstra-
 tions, including one incident in December when there were reports of beatings and
 abusive treatment, especially of those taken into custody, following a demonstration
 of workers and students (see Section 2.c.).
 Despite efforts to introduce some prison reforms, prison conditions throughout the
 country remained extremely poor and a threat to prisoners' health and safety. Most
 prisons are dilapidated and overcrowded. Medical screening and care is inadequate,
 with tuberculosis and other communicable diseases common among the prison popu-
 lation. Frequent gang battles injured or killed numerous inmates. Many of the prob-
 lems within the prisons stem not only from overcrowding but also from the lack of
 separation of inmates by classification according to the type or severity of the crime
 committed.
 An inmate at Tinajitas prison, Roberto Johnston, reported that eight prison
 guards severely beat him on April 24 with two-by-fours after he resisted their har-
 assment. Johnston was taken to a local hospital for treatment, but the authorities
 did not investigate his charges of brutal treatment.
 The National Department of Corrections (DNC) largely depends on PNP officers,
 who are inadequately trained for prison duty, to supply its guard force. Civilian cor-
 rections officers or "custodians" handle inmates within La Joya, El Renacer, and the
 central women's prison (which uses only female guards). The DNC has authority to
 discipline prison guards with criminal or civil sanctions. No action was taken re-
 garding a 1997 proposal by one legislator to create a permanent bureau within the
 PNP to train officers on human rights issues.
 Prison conditions on Coiba Island Penal Colony remained grim. According to a
 former prison official, in January five prisoners attempted to escape into the moun-
 tains from their loosely guarded compound on the island. However, they apparently
 emerged on a part of the island reportedly controlled by a rival prison gang and,
 according to a witness and the police, the rival prisoners captured, tortured, and be-
 headed four prisoners. The fifth individual survived and is protected under maxi-
 mum security as the only witness. The authorities accused 14 prisoners of partici-
 pating in the killings.
 A special prosecutor investigating the killings suspendedplans in July for a recon-
 struction of the crime due to the prison officials' inability to provide adequate secu-
 rity to the investigators while on Coiba Island. As a result of the investigation into
 the decapitations, the murders of eight additional prisoners were uncovered. The
 prosecutor claimed that these murders also resulted from gang rivalries that per-
 vade the prison colony. In a subsequent incident on August 10, four prisoners were
 stabbed in a dispute between rival gangs.
 Although national prison authorities had slated Coiba for closure, they have used
 the island prison colony as a means to relieve overcrowding at the two largest pris-
 ons, La Joya and La Joyita. By moving dangerous prisoners to Coiba, prison officials
 have attempted to establish order in the other prisons. Although the Government
 began reducing the number of prisoners at Coiba, a recent influx has caused the
 inmate population to increase once again. The Government acknowledges that it
 must keep Coiba open, but it has not made adequate provisions for health, security,
 and other basic needs of prisoners there.
 Many prisoners on Coiba Island have not yet been tried. Geographic isolation and
 lack of communications have separated detainees from their attorneys and caused
 many to miss trials. Prisoners suffer from malnutrition and shortages of potable
 
 
 719
 
 water, and medical care is practically nonexistent. Coiba has a civilian adminis-
 trator, but its guard force still consists of police guards instead of civilian correc-
 tions officers. Escapes from Coiba are reportedly common.
 Prison conditions in Colon province also are extremely poor. According to the
 Human Rights Commission of the Legislative Assembly, prisoners at the Women's
 Prison of Colon must contend with overcrowding, semidarkness day and night, con-
 stantly wet floors, and virtually no health care. The Commission also described the
 Public Prison of Colon as a "time bomb" that fails to provide the most basic health
 needs. The prison frequently has no running water or functioning sewage system.
 Conditions at women's prisons in Panama City and Chiriqui province and at the
 Juvenile Detention Center were noticeably better than at adult male prisons. Even
 so, female prisoners, especially those in the primary detention area, reportedly suf-
 fered from overcrowding, poor medical care, and lack of basic supplies for personal
 hygiene.
 The Prison Director acknowledges that the current prison system has over 8,000
 prisoners with only 6,116 allotted positions. Even after the 12 murders at Coiba, the
 Government appears to have no plans to close the colony. However, it announced
 plans to build five new medium and maximum security compounds at La Joya pris-
 on to relieve overcrowding and to allow for more effective classification of prisoners,
 reducing the mixing of hardened criminals with lesser offenders. The Government
 also completed a new security fence and visitation center at La Joya, and it has
 plans for remodeling both the Women's Prison and the Nueva Esperanza Prison in
 Colon.
 On July 30, the Prison Director announced an organizational restructuring of the
 National Prison System to improve procedures and inmate management. She also
 introduced a conditional release program for inmates charged with minor offenses
 who have served a substantial part of their sentence. President Perez Balladares
 initiated the program on August 3, authorizing the release of 228 prisoners who are
 to remain under supervised parole.
 The Government generally allows prison visits by independent human rights mon-
 itors, although Human Rights Ombudsman Italo Antinori was prevented from enter-
 ing La Joya on July 2. In this incident, Antinori attempted to visit construction
 union activists arrested in a demonstration. Then-Minister of Government and Jus-
 tice Raul Montenegro stated that Antinori was stopped because he had not given
 advance notice to prison officials of his visit.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The Constitution stipulates that arrests
 must be carried out with a warrant issued by the appropriate authorities, and the
 Government generally respected this provision. Exceptions are permitted when an
 officer apprehends a person during the commission of a crime, or when disrespect
 by an individual towards an officer prevents the officer from carrying out his duty.
 The law requires the arresting officer to inform the detainee immediately of the rea-
 sons for arrest or detention and of the right to immediate legal counsel, to be pro-
 vided by the State for the indigent.
 The Constitution also provides for judicial review of the legality of detention and
 mandates the immediate release of any person detained or arrested illegally. The
 Constitution prohibits police from detaining suspects for more than 24 hours with-
 out bringing them before a competent judicial authority. In practice, the authorities
 often violated the 24-hour time limit by several days. Under law the preliminary
 investigation phase may last 8 days to 2 months, and the follow-on investigation
 phase another 2 to 4 months, depending on the number of suspects. Extensions of
 these limits are frequently granted by the courts, leaving the accused in detention
 for a long period without having been formally charged.
 Extended pretrial detention continued to be one of the most serious human rights
 problems, in part a consequence of the elaborate notification phase in criminal
 cases. Many legal authorities (including court officials) criticized judges for excessive
 use of this measure. According to government statistics, pretrial detainees con-
 stituted approximately 65 percent of the prison population, down from 78 percent
 in 1995. The average period of pretrial custody was 16 months, and pretrial deten-
 tion in excess of the maximum sentence for the alleged crime was common. A legal
 mechanism exists to hold the Government financially accountable in cases where a
 detainee spends more than 1 year in jail but subsequently has all charges dismissed
 at a preliminary hearing. The dismissal must be either because the act of which the
 detainee was accused is not ruled a crime or because there is no evidence to link
 the suspect to the crime. Although this redress procedure is not complicated, few
 former detainees have employed it. On May 8, President Perez Balladares stated
 that the justice system was on the verge of collapse, and he confirmed that more
 than 60 percent of the penal population consisted of pretrial detainees.
 
 
 Legal alternatives to prison exist but are not widely implemented. Options such
 as house arrest have been used in some cases involving the elderly or minors, but
 require that the defendants have access to and understanding of their legal options.
 The police detained 80 minors in overcrowded and unsanitary conditions for & to
 10 days in April for minor violations despite the legal requirement that they be
 brought before a juvenile judge within 24 hours. According to the police, the delay
 was due to the absence of court personnel during the Holy Week holidays.
 The Constitution prohibits exile; there were no reports of forced exile.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The Constitution provides for an independent judi-
 ciary; however, the judiciary is susceptible to corruption and outside influence, in-
 cluding from other branches of government.
 The President appoints nine Supreme Court magistrates to 10-year terms, subject
 to Legislative Assembly confirmation. The Supreme Court magistrates appoint ap-
 pellate (Superior Tribunal) judges, who, in turn, appoint circuit and municipal court
 judges in their respective jurisdictions. Judicial appointments are supposed to be
 made under a merit-based system, but the top-down appointment system lends itself
 to political tinkering and undue interference by higher-level judges in lower-level
 cases in which they have no jurisdiction. The Attorney General, who heads the Pub-
 lic Ministry, appoints the superior and circuit-level prosecutors.
 In December the Legislative Assembly passed a law that gives the Supreme Court
 the power to appoint the Director and Sub-Director of the PTJ for 7-year terms and
 requires Supreme Court approval for their removal. Opposition and media critics
 charge that this move may increase the influence of the Supreme Court over the
 criminal investigators, while removing the generally positive oversight of the Attor-
 ney General, and make cooperation between prosecutors and the police much more
 difficult. President Balladares and the PTJ Director reject arguments, that the re-
 moval of the Attorney General's oversight over the PTJ may make this investigative
 agency more susceptible to political manipulation and corruption and argue that the
 changes would help institutionalize the PTJ.
 At the local level, mayors appoint administrative judges who exercise jurisdiction
 over minor civil and criminal cases in which they may impose fines or sentences of
 up to 1 year. This system has serious shortcomings: defendants lack adequate proce-
 dural safeguards; judges need not be (and normally are not) attorneys; and some
 engage in corrupt practices. In reality, appeal procedures are nonexistent. More af-
 fluent defendants tend to pay fines while poorer defendants go to jail, one of the
 chief factors leading to prison overcrowding.
 In May the Government announced an $18.9 million Inter-American Development
 Bank loan to reform the judicial system. The loan is to be used at national and local
 levels to provide better conditions for the court system, including better information
 management, training for personnel, revision of judicial procedures, and construc-
 tion of administrative offices for judges and prosecutors in various locations nation-
 wide.
 In August the Government created two commissions to review and make rec-
 ommendations for improvements to the justice system. These commissions are com-
 posed of representatives from the Attorney General's office, the National Bar Asso-
 ciation, the Legislative Assembly, and the Ministry of Government and Justice,
 among others. At year's end, drafting of the final reports was underway and both
 were expected in early 1999.
 The Constitution provides that persons charged with crimes have the right to
 counsel, to be presumed innocent until proven guilty, to refrain from incriminating
 themselves or close relatives, and to be tried only once for a given offense. If not
 under pretrial detention, the accused may be present with counsel during the inves-
 tigative phase of the proceeding. Judges can order the presence of pretrial detainees
 for the rendering or amplification of statements, or for confronting witnesses. Trials
 are conducted on the basis of evidence presented by the public prosecutor, and the
 accused person is not necessarily present. The Constitution and the Criminal Proce-
 dure Code provide for trial by jury at the defendant's election, but only in criminal
 cases where at least one of the charges is murder.
 The Constitution obliges the Government to provide public defenders for the indi-
 gent. However, many public defenders are not appointed until after the investigative
 phase of the case, a serious disadvantage for the defendant since it is during this
 stage that the prosecutor produces and evaluates the bulk of the evidence and de-
 cides whether to recommend trial or the dismissal of charges. Public defenders' case-
 loads remained staggering, averaging 540 cases per attorney. Only 1 new public de-
 fender has been hired since 1992, making a total of 36 nationwide. This heavy work-
 load undermined the quality of representation, with many prisoners meeting their
 public defender for the first time on the day of trial.
 
 
 721
 The right to a fair and independent trial was compromised seriously in 1997 in
 the case of Jaime Abad, former director of the PTJ. Based on dubious evidence,
 Gerardo Gonzalez, President of the PRD and of the Legislative Assembly, accused
 Abad of hiding or manipulating ballistics test results in the investigation of Gon-
 zalez's son, Pedro Miguel, for the 1992 murder of U.S. serviceman Zak Hernandez.
 (Gonzalez also used his influence to ensure the acquittal of his son despite substan-
 tial evidence against him.) While Abad was originally charged with a misdemeanor,
 the charges against him were increased to felony counts in January 1997 after Gon-
 zalez closeted himself with the judge in her chambers for 50 minutes prior to the
 hearing. In reviewing the case, the local Center for Human Rights Investigation and
 Legal Assistance (CIDHS) stated that "Jaime Abad. . . faces a judicial process in
 which there are clear indicators that it has been the subject of manipulation by in-
 terests of dubious origin." The CIDHS further concluded that Gonzalez used and
 abused his political power to manipulate the judicial process against Abad in order
 to help his son Pedro Miguel Gonzalez. Abad was convicted in December 1997 and
 sentenced to 3 years in prison. The judge subsequently reduced the sentence to a
 $1,500 fine. Abad refused to pay the fine and appealed. On June 25, President Perez
 Balladares issued a full pardon for Abad, terminating the legal process against him
 and preventing any future legal action on the alleged crimes. Abad departed the
 country the following week.
 The Legislative Assembly passed legislation in July, popularly known as the
 "Faundes Law," which requires judges to retire at age 75. The law was designed
 to remove former Supreme Court magistrate Jose Manuel Faundes after attempts
 to impeach him failed to muster the necessary two-thirds majority vote in the As-
 sembly. The law, which was signed by the President in August, required the 82-
 year-old Faundes to retire, making the impeachment proceedings moot. The Na-
 tional Bar Association believed that the retroactive nature of the law was unconsti-
 tutional.
 There were no reports of political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Constitution provides for the inviolability of the home, private papers, and tele-
 phonic communications. The authorities may not enter private residences except
 with the owner's permission, or by written order from the appropriate authority for
 specific purposes. These may include entry to assist the victims of crime or disaster,
 or to conduct lawful health and safety inspections. The authorities may not examine
 private papers and correspondence, except as properly authorized by competent
 legal authority and in the presence of the owner, a family member, or two neigh-
 bors. The Government generally has respected these rights. However, there were
 complaints that in some cases police failed to follow legal requirements and con-
 ducted unauthorized searches of private residences.  -
 Although the Constitution prohibits all wiretapping, the Government maintains
 that wiretapping with judicial approval is legal. Under the guidelines established
 by antinarcotics legislation passed in July 1994, the Public Ministry may engage in
 undercover operations, including "videotaping and recording of conversations and
 telephonic communications." The Supreme Court has not issued a definitive ruling
 on whether wiretapping is constitutional and, if so, under what circumstances.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of speech
 and of the press, and the Government generally respects these rights in practice.
 There is an active and often adversarial press and a broad range of electronic and
 print media outlets, including foreign television and radio broadcasts, cable stations,
 and newspapers. Six national daily newspapers, 3 commercial television stations, 2
 educational television stations, and over 95 radio stations provide a broad choice of
 informational sources; all are privately or institutionally owned. While many media
 outlets took identifiable editorial positions, the media carried a wide variety of polit-
 ical commentaries and other perspectives, both local and foreign. There is a notice-
 able concentration of control of television outlets in the hands of close relatives and
 associates of the President. The President's cousin owns a controlling interest in two
 of the three commercial television stations and the principal cable television pro-
 vider.
 Panamanian and foreign journalists worked and traveled freely throughout the
 country. However, by year's end the Government still had not fulfilled its earlier,
 informal promise to seek revocation of the 1978 law that requires directors and dep-
 uty directors of media outlets to be citizens. In 1997 the Government attempted to
 expel Peruvian journalist Gustavo Gorriti under this law because of the embarrass-
 ment that his investigative reports caused relatives and close associates of President
 Balladares.
 
 
 Under "gag laws" dating from the military dictatorship, the Government has legal
 authority to prosecute media owners and reporters for criminal libel and calumny.
 A special executive branch authority has discretionary powers to administer the
 libel laws, which provide for fines and up to 2 years in prison. Under the statute,
 opinions, comments, or criticism of government officials acting in their official capac-
 ity are specifically exempted from libel prosecution, but a section of the law allows
 for the immediate discipline of journalists who show "disrespect' for the office of cer-
 tain government officials.
 PNP Director Jose Luis Sosa used this law to bring charges against National Uni-
 versity law professor Miguel Bernal for statements about the decapitations of the
 prisoners on Coiba Island (see Section 1.c.). Bernal said on television that "the only
 ones who have decapitated others in this country are the National Police and the
 National Guard of the now defunct Defense Forces." Bernal clarified that he had
 not said the PNP had carried out the decapitations at Coiba, rather that the PNP,
 through acts of omission, allowed the decapitations. Bernal, an advocate of prison
 reform, repeated his charges in follow-up interviews and opinion pieces. He claims
 that the PNP Director's charges amount to a limitation of freedom of expression.
 Sosa's charges against Bernal remained pending at year's end.
 In another case, a prosecutor acting on behalf of Attorney General Jose Antonio
 Sossa charged La Prensa journalists Gustavo Gorriti and Rolando Rodriguez with
 a "crime against the honor of the authorities" for defaming a government official
 and allegedly falsifying evidence. Gorriti and Rodriguez refused to reveal sources for
 a story they wrote in 1996, which alleged that the Attorney General accepted checks
 of dubious origin in his unsuccessful 1994 campaign for a seat in the Legislative
 Assembly. Subsequent press reports suggested that the story was erroneous. The
 charges remained pending at year's end.
 In August Solicitor General Alma Montenegro de Fletcher threatened in the press
 to charge journalists Marcelino Rodriguez and Blas Julio under the libel and cal-
 umny law for reporting allegations that she received a house on a former U.S. mili-
 tary base through questionable procedures.
 In late December, La Prensa journalist Herasto Reyes Barahona was called in for
 official questioning for allegedly committing a crime against the honor of the au-
 thorities by defaming the Housing Minister and the President. At year's end, the
 investigation continued, with Herasto Reyes refusing to cooperate.
 The press laws provide for the establishment of a censorship board. The board
 monitors radio transmissions and has the authority to fine stations that violate
 norms regarding vulgar and profane language.
 The law provides for academic freedom, which was generally respected in both
 public and private universities.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution provides for
 the right of peaceful assembly, and the Government generally respects this right in
 practice. No authorization is needed for outdoor assembly, although prior notifica-
 tion for administrative purposes is required.
 The Legislative Assembly is considering a bill that would tighten restrictions on
 public demonstrations and prohibit demonstrators from carrying weapons, damaging
 property, or interrupting traffic. It also would require 24 hours' notice prior to any
 event, provide for increased fines, and apply penalties to anyone "inciting' illegal
 behavior through the media. Opponents claim that the bill, which is backed by the
 Government, would limit freedom of expression and peaceful assembly. The Govern-
 ment supports the bill as an attempt to alleviate the massive traffic jams that even
 small and orderiy demonstrations can cause. Often, demonstrators purposefully at-
 tempt to disrupt traffic.
 Police response to public protests was mixed. Throughout much of the year, police
 showed restraint and professionalism while monitoring very large protest marches
 by students, political activists, and construction workers. In June construction work-
 ers, demanding higher wages and better working conditions, confronted police in 2
 days of violent demonstrations. Workers pelted antiriot police with stones and bot-
 ties, injuring 21 officers. The police responded with tear gas and bird shot, resulting
 in minor injuries, and arrested 37 demonstrators.
 In early December, a mix of student and worker groups, protesting the privatiza-
 tion of the state-owned water utility and the changing of the date to celebrate a na-
 tional holiday, engaged in a week of protests and confrontations. The demonstrators
 used Molotov cocktails and hurled stones at police. The police response to the at-
 times violent protests included the use of bird shot, tear gas, and rubber bullets.
 There were reportedly dozens of beatings and instances of abusive treatment, par-
 ticularly against those taken into custody. The police entered and temporarily closed
 the University of Panama for the first time since 1968.
 
 
 723
 The Constitution provides for the right of association, and the Government gen-
 erally respects this right in practice. Citizens have the right to form associations
 and professional or civic groups. They may form and organize political parties freely,
 although new parties must meet strict membership and organizational standards in
 order to gain official recognition and participate in national campaigns.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution, although recognizing Catholicism as
 "the religion of the majority of Panamanians," provides for free exercise of all reli-
 gious beliefs, provided that "Christian morality and public order" are respected. The
 Government imposes no limitations in practice, and there is a broad diversity of reli-
 gions. The Constitution prohibits clerics from holding public office, except as related
 to social assistance, education, or scientific research.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Constitution provides for these rights, and the Government re-
 spects them in practice. The Government enforced exit permit requirements for for-
 eigners who overstayed their initial visas. A 9:00 p.m. curfew for minors under 18
 years of age in the Panama City and San Miguelito districts of Panama province,
 imposed in 1992, remained in effect. Police enforcement of the curfew was uneven,
 with strictest compliance focused on high-crime areas.
 The law has provisions for granting refugee status in accordance with the 1951
 United Nations Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees and its 1967 Protocol.
 The Government generally cooperates with the office of the United Nations High
 Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and other humanitarian organizations in as-
 sisting refugees. The issue of fir-st asylum did not arise during the year. As of year's
 end, the UNHCR had still not reached agreement with the Government on the legal
 framework for UNHCR involvement in the drafting of a contingency plan for the
 possible future entry of large groups of Colombians.
 In 1997 approximately 200 Colombians, who entered Panama fleeing violence by
 paramilitary and guerilla groups, were returned to Colombia. In 1998 there were
 unconfirmed reports that police stationed along the border had, on an ad hoc basis,
 required Colombians to return to Colombia.
 There were no reports of the forced return of persons to a country where they
 feared persecution.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens have this right and last exercised it in the 1994 general elections. The
 Constitution provides for a representative democracy with direct popular election by
 secret ballot of the President, two vice presidents, legislators, and local representa-
 tives every 5 years. While the Constitution provides for independent legislative and
 judicial branches, in practice the executive dominates. The independent Electoral
 Tribunal arranges and supervises elections. The Government respected the rights of
 its citizens to join any political party, propagate their views, and vote for candidates
 of their choice.
 During the year, the governing party engaged in a major campaign to amend the
 Constitution to allow reelection of the President to a second consecutive term. The
 constitutional amendment was debated in two sessions of the Legislative Assembly,
 as required under the Constitution. The Assembly approved the amendment on May
 18. However, in an August 30 referendum, the public rejected the proposed amend-
 ment by a margin of almost two to one.
 The lively referendum campaign was characterized by heavy spending and dis-
 ciplined organization by the administration's proreelection camp. Meanwhile, the op-
 position complained about the Government's use of public funds in campaign spend-
 ing and possible undue influence over the Electoral Tribunal. Voter turnout was ap-
 proximately 65 percent. The voting was very orderly and marred by only minor inci-
 dents, mostly involving politicking at the voting centers. Proponents of both sides
 of the proposal, along with national and international observers, commended the
 Electoral Tribunal for a well organized and transparent process.
 There are no legal barriers to participation by women, members of minorities, or
 persons of indigenous descent, but they are generally underrepresented in govern-
 ment and politics. Women hold 5 of 72 Legislative Assembly seats and 3 of 13 cabi-
 net positions. A woman leads the major opposition party, and another woman is the
 mayor of the capital city, one of the most important elected positions in the country.
 The Government provides semiautonomous status to several indigenous groups in
 their homelands, including the Kuna Yala, Ngobe-Bugle, Madugandi, and Embera-
 Wounaan reserves. The Kuna Yala of San Blas have two representatives in the Leg-
 islative Assembly, proportionate to their share of the population.
 
 
 724
 Locally, tribal chiefs govern each reserve; they meet in a general congress at regu-
 lar intervals. Neither the Madugandi nor the Embera-Wounaan reserve has its own
 dedicated legislators, but each has a separate governor.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and 'Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Human rights organizations, including both religious and secular groups, operated
 without government restrictions. These organizations carried out a full range of ac-
 tivities, including investigations and dissemination of their findings. Organizations
 generally had access -to government officials while conducting investigations. Some
 organizations were particularly active in encouraging voter turnout for the referen-
 dumand in assisting election observers.
 'Human Rights Ombudsman Italo Antinori, the first to fill the position that was
 established in December 1996, sparred with the Government throughout the year.
 On February 12, the Supreme Court stripped him of immunity against criminal
 prosecution as well as authority to investigate human rights violations in the ad-
 ministration of justice. After meeting with other Human Rights Ombudsmen in the
 region, on March 4 Antinori filed a petition with the Inter-American Commission
 on Human Rights (IACHR) alleging that the Government violated his human rights.
 Although the Chief Justice and some jurists noted some constitutional flaws in the
 Ombudsman law, most saw -the February Court ruling as a means to weaken the
 Ombudsman.
 In response' to the Ombudsman's petition, the Government invited the IACHR to
 visit to review first hand his status and the human rights situation in general. The
 President announced on March 10 that he would propose a constitutional amend-
 ment to restore the rightful powers of investigation to the Ombudsman. Although
 he did not criticize the Supreme Court ruling, the President stated that the Om-
 budsman must have the power to investigate, receive complaints from the public,
 and "morally sanction" anyone who violated human rights. The proposed constitu-
 tional amendment would not come into effect until late 1999. The Chief Justice an-
 nounced his opposition to any attempt to restore the powers of the Ombudsman. At
 year's end, nothing had been done to restore the Ombudsman's authority.
 On June 29, PRD leader and Assembly president Gonzalez demanded that
 Antinori. submit proposed operating regulations for the Ombudsman's office to the
 Assembly, claiming Antinori was operating it without authorization. Antinori re-
 plied that he had submitted the regulations in October 1997. Gonzalez maintained
 that the Supreme Court's ruling on February 12 necessitated revising the regula-
 tions. Antinori resubmitted the original regulations on July 2, and the Assembly re-
 jected them. Antinori revised and resubmitted the regulations. At the close of the
 1998 legislative session, the Assembly had not yet voted on them.
 After an initial delay in receiving funding from the Government, the Ombudsman
 began operation in January and created an effective and professional operation,
 which receives 15 to 20 complaints daily. With the authority only to investigate and
 publicize, Antinori handled several high-profile cases, including: Lobbying on behalf
 of residents near a cement factory that emits allegedly carcinogenic dust; criticizing
 prison conditions; publicizing alleged environmental degradation and health hazards
 in the mining sector; and supporting various journalists who had angered govern-
 ment and governing party officials. The Ombudsman also conducted a vigorous "get
 out the vote" campaign prior to the presidential referendum.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution prohibits either special privileges or discrimination on the basis
 of race, birth status, social class, sex, religion, or political views. Nevertheless, soci-
 ety still harbors many prejudices based primarily on social status. Cases of discrimi-
 nation are difficult to prove, and legal remedies for victims are complicated, time-
 consuming, and costly.
 Women.-Domestic violence against women continued to be a serious problem.
 The Center for the Development of the Woman estimated that victims report as few
 as 20 percent of sexual assaults to judicial or-law enforcement authorities. However,
 statistics indicate a greater willingness by women to report incidents of abuse. The
 PTJ registered 412 cases of domestic violence through June, compared with only 35
 for all of 1997. The Foundation for the Promotion of the Woman, among other wom-
 en's advocacy groups and government agencies, operated programs to assist victims
 of abuse, and to educate women on their legal rights. The 1995 Family Code crim-
 inalizes family violence, including psychological, physical, or sexual abuse, although
 convictions are rare unless a death occurs.
 
 
 725
 In addition to domestic violence, sexual harassment is a threat to the equal status
 of women in society. According to a report by the Latin American Committee for
 the Defense of Women, in 1995 about 70 percent of female government employees
 reported having endured sexual harassment in the workplace, 42 percent by their
 immediate supervisors and 18 percent by even more senior supervisors. Since a bill
 to criminalize sexual harassment failed to pass the legislature in 1995, no further
 legislation has been introduced.
 The 1995 Family Code recognizes joint or common property in marriages. Insuffi-
 cient resources, however, hampered government efforts to enforce the Code's provi-
 sions effectively.
 The Constitution mandates equal pay for men and women in equivalent jobs, but
 wages paid to women are 20 percent lower and increase at a slower rate. Although
 statistics are lacking, there are credible reports of irregular hiring practices based
 upon age and "attractiveness." In December the Legislative Assembly passed a law
 that reiterates protections laid out in the Constitution and prohibits all discrimina-
 tion on the basis of sex.
 .. A number of private women's rights groups, including groups for indigenous
 women, concentrate on disseminating information about women's rights, countering
 domestic abuse, enhancing employment and other skills, and pressing for legal re-
 forms. The Foundation for the Promotion of the Woman said that it provided legal
 assistance, counseling, and skills training to over 2,000 women in 1997.
 In January the Government created the Ministry of Women, Youth, Family, and
 Childhood, appointing Leonor Calderon as the Minister. Although the new Ministry
 is largely a consolidation of departments previously operating in other government
 ministries, its creation raises the profile of social issues.
 Children.-Minors (under 18 years of age) represent 48 percent of the population.
 Education of children is compulsory through the equivalent of ninth grade. How-
 ever, in remote areas children do not always attend school due to a lack of transpor-
 tation, traditional attitudes, and insufficient government enforcement resources. The
 Government furnishes basic health care for children through local clinics run by the
 Ministry of Health. A central children's hospital in Panama City operates on govern-
 ment funds as well as private donations.
 The Superior Tribunal for Minors and Superior Tribunal for Families are judicial
 authorities charged with overseeing the protection and care of minors. The new
 Minister of Women, Youth, Family, and Childhood acts much like an ombudsman,
 and her office proposes and reviews laws and monitors government performance.
 The office of the First Lady has assumed an advocacy role on some children's issues.
 Many children continue to suffer from malnutrition, neglect, and inadequate medi-
 cal care. Malnourishment is lowest in urban areas and highest among rural indige-
 nous groups.
 Juvenile courts report a high incidence of juvenile delinquency in major urban
 areas. The authorities report an increase in crimes attributed to juvenile gangs, in-
 cluding drug trafficking, armed robberies, kidnapings, car thefts, and murders.
 People With Disabilities.-The Workers with Disabilities Office of the Department
 of Labor and Social Welfare is responsible for government policy and support for
 citizens with disabilities and for placing qualified disabled workers with employers.
 The office was in charge of implementing a June 1993 executive order that provided
 employers with tax incentives for hiring people with disabilities but has had only
 minimal success. Although some public buildings and retail stores have access
 ramps for disabled people, no law or regulation compels the installation of facili-
 tated access features in public or private buildings.
 Indigenous People.-Indigenous people number approximately 194,000 (8 percent
 of the population) and have the same political and legal rights as other citizens. The
 Constitution protects the ethnic identity and native languages of indigenous people,
 requiring the Government to provide bilingual literacy programs in indigenous com-
 munities. Indigenous people have legal rights and take part in decisions affecting
 their lands, cultures, traditions, and the allocation of natural resources. The Family
 Code recognizes traditional indigenous cultural marriage rites as the equivalent of
 a civil ceremony. The Ministry of Government and Justice maintains a Directorate
 of Indigenous Policy. The Legislative Assembly also has an Indigenous Affairs Com-
 mission to address charges that the Government has neglected indigenous needs.
 Despite legal protection and formal equality, indigenous people generally endure rel-
 atively higher levels of poverty, disease, malnutrition, and illiteracy than the rest
 of the population. Discrimination against indigenous people, although generally not
 overt, is widespread.
 Since rural indigenous populations infrequently master Spanish well enough to
 use appropriate legal terminology, they often have difficulty understanding their
 rights under the law and defending themselves in court. The indigenous population
 
 
 726
 has grown increasingly vocal in requesting that the Government grant it more au-
 tonomy by creating more indigenous reserves or expanding existing ones. The Gov-
 ernment continued the process of demarcating electoral districts within a new re-
 serve created for the Ngobe-Bugle.
 The Ngobe-Bugle Congress condemned the Government for allowing mining con-
 cessions within its territory, one of which allegedly produced a cyanide spill.
 National/Racial/Ethnic Minorities.-The law prohibits discrimination against
 any social, religious, or cultural group; however, -naturalized citizens may not hold
 certain categories of elective office. There is some evidence that a constitutional pro-
 vision reserving retail trade to Panamanian citizens originally was directed at Chi-
 nese immigrants, but government officials have stated that it serves as a barrier
 to prevent oreign retail chains from operating in the country. The measure is not
 enforced in practice,               , Middle Eastern, and Indian legal residents,
 as well as citizens of Chinese and Indian descent, operate much of the retail trade,
 articularly in urban areas. Leaders of the over 100,000-member East Asian and
 outh Asian communities credibly claimed that Panamanian elites treat Panama-
 nian-resident Chinese and Indians as well as citizens of Asian origin as second-class
 citizens.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of A        dsociation.-Private sector workers have the right to form and
 join unions of their choice, subject to registration by the Government. A labor code
 reform package signed in 1995 significantly increased workers' ability to establish
 unions. The reforms streamline the accreditation and registration process for
 unions, reduce the minimum size from 50 to 40 workers, and cut the Governments
 required response time on applications from 2 months to 15 days. In the event the
 Government does not respond within this time frame, the union automatically gains
 recognition and is accorded all rights and privileges under the law.
 According to Ministry of Labor statistics, approximately 10 percent of the total
 employed labor force is organized. There are 257 active unions, grouped under  7
 confederations and 48 federations eresenting approximately 80,000 members in
 the private sector. Neither the Government nor the political parties control or finan-
 cially support unions.
 The 1994 Civil Service Law permits most government workers to form public em-
 ployee associations and federations and establishes their right to represent members
 in collective bargaining withtheir respective agencies. It also provides most workers
 with the right to strike, except for certain government workers in areas vital to pub-
 lic welfare and security, such as the police and health workers and those employed
 by the U.S. military forces and the Panama Canal Commission.
 The Labor Code reforms addressed some longstanding concerns of the Inter-
 national Labor Organization (ILO). The code no longer makes labor leaders auto-
 matically ineligible to keep their union positions if they are fired from their jobs.
 An April ILO ruling supported the Governments decision to fire striking air traf-
 fic controllers in 1996 based  on the finding that air traffic control is an essential
 service. The ruling stated that the controllers have no ground for reinstatement to
 their jobs.
 Union organizations at every level may and do afilate with international bodies.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The Labor Code provides
 most workers with the right to organize and bargain collectively, and unions widely
 exercise it. The law protects union workers from antiunion discrimination and re-
 quires employers to reinstate workers fired for union activities. The Ministry of
 Labor has mechanisms to resolve complaints against antinnion employers. The Civil
 Service Law allows most public employees to organize and bargain collectively and
 grants them a limited right to strike. The Labor Code establishes a conciliation
 board in the Ministry of Labor to resolve labor complaints and provides a procedure
 for arbitration.
 Employers commonly hire temporary workers to circumvent onerous labor code re-
 quirements for permanent workers; such temporary workers receive neither pen-
 sions nor other benefits. The practice of blank contracts is, according to union
 sources, becoming more widespread. Labor law addresses this problem by requiring
 all companies to submit copies of all labor contracts for permanent workers to the
 Labor Ministry and by requiringthe Labor Ministry to conduct periodic inspections
 of companies' work forces and review all contracts to ensure that they are in order.
 The code also authorizes the Labor Ministry to levy fines against companies not in
 compliance with the law.
 In January and February 1996, the Government issued cabinet decrees governing
 labor relations in export processing zones (EPZ's) as a means of attracting invest-
 ment into areas vacated under the terms of the Panama Canal Treaty. The original
 
 
 727
 decree limited a broad range of labor rights, including the right to strike and to bar-
 gain collectively. The second decree modified the first and restored most worker
 rights in EPZ's. However, it provides for collective bargaining with "representatives
 of employees" but makes no specific mention of trade unions; it requires mandatory
 arbitration of disputes; and it allows for the participation of an unrepresentative
 worker delegate in the tripartite (government, labor, and industry) arbitration com-
 mission.
 A January 1997 decree further modified the EPZ labor regulations, stipulating
 that a strike may be considered legal only after 36 workdays of conciliation are ex-
 hausted. If this requirement is not met, striking workers can be fined or fired. An
 April ILO ruling noted that the January 1997 regulations do not mention arbitra-
 tion or specify procedures to resolve disputes in the courts. The ILO ruling stated
 that the Government should amend the EPZ labor regulations to conform with
 international norms.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The Labor Code prohibits forced
 or compulsory labor, including that performed by children, and neither practice was
 reported.
 d. Status of Child Labor Practices and Minimum Age for Employment.-The
 Labor Code prohibits the employment of children under 14 years of age as well as
 those under 15 years if the child has not completed primary school; children under
 age 16 cannot work overtime; those under 18 years cannot perform night work. Chil-
 dren between the ages of 12 and 15 may perform farm or domestic labor as long
 as the work is light and does not interfere with the child's schooling. The Ministry
 of Labor enforces these provisions in response to complaints and may order the ter-
 mination of unauthorized employment. The law prohibits forced or bonded labor by
 children, and the Government enforces this provision (see Section 6.c.). However,
 the Government acknowledges that it is unable to enforce other child labor provi-
 sions in rural areas, due to insufficient staff.
 Child labor violations are reported more frequently in the production of sugar
 cane and coffee, and in subsistence agriculture. In addition, many children work as
 domestic workers or sell items in the streets. The Permanent Committee Against
 Child Labor asserted that 11 percent of all children between the ages of 10 and 17
 are working or are actively seeking work.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The Labor Code establishes a standard work-
 week of 48 hours and provides for at least one 24-hour rest period weekly. It also
 establishes minimum wage rates for specific regions and for most categories of labor.
 The minimum wage, which was increased in July by $0.08 per hour, ranges from
 $0.77 per hour to $1.33 per hour, depending on the sector. It is not enough to sup-
 port a worker and family above the poverty level. Most workers formally employed
 in urban areas earn the minimum wage or above. Most workers in the large infor-
 mal sector earn below the minimum wage.
 Unions have repeatedly alleged that contractors operating in the Panama Canal
 area pay less than the required minimum wage. The Ministry of Labor does not ade-
 quately enforce the minimum wage law, due to insufficient personnel and financial
 resources.
 The Ministry of Labor is responsible for enforcing health and safety standards
 and generally does so. The standards are fairly encompassing and generally empha-
 size safety over long-term health hazards, according to organized labor sources. An
 occupational health section in the social security system is responsible for conduct-
 ing periodic inspections of especially hazardous employment sites, such as those in
 the construction industry, as well as inspecting health and safety standards in re-
 sponse to union or worker requests. In April a broken freight elevator at a high-
 rise construction site caused 13 construction workers to fall 25 floors to their deaths.
 The construction union claimed that the tragedy illustrated the unsafe work condi-
 tions in the construction industry. Worker complaints of health problems continued
 in the banana industry as well as in the cement and milling industries.
 The law protects from dismissal workers who file requests for health and safety
 inspections. Workers also have the right to remove themselves from situations that
 present an immediate health or safety hazard without jeopardizing their employ-
 ment. They are generally not allowed to do so if the threat is not immediate, but
 may request a health and safety inspection to determine the extent and nature of
 the hazard.
 
 
