 PANAMA
 Panama's Constitution establishes a representative democracy
 with three branches of government--executive and legislative
 branches elected by direct secret'vote for 5-year terms and an
 independent judiciary-plus an independent electoral tribunal.
 The current Government, headed by President Guillermo Endara,
 is a multiparty coalition that successfully opposed the
 candidate of former dictator Manuel Noriega in the May 1989
 general elections. Elected executive branch officials were
 sworn into office on December 19, 1989, prior to the collapse
 of the Noriega regime in the wake of U.S. military action
 against his forces on December 20. Special elections were held
 in January 1991 for nine legislative seats and various
 municipal representatives for which winners could not be
 determined from the 1989 elections. Five of the legislative
 seats were won by opposition parties.
 Panama has no military; constitutional amendments that, among
 other things, prohibit the establishment of military forces
 were approved by the Legislative Assembly in late 1991. (To go
 into effect, the amendments must be approved by a second
 consecutive Assembly session. The first 1992 session is
 scheduled from March to June.) Law enforcement duties are the
 responsibility of the Panamanian Public Force (PPF). Criminal
 investigations are performed by the Judicial Technical Police
 (PTJ), which is not part of the PPF. The Minister of
 Government and Justice is responsible for all law enforcement
 organizations, although legislation approved in 1991 moves the
 PTJ in January 1992 to the Public Ministry, headed by the
 Attorney General. There were credible charges of serious
 abuses committed by prison guards in 1991.
 Panama has a free enterprise, service-based economy. Efforts
 were under way in 1991 to reduce tariff and nontariff trade
 restrictions and to open the economy to international
 competition. The Government reached agreement on an economic
 reform program with the major international financial
 institutions, contingent on passage of social security, tax
 reform, and privatization laws. Unemployment, estimated at
 approximately 35 percent in early 1990, was reduced to
 approximately 17 percent in 1991.
 The Government continued in 1991 to stress respect for human
 rights, to strengthen institutional protections, and to attempt
 to rectify the abuses and civic and economic distortions
 ensuing from 21 years of dictatorship. Principal human rights
 concerns during 1991 were an inefficient and overloaded
 criminal justice system (including prolonged preliminary
 detention and pretrial detention), and credible reports of
 abuse of detainees by prison security personnel. Limitations
 on union activity in the public sector, banks, and export
 processing zones have prompted complaints from labor and human
 rights organizations. The Government approved legislation
 reforming the judicial system and amended the Civil Code to
 eliminate.provisions discriminating against women.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing
 No cases of political or other extrajudicial killings were
 reported during 1991. The Government continued to investigate
 
 
 691
 PANAMA
 politically motivated murders that took place under the
 military dictatorship. Former PDF member Olmedo Espinosa was
 convicted for the 1989 murder of Dutch priest Nicolas Van
 Kleff. Progress in other cases has been slow. Key cases
 include the 1971 disappearance of Catholic Priest Hector
 Gallegos; the 1985 murder of Dr. Hugo Spadafora, a former
 Minister of Health and critic of Noriega; and the summary
 executions of 11 PDF members after the October 1989 coup
 attempt against Noriega. The Government continued to prepare -
 charges against those accused of the kidnaping and murder of
 American citizen Raymond Dragseth, killed during the 1989 U.S.
 military action, reportedly by agents of the Noriega regime.
 The Government served legal notice on Manuel Noriega in July
 for his alleged role in the murder of Dr. Spadafora; he is to
 be tried in absentia in accordance with Panamanian law.
 Investigations and judicial proceedings into other cases of
 ex-government officials or members of the security forces
 accused of participating in extrajudicial executions continued
 at a slow pace. Various local and international human rights
 organizations called for intensified investigation and
 prosecution of alleged Noriega-era human rights abuses and
 other crimes. The Attorney General introduced legislation to
 permit the expedited judicial processing of criminal cases
 involving Noriega regime figures. According to the Supreme
 Court, 80 criminal cases were initiated against Noriega-era
 defendants in 1991, 29 of which were set for trial. Former PDF
 Captain Jose Maria Chaverri and former Revolutionary Democratic
 Party (PRD) legislator Rigoberto Paredes were the first members
 of the Noriega regime to be tried and convicted in Panama.
 Chaverri was sentenced to 42 months' impris6nment for
 extortion, and Paredes was sentenced to three years'
 imprisonment for his involvement with pro-Noriega paramilitary
 groups that fired.on a crowd following the 1989 elections.
 Three defendants were acquitted in cases stemming from
 activities of the Noriega regime.
 A report released in February by the Inter-American Human
 Rights Commission (IAHRC) estimated that between 300 and 600
 persons were killed during the clash between the U.S. military
 and Noriega's forces in December 1989. The Commission
 recommended a thorough investigation and compensation for
 relatives of noncombatant victims. A report released by the
 Panamanian Committee for Human Rights (CPDH) asserted there
 were 403 casualties during December 1989. Lawyers on behalf of
 various Panamanians continue to pursue claims before the IAHRC
 for compensation for alleged damages.
 b. Disappearance
 No known or alleged cases of politically motivated
 disappearance occurred during 1991.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 The Constitution prohibits measures that could damage the
 physical, mental, or moral integrity of prisoners or
 detainees. Panama acceded in June 1991 to the Inter-American
 Convention to Prevent and Punish Torture. However, there were
 cases of police brutality during 1991. Members of the National
 Police and the Judicial Technical Police who were found guilty
 of abuses were fired or suspended without pay. Criminal
 investigations were initiated againtt the most serious
 
 
 PANAMA
 abusers. The most egregious and notorious problem involved the
 mistreatment of prisoners at the Coiba Island penal colony.
 Some prisoners there were subjected to beatings and other forms
 of abuse by guards and by other ifimates. The CPDH reported
 several-unexplained or suspicious deaths on the island.
 Conditions on Coiba generally were deplorable, including
 primitive living conditions, undernourished inmates, no
 electricity between 6 p.m. and 5 a.m., and contaminated water.
 The Government appointed a new prison director and formed a
 commission to investigate accusations of prisoner abuse.
 Criminal charges were filed against seven prison officials as a
 result of the investigation.
 Prison. conditions throughout Panama improved little in 1991;
 overcrowded and unhealthful conditions remained common. The
 physical plant of many prisons had seriously deteriorated,
 medical care was lacking, escape attempts were frequent, guards
 and correction personnel were poorly trained, and there were
 credible reports of corruption. Government steps to improve
 the penal system included appointment of a new National
 Director of Corrections in February, a reduction in the number
 of pretrial detainees (see Section l.d.), and action to
 construct a new prison. The Panamanian National Police and
 Judicial Technical Police each established offices of
 professional responsibility to investigate claims of police
 misconduct, including corruption of members of their respective
 organizations. Sanctions included formal reprimand,
 disciplinary transfer, and, in severe cases, dismissal or
 prosecution. Through the end of November, the National Police
 Office had investigated 320 cases; 17 officials were dismissed
 for their actions, and 7 cases were forwarded for prosecution
 in the courts. In the same period, the PTJ office investigated
 175 cases; 14 PTJ officials were dismissed, and 14 cases were
 awaiting legal action, Each organization, with the assistance
 of the CPDH, established training programs for existing
 personnel and incoming cadets on laws and procedures designed
 to protect the human rights and legal guarantees of citizens.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 No known cases of arbitrary arrest, detention, or exile
 occurred in 1991. The Constitution stipulates that arrests
 must be carried out with a warrant issued by the relevant
 judicial authorities, except when a person is apprehended
 during the commission of a crime. The detainee is to be
 informed immediately of the reasons for arrest or detention,
 and the detainee has a right to immediate legal counsel, to be
 provided by the State for the indigent. The Constitution
 provides for judicial review of the legality of detention and
 mandates the immediate release of any person found to have been
 detained or arrested illegally. A suspect may not be detained
 for more than 24 hours without being charged and brought before
 a magistrate, after which a prosecutor has a fixed period
 (which varies according to the crime) to complete the
 investigative file for judicial review. The judge, in turn,
 has an additional 20 to 30 days to render a decision as to
 whether a trial is warranted. In practice, these time limits
 are often ignored.
 Extended preliminary and pretrial detention is common. As of
 June 30, the 11 jails or detention centers of the penal system
 had a combined population of approximately 3,610 inmates;
 nearly 80 percent were in pretrial detention. Criminal
 suspects have been held in pretrial detention for as long as 5
 years, and some prisoners have been held without
 
 
 693
 PANAMA
 trial for longer than the maximum period established to punish
 the crimes of which they were accused.
 The Government took several steps to try to reduce the judicial
 backlog. It established four new courts to assist with pending
 cases in the two largest cities; legislation was passed to
 permit alternatives to pretrial detention; and the Attorney
 General ordered prosecutors to review cases for the possible
 use of such alternatives. Judges also sought to expedite cases
 involving extended pretrial detention. As a result, the
 proportion of prisoners held for pretrial detention fell from
 92 percent in August 1990 to 79.4 percent in June 1991.-
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The nine Supreme Court magistrates are appointed to 10-year
 terms by the executive branch and confirmed by the Legislative
 Assembly. The magistrates appoint Superior Court judges, while
 the latter appoint lower court judges of their respective
 jurisdictions. The Supreme Court recently approved judicial
 career regulations intended to promote professionalism and to
 prevent the removal of judges for nonprofessional reasons.
 At the local level, a system similar to that of justices of the
 peace is in use. These officials (corregidores) are appointed
 by municipal mayors and exercise jurisdiction over minor civil
 and criminal cases in which they may impose sentences of up to
 2 years. The system has been harshly criticized by the legal
 community because these officials need not be (and normally are
 not) attorneys, operate outside the jurisdictional control of
 the courts, and some-allegedly engage in corrupt practices.
 Their actions are not regulated by the Code of Criminal
 Procedure, nor are their decisions subject to appeal. Another
 group, "night" or "police" judges, has jurisdiction over minor
 cases arising at night. Like their counterparts in the
 municipal system, judges in the police courts are beyond the
 jurisdiction of the regular courts, operate without reference
 to the Code of Criminal Procedure, .andlack training as
 attorneys.
 The Constitution provides that persons charged with crimes have
 the right to counsel and are presumed innocent until proven
 guilty. The Government is constitutionally obliged to provide
 public defenders for tie indigent, butthis guarantee was in
 practice routinely ignored because of the shortage of public
 defense attorneys. The Government in 1991 hired 15 new public
 defenders, leaving the judicial system five short of the 36
 required by law. Court proceedings during the investigative
 phase are conducted with written presentations by the
 prosecution and defense without the presence of the accused.
 Trial proceedings are conducted orally with the accused
 present. The Constitution provides for trial by jury to be
 used in some circumstances; however, most trials do not use a
 jury.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The Constitution provides for the inviolability of the home and
 communications. Personal documents may not be examined or a
 private residence entered and searched except by written order
 of a competent authority for a specific purpose.' There were no
 known cases of violation of home or correspondence in 1991. In'
 March the press reported that the Council on Public Security
 and National Defense (CSPDN), Panama's intelligence service,
 had engaged in telephone tapping. Government spokesmen claimed
 
 
 694
 PANAM
 such activity was done only with the required approval of the
 Attorney General for law enforcement purposes. One month
 later, a public controversy broke out over a surveillance
 operation by the Ministry of Govetnetnt and Justice; President
 Endara ordered that operation stopped.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Panamanians generally enjoyed the freedom of speech and press
 provided for by the Constitution. Seven national daily
 newspapers were published. Foreign journalists worked and
 traveled freely throughout Panama, and the population had
 access to foreign media. Three commercial television
 stations--two of which were national networks-operated in
 Panama, as did an educational station located at the University
 of Panama. Panama had 139 privately owned radio stations,
 broadcasting a wide variety of political and other commentaries
 and perspectives.
 Legislation was introduced in late September to repeal
 Noriega-era gag laws and related decrees which regulated the
 practice of journalism (such as accreditation of journalists),
 restricted the free flow of information, and made libel a
 criminal offense subject to fine and jail. President Endara
 filed a criminal libel complaint against a political cartoonist
 in mid-1991 in response to a caricature questioning the
 President's honesty. The matter became a major issue in the
 press, and the President eventually withdrew his complaint.
 Academic freedom was recognized at public as well as private
 universities.
 b.   Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 The Constitution provides the rights of peaceful assembly and
 association, and the Government generally respected these
 rights. No authorization is needed for outdoor assembly,
 although prior notification for administrative purposes is
 required. Panamanians- have the right to form and organize
 political parties, associations, and professional or civic
 groups without government interference.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 The Constitution provides for religious freedom. During 1991
 there were no governmental restrictions on the free exercise
 and proselytization of religious beliefs. Although Roman
 Catholicism is predominant, Panama has no state religion.
 Clerics are constitutionally prohibited from holding public
 office except as related to social assistance, education, or
 scientific research.-
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 The Constitution grants Panamanians the right to move freely
 within the country and to emigrate and return. These rights
 are respected in practice. No known cases of forcible
 repatriation of refugees or asylees occurred in 1991. There
 were unsubstantiated charges of-forcible repatriation of
 illegal immigrants from the People's Republic of China and Hong
 Kong, most of whom reportedly had gained entry through the
 illegal purchase of travel and residency documents from
 
 
 695
 PANAMA
 corrupt Panamanian officials. , The Government in 1991 granted
 safe conduct for the departure of remaining former officials of
 the Noriega regime and participants in the December 1990
 seizure of police headquarters who had claimed asylum in
 foreign embassies.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights:' The light of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 The Constitution provides for a representative democracy with
 direct popular election of the President, Vice Presidents, and
 legislators every 5 years. Technical arrangements for, and the
 supervision of, elections are the responsibility of the
 independent National Electoral Tribunal. Suffrage. is a right
 and duty for all citizens; there is, however, no penalty for
 noncompliance. Voting is by secret ballot. Panamanians enjoy
 the right to join any political party, to propagate their
 views, and to vote for candidates of their choice without
 government interference. These rights were respected by the
 Government in 1991.
 Special elections were held in January for nine legislative
 seats and a number of municipal representatives for which
 winners could not be determined on the basis of available tally
 sheets from the May 1989 elections. Five legislative seats
 were won by opposition parties. The Electoral Tribunal
 withdrew official recognition from seven political parties as a
 result of their failure to receive the minimum required 3
 percent of votes during the May 1989 general elections and the
 January 1991 elections. These parties must reregister to
 contest the 1994 general elections. To obtain legal
 recognition, a registering party must present 30,000 signatures
 representing all of the country's provinces.
 Section 4 -Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The Government was.sensitive to allegations of human rights
 abuses and endeavored to investigate charges. Several local
 human rights organizations, including both church and secular
 groups, operated without restrictions in Panama:. These
 organizations carried out'a full range of activities, including
 investigations and dissemination of findings. International
 human rights groups were permitted to operate without
 government restriction.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 The Constitution prohibits discrimination on the basis of race,
 illegitimacy, social class, sex, religion, or political views.
 Owing to traditional bias and general economic conditions,
 women generally do not enjoy the same economic opportunities as
 men. Panamanian law does not recognize community property, and
 divorced or deserted women are often left destitute. Although
 the Constitution mandates equal pay for equal work, wages paid
 to women are often lower than for equivalent work performed by
 men and increase- at a slower rate. Amendments to the Civil
 Code in July removed prohibitions against divorced women using
 their maiden names and remarrying without a mandatory waiting
 period. Domestic violence against women continues to be a
 serious problem, but few.reliable statistics exist on the
 subject. Private groups and government agencies operate
 programs to assist victims of such abuse.
 
 
 696'
 PANAMA
 Panama is a racially mixed country. People of African and
 indigenous descent are politically active, but underrepresented
 in senior positions in the Government and the private sector.
 The law does not discriminate against any social, religious, or
 cultural group. However, naturalized citizens may not hold
 certain categories of elective office, and the Constitution
 reserves retail trade to Panamanian citizens.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 Panamanian workers, with the exception of certain sectors
 (e.g., central government civil servants), have the right to
 form arid join unions of their choosing, subject to registration
 by the Government. Public employees who are not permitted to
 unionize had the right to form representative associations
 subject to restrictions imposed by Law 25 of 1990. Several
 public employee associations exist. Workers in state-owned
 companies are permitted to organize, and these unions along
 with teacher unions are among the strongest in Panama.
 Approximately 11 percent of Panamanian workers are organized
 into roughly 225 unions and associations, grouped under five
 labor centrals and several independent federations. Organized
 labor, which received various benefits from and was largely
 coopted by the military regime, is no longer identified with,
 or controlled by, the Government or political parties. Unions
 may and do affiliate with international bodies.   -
 Workers, except government workers and those employed by U.S.
 forces and the PAnama Canal Commission, have the right to'
 strike. (Employees of state-owned enterprises that were once
 private, such as the electric and telecommunications companies,
 have the right to strike when certain criteria are met).
 Employees in banks and the Colon Free Zone technically have the
 right to strike, though there are no unions in the banks or the
 Zone. However, Law 13 of 1990 limits the right to strike by
 requiring compulsory arbitration in all enterprises that
 provide public services and in other enterprises when the
 strike could create serious economic problems for that
 enterprise. The private sector experienced only minor strikes
 in 1991, other than a work stoppage in July led by the
 transportation collective serving the Colon Free Zone which was
 resolved through government mediation. In the public sector,
 legal nationwide strikes by teacher unions were resolved by
 government acceptance of most of the teachers' demands.
 Organized labor maintains that changes in labor law and
 practice begun in 1990 (see also Section 6.b.) violate the
 right of free association. The union movement charges that the
 Ministry of Labor discourages freedom of association through
 bureaucratic delays that prevent recognition of new unions.
 The Government contends it cannot grant legal recognition to
 unions whose applications do not comply with the current labor
 registration regulations, which have been in effect since
 1947. The'Government granted legal recognition to 11 new
 unions in 1990 and 1991.
 Law 25 of 1990, which expired at the end of 1991, empowered the
 executive branch of the Government to dismiss a public employee
 calling for, organizing, or participating in action contrary to
 democracy and the Constitution. The law was prompted by a
 December 4-5, 1990, labor march and attempted general strike
 coincident with an abortive police coup led by Colonel Herrera
 
 
 PANAMA
 and supported by various former members of Noriega's Panamanian
 Defense Force. Organized labor characterized the Government's
 dismissal of several hundred workers under this law as a
 violation of the right of association and complained that the
 Government's use of the law violated other legally mandated
 procedures. Several unions challenged the constitutionality of
 Law 25. In May the Supreme Court upheld the law's
 constitutionality but struck the paragraph that enabled the
 executive brandh to dismiss state workers unilaterally, noting
 that determination of an activity's illegality was reserved to
 the courts. This ruling had no retroactive effect, and those
 fired generally were not reinstated.
 In 1990 the Government dismissed a number of'officials of the
 previous regime because of their alleged involvement in
 paramilitary organizations such as the Dignity Battalions.
 International Confederation of Free Trade Unions complaints
 filed in 1990 on behalf of FENASEP (a government employees'
 association) charged the Government with violations of public
 employee rights through alleged massive dismissals, closure of
 union offices, and a campaign to pressure FENASEP members to
 resign their association membership. The Government has denied
 the charges and the case continued under review by the
 International Labor Organization's (ILO) Committee on Freedom
 of Association (CFA) in 1991. The CFA, in its interim
 conclusions, reminded the Government that many of these actions
 violated the principles of freedom of association. Another ILO
 body criticized the Labor Code which provides for the automatic
 removal from office of a trade union officer in the event of
 dismissal and grants the Government wide powers to supervise
 the records and accounts of trade unions.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 The law affords most workers the right to organize and bargain
 collectively,.and the right is widely exercised. Despite legal
 exclusions for public sector employees (including employees in
 public enterprises), the Government allows civil servants to
 form employee associations for the purpose of representing
 public employees in employee-management relations, but they do
 not have the right to strike. Also excluded are workers in the
 Colon Free Zone and the banking sector.
 The right of collective bargaining is restricted by two laws
 enacted by the legislature in late 1990 in response to Panama's
 economic-crisis. The first, Law 13, extended existing
 collective bargaining agreements for 1 to 2 years absent
 agreement by owner-management and employees to negotiate a new
 agreement; relieved new companies and companies without a
 collective bargaining agreement of the obligation to bargain
 for a period of 3 years; authorized the Government to suspend
 agreements for up to 6 months "when special circumstances"
 prevent continued employer operations; and authorized the
 Government to order binding arbitration of disputes that "cause
 serious economic difficulties." The second, Law 16, relieved
 employers in any export processing zones that might be
 established of the obligation to bargain for the first 4 years
 of operation, imposed binding arbitration of certain disputes,
 relaxed restrictions on layoffs, and expanded the grounds on
 which workers may be fired. No export processing zones,
 however, were established in Panama during 1991.
 The 1991 ILO Conference Committee on the Application of
 Standards (CACR) pointed to Laws 13 and 16 in citing Panama in
 
 
 698
 PANAMA
 a "special paragraph," its highest form of condemnation. The
 Government initiated with ILO assistance a tripartite
 government/labor/private sector dialog to reach agreement on
 modifications to Laws 13 and 16"that would meet ILO and related
 worker rights concerns while preserving the economic
 competitiveness sought through these laws.
 Panama's Labor Code prohibits antiunion discrimination by
 employers. Disputes or complaints may be brought to a
 conciliation board in the Ministry of Labor for resolution.
 The Labor Code provides a general mechanism for arbitration
 once conciliation procedures have been terminated. Several
 complaints were filed with the ILO alleging harassment of
 private sector union members intended to promote resignations
 from or refusal to join unions, particularly in the Colon. Free
 Zone. A report released in February by the IAHRC noted that
 the Commission had received complaints of antiunion harassment,
 including obstruction of the work of union leaders and members,
 and repression of government employees' union activity.
 c. Prohibition Against Forced or Compulsory Labor
 The Labor Code prohibits forced or compulsory labor, and during
 1991 there were no reports of either practice.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 The Labor Code prohibits the employment of children under the
 age of 14, or under the age of 15 if the child has not
 completed primary school. The Code prohibits the employment of
 persons under the age of 18 in night work. Children between
 the ages of 12 and 14 may perform farm or domestic labor as
 long as the work is light and does not interfere with the
 child's schooling. Enforcement of these provisions is
 triggered by a complaint to the Ministry of Labor, which can
 order the termination of illegal employment. Though not
 engaged in organized and regulated employment, street children
 sell flowers and other items at several intersections in Panama
 city.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 The Labor Code establishes minimum wage rates for most
 categories of labor and requires substantial bonuses for
 overtime work, but the minimum wage is not sufficient to
 provide a basic standard of living for a worker and family.
 The vast majority of Panamanian workers earn the minimum wage
 or above. However, Panama has a substantial informal sector,
 some of whose workers undoubtedly earn below the minimum wage.
 The Ministry of Labor is charged with enforcing the minimum
 wage, although budget and personnel restrictions limit its
 enforcement capacity. The Government initiated a review of the
 minimum wage rate in 1991.
 The Labor Code establishes a standard legal workweek of 48
 hours and provides for at least one 24-hour rest period; this
 is the standard workweek throughout Panama. The Labor Code
 establishes numerous health and safety standards for all places
 of employment. The Ministry of Labor, which is responsible for
 insuring that employers.comply with these regulations, does not
 have enough inspectors and resources to enforce these laws
 effectively.
 
 
 699
