 PANAMA
 Panama's last elected constitutional government was ousted in a
 military coup d'etat in 1968 and ultimate political power has
 rested in the National Guard since then. During most of this
 period, the Commander of the National Guard, the late General
 Omar Torrijos Herrera, was the actual head of government. In
 1978 Torrijos proposed and the National Assembly approved his
 nominations of Aristides Royo and Ricardo de la Espriella to
 serve as president and vice president, respectively, until
 national elections in 1984. Torrijos continued to serve as
 Commander of the National Guard until his death in an airplane
 accident in 1981, when he was replaced as Guard Commander by
 Colonel Florencio Florez. In March 1982 Florez retired and was
 replaced by then Colonel Ruben Dario Paredes; Royo resigned in
 July 1982 and was succeeded by Vice President de la Espriella.
 During 1982 Panama continued to move toward a full democratic
 government, a process to culminate in the direct national
 elections scheduled for 1984. President de la Espriella as
 well as Guard Commander Paredes have repeatedly stated that
 they intend to hold honest and open national elections in 1984;
 preparatory thereto, a national electoral census was conducted
 on December 12, 1982. Freedom House, in its 1982 report,
 places Panama among those countries that are "partly free.'
 Opposition political groups have strengthened their existing
 organizations or formed new ones. Nine political parties,
 representing wide-ranging shades of political opinion, are
 legally inscribed and at least six others are in the process of
 registering.
 Public debate flourished during 1982, and criticisms of
 government programs and policies grew in the media. Following
 the resignation of President Royo, however, the National Guard
 closed all newspapers for a week, for which it was roundly
 criticized.
 The Government continued its generally good record of respect
 for the integrity of the person. It is taking further steps to
 improve the administration of ciiminal justice and the prison
 system, especially to end flagrant abuse of the human rights of
 certain inmates committed by prison officials during the year.
 Most notably, overcrowding in the prisons was relieved somewhat
 by the continued development of a rehabilitation center at the
 penitentiary formerly operated by the Canal Zone Government and
 transferred to the Panamanian Government at the close of 1980.
 Despite severe budget constraints, during 1982 the Government
 continued to carry out its economic and social development
 program, which is oriented toward meeting the basic needs of
 the poorer sectors of the population. Policies aimed at
 fostering private enterprise were largely responsible for the
 maintenance of a moderately healthy growth in the economy
 through 1980. This growth slowed in 1981 and 1982, largely
 because Panama's economy is closely tied to the United States.
 Unemployment is nearly 20 percent nationally, and in Colon, the
 Caribbean terminal city of the Canal, approximately 40 percent.
 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Killing
 During 1982 there were no executions or killings for political
 motives by the Government or opposition groups. There are,
 
 
 591
 however, occasional reports of prisoners being beaten, and in
 October two teenage prisoners in the juvenile rehabilitation
 center in Colon were beaten to death.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no cases of disappearance of apprehended persons in
 1982 and there have been no reports of clandestine
 apprehensions. There are no quasi-official or extra-legal
 security forces in Panama. The Constitution provides for
 habeas corpus and requires warrants for arrests, except for
 those seized while committing crimes.
 c. Torture
 The Constitution prohibits self-incrimination, and, implicitly,
 the use of torture. During 1982 there were some allegations of
 mistreatment and one case (mentioned above) in which two
 detained juveniles in Colon were allegedly tortured and beaten
 to death. While the incident excited wide-spread public
 indignation and high level governmental concern, the trial of
 those accused has not yet begun.
 d. Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment
 The Constitution limits criminal punishment to fines and/or
 prison terms of a maximum of 20 years for a single offense.
 Hard labor may be imposed, but the Constitution prohibits
 measures that harm the physical, mental, or moral integrity of
 persons under detention. There are violations of these
 prohibitions (see above], but they are infrequent.
 Very crowded and poor living conditions in prison result from
 lack of economic resources rather than government policy or an
 intent to degrade prisoners. For instance, the model jail of
 Panama City, built in 1925 to house 225 prisoners, now has over
 600 inmates, and most sleep on the floor. The de la Espriella
 Governmegt has recognized the problem publicly and is looking
 for ways to improve prison conditions.
 In 1981 the Government began operating the penitentiary
 formerly used by the Canal Zone Government and has undertaken a
 program to transform the prison into a rehabilitation center.
 The new installation has reduced crowding in the prison
 system. Prison authorities have initiated a program with a
 major private enterprise service organization to strengthen the
 rehabilitation program in the main prison as well and the
 Government has announced its intention to attempt to relocate
 prisoners from the Coiba Island penal colony.
 Government policy prohibits discriminatory treatment of
 prisoners on the basis of class, race, sex, or religion. Food
 and other prison services beyond those normally provided may be
 purchased by those able to afford them.
 e. Arbitrary Arrest and Imprisonment
 With few exceptions, Panamanian police and judicial authorities
 adhered to legal and procedural standards in 1982. Panamanian
 and foreign observers have noted, however, that juvenile
 delinquents are occasionally tried and incarcerated as adults,
 especially when they are considered to be hardened criminals.
 There also have been charges that juveniles and poor people
 with criminal records have been detained and pressured during
 interrogation to confess to crimes they may not have
 committed. Other reported practices -- publicly criticized in
 
 
 592
 the Panamanian press by government ofticials and private
 citizens -- include summary hearings and convictions for
 misdemeanors before "night court* judges without duly
 prescribed defense counsel.
 The Constitution provides for habeas corpus and requires
 warrants for arrest, except for those seized in the commission
 of a crime, and does not allow preventive detention. As a
 rule, these safeguards are observed by the Government.
 Pre-trial detention, especially for people from lower economic
 classes, can last up to eight months in some cases, and is
 recognized as a problem by the Government. A suspect may be
 held for no more than 24 hours following arrest without being
 brought before competent authority; however, the accused may be
 held in custody for as much time as it takes to conduct the
 investigation and obtain an indictment or dismissal. This time
 is credited against any sentence imposed.
 f. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The administrative code mandates public trials based on oral
 testimony and argument and gives the accused the right to be
 present. In most criminal cases, however, the court process
 consists of written presentations by the prosecution and
 defense without the presence of the accused. The documents
 produced are available for examination by both sides.
 According to authorities, the burden of proof rests on the
 prosecutor, but the right to appeal both the charges and
 sentence is available to the prosecution as well as the
 defense. Panamanian police must bring charges against the
 accused at the time he is arrested or summoned; the failure to
 make such charges personally to the accused has led to
 invalidation of sentences. A new administrative code was
 promulgated in 1982, and a new penal code and a revised
 judicial code are expected soon.
 The Supreme Court is charged to uphold the Constitution and the
 laws, and magistrates and judges are legally independent. In
 practice the judiciary is not politically independent from the
 executive in all cases. The preponderant influence of the
 executive as against the judiciary is traditional in Panama.
 There is no military jurisdiction over civilians in Panama.
 The National Guard has no code of military justice; its members
 are subject to civil law. Because of its concern over the
 provision of defense counsel, the local bar association has a
 public defender service.
 g. Invasion of the Home
 Under the Constitution, judicial warrants must be issued before
 officials may enter homes, but there was at least one violation
 of this guarantee during 1982. Telephones are considered
 widely to be tapped by the National Guard on grounds of
 national security. No judicial order is required to
 permitwiretaps and there is no legal restraint on such
 activity. Wiretap evidence, however, is not used in criminal
 or civil cases.
 2. Respect for Civil and Political Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 The Constitution guarantees freedom of speech, press, and other
 forms of communication without censorship. There is no
 interference with academic freedom. Views of opponents of the
 
 
 present government are circulated widely by the press and radio
 and in public speeches, including their criticisms of the
 public activities of Panamanian officials. The opposition
 newspaper, "La Prensa,' which began publishing in 1980, was an
 influential news medium during 1982, and radio and television
 commentators publicly criticize government programs and
 policies.
 Despite constitutional guarantees, however, some Panamanian
 leaders have occasionally attempted to intimidate the press in
 the face of criticism. Following the resignation of President
 Royo in July 1982, the Commander of the National Guard, General
 Paredes, *recommended' that all newspapers cease publishing for
 a week. Squads of national guardsmen enforced the
 'recommendation'. While in the custody of the National Guard,
 the computer-operated printing system of the increasingly
 vociferous 'La Prensal was vandalized, with damages estimated
 at U.S. $100,000. President de is Espriella within the week
 ordered that the papers be permitted to reopen. An official
 inquiry by the National Guard which cleared it of any
 wrongdoing was ridiculed in "La Prensa.' 'La Prensa' continues
 to criticize government policies and officials and says it has
 received warnings about this from the Guard. Some *La Prensa*
 writers have said that they received death threats from unknown
 sources. There has not been any significant pressure exerted
 against the paper's advertisers.
 The other six newspapers, while they air opposition viewpoints,
 exercise considerable self-censorship. Three government-owned
 papers which often took strongly leftist, frequently
 anti-American positions, moderated their rhetoric following the
 temporary closure after Royo's resignation. There is no
 censorship of foreign newspapers, magazines, books, cable TV
 programming, or artistic works, including pornography. A
 commission on pornography was set up by the Ministry of
 Government and Justice, but it appears to have only advisory
 powers.
 Although public debate flourishes, a 1978 law places in the
 hands of a government-dominated board the power to judge the
 professional competence of practicing journalists or those
 seeking to enter the profession. While the board has rarely
 been used punitively, its existence is perceived as
 intimidating, and 'La Prensa' has claimed difficulty in
 staffing its operations. The law has been criticized by the
 Inter-American Press Association as interfering with freedom of
 the press. This past spring, President Royo restored
 professional licenses to two of four prominent radio
 commentators whose rights to broadcast he had revoked in 1979.
 President de la Espriella restored licenses to the remaining
 two broadcasters shortly after assuming power.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 The Constitution guarantees the right of peaceful assembly
 without arms and for a legitimate purpose. Authorities legally
 can control the exercise of this right if it interferes with
 traffic, threatens public order, or violates the rights of
 third parties. According to the Constitution, demonstrations
 on public property require 24-hours advance notice to the
 authorities, but this advance notice has not always been
 required. There have been no cases of banned demonstrations
 and those carried out spontaneously by teachers and students
 during 1982 were not stopped. Freedom of assembly is practiced
 by groups of various ideological backgrounds as well as by
 professional organizations. When violence and property
 
 
 594
 destruction have occurred, police have intervened and restored
 order, usually without brutality. Professional, social, and
 political groups, as well as trade unions, meet without
 interference.
 There are ideological as well as non-political labor
 organizations in Panama. Union elections are democratic, fair,
 and free from government interference. Consultation with
 unions about government policies (particularly employment
 issues) is institutionalized through a national commission that
 includes representatives of the major labor organizations.
 Both collective bargaining and strikes are constitutionally-
 guaranteed rights of workers, although government regulations
 restrict or forbid this right for certain government
 employees. Panama has a moderately progressive labor code, and
 union rights are respected.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 The Constitution guarantees religious freedom to all in law and
 in practice, and there is no state religion. There are no
 restrictions on proselyting by religious groups and General
 Paredes has said that all of them are welcome in Panama to
 contribute to the country's development. Large numbers of
 religious groups operate freely in Panama.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 The Constitution permits Panamanians to move freely within the
 country and to emigrate -- rights which are honored in
 practice. It also prohibits compulsory exile. Civilian
 exiles, from the days of the Torrijos regime, have returned and
 have resumed full participation in Panamanian society. Some
 military exiles remain abroad, but General Paredes has stated
 publicly that all are welcome to return to Panama.
 Panama has accepted refugees of widely differing ideological
 persuasions, with hundreds of refugees or self exiles in
 residence. The Government, however, pleading insufficient
 resources to meet satisfactorily the needs of its own citizens,
 has participated only minimally in refugee resettlement
 programs. One group of several hundred Salvadorans is now
 resident in a resettlement village. Except where there is
 evidence of past political persecution, the Panamanian
 Government has not recognized the rights of asylum for seamen
 who desert their ships in Panama. No cases of forcible
 repatriation of political exiles occurred in 1982.
 e. Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 Panama is a unitary state governed by a president with strong
 executive powers. Ultimate power, however, rests with the
 National Guard. Under the 1972 Constitution (amended in 1978),
 the President shares power in law and in fact with the
 legislature, judiciary, and National Guard. The President is
 required to rule 'in harmony* with the Guard, which often
 exerts a significant influence in politics. Power is
 informally shared in varying degrees by interest groups such as
 business, the official political party, labor, the information
 media, political independents, and even opposition groups.
 Following the military coup of October 1968, there were no
 elections in Panama until 1972. A ban on political parties,
 not strictly enforced, was in effect from 1969 until 1978 when
 legislation providing for their legal recognition was adopted.
 
 
 595
 The opposition parties' new legal status legitimized their
 criticism of the Government and represented an advance for free
 speech and free assembly as well as allowing increased
 participation by citizens in the political process. In 1980,
 political parties participated as organizations for the first
 time since 1968 in the elections to the Legislative Council.
 The Government is carrying out a program of return to full
 democratic processes which is to culminate in the general
 elections of 1984.
 In 1978, the 505-member National Assembly was elected by
 secret, popular vote in local elections for a six-year term.
 Only the government party was permitted to run candidates. The
 Assembly in turn elects two-thirds of the members of a
 56-member National Legislative Council from the Assembly's own
 membership; one-third are chosen through direct popular
 election. The first legislative council popular election took
 place in 1980, in which'seven of the nineteen seats contested
 were won by the opposition and two by independents. Despite a
 strong showing in the direct election, the opposition remains a
 small minority in the Council, as all of the 37 members chosen
 by the National Assembly are pro-government.
 In the wake of the 1980 election, numerous groups sought
 registration as political parties. Nine succeeded, ranging
 from communist to conservative; most tend to be relatively
 moderate. At least six others are in the process of
 registering.-
 President Royo resigned in July 1982, reportedly under pressure
 from the National Guard although some believe he had tired of
 the office and preferred to move to Spain as Panama's
 Ambassador. Following President de la Espriella's succession,
 access to decision-making positions in the Government broadened
 to include technocrats and independents, and even a few members
 of opposition parties, where before most positions were
 reserved for official party adherents.
 The National Guard Commander who succeeded General Torrijos in
 1981, Colonel Florencio Florez, retired in March 1982. The new
 Commander, General Paredes, like the President, has publicly
 expressed his commitment to the constitutional processes
 initiated by Torrijos, in particular the holding of free and
 honest national elections for president and the legislature in
 1984. The biggest factor in favor of the democratization
 process is the overwhelming momentum and support across the
 spectrum for free elections. The Panamanian people have not
 had a presidential election since 1968, have been promised one
 in 1984, and expect it. Support for this process is virtually
 universal and, barring an economic breakdown, elections are
 expected to proceed as scheduled. An electoral tribunal has
 been at work for some years, and a new electoral law designed
 to make fraud difficult is nearing completion. A national
 electoral census was conducted on december 12.
 Women are accorded equal political rights under Panamanian law,
 but participate in politics to a lesser extent than men. For
 example, 30 of Panama's 505 legislators are women, and one of
 the legislature's nine vice presidents is a woman.
 Nevertheless, women play an active role in political and
 governmental affairs, and hold a number of important political
 and governmental positions. For example, the Minister of
 Education, the president of the ruling political party, one of
 the three members of the electoral tribunal, three of Panama's
 nine provincial governors (including the governor of Panama
 province), one of the nine Supreme Court Justices, and the head
 
 
 596
 of the post office are women. There are also several
 organizations comprised of women, such as Unidad and Accion
 Femenina, which are active in Panamanian politics.
 Panama is a country of minorities. The Government and
 bureaucracy have traditionally been dominated by Panamanians of
 European descent, but members of all of Panama's minorities are
 active politically. There is, for instance, a black cabinet
 minister, as well as a Vice Minister of Justice of Chinese
 descent, and blacks hold a number of high level government
 positions. In addition the National Guard is dominated by
 Panamanians who are either *mestizo" or of at least partial
 African descent. The National Guard Commander is in the latter
 category, and one of the key members of the general staff is
 black. These groups also dominate the legislature.
 Panama's Indians also are active politically. About one~third
 of the National Assembly is Indian because Panama's political
 districting tends to favor sparsely populated areas where
 Indians are a majority. In addition one-third of Panama's
 districts are headed by Indians and they play significant roles
 in the governments of the four important provinces of Darien,
 Chiriqui, Bocas del Toro, and Veraguas. Some of Panama's
 Indians, such as the San Blas Indians, live in self-governing
 semi-autonomous districts, and are not as active on the
 national political scene.
 Other important minorities, such as Jews, Lebanese, Chinese
 and East Indians, have until recently concentrated their
 efforts in economic fields, and have tended to avoid direct
 involvement in political activities.
 3. Government Attitude Regarding International and Non-
 governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations of
 Human Rights
 The Government has espoused human rights causes in the
 Organization of American States, the United Nations, and
 elsewhere. A human rights committee formed in Panama in 1978
 operated freely in 1982. Panama was not mentioned in Amnesty
 International's 1981 or 1982 reports.
 4. Econ~mic, Social, and Cultural Situation
 During the past 15 years, the Panamanian Government has
 expanded and extended education and health care programs into
 the countryside and poorer urban neighborhoods, invested large
 sums in infrastructure projects (roads, electricity,
 telecommunications, water systems) and improved national
 socio-economic integration through greater attention to
 provincial population centers.
 Declining infant mortality and death rates suggest improvements
 in the area of public health. Infant mortality dropped from
 37.6 per thousand in 1971 to 21.1 per thousand in 1981.
 Between 1971 and 1981, the death rate per 1,000 live births
 dropped from 6.7 to 4.2. In 1981, there was one doctor per
 1,000 persons, an improvement over the one per 1,389 persons in
 1971. Life expectancy at birth was 70.4 years in 1980.
 Along with the falling mortality rate, the birth rate has also
 been declining, dropping from 37.2 per thousand in 1971 to 27.7
 per thousand 10 years later. The annual population growth rate
 declined from 3 percent to 2.4 percent during the same decade.
 Panama's total population was estimated at 1,966,000 in 1981.
 
 
 597
 In 1981, 82.8 percent of the total population had access to
 safe water. The ratio of calorie supply available for
 consumption relative to nutritional requirements was calculated
 at 101 percent in 1977.
 Access to education has improved as well. According to
 available data, 115 percent of the population in the
 appropriate age group was enrolled in primary education in
 1979. (This figure is more than 100 percent because some
 persons outside the primary age group are enrolled and possibly
 because the age group may be slightly under-counted.) The
 adult literacy rate was about 85 percent in 1979.
 Panama's Constitution states that economic activities fall
 primarily within the private sector, but authorizes the state
 to orient, direct, regulate, replace, or create economic
 activities to increase the nation's wealth and to assure
 benefits of the economy for the greatest possible number of
 people. Private property is respected in law and practice, and
 citizens, without regard to sex; social origin, birth, race,
 religion, or political opinion, are guaranteed a right to own
 property, as well as to avail themselves of any economic
 benefits, programs or services of the state. The 1972
 Constitution, however, limits the rights of naturalized
 Panamanians to participate in retail commerce.
 After relatively good years in 1978-80, recent economic
 performance has been weak as a result of deteriorating regional
 and world-wide conditions. Real per capita gross domestic
 product is approximately $2,000, a relatively high figure for
 the third world. However, this conceals the fact that there
 are many people in Panama who are very poor. The Panamanian
 consumer price index increased 13.8 percent in 1980, but this
 increase dropped to 7.3 percent in 1981 and to 3.9 percent for
 the period October 1981 to October 1992.
 Official figures show unemployment at about nine percent for
 1979'(the latest year for which statistics are available), but
 the current rate probably is nearly 20 percent. How to employ
 the ever-growing number of job seekers is the country's most
 serious economic and social problem. Because of the age
 structure of the population, the economy would have to grow at
 a much faster rate (real growth of eight percent or more) or
 become much more labor intensive in order to reduce
 unemployment. The Government of Panama is actively seeking
 foreign private investment and attempting to provide
 appropriate incentives to private enterprise in an effort to
 bring about improvement.
 According to most recent US Agency for International Development
 studies, an estimated 35-40 percent of the population lives
 under conditions of poverty, that is, with an income barely or
 less than adequate to provide for a family's basic needs. Of
 this group, approximately half, or 20 percent of the country's
 population, lives in serious or extreme poverty -- unable to
 provide for basic necessities. Although a larger percentage of
 the poor is found in rural areas, the trend toward an urbanized
 society indicates that, within this decade, Panama's poor
 population may be split evenly between the urban and rural
 areas. Although figures for earlier periods are not available,
 it can be assumed that current poverty figures represent a
 significant improvement over the situation a decade ago.
 Further, because of the availability of a variety of public
 services, such as health clinics and school and maternal/child
 feeding programs, even the poorest families have a cushion
 which eases their economic situation.
 
 
 598
 Panama's social system and legal code accord equal treatment to
 women and to men. The Constitution prohibits discrimination on
 the basis of race, birth, social class, sex, religion, or
 political ideas. The Constitution also requires equal pay for
 equal work without distinction based on sex. The Constitution
 gives pregnant employees 12 weeks mandatory maternity leave and
 the right to return to their jobs.
 Panamanian women enjoy a high level of social freedom; many are
 active in politics, business, government, the military, and
 academia. But women in general still do not share the same
 opportunities for individual and collective advancement
 available to men. As Panamanian law does not recognize
 community property, divorced or deserted women often suffer
 financially. From 1974 through 1978, the country experienced a
 severe recession, causing widespread unemployment and
 underemployment, both of which were especially high for women.
 The Government estimated in 1977 that 14 percent of the
 femalework force was unemployed and 44 percent underemployed;
 the comparable figures for men were 10 and 18 percent,
 respectively.
 Female employment in urban Panama is concentrated in the service
 sector, where wages are generally lower; wages paid to women
 are lower than those for males and increase at a much slower
 rate. Comparatively fewer women than men participate in the
 labor force, and their participation seems to fluctuate as the
 job market expands and contracts. Government statistics showed
 that in 1978 women made up about 29 percent of the economically
 active work force.
 In the late 1970s it was estimated that there were between
 90,000 and 100,000 Indians living under tribal organization in
 the country. There were three major groups -- the Guaymi, the
 Cuna, and the Choco. They were concentrated in three distinct
 and widely separated localities, where they were thinly
 distributed and exposed to varying degrees of contact with the
 rural non-Indian Panamanians in the same territories. The
 Indians in these three groups have elected to remain in their
 own semi-autonomous communities, subject to tribal government,
 and to live according to their own traditions.
 While the Cuna have a semi-autonomous territory called a
 comarca, the Guaymi and Choco do not and are under increasing
 pressure from settlers and large companies encroaching on their
 traditional lands. The Indians feel that the creation of a
 comarca is their foremost concern and have found support for
 their cause at home and abroad, especially in Europe. The
 Government has promised to work with the Indian leaders on the
 details of the establishment of comarcas. Many meetings have
 been held with the Guaymi, but as yet there is no sign that the
 comarca is about to become a reality.
 The tribes are assisted in certain respects by the central and
 the provincial governments, particularly in matters of public
 health and welfare, and are regulated by the Ministry of
 Government and Justice when circumstances warrant. They are
 considered apart from the civil population and have a separate
 and largely autonomous political status. This does not,
 however, deprive them of the rights of citizenship, and they
 exercise full voting privileges. They are not restricted to
 their tribal areas, but most remain there by choice, reflecting
 their long-standing resistance to assimilation.
 The more prominent among the small minorities are Jews, Arabs,
 Chinese, East Indians, and North Americans. All of these
 
 
 599
 groups play roles in Panama's trade and commerce well out of
 proportion to their numbers. There is no legal discrimination
 against these or any other social or cultural groups. While
 innumerable ekceptions exist, Caucasians and mestizos tend to
 be better-off economically and occupy higher positions in
 government and business than blacks and Indians.
 
 
 600
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: PANAMA
 1980     1981     1982
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-OTAL,..         2.0      10.6     13.0
 LOANS .................    0.0       6.4      8.1
 GRANTS ............... ..  2.0      4.2      4.9
 A.AID ....... .  .... ! .......  1.0     8.7     11.7
 LOANS ...............       0.0       6.4      8.1
 GRANTS .................    1.0      2.3      3.6
 .(SEC.SUPPASSST.)..         0.0      0.0      0.0
 8.FOOD FOR PEACE .......         1.0      1.9      1.3
 LOANS .................   0.0       0.0      0.0
 GRANTS.............         1.0       1.9      1.3
 TITLE I-TOTAL ..........        0.0       0.0      0.0
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS .....        0.0       0.0      0.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR .....        0.0       0.0      0.0
 TITLE II-TOTAL .........        1.0       1.9      1.3
 .RELIEF.tC.OEV & WFP,         0.1       0.0      0.0
 VOL.RELIEP AGENCY .....        0.9       1.9      1.3
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST .. ..0              .0.0      0.0
 LOANS .................     0.0       0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................    0.0       0.0      O.o
 PEACE CORPS ......        0.0      0.0       0.0
 NARCOTICS ....... ,.0               0.0      0.0
 OTHER ............ 0.0           '0.0       0.0
 Z1.MIL. ASSLST-TOTAL.           0.3      0.4      5.4
 LOANS..  ........ ...       0.0       0.0      5.0
 GRANTS ...........  ... 0.           0.4      0.4
 A.MAP GRANTS ..........         0.0      0.0      0.0
 b.CREOIT SALS-MS,..         0.0       0.0      5.0
 C.INTL MIL.0.TRNG...          0.1       0.,4     0.4
 D.TRAN-EXRLSS STOCK...        0.0       0.0      0.0
 E.CTHER GRANTS ........        0.0       0.0      0.0
 II1.TOTAL -CON. C MIL...          2.3     11.0,    18.
 LOANS .................   0.0       6.4     13.1
 3RANTS ...  ....     .....  2.3      4.6      5.3
 OTHER US LOANS ..........         0.0      0.0      0.0
 EX-IM BANK LOANS .......        0.0       0.0      0.0
 ALL OTHER ...............       0.0      0.0      0.0
 ASSISTANCt PROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1990     1981     1952     1946-82
 TOTAL. .......   149.9     74.5    123.4     923.9
 IBRO             5.)      45.5     24.4     382.9
 IFC                0.0      0.0       0.0      8.3
 IDA                0.0      0.0      0.0       0.0
 105               91.4     Zb,5      9?.0    505.3
 A0                 0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 AFOB               0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 UNOP               0.5      0.5       0.0     22.6
 OTmER-UN          O.        0.0      0.0      4.3
 CEC                0.0      O.O      0.0       0.0
 
 
 601
