 PANAMA
 Panama is a republic governed under a Constitution promul-
 gated in 1972. The present government came into power
 in 1968, following a coup by the National Guard. A transi-
 tory provision of the Constitution grants General Omar
 Torrijos broad powers as "Maximum Leader of the Panaman-
 ian Revolution" for a six-year period ending in October
 1978. Organized opposition by political parties is not
 permitted but, as the 1978 elections approach, Panamanian
 politicians are optimistic about participating more ac-
 tively in the country's policy and decision making process.
 Panama's human rights record has improved since the po-
 litically turbulent period of 1968-72. Progress was espec-
 ially pronounced in 1977, as the Government took several
 important actions, including steps toward restoration of
 the right to trial in all cases. The Government strives
 to provide economic and social benefits to the poorest
 sectors of the population but these efforts have been im-
 peded somewhat by the.country's current economic difficul-
 ties.
 1.   Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Torture
 Torture is not practiced systbmatically in Panama and is
 not a policy of the government. A group of Panamanian
 exiles living in the United States, the Panamanian Com-
 mittee for Human Rights, has alleged that 151 people
 were "arrested and tortured" in .1976, but has not provided
 details. The Amnesty International Report 1977 and the
 Annual Review for 1976-1977 of the International League for
 Human Rights do not contain sections about Panama.
 b. Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 Physical conditions in Panamanian prisons are primitive.
 Occasional physical abuse of prisoners by the police
 (National Guard) occurs. Criminal punishments are limited
 to fines and/or prison terms. The maximum prison term
 is twenty years. There is no capital punishment.
 
 (195)
 
 
 196
 c. Arbitrary Arrest or Imprisonment
 Some Panamanians claim the occasional use of arrests
 as "object lessons"--a person is jailed over the weekend,
 with no charge, and on Monday morning is told that it
 was a mistake and released. Such cases are not common.
 d. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 In ordinary criminal cases, Panamanians have the benefit
 of a fair and public trial by an independent judiciary.
 However, in certain public order and-state security
 cases the accused were interrogated, judged and sentenced,
 all without internationally recognized standards of
 due process. This was possible under an administrative,
 not judicial, procedure established under Decree Law
 342 of 1969. The Government was sparing in the application
 of this decree, invoking it on four occasions in 1976
 for the first time in several years. It was not applied
 in 1977.
 On November 12, 1977, General Omar Torrijos publicly
 promised a new legal code which would overturn Decree
 Law 342 and restore the right of trial for all offenses.
 On December 2, 1977, the Government announced the
 recision of this Decree.
 e. Invasion of the Home
 Under Article 25 of the Panamanian Constitution, the
 home is inviolable. There is no evidence that this provi-
 sion is not generally respected.
 2.   Governmental Policies Relating to the Fulfillment
 of Vital Needs for Food, Shelter, Health Care and
 Education
 By seeking to create new wealth through economic expan-
 sion policies, the Government has made efforts to improve
 the lot of poorer citizens in areas of the country which
 had previously been largely ignored. The Government is
 also extending and expanding educational benefits while
 undertaking a major revision of the educational system
 
 
 197
 to make it more responsive to Panama's development needs.
 Major efforts are being made to increase the number and
 quality of health facilities through the construction
 and organization of rural health centers, the training
 of paramedical personnel and the construction and
 development of sanitation facilities and potable water
 systems. In the agricultural and rural sectors principal
 emphasis is on the development of market towns, coopera-
 tives, marketing facilities, and infrastructure. The Gov-
 ernment is also financing a low-income housing program
 which has greatly exceeded original expectations both in
 quality and number of units constructed. Panama's efforts
 in these fields have been hampered by an economic recession
 influenced to a large degree by international economic fac-
 tors. The result of all these programs is a noticeable,
 positive impact on the physical well-being of the population,
 although substantial income disparities remain.
 3.   Respect for Civil and Political Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Thought, Speech, Press, Religion, and
 Assembly
 Freedom of religion is respected in Panama.
 Until early September 1977, freedom of assembly in Panama
 City anB Colon was limited under Decree Law 341 of 1969;
 rallies or open meetings of those opposed to the Government
 were not permitted. However, students were allowed more
 leeway to criticize than was the general population, and
 on many occasions student demonstrators criticized government
 policies and officials sharply, but within limits. Enforcement
 of Decree Law 341 was relaxed in September to permit more
 public discussion of the Canal treaties prior to the plebiscite
 vote. Decree Law 341 was annulled on December 2, 1977.
 The press and broadcast news media, while not subject
 to prior government censorship, practice self-censorship.
 The rules of self-censorship are defined in Decree Law 343
 as well as in certain sections of Decree Law 342 of 1969 (now
 rescinded, see section l.d). The rules are sufficiently vague
 that editors err on the conservative side. Despite the over-
 all caution, on occasion the media (particularly radio and
 
 
 television) discuss controversial issues. For example, a
 May 1977 television panel discussed human rights in Panama
 in unusually frank terms.
 Beginning in July 1977, criticism of the proposed Canal
 treaties began to appear frequently in the press. For roughly
 a month prior to the October 23 plebiscite on the Canal
 treaties, Panama enjoyed virtually untrammeled freedom of
 expression. As 1977 ended, direct, sharp public criticism
 of the Torrijod Government was appearing in the media.
 On December 20, 1977, General Torrijos met with the Pan-
 amanian journalists' union to discuss ways of modifying
 Decree Law 343 so as to eliminate the provisions offensive
 to human rights, while maintaining protections against
 libel and slander.
 Labor unions are generally free to organize and operate
 in Panama under the labor code of 1972. Membership is
 voluntary. About 10% to 12% of the Panamanian work force
 is unionized. Organizational and operational freedoms were
 somewhat reduced by a law promulgated at the beginning of
 1977 in an attempt to restore business confidence and sti-
 mulate the economy. The unions are generally free of
 outright Government control or open meddling and are
 relatively free to criticize official economic and labor
 policies. The Government frequently solicits labor's
 views before making domestic policy decisions.
 b. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel and Emigration
 Internal and external movement, including emigration, is
 entirely free. Expatriation has been a preferred Govern-
 ment tactic for dealing with outspoken dissidents. Citizens
 from the political right, left and center have been exiled.
 Although expatriation is prohibited under Article 29 of
 the 1972 Constitution, 18 persons were exiled without
 trial in 1976. The Minister of Labor stated in a May 26,
 1977, national television interview that the Government
 had preferred to exile 14 citizens in January 1976 rather
 than apply the *appropriate law" (probably Decree Law 342)
 which he described as "more severe". There were no expatri-
 ations in 1977.
 
 
 199
 In May 1977, General Torrijos announced his decision to
 allow the return of 82 exiles. .He indicated that the re-
 turn of others would be considered on a case-by-case basis.
 In November 1977, General Torrijos declared his commitment
 to the eventual return of all exiles.
 c. Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 Panama's authoritarian political system is governed by the
 Constitution of 1972. Under this charter, there is a Nation-
 al Assembly of Community Representatives (NACR), whose 505
 members were elected by popular vote in 1972 for a six-year
 term. The executive and other legislative organs of govern-
 ment, which hold the real power in the country (Presidency,
 Cabinet, Judiciary, and National Legislative Commission),
 are either elected indirectly by the NACR or appointed by
 General Torrijos. The latter holds special temporary powers
 under Article 277 of the Constitution as Supreme Chief of
 the Revolution. Persons elected to serve in the NACR also
 serve in representative bodies at the community and provinc-
 ial levels. This system has resulted in greater participation
 in public life at the local level and a more direct funneling
 of local concerns and interests to the national level than
 was previously the case. The Government also consults with
 a broad range of important non-governmental groups and as-
 sociations during the formulation of policy and initiatives.
 Political parties are banned, but the ban is not strictly
 enforced. Some parties have maintained their organizational
 identities and structures, and operate informally as "move-
 ments" or under the camouflage of business, labor, or trade
 groups. Some of the pre-1968 parties participated in the
 debate on the proposed Panama Canal treaties. At least one
 party, the Liberal, gave its views on a prime-time television
 broadcast. Party leaders met with several United States
 Senators visiting Panama in November and December 1977.
 The parties are tentatively planning to participate in the
 1978 NACR elections. On November 28, 1977, the Democratic
 Alliance for National Liberation was formed by some 300
 representatives of organizations and parties opposed to
 General Torrijos.
 The Alliance has strongly criticized the Government, its
 institutions, and its policies. The November 28 proceedings
 were broadcast on nationwide radio and reported in the press.
 
 
 4. Government Attitude and Record Regarding International
 and Non-Governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights.
 In September 1977 the Government invited the Inter-American
 Human Rights Commission to visit Panama to investigate
 various charges and to publicly report its findings.-
 General Torrijos promised that if any political prisoners
 were found, they would be released. The Commission sent a
 delegation to Panama on November 29 for a one-week visit.
 Also, in May 1977, in'response to criticism from a Venezuelan
 youth group, General Torrijos personally invited the group
 to visit Panama "to see for themselves" what the state of
 human rights was. The group has not acted on that invitation.
 On November 17, the Government announced that the NACR had
 ratified the American Convention on Human Rights.
 The Government invited the Secretary-General of the
 United Nations and the rectors of many universities in Latin
 America and the United States to observe the October 23, 1977,
 plebiscite on the proposed Panama Canal treaties. The
 Secretary-General sent a team of observers led by his
 Special Representative, Under-Secretary-General Erik Suy;
 and 20 universities, including three in the United States,
 sent their rectors. Approximately 95% of the eligible
 voting population turned out to vote, and the treaties were
 approved by 66.1% of those who voted.
 Reports indicate that the observers were given full
 freedom of movement, that voting irregularities were guickly
 corrected when observed, and that on the whole the plebiscite
 was fairly conducted. The United Nations Special Representa-
 tive reported "that the plebiscite of 23 October 1977 on the
 Carter-Torrijos treaties was extremely well prepared and that
 the plebiscite itself took place in an atmosphere of calm and
 in accordance with the usual democratic standards." The
 Special Representative added 'the plebiscite of 23 October
 1977 took place in a normal way and  . . was an example in
 democracy."
 
 
