 PANAMA
 Panama's Constitution establishes a representative democracy with     three
 branches of government-executive and legislative branches elected by direct secret
 vote for 5-year terms, and an independent judiciary-plus an independent electoral
 tribunal. The current Government, headed by President Guillermo Endara, is a
 multiparty coalition elected in 1989.
 Panama has no armed forces and had no military expenditures during 1992. Con-
 stitutional amendments that, among other things, would have prohibited the estab-
 lishment of military forces were approved by the Legislative Assembly but were de-
 feated in a national referendum onNovember 15, 1992. Law enforcement duties are
 the responsibility of the Panamanian Public Force (PPF) under the Minister of Gov-
 ernment and Justice. Criminal investigations are performed by the Judicial Tech-
 nical Police (PTJ) under the Public Ministry, headed by the Attorney General, who
 is part of the judicial branch.
 Panama has a free enterprise, service-oriented, dollar-based economy. In 1992 the
 Government initiated structural reforms designed to increase the efficiency and pro-
 
 
 ductivity of the economy. Panama's gross domestic product grew by over 8 percent.
 The official unemployment rate has slowly fallen to approximately 14 percent. Pov-
 erty is closely linked to high unemployment and underemployment in urban slums
 and in some rural areas.
 During 1992, the Panamanian Government generally respected human rights,
 strengthened some institutional protections, and began to prosecute those respon-
 sible 7or the abuses ensuing from 21 years of dictatorship. However, progress in key
 areas was slow, and Panama's principal human rights problems continued to be pro-
 longed preliminary and pretrial detention, an inefficient criminal justice system,
 and an overcrowded, oppressive prison system.
 RESPECr FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-No cases of political or other
 extrajudicial killings at the hands of government personnel were reported during
 1992. Some cases against those accused of politically motivated murders under the
 military dictatorship began to move slowly through the court system. In January
 the Supreme Court ordered three defendants to stand trial in the 1971 disappear-
 ance of Catholic priest Hector Gallego. In June Manuel Noriega and 5 other defend-
 ants were ordered to stand trial for the summary executions of 11 Panama Defense
 Force (PDF) members after the October 1989 coup attempt against Noriega. Also
 in June, 12 defendants were ordered to stand trial for the kidnaping and murder
 of American citizen Raymond Dragseth, killed during the 1989 U.S. military action,
 reportedly by agents of the Noriega regime. In July Noriega and others were or-
 dered to stand trial in the 1985 murder of Dr. Hugo Spadafora, a former Vice Min-
 ister of Health and critic of Noriega. Many defendants including Noriega, who is
 currently serving a 40 year prison sentence in the United States, appealedth order
 to stand trial, delaying commencement of the trials.
 Some groups continued to press for further investigation into the deaths of per-
 sons killed in 1989 during "Operation Just Cause" and for indemnification of t.eir
 families. A U.S. congressional report released in July concluded the number of Pan-
 amanians killed in Operation Just Cause" was between 300 and 400, of whom ap-
 proximately 100 were innocent bystanders. Also in July, the Catholic Church an-
 nounced formation of a commission to investigate, among other things, the number
 of deaths during "Operation Just Cause."
 b. Disappearance.-No known or alleged cases of politically motivated disappear.
 ance occurred during 1992.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution prohibits the death penalty as well as measures which could dam-
 age the physical, mental, or moral integrity of prisoners or detainees. There contin-
 ued, however, to be scattered cases of police brutality. The national police and the
 PTJ each maintained offices of professional responsibility to investigate claims of po-
 lice misconduct, including human rights abuses, against members of their respective
 organizations. Sanctions included formal reprimand, disciplinary transfer, reduction
 in rank, dismissal, and in severe cases, prosecution. Through the end of August, the
 PNP had investigated 151 cases; 24 officials were dismissed for their actions and
 3 cases were forwarded for possible prosecution in the courts. Through the end of
 July, the PTJ had investigated 70 cases; 4 agents were dismissed.
 The PPF, with the assistance of the Panamanian Committee for Human Rights
 (CPDH), routinely trained existing personnel and incoming recruits on laws and pro-
 cedures to protect the human rights and legal guarantees of citizens. The PTJ also
 integrated human rights courses into its training for new detectives. In November
 the PTJ's homicide division chief was suspended and arrested when he was identi-
 fied as allegedly being involved in a politically motivated kidnaping and torture in
 1985.
 In June Panama adopted measures to regulate the use of force, including deadly
 force, by members of Panamanian law enforcement organizations. The intent of the
 decree was to make individual officers responsible for decisions regarding use of
 force. The adopted measures require an officer to exhaust all other methods before
 using force, to use the minimum level of force necessary, and not to use deadly force
 except to defend against deadly force or in lire-threatening situations involving hos-
 tages or acts of terrorism.
 tson conditions throughout Panama remained deplorable in 1992; unhealthful
 conditions were common. The physical plant of most prisons was dilapidated, medi-
 cal care was lacking, escape attempts were frequent, and there were credible reports
 of corruption and abuse of prisoners by guards. The Government refurbished and
 expanded prison facilities in Colon, Cr.stobal and David, continued construction of
 
 
 460
 the 1,000-bed La Joya prison, and began to train civilian guards for the La Joya
 facility. Nonetheless, overcrowding of Panamanian prisons worsened in 1992 as ar-
 rests increased. According to government figures, the total prison population in Au-
 gust 1992 was approximately 4,300, an increase of approximately 17 percent over
 August 1991. Modelo prison Panama's largest, housed over 1,200 prisoners in a fa-
 cility built for 350; fights in Modelo caused at least 8 deaths in 1992.
 Conditions on the Coiba Island penal colony continued to be deplorable and primi-
 tive. There were continued credible allegations of torture and mistreatment at the
 hands of guards, although abuses were not as severe as reported in 1991. The Gov-
 ernment's policy was to investigate charges of torture and punish persons found re-
 sponsible. The greatest danger to inmates came from rival bands of prisoners who
 fought among themselves, often using homemade weapons. At least five inmates
 died on Coiba in 1992, three reportedly the result of gang-related violence. Prisoners
 who attempted to flee Coiba more than three times were confined to 80-year-old
 cells with no sanitary facilities. Transportation difficulties hindered communication
 between Coiba inmates and their attorneys and often caused further court delays
 when Coiba inmates were not transported to court on time. In December the Direc-
 tor of Coiba was dismissed after being accused of corruption.
 There was no known evidence in 1992 that female detainees or prisoners were
 targeted for sexual assault or other abuse by police or prison guards. Conditions at
 women's prisons generally were better than those at other prisons.
 In early July, the Director of Immigration ordered 32 illegal immigrants deported
 to Colombia on foot through the Darien Jungle; 6 were reported missing at the end
 of the march. After severe criticism of the deportation, the Attorney General an-
 nounced an investigation, and there were no more similar deportations. Later in
 July, deportations were halted completely due to lack of funding.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-No known cases of arbitrary arrest, de-
 tention, or exile occurred in 1992. The Constitution stipulates that arrests must be
 carried out with a warrant issued by the relevant authorities, except when a person
 is apprehended during the commission of a crime. The detainee is to be informed
 immediately of the reasons for arrest or detention, and the detainee has a right to
 immediate legal counsel, to be provided by the State for the indigent. The Constitu-
 tion provides for judicial review of the legality of detention and mandates the imme-
 diate release of any person found to have been detained or arrested illegally. A sus-
 pect may not be detained for more than 24 hours without being brought before a
 competent authority, after which a prosecutor has a fixed period (which varies ac-
 cording to the number of suspects) to complete the investigative file for judicial re-
 view. The judge, in turn, has an additional 15 days to render a decision as to wheth-
 er a trial is warranted.
 In practice these time limits were often not met, nor were sufficient public defend-
 ers available. The 24-hour time limit was often violated; arrestees were commonly
 held without charges for several days. Extended pretrial detention of those charged
 continued to be one of Panama's most serious human rights problems. According to
 government statistics, the proportion of pretrial detainees in the prison population
 hovered near 79 percent, the same percentage as in 1991. Pretrial detention in ex-
 cess of the maximum sentence for the alleged crime was not uncommon. According
 to public defenders, the average period of pretrial custody for a defendant was 18
 months. The Government took no meaningful action during the year to correct this
 situation.
 e. Denial of Fair Public TriaL-The nine Supreme Court magistrates are ap-
 pointed to 10-year terms by the Executive Branch and confirmed by the Legislative
 Assembly. The magistrates appoint Superior Court judges, who in turn appoint cir-
 cuit court judges in their respective jurisdictions. In 1992, two new criminal courts
 began to operate in Panama City. The Supreme Court recently approved judicial ca-
 reer regulations intended to promote professionalism and to prevent the removal of
 judges for nonprofessional reasons. At least five judges were removed in 1992 for
 various reasons involving malfeasance in office.
 At the local level, administrative judges similar to justices of the peace are ap-
 pointed by municipal mayors. There are two types of local judges, "corregidores" and
 "night" (or "police  judges. These judges exercise jurisdiction over minor civil and
 criminal cases in which they may impose sentences of up to 1 year. This system has
 serious shortcomings. These officials need not be (and normally are not) attorneys
 and they operate outside the jurisdictional control of the courts. Some allegedly en-
 gage in corrupt practices. Their actions are not regulated by the Code of Criminal
 Procedure and their decisions are appealable only to provincial governors.
 The Constitution provides that persons charged with crimes have the right to
 counsel and are presumed innocent until proven guilty. Court proceedings during
 the investigative phase are conducted with written presentations by the prosecution
 
 
 and defense without the presence of the accused. Trial proceedings are done orally
 with the accused present. The Constitution establishes trial by jury to be used in
 some circumstances; however, by law, most trials do not use a jury.
 The Government is constitutionally obliged to provide public defenders for the in-
 digent, but this guarantee was often violated in practice because of the shortage of
 public defense attorneys. Two new public defenders were hired in 1992, but the judi-
 cial system remained 3 public defenders short of the 36 required by law. Public de-
 fenders often were appointed after the investigative phase of the case had passed,
 limiting the defense's opportunity to present evidence. Public defenders' caseloads
 were staggering, numbering hundreds of cases per attorney and seriously undermin-
 ingthe quality of representation.
 Panama held no political prisoners in 1992. Various pro-Noriega and ex-PDF
 groups claimed approximately 50 to 54 prisoners held for alleged crimes including
 torture, homicide, kidnaping, and other human rights violations during the period
 of military dictatorship were "political" prisoners. Leading Panamanian human
 rights organizations unanimously disagreed with that characterization. Many of
 these prisoners have been awaiting trial since early 1990.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Constitution provides for the inviolability of the home and communications. Per-
 sonal documents may not be examined, communications may not be monitored, nor
 private residences entered and searched except by written order of a competent au-
 thority for a specific purpose. "Sweep" searches in high-crime areas by the Judicial
 Technical Police (PTJ) produced credible complaints that PTJ agents at various
 times failed to follow legal requirements for arrest and search warrants and con-
 ducted indiscriminate searches of entire apartment buildings or housing complexes.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-Panamanians generally enjoyed the freedom of
 speech and pressprovided for by the Constitution. Five national daily newspapers
 were published. Three commercial television stations-two of which were national
 networks-operated in Panama. Two local educational television stations broadcast
 in Panama City: one is operated by the University of Panama; and the second, run
 by the Catholic Church, began broadcasting in April. Panama had approximately 95
 privately owned radio stations broadcasting a wide variety of political and other
 commentaries and perspectives. There was also one national radio station run by
 the Government, limited to educational and cultural programming. Local and for-
 eign journalists worked and traveled freely throughout Panama, and the population
 had access to foreign media.
 Libel is a criminal offense subject to fines and up to 2 years in prison. Opinions,
 comments, or criticism of government officials acting in their official capacity are
 specifically exempted from libel prosecution. Legislation to repeal Noriega-era press
 restrictions still technically in existence was submitted to the Legislative Assembly
 in 1992 but did not reach final debate.
 In May the Attorney General ordered a newspaper columnist jailed for 5 days
 without a trial for showing "disrespect" to the Office of the Attorney General in sev-
 eral columns. The arrest, under a section of law allowing certain government offi-
 cials to impose immediate discipline in extraordinary situations, was upheld by the
 Supreme Court. The Panamanian Committee for Human Rights and the National
 Journalists' Association condemned the arrest.
 Academic freedom was recognized and freely exercised at public as well as private
 universities.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution provides the
 rights of peaceful assembly and association, and the Government generally re-
 spected these rights. No authorization is needed for outdoor assembly, although
 prior notification for administrative purposes is required. Panamanians have the
 right to form and organize political parties, associations, and professional or civic
 groups without government interference.
 Freedom of assembly was widely exercised in 1992, and citizens frequently assem-
 bled and marched to protest government policies and to make demands of the Gov-
 ernment.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for religious freedom. No gov-
 ernmental restrictions existed in 1992 on the free exercise and proselytization or re-
 ligious beliefs, nor on any particular religious groups. Although Roman Catholicism
 is predominant, Panama has no state religion. Clerics are constitutionally prohibited
 from holding public office except as related to social assistance, education, or sci-
 entific research. Foreign clergy are permitted to enter the country and enjoy the
 same religious freedoms as Panamanian citizens.
 
 
 462
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Constitution grants Panamanians the right to move freely within
 the country and to emigrate and return, and these rights are respected in practice.
 No known cases of forcible repatriation of refugees or asylees occurred in 1992.
 In September in response to complaints about juvenile crime, the Governor of
 Panama Province imposed a 9 p.m. curfew for minors.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 The Constitution provides for a representative democracy with direct popular elec-
 tion of the President, two Vice Presidents, legislators and local representatives every
 5 years. Technical arrangements for and the supervision of elections are the respon-
 sibility of the independent National Electoral Tribunal. Suffrage is a right and duty
 for aU citizens; there is, however, no penalty for noncompliance. Voting is by secret
 ballot. Panamanians enjoy the right to join any political party, to propagate their
 views, and to vote for candidates of their choice without government interference.
 These rights were respected by the Government in 1992.
 There are no legal bars to participation by women or people of African, Asian, or
 indigenous descent, but in fact few of them are found in senior leadership positions
 in government or political parties, owing to traditional patterns. However numerous
 representatives of these grodps are in the Legislative Assembly, inciuding five
 women.
 Panama's indigenous population of approximately 194,000 has the same political
 rights as other citizens. The Government provides semi-autonomous status to the
 San Bias reserve, populated mainly by indigenous Kuna indians. San Blas has two
 representatives in the Legislative Assembly, proportionate to its population. Locally,
 the reserve is governed by tribal chiefs, who meet in general congress twice a year.
 During 1992 Kunas objected to squatter incursions in areas of-Panama Province
 they considered their traditional lands and asked the Government to create another
 Kuna reserve. Guaymi Indians in the provinces of Bocas del Toro, Veraguas, and
 Chiriqui also called on the Government to create a Guaymi reserve. Bills to create
 the Kuna and Guaymi reserves and an additional indigenous reserve in Darien
 Province were introduced in the Legislative Assembly.
 The eight legally recognized political parties in 1992 represented a wide spectrum
 of political viewpoints. During 1992 at least nine other diverse political groups were
 registered as "parties in formation" with the electoral tribunal in preparation for the
 1994 national elections. A "party in formation' must present 18,220 signatures to
 the electoral tribunal for legal recognition as a political party.
 Constitutional amendments approved by the National Assembly were defeated in
 a national referendum in November. Political parties freely promoted or opposed the
 referendum, as did a wide variety of civic and professional groups. The referendum
 was observed bya number of national and international groups. Voting was free and
 fair and the Government respected the results. During the referendum, members
 of the PPF were placed under the authority of the electoral tribunal to safeguard
 voting places, helping to ensure a free election.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Several local human rights organizations, including both church and secular
 groups, operated without restrictions in Panama. These organizations carried out a
 full range of activities, including investigations and dissemination of findings. Local
 human rights advocates had free access to government officials while investigating
 complaints. No evidence suggests government retaliation against persons or orgam-
 zations making human rights complaints. International human rights groups oper-
 ated without government restriction.
 During the course of 1992 Noriega-era defendants were charged and began to be
 tried for offenses involvin human rights abuses. Among those convicted were ex-
 Panama Defense Forces (PDF) Major Felipe Camargo (sentenced to 40 months in
 prison for human rights abuses), ex-Provincial Governor Alberto Velasquez (sen-
 tenced to 21  years in prison for violating press freedom by closing a newspaper)
 and ex-Director of Modelo Prison Jorge Correa Munoz (sentenced to 3Y2 years in
 prison for human rights violations).
 The Legislative Assembly created a permanent Human Rights Commission that
 began to operate in 1992. It was too early by the end of the year to assess its effec-
 tiveness.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Language, or Social Status
 The Constitution prohibits discrimination on the basis of race, illegitimacy, social
 class, sex, religion, or political views. In October the Legislative Assembly gave final
 
 
 approval to the San Salvador Protocol, which among other things prohibits discrimi-
 nation based on race, color, sex, language, religion, political opinions, national or so-
 cial origin, or economic position. The Constitution protects the ethnic identity and
 native languages of indigenous people, requiring the Government to provide bilin-
 gu al iteracy programs in indigenous communities. The Ministry of Government and
 ustice maintains a Directorate of Indigenous Policy. Despite legal protection and
 formal equality, during 1992 indigenous people generally had relatively higher lev-
 els of poverty, disease, and malnutrition.
 Women generally do not enjoy the same economic opporuities as men. Panama-
 nian law does not recognize community property, and divorced or deserted women
 are often left destitute. Although the Constitution mandates equal pay for equal
 work, wages paid to women are often lower than those for equivalent work per-
 formed by men and increase at a slower rate.
 Domestic violence against women continues to be a serious problem, but few reli-
 able statistics exist on the subject.
 Private groups and government agencies operate programs to assist victims of
 such abuse. The Legislative Assembly created a permanent Women's Affairs Com-
 mission that began to operate in 1992, but its effectiveness could not yet be as-
 sessed. Panama also had a number of private women's rights groups, including
 groups for indigenous women, that concentrated on disseminating information about
 women's rights, countering domestic abuse, enhancing employment and other skills,
 and pressing for legal reforms.
 Panama is a racially mixed country. People of African, Asian and indigenous de-
 scent are politically active, but-as noted in Section 3-underrepresented in senior
 positions in the Government and the private sector. The law does not discriminate
 against any social, religious, or cultural group. However, naturalized citizens may
 not hold certain categories of elective office, and the Constitution reserves retail
 trade to Panamanian citizens.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-Panamanian workers in the private sector have the
 right to form and join unions of their choosing, subject to registration by the Gov-
 ernment. Approximately 9 percent of the private sector work force is organized into
 some 177 unions, grouped under 5 labor centrals and several independent federa-
 tions. Some unions formerly affiliated with federations and confederations have cho-
 sen to function as independent unions in recent years. Organized labor, which re-
 ceived various benefits from and was largely coopted by the military regime, is no
 longer identified with nor controlled by the Government or political parties. Union
 organizations at every level may and do affiliate with international bodies.
 Government workers are not permitted to organize unions or bargain collectively,
 but do have the right to form representative associations. Some government employ-
 ees' groups have effectively pressured the Government on various issues, including
 the restitution of part of the 13th-month salary bonus withdrawn in 1991. Other as-
 sociations, such as those of the postal workers and air traffic controllers have used
 actual or threatened work stoppages to their advantage. For several years, the
 International Labor Organization (ILO) has pointed out that the Labor Code's exclu-
 sion of public servants from the right to organize and bargain collectively violates
 Convention 87 on freedom of association. In 1992 the ILO again asked Panama to
 amend provisions in the Labor Code and other legislation that prevents government
 workers from organizing unions. Workers in certain state-owned companies
 (parastatals), such as public utilities, however, are permitted to organize unions,
 and these are among the strongest labor unions in Panama. Workers in all other
 parastatals do not have the right to form unions but, like those in the rest of the
 public sector, have the right to form employee associations.
 Workers, except government workers and those employed by the U.S. forces and
 the Panama Canal Commission, have the right to strike. Employees of state-owned
 enterprises that were once private, such as the electric and telecommunications
 companies, have the right to strike when certain criteria are met. Law 13 of 1990
 limited the right to strike by requiring compulsory arbitration in enterprises that
 provide public services and in other enterprises when the strike could create serious
 economic problems for that enterprise. While this law remained in force at the end
 of November 1992, the executive branch had submitted legislation to repeal the
 clause that required compulsory arbitration. The private sector experienced only
 minor strikes in 1992.
 Public sector workers who went on strike included post office employees, social se-
 curity administrative and medical personnel (including doctors), telephone workers,
 and public university professors.
 
 
 The union movement charges that the Ministry of Labor discourages freedom of
 association through bureaucratic delays that prevent recognition of new unions.
 These criticisms were applied particularly to workers in the Colon Free Zone and
 the banking sector. The Government contends that it cannot grant legal recognition
 to unions whose applications do not comply with labor regis tration relulations,
 which have been in effect since 1947. According to Ministry of Labor statistics, the
 Ministry has granted legal reconi'tion to 19 unions since 1990, a figure unchal-
 lenged by organized labor. A Ministry resolution in May reduces the number of doc-
 uments required for the recognition and functionin$ of trade unions.
 In 1990 the Government used Decree No. 1 to dismiss a number of officials of the
 previous regime because of their alleged involvement in paramilitary organizations
 such as the "Dignity Battalions." The International Confederation of Free Trade
 Unions filed complaints in 1990 on behalf of FENASEP (the umbrella organization
 for the public employee associations) charging the Government with violations of
 public employee rights through alleged dismissals, closure of association and union
 offices, and a campaign to pressureFENASEP members to resign their association
 memberships. The Government has denied the charges, and the case continued
 under review by the ILO's Committee on Freedom of Association (CFA) in 1992.
 Law 25 of 1990 empowered the Executive Branch of the Government to dismiss
 a public employee calling for, organizing or participating in action contrary to de-
 mocracy and the Constitution. While the law expired in December 1991, several
 unions challenged the constitutionality of dismissals in 1991 under this law. In May
 1991, the Supreme Court upheld the law's constitutionality but struck the para-
 graph that enabled the Executive Branch to dismiss state workers unilaterally, not-
 ing that determination of an activity's illegality was reserved to the courts. The
 IL's CFA reiterated in 1992 its observation that Law 25 had "gatly prejudiced
 the right of association of public employees, including the use of strikes, and that
 it was intended to legitimize the dismissal of a large number of such employees
 without providing for judicial appeal against such decisions." Workers fired under
 Law 25 took their cases to the Supreme Court. At the close of 1992, 25 workers had
 been reinstated, and 145 cases were under review.
 Other ILO criticism of the Labor Code relates to the number of members required
 to establish a union, the requirement that 75 percent of union members be Panama-
 nian nationals, the automatic removal of trade union officers dismissed from their
 jobs, and the Government's wide powers of supervision over trade union records and
 accounts.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The law affords most workers
 the right to organize and bargain collectively, and the right is widely exercised. Pub-
 lic employees are excluded-from the right to organize, bargain collectively, and
 strike. Workers in the Colon Free Zone and the bainking sector are effectively denied
 this right through the de facto exclusion of unions in these sectors.
 While a Tripartite Commission set up to propose changes in the law proved inef-
 fective, the Government, on its own, advanced legislation n late 1992 to amend Law
 16 of 1990 and to repeal Law 13 of 1990. These two laws, enacted in response to
 Panama's economic crisis in 1990, restricted the right of collective bargaimng. The
 Government signed into law in November 1992 an amended export processing law
 that repealed articles 34 and 35 of Law 16 of 1990 relieving employers in any export
 processing zones (EPZ's) that might be established of the obligation to bargain for
 the first 4 years of operation and had imposed binding arbitration of certain dis-
 putes. Workers in EPZ's, as before the enactment of Law 16 in 1990, now again are
 legally covered by the national Labor Code, although there are additional provisions
 in the EPZ law of 1992 relating to piece rates, bnuses, and other uncontrversial
 details. However, although three EPZ's were established under Law 16, they remain
 inoperative.
 Law 13 had extended existing collective bargaining agreements for 1 to 2 years,
 absent agreement by employers and employees to negotiate a new agreement; re-
 lieved new companies and companies without a collective bargaining agreement of
 the obligation to bargain for a period of three years; authorized the Government to
 suspend agreements for up to four months "when special circumstances prevent con-
 tinued employer operations; and authorized the Government to order binding arbi-
 tration of disputes that "cause serious economic difficulties." The Executive B ranch
 submitted leg lation to repeal these provisions in late November. Law 13 permitted
 voluntary collctive bargaining, however, and, during 1991 and 1992, 85 collective
 bargaininae   ments were neo tiated.
 Panama s Labor Cede prohibilts antiunion disrmination by employers. Disputes
 or complaints may be brought to a conciliation board in the Ministry of Labor for
 reslutin. The Labor Code provides a general mechanism for arbitration once con-
 ciliation procedures have been terminated. Severl complaints were filed with the
 
 
 ILO alleging harassment of private sector union members intended to promote res-
 ignations from or refusal to join unions.
 c. Prohibition against Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The Labor Code prohibits
 forced or compulsory labor, and neither practice was reported during 1992.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The Labor Code prohibits the em-
 ployment of children under 14, or under 15 if the child has not completed primary
 school. The Code prohibits the employment of people under the age of 18 in night
 work. Children between the ages of 12 and 14 may perform farm or domestic labor
 as long as the work is light and does not interfere with the child's schooling. En-
 forcement of these provisions is triggered by a complaint to the Ministry of Labor,
 which can order the termination of illegal employment.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The Labor Code establishes minimum wage
 rates for most categories of labor and requires substantial bonuses for overtime
 work. The minimum wage is not sufficient to produce the income necessary to meet
 a family's basic monthly nutritional and housing needs. Most Panamanian workers
 employed in urban areas earn the minimum wage or above. Nevertheless, Panama
 has a substantial informal sector, some of whose workers earn below the minimum
 wage. A Tripartite Commission (government, labor, and business) reviewed the min-
 imum wage rate and decreed a a 20.5 percent nominal increase effective January
 1, 1993. The Ministry of Labor is charged with enforcing the minimum wage, al-
 though budget and personnel restrictions limit its enforcement capacity.
 The Labor Code establishes a standard legal workweek of 48 hours throughout
 Panama and provides for at least one 24-hour rest period. The Code also sets nu-
 merous health and safety standards for all places of employment. However, the Min-
 istry of Labor, which is responsible for insuring that employers comply with these
 regulations, does not have enough inspectors and resources to enforce them effec-
 tively.
