 PANAMA
 Panama is governed under a Constitution promulgated
 in 1972. Under this Constitution, Panama is making
 a gradual transition to popularly elected government.
 At present, substantial political authority is held
 by General Omar Torrijos. Until 1978 General Torrijos
 served as both Head of Government and as Commander
 in Chief of the National Guard. In 1978, the constitu-
 tional provisions under which he had acted as Head
 of Government expired. At that time, individuals desig-
 nated by General Torrijos were elected by the National
 Assembly to serve as President and Vice President.
 Popular election of the next President and Vice President
 is scheduled for 1984.
 Panama has a record of excellent cooperation with
 the IAHRC which conducted a visit in 1977 at the invitation
 of the Government and issued reports in 1978 and 1979.
 In its 1979 report, the IAHRC noted, 'a gradual and
 sustained progress in Panama in the matter of human
 rights observance, (although) some irregularities and
 limitations on the full enjoyment of those rights still
 exist.
 "At the same time, the Commission is pleased to
 note that several of the recommendations which it proposed
 to the Panamanian Government in its previous report
 have been put into effect by that Government; considering,
 however, that compliance with those other recommendations
 which it proposed would contribute to an effective
 protection-of fundamental human rights in Panama, the
 Commission reiterates the necessity for such other
 recommendations to be fully implemented."
 Steps taken by the Government to guarantee respect
 for and observance of human rights include the repeal
 of restrictive measures limiting the freedoms of assembly,
 expression, and association, and the decision to allow
 political exiles to return. The IAHRC has not yet
 received a response on their recommendations regarding
 some aspects of Panama's judicial procedures. The
 Government has invited the IAHRC to return in the near
 future.
 The Government has stressed the need to improve
 the standard of living of the poor. It provides economic
 and social benefits to the poorest sectors of the popula-
 tion, but these efforts have been impeded somewhat
 by the country's continuing economic difficulties.
 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Torture
 Torture is not a Government policy and no incidents
 of torture were reported during 1979.
 
 (375)
 
 
 376
 b. Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punish-
 ment
 Criminal punishments are limited by law to fines and/or
 prison terms. There is no capital punishment, and
 the maximum prison term is twenty years. Panamanian
 jails are severely overcrowded. Sanitation and sleeping
 facilities are poor and medical attention is inadequate.
 Although physical abuse of prisoners is officially
 condemned, occasional incidents of abuse by police
 officers have occurred. Defendants are entitled to
 counsel, and counsel generally has free access to defendants.
 Consultations may be held in private. The Panamanian
 Red Cross has access to prisoners and makes periodic
 visits. A commission to investigate prison conditions
 and study possible reforms was constituted in August
 1979. No report has been made to date.
 c. Arbitrary Arrest and Imprisonment
 The Constitution provides that a person may not be
 held more than 24 hours without some legal disposi-
 tion of the case. With some important exceptions,
 such as the October 1979 arrests stemming from a subversive
 plot uncovered in Chiriqui Province, this provision
 is generally respected in practice. The Constitution
 also guarantees the right of habeas corpus, and the
 right is generally respected. Some Panamanians allege
 that temporary arrest on the basis of suspicion or
 false accusations is occasionally employed as an "object
 lesson". A person may be jailed over the weekend,
 without charges being brought, and released on Monday
 morning after being told that a mistake was made.
 The 1979 IAHRC report contained no mention of political
 prisoners. The report presented some evidence that
 the two police "night courts" may be administered in
 an arbitrary fashion. The "night courts", whose judges
 are appointed by the Ministry of Government, hear and
 decide lesser criminal cases in a summary manner, leaving
 the accused no time to consult an attorney before sentence
 is passed. Sentences range from 10 days to 1 year.
 Sentences over 60 days are reviewable.
 The Constitution provides the Supreme Court with ultimate
 authority to annul illegal acts of public authorities
 and protect the rights of the individual. The right
 of appeal against an illegal act by any government
 agent is guaranteed to any resident of the Republic.
 The Court has not yet had an opportunity to test its
 powers in this regard since no relevant illegal or
 arbitrary government acts have been alleged to date.
 d. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The Constitution establishes trial by jury, but also
 provides that the classes of cases to be decided by
 that system shall be determined by law. In practice,
 
 
 377
 only serious criminal cases such as homicide are tried
 by jury with the accused present. Otherwise, except
 for the very informal "night courts" in Panama City
 and Colon, criminal cases are generally conducted by
 deposition without the presence of the accused. The
 decision is made by a judge upon consideration of written
 presentations by the prosecution and defense which
 are available for examination. Defendants and their
 attorneys are made fully aware of the charges brought,
 and may inform themselves of the evidence on which
 the charges are based. The right to appeal, both the
 charges and the sentence, is available to the prosecution
 as well as the defense.
 The Constitution requires that magistrates and judges
 be independent. In practice, the judiciary appears
 to be susceptible to the influence of the Executive
 Branch and to interference by the National Guard.
 The military intelligence branch of the National Guard
 has de facto right of review of all aspects of procedure.
 A 1978 constitutional amendment, which requires National
 Assembly approval for certain Executive Branch appointments,
 including Supreme Court magistrates and the Attorney
 General, may have a positive influence on judicial
 independence.
 The National Guard is subject to civil law as well
 as to a military code. Civilians are not brought before
 National Guard Disciplinary Councils. The military
 code covers primarily minor offenses by Guard personnel,
 with punishments ranging from admonishment to arrest
 to dismissal. There is an appeal system.
 e. Invasion of the Home
 The inviolability of the home is constitutionally guaranteed.
 There is no. evidence that this provision is not respected
 in practice. Judicial warrants are required before
 entering a home.
 2. Governmental Policies Relating to the Fulfillment
 of Such Vital Needs as Food, Shelter, Health Care
 and Education
 Panama's economy historically has been predominantly
 based on private sector investment and control. This
 pattern has been altered somewhat in the past decade
 by increased government investment and control in public
 utilities, agriculture, and other areas of particular
 public concern. The economy is a mixed system that
 relies mainly on private enterprise to provide for
 economic g.rowth and employment. Private property rights
 are fully protected. Panama's individual and corporate
 tax system is progressive. Its five percent transfer
 tax is not applied to either medicines or foods.
 
 
 378
 Fulfillment of such needs as food, shelter, health
 care and education is specifically defined in the Consti-
 tution as an obligation of the State. The Government
 has recognized the need to improve the standard of
 living of the poor and has made significant efforts
 to do so. Its national development plan stresses a
 higher rate of economic growth and a wider, more equitable
 distribution of the benefits of this growth. These
 objectives have been translated into explicit policies
 and programs providing vital social services such as
 free education, health care at minimal cost, price
 controls on basic foodstuffs and subsidized housing
 projects.
 Recognizing the wide disparities between urban and
 rural areas in levels of income and development, as
 well as the importance of rural areas to national develop-
 ment goals, the Government-has adopted a regional develop-
 ment policy, the basic goal of which is to improve
 the quality of life of the peasant. Major programs
 which have emerged from this policy include:
 -- an expansion of the educational system and a
 program of rural school construction with 30 schools
 to be completed in the 1975-1980 period, many in
 the most remote areas. Sufficient access to education
 (over 90% of primary school age children are reported
 to be in school) over the years has produced a
 literacy rate estimated at 86% in 1975. Education
 is free through the ninth grade, and available
 at low cost through the university level.
 -- the development of market towns to provide in-
 frastructure and services necessary to rural areas;
 integrated rural development projects to help small
 farmers increase their production and incomes;
 and the construction of rural roads to improve
 access by remote populations to markets and other
 services.
 -- a large scale program of assistance to provide
 adequate shelter, a significant problem for a great
 many Panamanians. During 1979, some 5,000 houses
 were being constructed, representing new housing
 for about 25,000 people. Government- supported
 housing projects are concentrated in the Panama
 City/Colon area, but rural areas also benefit.
 The Government has not only issued specific policy
 statements committing itself to these goals, but has
 continued programs requiring significant investment
 of central government budgetary resources. Government
 expenditures for education have accounted for about
 one-third of the expenditures for all ministry operations
 over the last several years, increasing from $50.2
 million in 1972 to a budgeted $85 million in 1979 (the
 largest budget for any one ministry). Expenditures
 
 
 379
 for health have accounted for about fifteen percent
 of all ministry operations, increasing from $23.6 million
 in 1972 to a budgeted $38.3 million in 1979. Panama's
 pursuit of its goals has been hampered by an economic
 recession resulting largely from international economic
 factors. However, the Government has continued to
 make the efforts necessary to progress in providing
 for the basic needs of the poor. Programs of international
 lending agencies carried out with Panama for social
 development in rural areas have been very successful.
 While there is some corruption, it does not seem to
 be so extensive as to divert significant resources
 toward the nation's elites and away from the majority
 of the population. A result of all these programs.
 is a noticeable, positive impact on the physical well-being
 of the population, although substantial income disparities
 remain.
 3. Respect for Civil and Political Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech, Press, Religion and Assembly
 Freedom of expression is guaranteed under the Constitution.
 However, the press and some broadcast news media, though
 not subject to official prior censorship, practice
 self-censorship and receive informal government guidance
 as to treatment of news events. Three of Panama's
 four major newspapers are put out by a Government publish-
 ing house.
 A new law regulating the practice of journalism as
 a profession, written in consultation with media represen-
 tatives, was adopted by the National Council on Legislation
 in September 1978. It contains no provisions regarding
 censorship. When put into effect in the spring of
 1979, however, its requirement for licensing of journalists
 by the Government was criticized by many newsmen as
 a threat to freedom of expression and as a guarantee
 of self-censorship.
 Three opposition newspapers were founded since mid-1978,
 all modest efforts. Due principally to economic reasons,
 only one is still in print. Many new radio commentary
 shows have sprung up in the past year, several of them
 outspokenly critical of the Government. While the
 Government has publicly attacked these programs they
 continue unabated.
 For a brief period before and after the October 1 ceremonies
 celebrating the entry into force of the Panama Canal
 Treaties, the Government required radio stations to
 form a single "national network" to broadcast government
 programs. Various business groups brought suit to
 prevent the net, but on October 3 the Supreme Court
 rejected their petition for an injunction. Regular
 broadcasting resumed on October 3 when the net was
 dissolved.
 
 
 380
 It is clear that the Government's point of view still
 dominates the media. However, there is more freedom
 and diversity of expression in Panama now than at any
 time during the past ten years. A case in point is
 the example of "Juan Carrete", an outspoken radio commen-
 tator who was sanctioned because of criticisms voiced
 on his program in March 1979. The ensuing uproar from
 his colleagues forced the Government not only to lift
 the sanction, but to suspend a two-month old radio
 decree which it had attempted to apply against him.
 Freedom of religion is constitutionally guaranteed
 and is respected in practice.
 Freedom of assembly is guaranteed by the Constitution.
 With one possible exception (see below) this constitutional
 guarantee has been respected since the 1977 repeal
 of a 1969 Decree law prohibiting opposition rallies
 and open meetings.
 The Government of Panama handled a two-month long teachers'
 strike in the fall of 1979 without serious incident.
 The teachers organized the strike and communicated
 with other organizations without impediment. While
 the major national periodicals reflected the Government
 view and gave scant coverage to the teachers' position,
 several radio stations and a small opposition daily
 provided an open forum for the strikers and their supporters.
 The success of the strike leaders in rallying public
 support for their cause was demonstrated in major protest
 marches through downtown Panama City and in provincial
 capitals. These large-scale demonstrations were conducted
 without any interference from the Government.
 The municipal government of Panama City issued two
 decrees in August and September regulating demonstra-
 tions. The first prohibits demonstrations within 500
 meters of the Presidential Palace, the National Guard
 Headquarters and hospitals. The second decree prohibits
 demonstrations with the intention of altering public
 order or inciting citizens to break the law or disobey
 public authorities. The issuance of these decrees
 was apparently prompted by the announcement of a protest
 march by a political splinter group, the "God and Panama
 Movement". The demonstration, begun on September 8,
 was broken up by police. The latter decree was subsequently
 found unconstitutional.
 In mid December 1979, the Government, in an humanitarian
 gesture, granted the former Shah of Iran residence.
 Students opposed to this action have staged several
 demonstrations in Panama City and Colon. While not
 banning such demonstrations, the National Guard did
 intervene to limit excesses.
 
 
 b. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel and Emigration
 Freedom of movement within Panama is guaranteed under
 the Constitution and is respected in practice. Foreign
 travel and emigration are also entirely free. Although
 constitutionally prohibited, forcible expatriation
 did occur up to 1976. In 1977, however, the Government
 began to allow exiles to return and in 1978 General
 Torrijos declared that all exiles could return to Panama
 without fear of reprisals. Many have done so. No
 incidents of forced expatriation have occurred since
 1976.
 c. Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 In accordance with the Constitution of 1972, Panama
 is making a gradual transition to popularly elected
 government. At present, General Torrijos, who enjoys
 broad popular support, retains substantial political
 authority. His designees were elected President and
 Vice President by the National Assembly in 1978. Under
 1978 constitutional reforms, legislative power, except
 for the power of the purse, was shifted from the executive
 to a National Legislative Council composed of National
 Assembly members. The National Assembly, although
 popularly elected, has exercised little substantive
 power until recently when it refused to ratify two
 bilateral treaties negotiated by the executive. Assembly
 and Council members are currently pressing for greater
 substantive power to include review of the national
 budget. In 1980 a minority of the Council will be
 selected in direct provincial elections, with the majority
 appointed by the Assembly. The President and Vice
 President are to be chosen in direct popular elections
 beginning in 1984.
 Under the 1972 Constitution, 505 community representatives
 are elected by secret, popular vote for six-year terms
 and constitute the National Assembly. Roughly 70-80
 percent of the electorate participated in the elections
 held in August 1978. Because representatives are elected
 from municipal subdivisions ("corregimientos"), and
 not on the basis of population, the less populous rural
 districts are dominant in the Assembly. The 505 community
 representatives are essentially local officials who
 have little real power as a collective entity, but
 they also serve in representative bodies at the community
 and provincial levels. This system has resulted in
 greater participation in public life at those levels
 and permits a more direct articulation of local concerns
 and interests at the national level. The Government
 consults with a broad range of important non-government
 groups and associations during the formulation of policy
 and initiatives.
 In 1978, legislation was enacted to provide legal status
 for political parties which had been banned since 1969.
 
 
 382
 
 The ban had not been strictly enforced in any event,
 and opposition parties have been sharply critical of
 the Government. The basic requirement for legalization
 is the fulfillment of a 30,000-member quota. Seven
 parties entered into the so-called "inscription" process
 during the first registration period in 1979. To date,
 three have filled the quota: the pro-Government Democratic
 Revolutionary Party, the basically pro-Government Broad
 Popular Front Party, and the opposition Liberal Party.
 Several opposition parties, notably the Panamenista
 Party of former President Arnulfo Arias, have declined
 to seek legal status, charging that the system is "rigged"
 in favor of the Government.
 The Constitution prohibits any personal privileges,
 distinctions or discrimination on the basis of sex,
 but some differentiation exists both in law and in
 practice. Although women are generally treated without
 discrimination judicially, there are discriminatory
 provisions in the Civil Code and Labor Code. In the
 former case, for example, proof of some grounds for
 divorce is more onerous for women. In the latter case,
 special provisions are intended to be protective, for
 example, with respect to maternity benefits. In practice,
 women also suffer discrimination in terms of employment
 opportunity and salary rates. women enjoy equal access
 to education, and there are roughly equal numbers of
 males and females enrolled at all educational levels.
 There is no legal impediment to pajticipation in the
 political process by women. The Constitution provides
 that suffrage is a right and duty of all citizens,
 and prohibits the formation of parties on the basis
 of sex, race, or religion. In practice, men traditionally
 have the dominant role in politics. There is no woman
 cabinet minister, for example, and only one woman vice
 minister.
 Panama has an active trade union movement. Trade union
 rights to organize, strike and bargain collectively
 are guaranteed in the Constitution, in Panama's ratifica-
 tion of Article 87 of the ILO Convention, and in repeated
 specific decree laws in the Labor Code. One union,
 representing a group of bank workers, has been trying
 for about seven years to secure legal recognition from
 the Government. The Banking Association has apparently
 opposed such recognition. In a meeting with union
 leaders in December, President Royo repeated the Govern-
 ment's opposition to recognition of the union, because
 it considers a labor union would be prejudicial to
 Panama's efforts to expand its large international
 banking sector. He believed an association of banking
 employees would be a more appropriate organization
 to represent bank workers.
 A 1979 prohibition on collective bargaining for wages
 expired in January 1979. Unions have been negotiating
 
 
 383
 contracts since that date, and rights to collective
 bargaining have been respected in practice.
 4. Government Attitude and Record Regarding International
 and Non-Governmental Investigation of Alleged Viola-
 tions of Human Rights
 The Government has been an active advocate of human
 rights in international forums. Panama deposited its
 instrument of ratification of the American Convention
 on Human Rights in 1978. As noted, the Government
 has invited the IAHRC to return to Panama in the near
 future. Amnesty International's 1979 Report contained
 no mention of Panama.
 In 1978 a private Panamanian Committee on Human Rights
 was established, with much publicity in the media.
 The Committee has been active in public information
 programs on human rights issues, including speakers'
 programs in public forums. The Committee has also
 distributed printed material, including the 1978 IAHRC
 Report. The Committee has also facilitated legal assistance
 to those requiring it. It generally refers complaints
 of human rights violations to the Inter-American Human
 Rights Commission.
 At the General Assembly of the Organization of American
 States in La Paz in October 1979, the OAS resolved:
 Nto congratulate the Government of Panama for having
 taken the initiative in inviting the Commission to
 visit the country, and for the cooperation it provided
 during the visit, and to take note of the measures
 taken by the Government of Panama to implement the
 recommendations contained in the Commission's special
 report.0
 
 
 384
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: PANAMA
 1977     1978     1979
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL ..        16.3     23.1     21.2
 LOANS...............       12.2     20.0     16.0
 GRANTS.............         4.1      3.1      5.2
 A.AID ................       . 13.7     21.3     19.9
 LOANS.........   ..        12.2     20.0     16.0
 GRANTS.............         1.5      1.3      3.9
 (SEC.SUPP.ASSIST.),.          0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.FOOD FOR PEACEE......         2.2      1.3      1.1
 LOANS..............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS.............         2.2      1.3      1.1
 TITLE I-TOTAL..........         0.0      0.0      0.0
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS.....         0.0      0.0      0.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR ....         0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE II-TOTAL ......          2.2      1.3      1.1
 E.RELIEF.EC.DEV & WFP.         0.0      0.0      0.0
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY.           2.2      1.3      1.1
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST,..         0.4      0.5      0.2
 LOANS..............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............        0.4      0.5      0.2
 CONTR. TO IFI....         0.0      0.0      0.0
 PEACE CORPS......         0.0      0.0      0.0
 OTHER............         0.4      0.5      0.2
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL ..         3.1      0.5      1.4
 LOANS..............         2.5      0.0      1.0
 GRANTS.............        0.6      0.5      0.4
 A.MAP GRANTS......           0.2      0.0      0.0
 B.CREDIT SALES-FMS...          2.5      0.0      1.0
 C.INTL MIL.ED.TRNG...          0.4      0.5      0.4
 D.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK,..         0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTST.......         0.0      0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. & NIL.,         19.4     23.6     22.6
 LOANS..............        14.7     20.0     17.0
 GRANTS..............        4.7      3.6      5.6
 ------------------------------------------------------
 OTHER US LOANS,.......          0.0      0.0     12.0
 EX-IM BANK LOANS....          0.0     .0.0     12.0
 ALL OTHER............           0.0      0.0      0.0
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIESCOMMITMENTS
 1977     1978     1979     1946-79
 
 TOTAL....        177.0     22.5     68.2    588.9
 IBRD              57.5     12.0     34.0    257.7
 IFC                0.0      3.8      3.0      8.3
 IDA                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 IDB              119.0      5.4     29.0    296.8
 ADB                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 AFDB               0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 UNDP               0.5      1.3       1.7    21.7
 OTHER-UN           0.0      0.0      0.5      4.4
 EEC                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 
 
