PANAMA
The State Department's 1993 report on the RepubHc of Panama contains some significant improvements over prior years, but is not without its problems. In line with the new State Department instructions, this year's report includes for the first time separate sections on the political and economic status of women, children and indigenous people, It also correctly identifies some of the most prominent human rights problems in Panama, including prolonged pre-trial detention and antiquated and overcrowded prison facilities. For the most part, the report provides accurate descriptions of these problems and displays a greater willingness than before to criticize the Panamanian government's lack of progress in these areas. This is not the case, however, in all areas. Too often, the report either declines to criticize the Panamanian government, for example over its use of wiretapping or regarding worker rights, or attributes the criticisms to other sources without offering an opinion of its own.
The 1993 report also contains some notable omissions and understatements. Police-inspired violence against striking union members and the harassment of certain opposition journalists both receive inadequate attention. Continued allegations of corruption in both the police force and the Attorney General's office, which impacted both the administration and perceptions of justice in Panama, also deserves greater attention.
The report is strongest in its treatment of two of Panama's most pressing human rights problems: its antiquated and overcrowded prisons and its ineffective and overburdened criminal justice system. Beyond accurately characterizing Panama's prison system as one of the country's "principal human ri^ts concerns," the report describes in detail its overcrowding, the continued abuse of prisoners by guards and inadequate medical care and facilities. As in 1992, the report provides useful statistics to give a clearer picture of the extent of overcrowding, including the 23% increase in the prison population last year. The State Department also describes a report fi*om the Panamanian Commission on Human Rights (CPDH), which charged that excessive force was being used at a juvenile detention center in Panama City. Departing fi"om the reticence that has characterized prior reports — as well as other areas of this year's — it describes the CPDH findings as "credible," and states that "the government took no concrete action in response to it." This approach should be more consistently employed.
For example, the criticism of other aspects of the Panamanian prison system should have been more direct. Although the report cites the prison system in its introduction as one area in which there was "slow progress," it should have more directly criticized the inadequate government response to these problems in the section on Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
266
PANAMA
Punishment. For example, the report should have indicated that even with the upcoming opening of the La Joya prison in March 1994, the additional facilities will not even be capable of absorbing the 1993 increase in the prison population, much less alleviate the existing overcrowding in other facilities.
Another of the report's strengths is the section on the system of justice. For example, the report correctly highlights the problem of "extended pretrial detention," noting that nearly 80% of the prison population were pretrial detainees, higher than in previous years. This enables the reader to gain a more contextualized picture of the problem. The report also notes again the Panamanian government's failure to take meaningful action during 1993 to correct these problems.
However, the report is disappointing in its discussion of the Attorney General's office, which is responsible for investigating and bringing to trial the numerous pretrial detainees. Almost in passing, ¿le report notes that, "Personnel changes in the Attorney General's office in 1992-1993 reduced efficiency and slowed processing of cases," and that fonner Attorney General Rogelio Cruz and several "of his immediate collaborators" were suspended from office or dismissed. This topic deserved more extensive treatment, given its impact on the pretrial detainee population and the circumstances surrounding Attorney General Cruz's dismissal. The report should have mentioned that Cruz was removed from office as a result of charges involving corruption and the release of money belonging to drug traffickers. By failing to do so, the report understates the impact of these charges, as well as the persistent allegations of corruption and political infighting in the Attorney General's office, which many observers believe has greatly hurt not only the effectiveness of that office but also the administration of justice in Panama.
The report's discussion of Panama's corregidores court system represents an improvement over last year's. For the first time the report provides an accurate and critical picture of this system and the problems it poses for the administration of justice. The corregidores are a system of local courts whose "judges" need not be, and often are not lawyers. The actions of these "judges" are not subject to the Panamanian Code of Criminal Procedure, and many reportedly engage in corruption. While the 1992 report simply quoted other sources without comment, this year's criticizes the system directly. The report might have also noted, however, that the Panamanian government continued to address these problems effectively, even though it has been widely criticized in Panama and abroad.
The treatment of the justice system should also have included some mention of its politicization, given that controversial judicial decisions are often the subject of political pressure and second guessing. For example, in April 1993, a Panamanian judge repealed a preventive arrest order against Eduardo Herrara, the former army officer who engineered a failed coup, and ordered his immediate release. The order was then immediately followed by "a wave of protests by government ministers who eventually succeeded in keeping Herrara in detention.
267
CRITIQUE 1993
Another part of the report showing improvement is the section on corruption and mistreatment by members of the two pohce forces in Panama. The 1993 report dealt with this topic much more extensively than its predecessors, noting not only that there continue to be scattered cases of brutality and use of excessive force, but also reporting on specific incidents where police used violence on fleeing suspects and against certain protestors. Corruption, not mentioned in the report, also continued to plague both the Panamanian National Police (PNP) and the Judicial Technical Pohce (PTJ).
This year's report also marks the first time that problems relating to women in Panama were separately addressed. For the most part the report does an adequate job of addressing these issues. On some occasions, however, it might have used statistics or other descriptive tools to better illustrate the scope of the problem. For example, the statement that the number of women in senior leadership positions is "not proportionate to their numbers in society," is insufficient. In fact, there is only one woman in the senior leadership of the Endara government. The current government and the Panamanian oligarchy (historically backed by the United States) have traditionally limited the access of women and minorities to positions of power.
The 1993 report is also the first to devote significant attention to Panama's indigenous population. To its credit, the report notes that beyond legal protections and formal equality, indigenous people in Panama have relatively higher levels of poverty, disease, malnutrition and illiteracy than the rest of the population. However, this part of the report is not without its problems. For example, the statement that a party supported by the indigenous Kuna Indians has two legislative representatives gives the somewhat misleading impression that indigenous people are adequately represented in the Panamanian government. Such is not the case. The report fails to mention that indigenous groups organized several large demonstrations last year, protesting their economic and political problems. Moreover, the government's response to these demands has been far from conciliatory; in two of these demonstrations police used teargas and buckshot to disperse the protestors, and several indigenous leaders were arrested. The report states that, "Indigenous groups claimed that the Government will only permit them to take part in decisions when it is coerced to do so," yet it fails to offer its own opinion on the subject.
While there are several noteworthy additions to the 1993 report, there are also several significant omissions, most notably in the section on freedom of speech and the press. Although the report correctly points out that Panamanians "generally enjoyed freedom of speech and the press," it fails to mention several incidents where government officials harassed or attacked journalists who either oppose the current government or wrote unflattering articles about it. In October 1993, for example, Jaime Padilla Beliz, owner and manager of the well-known opposition
268
PANAMA
daily El Siglo, was forced to seek political asylum at the Embassy of Honduras to avoid arrest on the order of the Supreme Court, which accused him of "corruption" in his editorials, Luis DeJanon, a columnist for the opposition daily La Estrella de Panamá, was beaten by a special advisor to President Endara after publishing a number of columns implicating that advisor and his brother in money-laundering investigations. Two reporters from Diario Critica were also physically attacked by government officials after publishing a story implicating a member of the presidential police in a murder. The report makes no mention of these incidents.
The report's treatment of Panama's libel laws is also disappointing. While it mentions the existence of these laws, which allow for the immediate discipline of journalists who show "disrespect" for the office of certain government officials, the report fails to evaluate the laws and to explain their impact on Panamanian journalists. In fact, these statutes have been a potent weapon against journalists in Panama. Approximately 200 journalists currently face at least 300 pending suits for slander and injury for attacking the "internal security" of the state. The targets of these long, complicated and costly suits by government officials have predominantly been members of opposition papers.
More extensive treatment should also have been given to the issue of censorship in Panama. The report mentions, in passing, that a "national censorship board" initially baimed the US documentary. The Panama Deception, but then rescinded that ban on March 17, The report should have asked why a censorship board even exists in a country whose Constitution purportedly guarantees freedom of speech and the press. In addition, the report should have also addressed the criteria used by this board, as well as why, for example, in the incident relating to The Panama Deception, it was influenced — for better or worse — by political pressure.
There are also several significant omissions in the section on freedom of peaceful assembly. The section on political and extrajudicial killing does not mention complaints by indigenous demonsfrators in Darién and Chiriqui of rough handling and indiscriminate use of tear gas. The report also mentions that in "other instances, police used birdshot against demonstrators at times when use of lesser force would have been more appropriate," However, it fails to note that the leaders and organizers of several demonstrations were arrested by the police. For example, Raúl Bliz, a leader of MODESCO, one of the organizations involved, was imprisoned by the officials of Colon Province on August 20. Bliz was reportedly held for 25 days and claimed to have been beaten while in custody. Another MODESCO member, Marcial Goodwin, was arrested in September and sentenced to three months in prison for helping to organize the protests.
The report might also have provided examples of police violence against striking workers. For example, during the cane cutters strike in March 1993, 100 members of the Fuerza Pública fired on strikers with birdshot and teargas. Five
269
CRITIQUE 1993
strikers were reportedly injured, and eight others arrested. Orlando Stanziola, the cane cutters' union leader, was detained after the strike and reportedly received death threats. Similarly, strikes by transportation workers in June and by construction workers in February were met by tear gas and birdshot from the police, Another problem with this year's report, and one which repeats a weakness in its predecessor, is its unwillingness to criticize the Endara government on several key issues. For example, the report seems reluctant to criticize the government for its use of wiretaps. It states that no "official wiretaps were used in 1993 for other than national security or criminal prosecution reasons." This statement seems to indicate, however, that wiretapping in these situations is acceptable, even though in the preceding paragraph the report proclaims that, "The Constitution provides for the inviolability of the home and communications." Moreover, there have been credible reports that the Council for Public Security conducted a far more wide-ranging wiretapping campaign against some 300 people, including political opponents and journalists.
The State Department remains reticent on several issues relating to worker rights, This section of the report remains reliant on the criticisms of others, such as human rights organizations or the International Labour Organization (ILO), rather than offering an opinion of its own on the matter. For example, when commenting on the fact that only 25 of the over 200 workers dismissed pursuant to Law 25 of 1990 were ever returned to work, the report simply states that the ILO "reiterated its conclusion that the mass dismissal of trade union leaders and workers in the public sector was a serious violation of the right to organize." Similarly, while the report notes ILO criticism of various barriers against the formation of unions, it fails to give its own opinion of these practices, or of the government's failure to make headway in addressing these problems.
Finally, the report once again avoids criticizing the Panamanian government on issues relating to the 1989 US invasion. In the section on the government's attitude toward the investigation of alleged violations of human rights, it states that Panama allows a variety of domestic and international human rights organizations to operate without restriction or interference. While that statement is certainly true, the report fails to mention that the Endara government has consistently resisted calls from many segments of Panamanian society, including the Catholic Church, to commission an objective study of the damage caused by the invasion. Also in 1993, the Inter-American HumanRights Commission of the OAS agreed to consider a suit by alleged victims of the invasion. The report makes no reference to this fact, and also fails to mention that both the Panamanian and the United States governments openly opposed such an investigation.
270
