 PANAMA
 Panama continued on the path toward a full, open democra-
 tic political system in 1981, despite the shock of
 the death in mid-year of the National Guard commander
 and former head of government, General Omar Torrijos.
 In the wake of the legislative council elections of
 September 1980, in which pro-government candidates
 won only ten of the 19 seats being contested, most
 opposition political groups pushed ahead to strengthen
 existing party organizations or to form new ones.
 The president, as well as the new Guard commander,
 reiterated the government's commitment to hold the
 national elections mandated by the constitution for
 1984.
 Public debate flourished during 1981, and criticism
 of government programs and policies grew in the media.
 An outspoken opposition newspaper, "La Prensa," founded
 in 1980, established itself as a competitive enterprise
 with wide circulation. On the other hand, the govern-
 ment continued to enjoy the support of all of the
 other national newspapers and all of the television
 stations, a number of which it owns. It regulates
 the profession of journalism by a law which has been
 criticized by the opposition and by the Inter-American
 Press Association as a restraint on the freedom of
 expression. The government has made public its displea-
 sure at *La Prensa's' criticisms, and, when a group
 of thugs attacked "La Prensals" offices in October
 1981, concern regarding the government's commitment
 to the maintenance of a free press was heightened.
 The government continued its good record of respect
 for personal integrity. It took further steps to
 improve the administration of criminal justice and
 the prison system. Most notably, overcrowding in
 the national penitentiary began to be relieved by
 the development of a rehabilitation center in the
 jail formerly operated by the Canal Zone government
 and transferred to the Panamanian government at the
 close of 1980.
 Despite severe budget constraints, the government
 continued to carry out its development program, which
 is strongly skewed toward meeting the basic needs
 of the poorer sectors of the population. Policies
 aimed at fostering private enterprise were largely
 responsible for the maintenance of a moderately healthy
 growth in the economy through 1980. This growth appeared
 to have slowed somewhat in 1981.
 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Torture
 
 (49G)
 
 
 496
 Article 24 of the constitution prohibits self-incrimina-
 tion, and implicitly, the use of torture. During
 1981 one incident was brought to the attention of
 United States officials in which three American women
 accused of trafficking in narcotics stated that they
 had been burned with flatirons while under detention.
 A United States official observed their burn marks.
 b. Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punish-
 ment
 The constitution limits criminal punishment to fines
 and/or prison terms of up to 20 years. There is no
 death penalty in Panama. Hard labor may be imposed,
 but the constitution prohibits measures that harm
 the physical, mental or moral integrity of persons
 under detention. There may be exceptions, but this
 prohibition is normally observed.
 Very crowded and poor living conditions in prison
 result from lack of economic resources rather than
 government policy or an intent to degrade prisoners.
 Government officials recognize the problem and are
 looking for ways to improve prison conditions.
 In 1981 the government began operating the penitentiary
 formerly used by the Canal Zone government, and has
 undertaken a well-planned program to transform the
 prison into a rehabilitation center. The new installa-
 tion will reduce crowding in the prison system. Prison
 authorities have also initiated a program with a major
 private enterprise service organization to strengthen
 the rehabilitation program in the main prison as well.
 Government policy proscribes discriminatory treatment
 of prisoners on the basis of class, race, sex or reli-
 gion. People under detention who are well-off economi-
 cally can buy better food and other services just
 as they may secure a better defense lawyer.
 c. Disappearances
 There have been no cases of summary executions or
 of the disappearance of apprehended persons. There
 are no quasi-official or extra-legal security forces
 in Panama. The constitution provides for habeas corpus
 and requires warrants for arrests (with an exception
 allowed for those seized while committing crimes).
 d. Arbitrary Arrest and Imprisonment
 As a regular practice, Panamanian police and judicial
 authorities adhere to legal and procedural norms.
 Panamanian and foreign observers have noted, however,
 that juvenile delinquents are occasionally tried and
 incarcerated as adults, especially when they are con-
 sidered to be hardened criminals. Other reported
 practices -- publicly criticized in the Panamanian
 press by government officials and private citizens
 -- include summary hearings and convictions for misde-
 meanors before "night court" judges without duly pre-
 scribed defense counsel.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 
 
 497
 The administrative code mandates public trials based
 on oral testimony and argument and gives the accused
 the right to be present. However, in most criminal
 cases the court process consists of written presentations
 by the prosecution and defense without the presence
 of the accused. The documents produced are available
 for examination by both sides. According to authorities,
 the burden of proof rests on the prosecutor, but the
 right to appeal both the charges and sentence is available
 to the prosecution as well as the defense. Panamanian
 police must bring charges against the accused at the
 time he is summoned, and the failure to make such
 charges personally to the accused has led to invalidation
 of sentences.
 The supreme court is charged to uphold the constitution
 and the laws, and magistrates and judges are legally
 independent. In practice, the military intelligence
 branch of the National Guard has a right of review
 of all aspects of procedure.
 There is no military jurisdiction over civilians in
 Panama. The National Guard has a code of military
 justice, but its members also are subject to civil
 law.
 Because of its concern over the provision of adequate
 defense counsel, the local legal association has recently
 instituted a limited public defender service.
 f. Invasion of the Home
 Under the constitution, judicial warrants must be
 issued before officials can enter homes. There were
 no allegations of violations of this guarantee during
 1981.
 2. Respect for Civil and Political Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech, Press, Religion and Assembly
 The constitution guarantees freedom of speech, press
 and other forms of communication without censorship.
 There is no interference with academic freedom. However,
 actions against a person's reputation, against the
 security of society, public security or public order,
 may be penalized by law, and media controls are still
 utilized when the Panamanian authorities believe this
 to be necessary. Views of opponents of the present
 government are circulated widely by the press, radio
 and in public speeches, including criticism of all
 Panamanian officials from the president down.
 The opposition newspaper, *La Prensa," which began
 publishing in 1980, established itself as a major
 news medium during 1981, reaching levels of circulation
 comparable to the pro- government press. Radio and
 television commentators have increased their public
 criticism of government programs and policies, and
 one of the three government-owned newspapers tends
 to be increasingly independent. However, through
 ownership and varying degrees of support, the government
 remains the dominant voice in both the printed and
 broadcast media.
 
 
 498
 Although public debate flourishes, a 1978 law places
 in the hands of a government-dominated board the power
 to judge the professional competence of practicing
 journalists or those seeking to enter the profession.
 While the board has rarely been used punitively, its
 existence is perceived as intimidating, and "La Prensa"
 has claimed difficulty in staffing its operations.
 The law has been criticized by the Inter-American
 Press Association as interfering with freedom of the
 press.
 Further, the government refused to respond to public
 and private appeals that it restore the licenses of
 four prominent radio commentators which it had revoked
 in 1980. That continuing example, combined with a
 public threat against a satirical columnist in "La
 Prensa," clouded the atmosphere. In October 1981
 the offices of "La Prensa" were wrecked by a gang
 of youths affiliated with the official government
 political party, whose secretary implied that the
 act was justified. The act was firmly condemned,
 however, by President Royo, the general staff of the
 National Guard, the minister of government, other
 government officials and the pro-government press.
 Among the trade unions in Panama there are ideological
 as well as non-political labor organizations. Union
 elections are democratic, fair and free from government
 interference. Consultation with unions about government
 policies (particularly employment issues) is institu-
 tionalized through a national commission that includes
 representatives of the major labor organizations.
 Both collective bargaining and strikes are constitu-
 tionally-guaranteed rights of workers; although govern-
 ment regulations restrict or forbid this right for
 certain government employees.
 Panama has a moderately progressive labor code, and
 union rights generally are respected in practice.
 After some controversy, the government adopted a labor-
 management relations law which in its main provisions
 was a compromise between labor and management positions.
 b. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration and Repatriation
 The constitution permits Panamanians to move freely
 within the country and to emigrate -- rights which
 are honored in practice. It also prohibits compulsory
 exile, although some instances occured some years
 ago. Civilian exiles have returned without being
 subjected to physical or economic harassment. A few
 military exiles remain abroad and allege that they
 could not return without provoking government reprisals,
 but the government's attitude has not been tested.
 Panama has accepted political refugees of widely dif-
 fering ideological persuasions. However, the govern-
 ment, pleading insufficient resources to meet satisfac-
 torily the needs of its own citizens, has participated
 only minimally in refugee resettlement programs.
 One group of several hundred Salvadorans has been
 offered resettlement in Panama, as have some Cubans
 awaiting immigrant visa petitions from the United
 
 
 499
 States. Except where there is evidence of past political
 persecution, the Panamanian government has not recognized
 the right of asylum for seamen who jump ship in Panama.
 No cases of forcible repatriation are known to have
 occured in 1981.
 c. Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 Following the military coup of October 1968, there
 were no elections in Panama until 1972, and political
 parties were not permitted to participate in elections
 as organizations until the Legislative Council elections
 of 1980. The government is carrying out a program
 of return to full democratic processes culminating
 in general elections in 1984. A ban on political
 parties, not strictly enforced, was put into effect
 in 1969, and an important step in the democratization
 process was the adoption in 1978 of legislation providing
 for the legal recognition of political parties. The
 opposition parties' new legal status legitimized their
 criticism of the government and represented an advance
 for free speech and free assembly as well as allowing
 increased participation by citizens in the political
 process. However, the 1972 constitution, which provides
 for the conduct of executive, legislative and judicial
 activities in harmonious coordination with the public
 security force, continues to empower the National
 Guard to play an active role in the political life
 of the country.
 The national assembly is elected by secret, popular
 vote in local elections. The assembly in turn elects
 two-thirds of the members of a national legislative
 council from the assembly's own membership; one-third
 is chosen through direct popular election. The first
 legislative council popular election took place in
 1980, in which seven of the 19 seats contested were
 won by the opposition and two by independents. Despite
 a strong showing in the direct election, the opposition
 remains a small minority in the council, as all of
 the 37 members chosen by the national assembly are
 pro-government.
 In the wake of the 1980 election, several other groups
 have sought registration as political parties, and
 three succeeded, including the communist Peoples Party.
 Two important opposition groups, the Nationalist Repub-
 lican Liberal Movement and the Republican Party, initiated
 the registration process in 1981, while other smaller
 groups have continued efforts to gather the required
 number of enrolled supporters.
 The death of National Guard commander General Torrijos
 in July 1981 was a shock to all Panamanians and left
 a substantial political vacuum. The government structure
 and political party system were essentially unaffected.
 Government authorities, including the new Guard commander,
 publicly expressed their commitment to constitutional
 processes, in particular the holding of national elec-
 tions for the presidency and the legislature in 1984.
 Panama's constitution guarantees the right of peaceful
 assembly without arms and for a legitimate purpose.
 Authorities legally can control the exercise of this
 
 
 500
 right if it interferes with traffic, threatens public
 order or violates the rights of third parties. Demon-
 strations constitutionally require 24-hour advance
 notice to the authorities, but this advance notice
 appears not to have been given in some cases. Freedom
 of assembly has been practiced by groups with various
 ideological backgrounds as well as by professional
 organizations. When violence or property destruction
 has occurred, police have intervened and restored
 order, usually without charges of brutality. Profes-
 sional, social, religious and political groups, as
 well as trade unions, meet without interference.
 The constitution guarantees religious freedom to all
 in law and in practice. Persons in Panama appear
 to be neither favored nor disadvantaged because of
 their religious beliefs. Property rights, citizenship,
 public education, suffrage and office holding are
 rights of all Panamanians without regard to sex.
 The formation of political parties based on sexual
 discrimination is specifically prohibited, as are
 parties founded on racial or religious bias.
 3. Government Attitude and Record Regarding Interna-
 tional and Non-governmental Investigation of Alleged
 Violations of Human Rights
 The government has espoused human rights causes in
 the Organization of American States, the United Nations
 and elsewhere, and has voted for investigations into
 human rights abuses. In September 1981 Panama hosted
 an international conference on peace and human rights
 sponsored by three human rights organizations. A
 human rights committee formed in Panama in 1978 operated
 freely but at a low level of activity in 1981.
 In October 1981 Panama deposited instruments of ratifi-
 cation of the United Nations Convention on the Elimina-
 tion of all Forms of Discrimination Against Women.
 4. Economic and Social Circumstances
 Government projects are aimed at giving each individual
 access to the nation's limited resources. The most
 recent national development plan stressed a higher
 rate of growth and a wider, more equitable distribution
 of the benefits of this growth. The government has
 expanded and extended education and health programs
 into the countryside and poorer urban neighborhoods,
 invested large sums in infrastructure projects (roads,
 electricity, telecommunications, water system, etc.),
 and improved national socio-economic integration through
 greater attention to provincial population centers.
 Between 1968 and 1978 the death rate (per thousand)
 dropped from 7.0 to 4.4 and infant mortality (per
 thousand live births) from 39.6 to 24.8; the population
 with access to potable water rose from 66.4 percent
 to 82.7 percent, while the population with access
 to sanitary facilities increased from 74.7 percent
 to 89.2 percent. The birth rate (per thousand) decreased
 from 38.9 to 28.9; annual population growth rate dropped
 from 3.3 percent to 2.4 percent; and, illiteracy fell
 from 21.7 percent to 17.8 percent.
 
501
 The constitution states that economic activities primarily
 fall within the private sector but authorizes the
 state to orient, direct, regulate, replace or create
 economic activities to increase the nation's wealth
 and to assure benefits of the economy for the greatest
 possible number of people. Private property is respected
 in law and practice, and citizens, without regard
 to sex, social origin, birth, race, religion or political
 opinion, have a right to own property, as well as
 to avail themselves of any economic benefits, programs
 or services of the state.
 Recent economic performance has been good. Per capita
 gross domestic product (GDP) reached a relatively
 high $1,700 in 1980, with real GDP growing by seven
 percent in 1979 and by about five percent in 1980.
 The rate of inflation in 1980 was about 14-15 percent
 (annual rate), but has moderated to about ten percent
 in 1981. Official figures show unemployment at about
 nine percent for 1979 (the latest year for which statistics
 are available), but the actual rate probably is closer
 to 15 percent or even higher. How to employ the ever-
 growing number of job seekers is the country's most
 serious economic problem.
 An estimated 39 percent of the population lives under
 conditions of poverty, that is, with an income barely
 or less than adequate to provide for a family's basic
 needs. Of this group, approximately half (or 20 percent
 of the country's population) lives in serious or extreme
 poverty (i.e., unable to provide for basic necessities).
 Although a larger percentage of the poor is to be
 found in rural areas, the trend toward an urbanized
 society indicates that, within five to ten years,
 Panama's poor population may be split evenly between
 the urban and rural areas. Although figures for earlier
 periods are not available, it can be assumed that
 current poverty figures represent a significant improvement
 over the situation a decade ago. Further, because
 of the availability of a variety of public services
 (e.g., health clinics, school and maternal/child feeding
 programs), even the poorest families have a cushion
 which makes their economic situation less unbearable.
 In 1975, there was one physician per 1,333 persons.
 Reduction of infant mortality as well as the drop
 in the general death rate and other indices suggest
 improvements in the area of public health.
 Panama's social system and legal code accord equal
 treatment to women and to men. The constitution prohi-
 bits discrimination on the basis of race, birth, social
 class, sex, religion or political ideas. The consti-
 tution also requires equal pay for equal work without
 distinction based on sex. The constitution gives
 pregnant employees 12 weeks mandatory maternity leave
 and the right to return to their jobs.
 Panamanian women enjoy.a high level of social freedom;
 many are active in business, government and academia.
 However, women in general still do not share the same
 opportunities for individual and collective advancement
 available to men. From 1974 through 1978, the country
 experienced a severe recession, causing widespread
 unemployment and underemployment, both of which have
 
 
 502
 been especially high for women. The government esti-
 mated in 1977 that 14 percent of the female work force
 was unemployed and 44 percent was underemployed, with
 the comparable figures for men being ten percent and
 18 percent, respectively. Female employment in urban
 Panama is concentrated in the service sector, where
 wages are generally lower; wages paid to women are
 both lower than those for males and increase at a
 much slower rate. Comparatively fewer women participate
 in the labor force than men, and their participation
 seems to fluctuate as the job market expands and con-
 tracts. Government statistics showed that in 1978
 women made up about 29 percent of the economically
 active work force.
 
 
 503
 U.S ,OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBL16ATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 IU.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: PANAMA
 1979     1980     1981
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL..,        21.Z       2.0     10.6
 LOANS.................lb.O           0.0      6.4
 GRANTS .............  ....  5.2      2.0      4.2
 AAID o.................         19.9      1.0      8.?
 LOANS ............       16.0       0.0      6.4
 ..GRANTS ..  ....            3.9      1.0      2.3
 ISE)CSUPPASSIST.) ...        0.0      0.0       0.0
 8.FOOO FOR PEACE .......         1.1      1.0      1.9
 LOANS.............. .       0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ...............       1.1      1.0      1.9
 TITLE I-TOTAL..........          0.0      0.0      0.0
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS...            0.0      0.0      0.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR.....          0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE II-TOTAL.........          1.1      1.0      1.9
 E.RELIEF.EC.DEV & WFP.          0.0       0.1      C.0
 VOL.RELIEF AGENLY.....          1.1      0.9      1.9
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST..          0.2      0.0      0.0
 LOANS ... ...........        0.0      0.0       0.0
 GRANTS.......... 6...0.2              0.0      0.0
 PEACE-CORPS......         0.0       0.0      0.0
 NARCOTICS .......        0.1       0.0      0.0
 OTHER...........       . .0.1       0.0      0.0
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL...          1.4      0.3      0.4
 LOANS..............         1.0      0.0      0.0
 -GRANTS.............        0.4      0.3      0.4
 A.MAP GRANTS ..........         0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.CREDIT SALES-FMS....          1.0      0.0      0.0
 C.INTL MIL.E.ITNG....          0.4      0.3      0.4
 O.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK...          0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS .......          0.0      0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. & MIL...        22.6       2.3     11.0
 LOANS ....   ......  .... 1.0       0.0      b.4
 GRANTS ...............       5.6      2.3      4.6
 OTHER US LOANS..........          3.7      0.0      0.0
 EX-IM BANK LOA.NS ..            3.b      0.0      0.0
 ALL OTHER............   "        0.1      0.0      0.0
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIFS
 1979     1980     1981     1946-81
 TOTAL-....    .. 6.2      149.9     14.5    806.1
 IBRD              34.0     58.0     45.5     358.7
 IFC                3.0      0.0       0.0      8.3
 IDA                0.0       0.0      0.0      0.0
 108               29.0     91.4      28.5    412.2
 ADS                0.0       0.0      0.0      0.0
 AFDB               0.0       0.0      0.0      0.0
 UNOP                1.7      0.5      0.5     22.6
 OTHER-UN           0.5       0.0      0.0      4.3
 EEC                0.0       0.0      0.0      0.0
 
 89-510 0 - 82 - 33
 
 
