 PANAMA
 Panama is officially again a representative democracy in which
 the security apparatus is subordinate to civilian authority
 and internationally accepted standards of human rights are the
 law. An elected Government under President Barletta was sworn
 in on October 11, 1984, to a five-year term. A new 67-member
 legislature took office on November 16.
 From 1968 to 1978 political power was concentrated almost
 entirely in the hands of the Panamanian National Guard (since
 1983 the Panama Defense Forces or PDF). From 1978 onwards
 there was a gradual opening of the political process, and a
 declared intention to return to the practice of representative
 democracy by 1984, though during this period the PDF has
 continued to exercise effective control through surrogates.
 The 1984 national elections saw large voter turnout, and were
 themselves peaceful and orderly. However, incidents of
 violence marred the aftermath, including PDF complicity
 alleged by opposition and independent observers in the
 snooting deaths of two demonstrators during a confrontation
 between pro-government and opposition elements. The prolonged
 vote tabulation process was marked by irregularities, and drew
 pointed charges of fraud from the opposition coalition. After
 an interval of two weeks the Supreme Electoral Tribunal
 declared the official Government-backed coalition candidate
 the winner by 1713 votes, or 0.29 percent over his opponent.
 The opposition.,coalition rejected these results as invalid.
 The new President, Nicholas Ardito Barletta, has pledged his
 Government's support for the principles of democracy and
 civilian control, and has expressed personal concern over the
 incidents of violence associated with the election. The PDF
 has declared its intention to retire from an active political
 role, and to concentrate on national security and civic action
 missions. For the first time since 1968, the new
 directly-elected legislature has significant powers to
 introduce, debate, and pass new legislation, as well as to
 ratify treaties and international agreements. While
 accusations of fraud were made by both sides in the
 legislative elections, the opposition did win a significant
 minority of seats.
 Panama, a middle-income developing country, has a mixed
 economy which has suffered severely from the worldwide
 recession; the 20 percent unemployment rate is a serious
 problem. The immediate priorities of the Barletta Government
 are to improve the economic situation and to reduce
 unemployment. More long-range goals include reducing the role
 of the PDF and cleaning up corruption. Panama's private
 sector and entrepreneurial class are active and influential,
 and individuals are generally speaking free to hold private
 property and to pursue private interests. Human, social,
 economic, and political rights are not restricted because of
 minority or other distinctive status, although there is an
 historical cultural/linguistic bias against English-speaking
 blacks of Antillean descent.
 The inviolability of the individual, family, home and property
 enshrined in Panama's Constitution and laws is generally
 honored in practice. Infrequent exceptions over the years
 appear to be isolated incidents, and do not constitute a
 consistent, deliberate pattern of human rights violations.
 Civil and civic rights such as freedom of aspembly,,
 
 
 627
 PANAMA
 expression, and religion are also protected by law and
 generally honored inpractice.
 Long-term human rights trends in Panama are positive. The
 publicly expressed dedication of the new Government to the
 principles of human rights and the evolution of democratic
 practice suggest that these trends will continue.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 On May 7, one day after the general elections, violence
 erupted in front of the Legislative Palace where election
 returns were being tabulated. Graphic photos show gunmen,
 firing into the largely oppositionist crowd. The incident
 resulted in the deaths of two opposition supporters and over
 forty injuries, some due to gun shots, others to beatings by
 accomplices of the gunmen. Uniformed police (PDF) on the
 scene were either unable or unwilling to halt the violence.
 According to the opposition press, the gunmen belonged to a
 group of thugs employed by PDF security forces to support the
 PRD. Some of the gunmen were promptly arrested; the leader of
 the group, Silverio Brown, was himself shot to death by police
 detectives on August.7, allegedly while trying to escape.
 Opposition groups and gang members claiming former employment
 with the PDF have charged that Brown was killed to suppress
 knowledge of a PDF role in the May 7 incident. Twenty other
 members of the group were said still to be in preventive
 detention at year's end. The Brown case apparently led
 several other presumed group members to seek refuge in foreign
 embassies. One of these, Angel Vasell Rock, sought diplomatic
 asylum in the Venezuelan Embassy. According to statements in
 the opposition press attributed to Vasell Rock, he escaped
 from a bus conveying the gang members to a Panamanian prison,
 where, he claimed, they were all to be shot, and made his way
 back to Panama City to seek diplomatic protection. After
 several weeks of negotiations between Panama and Venezuela,
 Vasell Rock left the Embassy under a guarantee that he would
 not be harmed, and entered police custody. He is charged with
 a number of common crimes unrelated t5 the post-election
 violence.
 b. Disappearance
 On May 18, the press reported that several bystanders had
 witnessed the arrest of Edwin Eredio Amaya Bravo in Chiriqui
 Province by members of the PDF on a counterinsurgency training
 exercise. Amaya's family lawyer filed a writ of habeas corpus
 against the Commander of the PDF before the Panamanian Supreme
 Court, but the PDF denied ever having arrested Amaya. In
 September Amaya's brother wrote the PDF Commander to express
 his fear that his brother had been killed. To date, no
 results have been made public of a supposedly ongoing police
 investigation of this reported disappearance.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment
 or Punishment
 The Constitution prohibits measures that harm the physical,
 mental or moral integrity of persons under detention.
 
 
 628
 PANAMA
 Opposition sources have publicly charged that billy-clubs and
 electric prods were used on those detained October 10
 following the violent dispersal in Panama City of an all-night
 opposition vigil, related to continuing objections to the
 elections. The opposition further charged that those detained
 were forced to move across the floor of the police station on
 their knees during questioning, and were threatened with
 additional beatings if they did not comply. Newspaper
 photographs taken shortly after their release show arrestees
 from the vigil with what appear to be contusions. On May 30,
 in response to the burning of a government-owned bus in front
 of opposition headquarters, PDF personnel sacked the
 opposition's offices. Photographs of that incident show
 beatings of opposition activists and bystanders.
 In 1984, there were several allegations by the opposition of
 police beatings of detainees awaiting trial in the Coiba Penal
 Colony. In September, a newspaper report denounced human
 rights violations in the Women's Penitentiary in Panama City,
 alleging that prisoners were punished by being forced to sleep
 on cement slabs and given reduced food rations.
 Overcrowding in Panama's prisons continues to be a major
 problem. The average population of the Central Men's Prison
 in Panama City, built in 1925 to accommodate 225, is now well
 over 700, and most detainees sleep on the floor. The
 Government attributes this to lack of economic resources to
 build new and more adequate prisons. Supplemental foodstuffs
 and other prison services not normally provided may be
 purchased by those able to afford them.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 The Constitution provides for habeas corpus and requires
 warrants for arrest, except for those arrested while
 committing a crime. The Constitution does not allow
 preventive detention, but in many cases the Government appeal
 of a granting of bail can take weeks or months to be finally
 adjudicated. During this time the detainee must remain behind
 bars. Amendments to the Constitution in 1983 strengthened
 procedural safeguards for arrested individuals. The police
 must bring charges against the accused at the time he is
 arrested or served with a summons. Failure to make such
 charges personally to the accused has led to invalidation of
 sentences. Those under arrest must also be immediately
 informed of their constitutional rights. Once arrested, a
 suspect may be held for no more than 24 hours without being
 charged and brought before a magistrate. Opposition groups
 have claimed that detainees have been held incommunicado up to
 a week after arrest before being brought before a magistrate,
 but there are no recent confirmed instances of this.
 An accused may be held in custody after being charged for as
 long as it takes to conduct the investigation and bring the
 case to trial. Pretrial detention, especially for people from
 lower economic classes, can last for months or even years.
 Such time is credited against any sentence imposed following
 conviction.
 Shortly after general elections in May, two commentators for
 opposition Radio Hit in Colon were arbitrarily detained
 without charges being brought against them. They were
 released after one and five days respectively. In the first
 incident, a school principal was held incommunicado for
 
 
 629
 PANAMA
 24 hours despite efforts by his lawyer and Radio Hit's owner
 to talk with him. In the second incident, the commentator,
 who was also correspondent for the opposition newspaper La
 Prensa in Colon, allegedly was physically hauled before the
 Mayor of Colon and, according to eyewitnesses, beaten in the
 Mayor's office. According to opposition sources, other
 supporters were arbitarily detained for short periods of time
 during and after the electoral period, and later released
 without having been charged.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Persons charged with crimes are presumed innocent until proven
 guilty and have the right of counsel. The local Bar
 Association, while underfunded, provides a public defender
 service for the indigent. In civil cases, the Administrative
 Code mandates public trials based on oral testimony and
 argument and gives the accused the right to be present. In
 most criminal cases, however, the court process allows written
 presentations by the prosecution and defense without the
 presence of the accused. Any documentary evidence is
 avdilable for examination by both sides. Both prosecution and
 defense have the right to appeal the verdict. A new
 Administrative Code was promulgated in 1982, and a new Penal
 Code wap enacted in 1983. A revision of the Judicial Code was
 completed in October 1984, with the stated goal of modernizing
 the legal system and making the courts more accessible to all
 classes of Panamanians.
 Panamanian and foreign observers have noted that juvenile
 delinquents are occasionally tried and incarcerated as adults,
 especially when they are considered to be hardened criminals.
 Although the Constitution prohibits self-incrimination, there
 also have been charges that juveniles and poor people with
 criminal records have been detained and pressured during
 interrogation to confess to crimes they may not have
 committed. Other reported practices--publicly criticized in
 the Panamanian press by government officials as well as
 private citizens--include summary proceedings and convictions
 for misdemeanors by 'night court' judges without duly
 prescribed defense counsel.
 The Supreme Court is charged with upholding the Constitution
 and the laws, and magistrates and judges are legally
 independent. The 1983 constitutional amendments have in
 theory strengthened the financial independence of the
 judiciary by guaranteeing it two percent of government
 revenues: in fact, however, it received less than one percent
 (the two percent is shared with the Attorney General' office,
 and the full amount was not delivered in the past year).
 Judges are paid relatively low salaries, even following a
 substantial raise in the past year. Magistrates are barred
 from simultaneously holding other public office or otherwise
 participating in politics. It must be noted that the
 Executive continues to exercise some influence over the
 judicial branch.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 'Private family life generally is respected. One recent
 departure from the norm reportedly occurred when, in the
 course of dispersing an opposition demonstration on October 10,
 the PDF riot squad pursued fleeing opposLtionists into nearby
 
 
 630
 PANAMA
 private residences and caused damages to these premises in the
 course of making arrests. Under the Constitution, judicial
 warrents must be issued before officials may enter houses.
 Tnere were occasional reports in 1984 that police violated
 this guarantee by entering without warrents.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Tne Constitution guarantees freedom of speech, press, and
 other forms of communication without censorship. There is no
 interference with academic freedom. The views of government
 opponents are made known through their speeches, and through
 the press and radio. The opposition newspaper, La Prensa, the
 popular tabloid Ya, and various radio commentators publicly
 criticize government programs and policies. Opponents also
 freely and often vehemently criticize public activities of
 civilian and military officials, including the President and
 the Commander of the PDF. The 1984 electoral campaign
 atforded substantial freedom of speech, with opposition groups
 free to make speeches and distribute leaflets, pamphlets, and
 other election materials.   Nevertheless, opposition groups
 experienced serious problems gaining access to the electronic
 media, with all Panamanian television stations and over
 90 percent of radio stations controlled by pro-government
 individuals or groups. During the election campaign,
 pro-government electronic media largely refused air time to
 opposition advertising. Opposition groups charge that they
 are unable to acquire radio or television licenses from the
 Government, because once the identities of the owners become
 known, the license applications are refused. Opposition radio
 station Voz Del Baru was closed on a technicality in June
 after the elections; in October, the station was allowed to
 reopen. The new transmitter of the Colon opposition station,
 Radio Hit, was destroyed by arsonists in May; after a few days
 off the air, the station resumed broadcasting with its old,
 less powerful transmitter.
 In the early morning hours of May 9, unknown assailants in
 moving vehicles sprayed machine gun fire at the offices of
 pro-government Editora Renovacion, S.A. (ERSA), which
 publishes three daily newspapers. ERSA accused opposition
 'commandos* of being responsible for the attack; the
 opposition claimed that the Government staged the shooting
 incident. In a possible act of reprisal, nine unknown gunmen
 in two cars fired shots over the residence of the opposition
 presidential candidate Arnulfo Arias late in the evening of
 May 9. No one was injured and none of the assailants in
 either case was ever apprehended.
 Opposition newspaper La Prensa was the object of a short
 strike of its type-setters and graphic artists in September.
 The paper charged that the strike was politically motivated
 and supported by only a quarter of the employees involved
 (although the remaining employees respected their picket
 line). It ended after a few days. The newspaper continues
 actively to oppose government policies and to publish freely,
 and is since mid-1984 operating at a profit. La Prensa has
 frequently been the sole source of public information on
 incidents related to the 1984 elections, such as the Vassell
 Rock case mentioned above. Another example was its report on
 the alleged beating of two of its journalists, Lissette
 Carasco and Aurelio Jimenez, by PDF personnel while the former
 
 
 631
 PANAMA
 were covering a December 14 march sponsored by the Government
 in support of the PDF. The incident was later condemned by
 the legislature.
 The other six newspapers are more circumspect, especially
 regarding the security forces and their leadership, and
 exercise a measure of self-censorship. The three newspapers
 of the ERSA group are responsive to directives from the
 Government and security forces. Absent such guidance,
 however, individual columnists write freely about a wide range
 of topics. There is no censorship of foreign newspapers,
 magazines, books, or cable television programming.
 In 1983, the Supreme Court ruled unconstitutional a 1978 press
 law which allowed a government-dominated board the power to
 rule on tne professional competence (and thus the right to
 practice) of journalists or those seeking to enter the
 profession. The court further ruled that most categories of
 employees working for newspapers and in the electronic media
 need not obtain licenses for work. Nevertheless, the Ministry
 of Government and Justice of the former regime was accused by
 opposition papers of denying broadcasting licenses to
 individual opposition commentators.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 The Constitution guarantees the right to peaceful assembly.
 Twenty-four hours' advance notice but not government
 permission is required for open-air meetings. However, while
 no demonstrations were banned during 1984, and all political
 parties held rallies throughout the country during the
 election campaign, the opposition encountered serious
 difficulties in holding rallies in May and October. For the
 final opposition rally before the general elections in May,
 the pro-government coalition, UNADE, rented all available
 buses (generally privately owned) several days before the
 event, and the authorities reportedly threatened bus operators
 with revocation of their licenses if they did not cooperate.
 In October, opposition groups alleged similar intimidation of
 bus operators, so that their march to protest the inauguration
 of President Barletta would be poorly attended. The October 9
 opposition rally, which turned into an all-night vigil in
 Cathedral Square near the Presidential Palace, was violently
 dispersed by the anti-riot squad in the early morning hours of
 October 10. Anti-riot troops used rubber truncheons,
 billy-clubs, and tear gas to break up the crowd, which was
 reportedly behaving peacefully, singing and dancing to taped
 music. The authorities claimed that the opposition had
 vandalized the automobiles of residents in the area, who had
 called the police for help. The opposition alleged, however,
 that the anti-riot squad itself deliberately perpetrated the
 vandalism while it was dispersing the crowd. Newspaper
 reports claimed dozens of injuries and some one hundred people
 arrested, most of whom were released the following morning
 without being charged, the others several days later.
 Professional and social groups meet without interference.
 Panama has a strong and longstanding labor movement, a liberal
 Labor Code, and union rights are generally respected. There
 are both political and apolitical labor organizations in
 Panama. One of the strongest is a local of the American
 Federation of State, County, and Municipal Employees
 (affili ated with the labor movements of both countries), and a
 second is the regional branch of the National Maritime Union
 
 40-387 0 - 85 - 41
 
 
 632
 PANAMA
 of America. Both are AFL-CIO unions. Union elections are
 generally free from government interference. Consultation
 with unions about government policies, particularly employment
 issues, is institutionalized tnrough a permanent national
 commission that includes representatives of the major labor
 organizations. Both collective bargaining and strikes are
 constitutionally guaranteed rights of workers, although
 government regulations restrict or forbid this right for
 certain government employees. Moreover, the Labor Ministry
 implements these laws in such a way as to impede or discourage
 organization of private employees in the Colon Free Zone and
 tne offshore banking industry, which is a source of concern
 for the democratic international trade union movement.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Tne Constitution guarantees religious freedom to all, and
 there is no state religion. There are no restrictions on the
 free exercise of religious beliefs, including proselytizing,
 and a broad range of religious groups operate freely in Panama.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 The Constitution permits Panamanians to move freely within the
 country and to emigrate, and these rights are honored in
 practice. It also prohibits compulsory exile and extradition
 of Panamanian nationals to other countries. Some civilians
 involuntarily exiled during previous regimes have since
 returned and resumed full participation in Panamanian
 society. Exiles remaining abroad have been publicly urged by
 the Government to return. Panama accepts displaced persons of
 widely differing ideological persuasions from other countries.
 Several hundred Salvadorans originally sponsored by the
 Government of Panama are now supporting themselves in a
 resettlement village. Perhaps as many as several thousand
 Cuoans are now in Panama, awaiting onward emigration. No cases
 of forcible repatriation of political exiles occurred in 1984.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 On May 6, 1984, Panama held its first direct Presidential and
 legislative elections since 1968. Fourteen legally-registered
 political parties fielded seven slates, each consisting of a
 Presidential and two Vice Presidential candidates, and also
 nominated a total of some 600 candidates for the new 67-seat
 Legislature. The election campaign, of some two months'
 duration, afforded all parties the opportunity to convey their
 political messages to citizens throughout the country by means
 of public rallies and media announcements, except for the
 limitation on electronic media access and intimidations
 outlined above. Voter turnout in general elections was
 estimated at 77 percent, and election day passed without
 incident.
 Panama's cumbersome vote counting procedures, agreed upon by
 all political parties and encompassed in the national
 electoral law, resulted in lengthy delays in determining the
 winners of the elections. 3902 voting tables passed their
 results on to 40 regional vote counting centers, which after
 often lengthy delays forwarded their results to the National
 Vote Counting Board, which was to resolve-all disputes and
 challenges and produce the final vote tally. In the event,
 
 
 633
 PANAMA
 the National Vote Counting Board merely read off the 40 vote
 counts; declared itself unable to determine the final vote
 count, and forwarded its totals to the three-man Electoral
 Tribunal, the ultimate electoral authority in Panama, to
 determine the official results. 372 voting tables in 18 of
 the 40 vote counting circuits were challenged by the
 government or opposition coalitions before the Electoral
 Tribunal, which summarily rejected all challenges but also did
 not count the disputed tables in the final vote count. The
 resuit was to eliminate some 60,000 votes from the final tally
 without ever judging whether those votes were valid or not.
 On May 16 the Electoral Tribunal announced it had determined
 that the government coalition candidate had won by 1713 votes
 (300,748 to 299,035). There followed a series of last-minute
 legal maneuverings by the opposition coalition to block a
 final ruling, amidst repeated charges of PDF coercion and
 physical alteration of tally sheets in the National Vote
 Counting Board and Electoral Tribunal. Nevertheless, the
 government slate received its credentials on May 30. The
 determination of which legislators had been elected on May 6
 became bogged down in lengthy court battles, and not until
 September was a final ruling made on all contests. One race
 was declared a tie by the Electoral Tribunal, which ordered a
 new election held in October. Having taken the position that
 the opposition candidate had clearly won, the President of the
 Electoral Tribunal resigned in protest after being outvoted 2
 to 1. This was the last of a number of cases in which the
 President was outvoted by his colleagues in a disputed
 election (members of the three-man Tribunal are named, one
 eacn, by the Executive, the Legislature, and the Supreme
 Court). .Several weeks after his resignation, he further
 publicly charged that several seats were won by alteration and
 falsification of voting records. With the government
 coalition's victory in the October election, the PRD, the
 principal coalition partner, obtained an absolute majority of
 34 in the 67-seat legislature. Both opposition and non-PRD
 government legislative candidates publicly protested the
 outcomes of other legislative contests, claiming that they had
 won but been displaced by PRD candidates. In a public speech
 at the National Press Club in Washington in July, the
 President-elect characterized Panama's electoral system as 'a
 mess' that badly needed to be changed to deal with the
 problems that followed the May elections.
 The June 3 local and municipal elections for mayors and
 community representatives had to be postponed one week to June
 10 because ballots had not been printed. The PRD posted a
 strong victory in these contests, with voter participation,
 however, dropping dramatically from May. The 505 community
 representatives, who met one month a year as a National
 Deliberative Body under the 1972 Constitution, will henceforth
 have purely local responsibilities. The National Legislative
 Council, a partially elected body which had legislative power
 prior to the 1983 amendments to the Constitution, went out of
 existence in November when the new legislature was seated.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Non-governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The Government has espoused human rights causes in the
 Organization of American States, the United Nations, and
 elsewhere. A human rights committee formed in Panama in 1978
 continued to operate freely in 1984. Amnesty International
 
 
 634
 PANAMA
 did not cover Panama in its 1984 report. Freedom House in
 1983 rated Panama 'partly free."
 ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND CULTURAL SITUATION
 Panama's total population in 1984 was estimated at 2,001,000.
 Annual population growth rate declined to 1.8 percent in 1984
 (from 2.5 percent in 1980), while infant mortality was 20.1
 per 1,000 live births, reflecting improvement in public health.
 In 1981, B2.8 percent of the population had access to safe
 water (urban: 94.7 percent, rural: 69.8 percent). The ratio
 of calorie supply available for consumption relative to
 nutritional requirements has been estimated at 101 percent
 since 1977. Access to education is good. The adjusted
 primary school enrollment ratio was 112.22 percent in 1981.
 The overall adult literacy rate was estimated at 87.1 percent
 in 1980; the rate in rural areas was 61.8 percent, while the
 urban rate was 93.7 percent.
 Under the Constitution, citizens are guaranteed the right to
 own property, as well as to avail themselves of economic
 benefits, programs, and services of the state, without regard
 to sex, social origin, birth, race, religion, or political
 opinion. Panamanian constitutions, however, traditionally
 have limited the rights of naturalized Panamanians and aliens
 to participate in retail commerce.
 Recent economic performance has been weak, largely as a result
 of depressed regional and worldwide conditions. Real per
 capita gross domestic product was estimated at $2,116 in 1982,
 uut has declined since then. Approximately 22 percent of the
 country's population live in extreme poverty -- unable to
 provide for basic necessities. A larger percentage of the
 poor is found in rural areas, but the trend toward
 urbanization has increased the number of poor in cities as
 well. President Barletta stated publicly in 1984 that one in
 six Panamanians was unemployed or underemployed. Unemployment
 is unofficially estimated at approximately 20 percent, rising
 to as high as 45-50 percent in pockets of urban poverty such
 as Colon.
 Panama's social system and legal code accord equal treatment
 to women and to men. The Constitution prohibits
 discrimination on the basis of race, birth, social class, sex,
 religion, or political ideas. It also gives pregnant
 employees 12 weeks maternity leave and the right to return to
 their jobs. Women are accorded equal political rights under
 Panamanian law. They play an active role in political and
 governmental affairs, holding a number of important
 positions. The 67 memoers of the new legislature include
 several women. Two independent agency heads and the
 presidential spokesperson in the new Barletta Government are
 women. Women also serve as the President of the ruling party,
 one of the three members of the Electoral Tribunal, three of
 Panama's nine provincial governors (including the Governor of
 Panama Province), and one of the nine Supreme Court Justices.
 Several women's organizations, such as UNIDAD and Accion
 Feminina, are active in Panamanian politics. Panamanian women
 enjoy full social freedom but in general still do not have the
 same opportunities for economic and professional advancement
 as do men. This reflects both traditional values and the
 current difficult economic climate. As Panamanian law does
 not recognize community property, divorced or deserted women
 can ue and on occasion are left destitute.
 
 
 635
 PANAMA
 Female employment in urban Panama is concentrated in the
 service sector, where wages are generally lower. Although the
 Constitution mandates equal pay for equal work, wages paid to
 women are frequently lower than those for the same work
 performed by males and increase at a slower rate. Government
 statistics showed that in 1978 women made up about 29 percent
 of the economically active work force.
 Panama is a racially mixed country. The traditional monopoly
 of power by persons of European descent was effectively ended
 with the ouster of the civilian President by the National
 Guard in 1968. Blacks, orientals, and mestizos are now active
 politically and are well represented at senior levels of
 Government and the PDF, as well as in the new legislature,
 which also includes 5 Indians.
 Prominent among minorities retaining a degree of separate
 identity are English-speaking blacks of Antillean descent,
 Jews, Arabs, Greeks, Chinese, East Indians, and North
 Americans. All these groups play roles in Panama's urban
 economy well out of proportion to their numbers. There is no
 discrimination in law against these or any other social,
 religious, or cultural groups, except that certain categories
 of elected office and ownership of retail trade establishments
 are constitutionally restricted to native-born Panamanians.
 While innumerable exceptions exist, Caucasians, orientals, and
 mestizos tend to be better off economically and to occupy
 higher positions in Government than blacks and American
 Indians; however, the latter groups participate actively in
 both the public and private sectors. Indian tribes receive
 special government assistance, particularly in the areas of
 public health and welfare, and education. They are not
 restricted to their tribal areas, but most remain there by
 choice, reflecting longstanding resistance to assimilation.
 Indians enjoy full voting'rights and all other rights of
 citizenship. They play significant roles in the Governments
 of four provinces. In October, the new President, in keeping
 with a campaign promise, named a Kuna Indian Vice Minister of
 Health. This is the first time an Indian has held Cabinet rank
 in Panama.
 Panama's Kuna Indians mostly reside in a self-governing,
 semiautonomous district, the Comarca of San Blas, established
 in 1953. The Embera (Choco) Indians, who live in Darien
 Province, eastern Panama, gained government approval for their
 own homeland in 1983 when a law was passed establishing their
 own autonomous district, or Comarca. The more numerous and
 geographically widespread Guaymi Indians of western Panama
 made some progress during 1984 towards the establishment of
 their own homeland, but serious differences between the
 Government and the Guaymi still exist over the size of the
 Comarca. The Guaymi claim that the latest government offer
 would leave almost two thirds of their tribe outside the
 proposed boundaries of the Comarca.
 In September, Panama hosted the fourth World Assembly of
 Indian Peoples, which was attended by Indians from more than
 thirty countries and sponsored with the assistance of
 international organizations.
 
 
 636
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: PANAMA
 1982     1983    1984
 ..........................................................
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL...        13.0      7.4    12.0
 LOANS ...............       8.1      3.8     5.0
 GRANTS .............  ... 4.9       3.6     7.0
 A.AID .     ................  11.7      6.3    10.7
 LOANS .............. ... .8.I       3.8     5.0
 GRANTS .....................  3.6    2.5     5.7
 (SEC.SUPP.ASSST.) ...        0.0     0.0      0.0
 B.FOOD FOR PEACE .......        1.3      1.1      1.3
 LOANS ...............       0.0     0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............      ...1.3     1.1     1.3
 TITLE I-TOTAL ..........        0.0      0.0     0.0
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS .....        0.0      0.0     0.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR .....        0.0      0.0     0.0
 TITLE  I-TOTAL .........       1.3      1.1      1.3
 E.RELIEF.EC.OEV & WFP.         0.0      0.1     0.3
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY .....        1.3      1.0      1.0
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST...         0.0      0.0     0.0
 LOANS ...............       0.0     0.0     0.0
 GRANTS .............  ... 0.0       0.0     0.0
 PEACE CORPS ......        0.0      0.0     0.0
 NARCOTICS ........        0.0      0.0     0.0
 OTHER ............     . 0.0      0.0     0.0
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL...         5.4      5.5    13.5
 LOANS ...............       5.0      5.0     5.0
 GRANTS .............   .. 0.4      0.5     8.5
 A.MAP GRANTS ..........        0.0      0.0     8.0
 B.CREDIT FINANCING ....        5.0      5.0     5.0
 C.INTL MIL.EO.TRNG ....        0.4      0.5     0.5
 D.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK...         0.0      0.0     0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS ........        0.0      0.0     0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. & NIL...        18.4     12.9    25.5
 LOANS ................    13.1      8.8     10.0
 GRANTS .....................  5.3    4.1     15.5
 ----------------------------------------------------------
 OTHER US LOANS ..........        0.0      0.0     0.0
 EX-IM BANK LOANS .......        0.0      0.0     0.0
 ALL OTHER ................     0.0      0.0     0.0
 ..........................................................
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1982     1983     1984    1946-84
 ---------------------------------------------------------
 TOTAL ..........  126.9  137.7     82.6   1169.1
 IBRD              24.4     85.0     74.2   544.8
 IFC                0.0      0.0      0.0     8.3
 IDA                0.0      0.0      0.0     0.0
 IDS               99.0     52.0      8.4    584.9
 ADS                0.0      0.0      0.0     0.0
 AFDB               0.0      0.0      0.0     0.0
 UNOP               3.5      0.6      0.0     26.7
 OTHER-UN           0.0      0.1      0.0      4.4
 EEC                0.0      0.0      0.0     0.0
 
 
 637
