 PANAMA
 Panama's Constitution establishes a- representative democracy with three
 branches of government--executive and legislative branches elected.by direct secret
 vote for 5-year terms, and an independent judiciary-plus an independent electoral
 tribunal. The current Government, headed by President Guillermo Endara, is a
 multiparty coalition elected in May 1989, but unable to take office until December
 of that year.
 
 
 513
 Panama has no military forces. Law enforcement duties are the responsibility of
 the Panamanian National Police (PNP) under the Minister of Government and Jus-
 tice. Criminal investigationsare performed by the Judicial Technical Police (PTJ)
 under the Public Ministry, headed by the Attorney General, who is part of the judi-
 cial branch. There continued to be instances of abuse of detainees and prisoners by
 individual members of both forces.
 Panama has a free enterprise, service-oriented, dollar-based economy. The econ-
 omy grew at least 6 percent in real terms in 1993, the fourth year of consecutive
 growth following the ownturn during the last years of the Noriega regime. Poverty
 is pervasive, however, reflecting high unemployment and underemployment in
 urban slums and in some rural areas.
 During 1993, the Government strengthened some institutional protections and
 continued to attempt to prosecute those responsible for the human rights abuses
 during the previous 21 years of dictatorship. Manuel Noriega and two others were
 convicted and sentenced for the 1985 murder of Dr. Hugo Spadafora. Progress in
 key areas was slow, however, and Panama's principal human rights problems in-
 cluded prolonged preliminary and pretrial detention, an inefficient criminal justice
 system, and an overcrowded, oppressive prison system. Violence against women re-
 mained a serious problem.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-No cases of political killings at the
 hands of government personnel were reported.
 There were, however, incidents in which Panamanian police used deadly force to
 stop fleeing suspects, which constitute extrajudicial killings, despite a 1992 presi-
 dential decree regulating the use of force by members of law enforcement organiza-
 tions. In October a PNP officer fired at a fleeing suspect in Chitre, killing the man;
 the officer was arrested and at year's end was in prison awaiting criminal proceed-
 ings. In May indigenous demonstrators in Darien and Chiriqui complained about
 rough handling and the indiscriminate use of tear gas by police. Indigenous and
 other sources also claimed the death of protester Saturnino Aguirre was caused by
 a blow he received from police during the demonstration in Chiriqui; the facts of
 the incident remain unclear. Indigenous leaders filed charges against the PNP in
 the death of Aguirre. In other instances, police used birdshot against demonstrators
 at times when use of lesser force would have been more appropriate. In a February
 4 police raid in the Curundu area, witnesses claimed police shot to death an 11-
 year-old boy during a "social protection" operation (see Section 1..). The PNP's Of-
 rice of Professional Responsibility reported that the 11-year-old was killed during a
 shootout with criminal suspects. No evidence was found to indicate whether the boy
 was killed by the police or by others. No PNP officer was charged in the incident.
 During 1993 the Government brought to trial two prominent human rights cases
 involving accusations of politically motivated murder and torture during the Torrijos
 and Noriega military dictatorships. In October a judge convicted Manuel Noriega (in
 absentia) and two other defendants for the 1985 murder and decapitation of Dr.
 Hugo Spadafora, a former Vice Minister of Health and a critic of Noriega. All three
 were sentenced to 20-year jail terms. In September a jury found seven other defend-
 ants not guilty, a decision which took nearly all observers by surprise and provoked
 riots and demonstrations. Four former military personnel went to trial in October
 for the 1971 disappearance and death of Catholic priest Hector Gallego, an orga-
 nizer of agrarian cooperatives. In November a jury found three of them guilty of
 murder (the other defendant opted for trial by judge and was awaiting the verdict
 at the end of the year). The three found guilty were expected to be sentenced to
 from 12 to 20 years' imprisonment.
 Other Noriega-era defendants continued to be charged and tried for offenses in-
 volving human rights abuses. Over 30 cases were pending against ex-Panama De-
 fense Forces (PDF) Major Felipe Camargo, who had been convicted of human rights
 abuses in 1992. Ex-PDF Major Luis "Papo" Cordoba and ex-head of the National In-
 vestigation Directorate Nivaldo Madrinan, both charged but acquitted in the
 Spadafora trial, are to stand trial also for the 1985 kidnaping and torture of Dr.
 Mauro Zuniga, president of the National Civic Coordination (COCINA), an organiza-
 tion opposed to the Noriega regime. A trial date for the defendants in the Zuniga
 case had yet to be fixed at year's end.
 Two major cases, however, remained stalled in the court system: the trial of 12
 defendants charged with the kidnaing and murder of American citizen Raymond
 Dragseth, killed during the 1989    . military action; and the trial of Manuel
 
 
 514
 
 Noriega and 5 others charged with the summary executions of 11 PDF members
 after the October 1989 coup attempt aginst Noriega.
 b. Disappearance.-No known or alleged cases of politically motivated disappear-
 ances occurred during 1993.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution prohibits the death penalty as well as measures which could dam-
 age the physical, mental, or moral integrity of prisoners or detainees. In addition
 to the constitutional prohibitions, Panama has ratified international conventions on
 the prohibition of torture and has incorporated them into its domestic law. However,
 there continued to be scattered cases of brutality and use of excessive force by po-
 lice. The PNP and the PTJ each maintained offices of professional responsibility to
 investigate claims of police misconduct, including human rights abuses. Sanctions
 included formal reprimand, disciplinary transfer, reduction in rank, dismissal, and,
 in severe cases, prosecution. Through August the PNP had investigated 130 cases;
 6 officials were dismissed for their actions, and 4 cases were forwarded for possible
 prosecution in the courts. Through July the PTJ had investigated 45 cases; 5 agents
 were dismissed, and 2 cases were forwarded for possible prosecution in the courts.
 In November the PNP's Office of Professional Responsibility reported that the ma-
 jority of complaints against police involved excessive use of force and inappropriate
 use of arms. The office also reported that 50 percent of public claims of police abuse
 were justified.
 As part of a 3-week orientation course, the PNP provided 20 hours of instruction
 to incoming recruits on laws and procedures to protect the human rights and legal
 guarantees of citizens. The PTJ had no such formal human rights instruction, al-
 though the Panamanian Committee on Human Rights (CPDH) organized periodic
 seminars on the need to respect human rights for new and veteran PTJ personnel.
 The CPDH provided the same assistance to the PNP.
 Prison conditions throughout Panama remained deplorable and health-threaten-
 ing. The physical plant of most prisons was dilapidated, medical care was inad-
 equate, escape attempts were frequent, and there were credible reports of corruption
 and abuse of prisoners by guards. Overcrowding of prisons worsened as arrests
 added to the prison population. According to government figures, the total prison
 population as of July was 5,241, an increase of approximately 23 percent over July
 1992. Modelo prison, Panama's largest, housed over 1,700 prisoners in a facility
 built for 300. Inmates reported that they slept in physical contact with their
 cellmates on bare cement floors that were perpetually wet from plumbing problems.
 There were frequent press reports of mistreatment of prisoners by guards and of in-
 mate attacks on other inmates.
 Addressing the inadequate prison facilities, the Government inaugurated the
 1,000-bed La Joya prison in August, although the facility, which has less than 100
 inmates, will not be fully operational until March 1994. Similarly, the Government
 announced the completion of a 150-bed wing in El Renacer prison in September, but
 officials reported in December that the facility was still not ready to admit pris-
 oners.
 There was a credible report from the CPDH in August that officials at a Panama
 City juvenile detention center were using excessive force to keep order at the facil-
 ity. Inmates told of beatings for breaking the rules, and the director admitted that
 some juveniles were mistreated, blaming the problem on lack of space. While there
 were no deaths or serious injuries reported at the center in 1993, the Government
 took no concrete action in response to the CPDH report. The CPDH reported in De-
 cember that the Supreme Court, which names the judge of Panama's Juvenile
 Court, favored moving responsibility for it from the Ministry of Government and
 Justice to the Judicial Branch, and might propose legislation to that effect. The
 CDPH believes such a move would help improve protection of children's rights.
 Conditions on the Coiba Island Penal Colony continued to be deplorable and
 primitive. At least five inmate gangs existed on the island, and escape attempts
 were commonplace. Allegations of mistreatment at the hands of guards, however,
 notably diminished over prior years. Unlike the situation during the past several
 years, no inmates died as the result of gang violence on Coiba in 1993; one inmate
 died in an accident. Prisoners who attempted to flee Coiba more than three times
 were confined to antiquated cells with no sanitary facilities. Coiba's isolation hin-
 dered communicationbetween inmates and their attorneys, often causing delays
 when its inmates were not transported to court on time.
 There was no known evidence in 1993 that female detainees or prisoners were
 targeted for sexual assault or other abuse by police or prison guards. Conditions at
 women's prisons were better than those at men's prisons.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-There were no known instances of arbi-
 trary arrest, detention, or exile. The Constitution stipulates that arrests must be
 
 
 515
 carried out with a warrant issued by the relevant authorities, except when a person
 is apprehended during the commissinn of a crime. The detainee is to be informed
 immediately of the reasons for arrest or detention, and has a right to immediate
 legal counsel, to be provided by the State for the indigent.
 The Constitution provides for judicial review of the legality of detention and man-
 dates the immediate release of any person found to have been detained or arrested
 illegally. A suspect may not be detained legally for more than 24 hours without
 being brought before a competent authority. A preliminary investigation report by
 the police must be completed within 8 days, atr which a prosecutor has a fixed
 period (which varies according to the number of suspects) to complete the investiga-
 tive file for judicial review. The judge, in turn has an additional 15 days to render
 a decision as to whether a trial is warranted. hese time limits were often not met
 in practice. The 24-hour time limit was often violated; detainees were commonly
 held without charges for several days. Many cases exceeded the time limits as a re-
 sult of further investigation, resubmissions and, in some cases, additional commu-
 nication between the court and the Public Ministry.
 Extended pretrial detention of those charged continued to be one of Panama's
 most serious human rights problems. According to government statistics, the propor-
 tion of pretrial detainees in the prison population as of July was nearly 80 percent,
 up slightly from the same period in 1992. According to public defenders, the average
 period of pretrial custody for a defendant was 14 to 18 months; pretrial detention
 in excess of the maximum sentence for the alleged crime was not uncommon. Fur-
 ther, should a detainee who spent a significant amount of time incarcerated be
 found innocent, there are no legal means to hold the Government accountable. The
 Government took no meaningful action during the year to correct this situation.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The nine Supreme Court magistrates are ap-
 pointed to 10-year terms by the executive branch and confirmed by the Legislative
 Assembly. The magistrates appoint superior court judges, who in turn appoint cir-
 cuit court judges in their respective jurisdictions.
 At the local level, administrative judges similar to justices of the peace are ap-
 pointed by municipal mayors. There are two types of local judges, "corregidores" and
 night" (or "police  udges. These judges exercise jurisdiction over minor civil and
 criminal cases in which they may impose sentences of up to 1 year. This system has
 serious shortcomings. The actions of orregidores and nigt udges are not regulated
 by the Code of Criminal Procedure, and defendants lac adequate procedural safe-
 guards. These officials need not be (and normally are n4) attorneys, and they oper-
 ate outside the control of the judicial branch. Some allegedly engaged in corrupt
 practices. By law, itl sentences meted out by these officials can be satisfied by pay-
 gea fine; in practice, more affluent defendants pay fines and poorer defendants go
 to jail. Shortcomings in this system have a serious impact since the vast majority
 of minor criminal cases are handled by corregidores and night judges.
 The Constitution provides that persons charged with crimes have the right to
 counsel and are presumed innocent until proven guilty. The accused may, if not
 under pretrial detention, be present with counsel during the investigative phase of
 the proceeding. Pretrial detainees can be requested to be present for the rendering
 of statements amplifications, or confrontation of witnesses. Trial proceedings are
 generally conducted orally with the accused present. The trial phase is a mixed sys-
 tm (written and oral), which includes the call to trial, the presentation of evidence,
 and oral hearing. The Constitution establishes trial by jury in some circumstances;
 by law, jury trials are not an option in most cases.
 The Government is constitutionally obliged to provide public defenders for the in-
 digent. In late 1992, the public defenders office reachedits legislatively mandated
 strength of 36 defenders and maintained that number throughout 1993. Public de-
 fenders often were appointed after the investigative phase of the case had passed,
 limiting the defense's opportunity to present evidence. Public defenders' caseloads
 were staggering, numbering hundreds of cases per attorney and seriously undermin-
 ingthe quality of representation.
 Personnel chan es within the Attorney General's office in 1992-93 reduced effi-
 ciency and slowed processing of cases. Attorney General Rogelio Cruz was sus-
 pended from office in December 1992; several of his immediate collaborators also
 were dismissed. The Public Ministry was slow to undertake needed changes, includ-
 ing the implementation of a career law within the Ministry and improvement of the
 work and accountability of the first-level prosecutors.
 Panama held no political prisoners in 1993. Various pro-Noriega and ex-PDF
 groups claimed that approximately 50 to 54 prisoners held for alleged crimes includ-
 ing torture, homicide, kidnaping, and other human rights violations during the pe-
 riod of military dictatorship were "political" prisoners. During the year, some of
 these prisoners were tried and convicted. Many others were still awaiting trial, most
 
 
 since early 1990. Although the judicial branch asserted that these cases are being
 expedited, progress was slow. (ome of the delays, however, stemmed from appeals
 and other legal motions on behalf of the defendants.) Families of victims of Noriea-
 era abuses vigorously protested bills to grant amnesty to all the defendants. The
 Legislative Assembly passed no amnesty bills in 1993.
 f.Arbitraiy Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Constitution provides for the inviolability of the home and communications. Per-
 sonal documents are not to be examined, communications monitored, or private resi-
 dences entered and searched except by written order. However, so-called social pro-
 tection operations in high-crime areas by the PTJ produced credible complaints that
 PTJ agents failed to follow legal requirements for arrest and search warrants and
 instead conducted indiscriminate searches of entire apartment buildings or housing
 complexes.
 Despite the view of some that the Constitution prohibits all wiretapping, the Gov-
 ernment maintains that wireta ping with judicial branch approval is legal. Media
 allegations in late November t at former Attorney General Rogelio Cruz had or-
 dered wiretaps in May 1991 prompted the CPDH to ask the Government to inves-
 tigate. These allegations also touched off calls for the Supreme Court or the Legisla-
 tive Assembly to define what constitutes a legal wiretap in the absence of laws and
 regulations adequately addressing the issue. The Government took no further action
 before the end of the year. No evidence was available to suggest that official wire-
 taps were used in 1993 for other than national security or criminal prosecution rea-
 sons; the debate centered on what legal limits should be acceptable.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-Panamanians _generally enjoyed freedom of
 speech and press as provided for in the Constitution. Five national daily newspapers
 (an additional daily opened in September 1993), 3 commercial television stations, 2
 educational television stations (1 run by the University of Panama, the other closely
 associated with the Catholic Church), and over 95 radio stations provided a broad
 choice of informational sources. While many media outlets took identifiable editorial
 positions, most carried a wide variety of political commentaries and other perspec-
 tives, both local and foreign. Local and foreign journalists worked and traveled free-
 ly throughout Panama, and the population had access to foreign media.
 Libel is a criminal offense subject to fines and up to 2 years in prison. Opinions,
 comments, or criticism of government officials acting in their official capacity are
 specifically exempted from libel prosecution, but a section of the law allows for the
 immediate discipline of journalists who show "disrespect" for the office of certain
 government officials. Several plans to annul or revise Noriega-era press restrictions
 did not reach final debate in the National Assembly by year's end.
 In early March, the national censorship board initially banned the U.S. film "The
 Panama Deception," which was highly critical of the 1989 U.S. Operation Just
 Cause and the Endara Government. Despite the ban, portions of the film's narrative
 were published in newspapers. The ban, publicly criticized by President Endara and
 by at least one member of the censorship board, was rescinded on March 17.
 Academic freedom was recognized and freely exercised in public as well as private
 universities.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution provides the
 rights of peaceful assembly and association, and the Government generally respects
 these rights. No authorization is needed for outdoor meetings, although prior notifi-
 cation for administrative purposes is required. Panamanians have the right to form
 associations and professional or civic groups without government interference; they
 may form and organize political parties as they like, though parties must meet
 membership and organizational standards in order to gain official recognition and
 run in national campaigns.
 Freedom of assembly was widely exercised in 1993; citizens frequently gathered
 and marched to protest government policies and to demand changes.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides For religious freedom. No gov-
 ernmental restrictions impinge on the free exercise and proselytization of religious
 beliefs, nor on any particular religious groups. Although Roman Catholicism ispre-
 dominant, Panama has no state religion. Clerics are constitutionally prohibited from
 holding public office except as related to social assistance, education, or scientific
 research. Foreign clergy are permitted to enter the country and enjoy the same reli-
 gious freedoms as Panamanian citizens.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Constitution grants Panamanians the right to move freely within
 the country and to emigrate and return, and these rights are respected in practice.
 
 
 517
 No known cases of forcible repatriation of refugees or asylum seekers occurred in
 1993.
 A 9 p.m. curfew for minors in Panama province, imposed in September 1992, re-
 mained in effect although it was enforced mainly in high-crime areas.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 The Constitution provides for a representative democracy with direct popular elec-
 tion of the president, two vice presidents, legislators, and local representatives every
 5 years. Technical arrangements for and the supervision of elections are the respon-
 sibility of the independent National Electoral Tribunal. Suffrage is a right and duty
 for allcitizens; there is, however, no penalty for noncompliance. Voting is by secret
 ballot. Panamanians enjoy the right to join any political party, to propagate their
 views, and to vote for candidates of their choice without government interference.
 These rights were respected by the Government in 1993.
 There are no legal bars to participation by wvomen or people of African, Asian, or
 indigenous descent, although their presence in senior leadership positions in govern-
 ment or political parties is not proportionate to their numbers within society. How-
 ever, numerous representatives of these groups, including five women, are in the
 Legislative Assembly and they are increasingly visible in mid-level political and gov-
 ernmental positions. San Blas, populated mainly by indigenous Kuna Indians, has
 two representatives in the Legislative Assembly.
 During 1993 Panama began to prepare for the May 1994 general elections. Six-
 teen parties, representing a wide spectrum of political views, were legally recognized
 and are expected to participate in the campaign. In May, under the auspices of the
 Catholic Church, representatives of all political parties and parties-in-formation
 signed an a   ement to conduct fair and peaceful election campaigns; the Church's
 iJustice and-eace Commission began investigating alleged violations of this agree-
 ment. In June the Legislative Assembly passed electoral code reforms aimed at en-
 suring fair elections.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Several local human rights organizations, including both church and secular
 groups, operated without restriction or government interference, conducting inves-
 tigations and disseminating their findings. International human rights groups also
 operated without government restriction.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution prohibits discrimination on the basis of race, illegitimacy, social
 class, sex, religion or political views.
 Women.-The Constitution notwithstanding, women generally do not enjoy the
 same economic opportunities as men. Panamanian law goes not recognize property
 in common, and divorced or deserted women are often left destitute. Although the
 Constitution mandates equal pay for equal work, wages paid to women are often
 lower than those for equivalent work performed by men and increase at a slower
 rate. There were credible reports of sexual harassment, threats of firing for preg-
 nancy, and hiring practices based on age and "sexual appeal." Although the Center
 for the Development of the Woman found that Panama has a relatively high rate
 of female enrollment in higher education, many of these graduates are shunted into
 menial and lower-paying jobs; only 5 percent of the managerial positions in the
 country are occupied by women.
 Domestic violence against women continued to be a serious problem. The Center
 for the Development of the Woman reports that the problem is widespread, but
 notes that few reliable statistics exist on the subject, given the tendency of many
 battered and abused women to disguise the true cause of their injuries. Although
 clinic personnel are required by law to report such abuse to the corresponding au-
 thorities for investigation, it is seldom done (except in cases of injuries caused by
 firearms). The Center further claims that police and judicial authorities are reluc-
 tant to interfere because domestic violence is widely seen as a "private" matter not
 subject to legal remedy. Penalties for wife beating and sexual abuse within marriage
 are also light and do not serve as a deterrent. Private groups and government agen-
 cies operated programs to assist victims of such abuse; the Center inaugurated a
 municipal center i August 1992 devoted exlusively to assisting abused women.
 In response to pressure by women's organizations, the Government created a
 Women's Department at the Ministry of Labor in May to report on abuses in the
 workplace as'well as domestic violence. The office receives funding through the Min-
 istry of Labor's Social Welfare Branch; the Legislative Assembly rejecte a request
 
 
 518
 in late 1993 for separate funding in 1994. In early December, the Legislative Assem-
 bly's Children's Commission sent a "Family Code" bill to the full Assembly that
 among other things, allows for property in common in marriages. The measure did
 not pass but it is expected to be taken up when the Assembly reconvenes in 1994.
 Children.-Panama is signatory to the U.N. Convention on the Rights of the
 Child; in 1991 the Convention was made part of Panama's domestic law. The Legis-
 lative Assembiy created a Permanent Commission on Children's Rights in 1992 and
 the Commission drafted several measures in 1993 to protect children, including a
 bill to create a Ministry of the Family. None of the Commission's measures, how-
 ever, have yet been approved by the Assembly. Although the Government was con-
 cerned about the rights of children, budgetary constraints limitprovision of edu-
 cational, health, and social services, particularly in rural areas. There was no uni-
 fied government response to curbing domestic child abuse. The proposed Family
 Code bill (see above) incorporated measures to guarantee the protection and welfare
 of children and to assure the commitment of the Government to safeguarding their
 legal rights.
 In response to the mistreatment ofjuveniles (see Section 1), the CPDH rec-
 ommended creation of a government office to defend children's legal rights, inde-
 pendent of any ministry and funded by a separate budget.
 Indigenous People.-The Constitution seeks to protect the ethnic identity and na-
 tive languages of Panama's population of about 194,000 indigenous people, requiring
 the Government to provide bilingual literacy programs in indigenous communities.
 The Ministry of Government and Justice maintains a Directorate of Indigenous Pol-
 icy. Despite legal protection and formal equality, indigenous people generally had
 relatively higher levels of poverty, disease, malnutrition, and illiteracy than the rest
 of the population.
 The Government provides semiautonomous status to the San Bias reserve, popu-
 lated mainly by indigenous Kuna Indians. The reserve is governed by tribal chiefs,
 who meet in general congress twice a year. During 1993 Kunas objected to squatter
 incursions in areas of Panama province they considered their traditional lands and
 asked the Government to create another Kuna reserve. Ngobe-Bugle Indians in the
 provinces of Bocas del Toro, Veraguas, and Chiriqui also called on the Government
 to create a reserve. Bills to create the Kuna and Ngbe-Bugle reserves and an addi-
 tional indigenous reserve in Darien province were introduced in the Legislative As-
 sembly in mid-1993, but failed to gain approval.
 The National Coordination of Indigenous Peoples of Panama-made up of Kuna,
 Embers and Ngobe-Bugle leaders-sponsored a national convention in November,
 the first since 1978, to discuss strategies to compel the Government to create re-
 serves and foster development in Indian areas. Convention participants produced a
 document calling for the creation of a high-level government commission to imple-
 ment greater government investment in indigenous communities in the areas of
 health and education. President Endara endorsed the document in a meeting with
 indigenous leaders in December. The Government incorporated into domestic law
 the Convention on the Indigenous Peoples' Development Fund during the same
 month. The fund provides economic support to the indigenous peoples of Latin
 America and was among the agreements reached at the second Ibero-Amrerican
 Summit in Madrid in 1992.
 Indigenous groups claimed that the Government will only permit them to take
 part in decisions affecting their lands, cultures, traditions, and the allocation of nat-
 ural resources when it is coerced into doing so. The Governor of Panama province,
 for example, was held hostage for a few hours in April by a group of Kunas who
 argued this was the only means of drawing attention to their demands.
 National/Racial /Ethnic Minorities.-Panama is a racially and ethnically mixed
 country. People of African, Asian, and indigenous descent are politically active,
 but-as noted in Section 3-underrepresented in senior positions in the Government
 and the private sector. The law does not discriminate against any social, religious,
 or cultural group. However, naturalized citizens may not hold certain categories of
 elective office, and the Constitution reserves retail trade to Panamanian citizens.
 While anecdotal evidence indicates that reserving retail trade to Panamanian citi-
 zens originally was directed at Chinese immigrants, government officials have stat-
 ed that it serves as a barrier to keep foreign retail chains from operating in Pan-
 ama. The measure is not enforced in practice; Chinese operate much of the rural
 retail trade.
 While there is no evidence to suggest any organized or government-sponsored dis-
 crimination against the 100,000-strong Chinese community, leaders of this commu-
 nity credibly claimed that Chinese were treated as second-class citizens by society
 at large. The rising Chinese immigration (both legal and illegal) has also raised as-
 similation problems. Many newer arrivals, seeking first to merge into a large and
 
 
 519
 influential urban Chinese community, do not attempt to learn Spanish or to inte-
 grate into Panamanian society at large.
 Religious Minorities.-Panama's sizable evangelical Christian and Jewish commu-
 nities, together making up more than 10 percent of the population, take part in
 nearly alaspects of national life. The same is true of practitioners of other faiths,
 including Muslims, Hindus, and Baha'is. No evidence suggested that religious mi-
 norities were denied the right to practice their faiths or were discriminated against
 based on their beliefs.
 People with Disabilities.-Panama has a number of private organizations to assist
 people with disabilities, the largest of which is the National Association of Disabled
 People founded in 1985. The Ministry of Labor's Department for Disabled Workers,
 createa in 1980, is responsible for placing qualified disabled workers with employ-
 ers. In 1993 the Department was in charge of implementing a June executive order
 which provided employers with monetary incentives for hiring people with disabil-
 ities, as well as an International Labor Organization (ILO) project to provide finan-
 cial assistance to disabled people who wish to start small businesses. Although some
 public buildings and retail stores have access ramps for disabled people, no law or
 regulation compels the use of ramps or other easy-access features in public or pri-
 vate buildings.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-Panamanian private sector workers have the right
 to form and join unions of their choice, subject to registration by the Government.
 According to Ministry of Labor statistics, a proximately 24 percent of the private
 sector workforce is organized; it is estimated that 11 percent of the total employed
 labor force is organized. There are 284 active unions, grouped under 7 confed-
 erations and 48 federations representing approximately 85,000 members. From Jan-
 uary to November, 11 new unions registered with the Government. Some unions for-
 merly affiliated with federations and confederations have chosen to function inde-
 pendently in recent years. Organized labor, which received various benefits from
 and was largely coopted by the military regime, is no longer identified with nor con-
 trolled by the Government or political parties. Union organizations at every level
 may and do affiliate with international bodies.
 Most government workers are not permitted to organize unions or bargain collec-
 tively, but have the right to form representative associations. Workers in certain
 state-owned companies, such as public utilities, are permitted to organize unions,
 and these are among the strongest in Panama. Workers from the National Tele-
 communications Institute marched against government proposals to privatize the
 company; electrical company workers demonstrated repeatedly to oppose the dismis-
 sal of workers fired during a recent reorganization. Workers in other state-owned
 companies do not have the right to form unions but, like those in the rest of the
 public sector, have the right to form employee associations. FENASEP (the umbrella
 organization for the public employee associations) elected its executive committee in
 May and was in the process of reorganizing and reactivating its member associa-
 tions. Of the 47 member associations under FENASEP, 24 were active and approxi-
 mately 20 were in the process of reorganizing.
 Workers, except government workers and those employed by the U.S. Forces and
 the Panama Canal Commission, have the right to strike. Employees of state-owned
 enterprises that were once private, such as the electricity and telecommunications
 companies, have the right to strike when certain criteria are met. For example, a
 notice of intention to strike must be served at least 8 calendar days in advance arid
 strikers must continue working in reduced shifts to prevent public services from
 being completely paralyzed.
 While Law 25 of 1990, enacted following the police uprising in December of that
 year, restricted the right of association by permitting the firing of public sector em-
 ployees participating in actions contrary to "democracy and the Constitution," this
 law expired on December 31, 1991. The Supreme Court reviewed the cases of public
 sector workers fired pursuant to this law and at the end of 1992 ruled that 25 work-
 er should be reinstated. In the remaining 145 cases, the Court determined that the
 dismissal of the workers was legal. Regretting that the parties concerned did not
 reach agreement, the ILO Committee on Freedom of Association (CFA) reiterated
 in November its conclusion that the mass dismissal of trade union leaders and
 workers in the public sector was a serious violation of the right to organize.
 The LO's Committee of Experts (COE) commented on positive developments with
 respect to administrative aspects of trade union organizations and the right to strike
 in 1993. The COE noted th   the Government reduced the number of union docu-
 ments it reviews and limited the effects of the provision of the Code obligating
 unions to allow the Government to inspectt     a  least every  months. Inref-
 
 
 520
 erence to restrictions on the right to strike, the COE noted the passage of Law 2
 of 1993 which restored freedom of association and collective bargaining rights to
 workers in the private sector. In particular, the OE noted favorably t  at w 2
 of 1993 repealed the provision of Law 13 of 1990 that allowed for compulsory arbi-
 tration when the continuation of a strike could result in serious economic problems
 for a business.
 The COE continued to criticize the exclusion of public servants from the right to
 organize and bargain collectively noting that though the Government submitted an
 administrative career bill to the Legislative Assembly, the bill did not contain provi-
 sions establishing the right of public servants to organize. The COE asked the Gov-
 ernment to take measures to address this issue as well as the excessively high num-
 ber of members required to establish a union, the requirement that 75 percent of
 union members be Panamanian nationals, and the automatic removal from office of
 trade union officials dismissed from their jobs. The COE reported the Government's
 reply that it would consider in a tripartite forum possible reform of Labor Code pro-
 visions dealing with numerical and nationality requirements for union formation, as
 well as the automatic removal from office of a trade union officer in the event of
 his dismissal from employment. The COE also noted that Panama's Constitution
 and the Labor Code require that the executive board of a trade union be composed
 exclusively of Panamanians. The ILO judged that government legislation should be
 mv~e more flexible to permit organizations to choose leaders without hindrance and
 should allow foreign workers to hold trade union office.
 Despite the prohibition on striking by public sector employees, there were numer-
 ous strikes in both the private and public sectors in 1993. Since the unions did not
 follow the terms of the Labor Code, the Government considered the strikes illegal.
 From March 8 to April 1, sugar cane cutters of the Estrella Azul sugar company
 struck to demand an increase in the minimum wage. (The strike was unsuccessful
 and 270 employees were fired.) Following a strike by construction workers at the
 La Fortuna dam, Skanska agreed to pay workers a portion of wages accrued during
 the strike as well as previously owed overtime and extra wages. In June banana
 workers of the Chiriqui Land Company called a strike to oppose the Legislative As-
 sembly's consideration of a bill which, among other things, would have enabled the
 company to purchase 5,000 hectares of land from the Government. (Ultimately the
 contract was rejected by the Assembly.) From May 31 to June 4, bus and taxi driv-
 ers called a strike to protest a transport law that established safety requirements
 and passenger rights.
 Panamanian teachers called a work stoppage on August 18 to demand a $100
 monthly salary increase and improved working conditions. After a 64-day stoppage,
 the teachers accepted minimal gains that included neither a salary increase nor pay
 for the time they failed to work. The teachers' unions still hope the Supreme Court
 will overrule President Endara's veto of a legislative compromise that would have
 given the teachers more of their original demands. After a brief September strike
 for payment of retroactive salary increases, National Institute of Telecommuni-
 cations (INTEL) workers secured an agreement from the Government to resolve the
 issue. The increases went to all INTEL workers who had received a performance
 evaluation of "excellent." The Comptroller General had refused to pay the increase
 since 97 percent of the workers had been given this exemplary rating.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The law affords most workers
 the right to organize and bargain collectively, and the right is widely exercised.
 Aside from the representative associations discussed above, most public employees
 are excluded from the right to organize, bargain collectively, and strike. Workers in
 the Colon Free Zone and the banking sector are effectively denied this right through
 the de facto exclusion of unions in these sectors. Unions have been excluded when
 their leaders were fired from their jobs; under the Labor Code, this automatically
 removes them from their ositions as trade union officials. In 1990 and 1991, three
 officials of the National Iank Workers' Union were fired from Banco Cafetero and
 Chase Manhattan Bank for union organizing activities. The Government contended
 that because the union was not legally recognized-even though it had a pplied for
 legal certification in 1972-its leaders were not eligible for reinstatement. The Gov-
 ernment, however, brokered generous severance ayments for the cashiered union
 officials to ameliorate the dispute. Nevertheless, the result is that the workers have
 been left effectively without an organizing force. During 1993, there were no at-
 tempts to organize in the banking sector or the Colon Free Zone.
 On January 13, President Endara signed Law 2 of 1993 restoring full freedom of
 association and collective bargaining rights to workers in the private sector and re-
 pealing sections of Law 13 of 1990. Following more than 18 months of domestic and
 international pressure, the Government amended or repealed those portions of Law
 16 (export processing zones-EPZ's) and Law 13 (collective bargaining) that the ILO
 
 
 521
 viewed as restricting internationally recognized workers' rights. Law 2 calls for the
 resumption of collective bargaining for agreements expiring on or after January
 1993, based on the agreement's original expiration date or the expiration of an ex-
 tension under Law 13. Law 2 also repealed the controversial clause of Law 13 that
 provided for government-mandated arbitration. Over 85 private sector collective bar-
 gaining agreements were successfully concluded in 1993.
 The amended export processing zone law (Law 25 of 1992) reimposed the obliga-
 tion of firms operating in EPZ's to enter into collective bargaining agreements with
 workers. There are three licensed EPZ's in Panama: Isla Margarita, Ojo de Agua,
 and Telepuerto. Isla Margarita is the only EPZ in operation; it has one apparel as-
 sembly facility. No organizational attempts have been made in this facility.
 The Labor Code prohibits antiunion discrimination by employers. Disputes or
 complaints may be brought to a conciliation board in the Ministry of Labor for reso-
 lution. The Labor Code provides a general mechanism for arbitration once concilia-
 tion procedures have been terminated. Under law, employers found guilty of
 antiunion discrimination are required to rehire workers fired for union activity. In
 practice, however, this does not always occur.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The Labor Code prohibits forced
 or compulsory labor, and neither practice was reported during 1993.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The Labor Code prohibits the em-
 ployment of all children under 14 years of age as well as those under 15 if the child
 has not completed primary school; children under 16 cannot work overtime; those
 under 18 cannot perform nightwork. Children between the ages of 12 and 15 may
 perform farm or domestic labor as long as the work is light and does not interfere
 with the child's schooling. Enforcement of these provisions is triggered by a com-
 plaint to the Ministry of Labor, which may order the termination oT illegalemploy-
 ment. Child labor provisions were generally enforced, although less so in the interior
 of the country because of insufficient staff to monitor abuses.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The Labor Code establishes a standard legal
 workweek of 48 hours and provides for at least one 24-hour rest period. It also es-
 tablishes minimum wage rates for specific regions and for most categories of labor.
 Most Panamanian workers employed in urban areas earn the minimum wage or
 above. Nevertheless, Panama has a substantial informal sector, some of whose
 workers earn below the minimum wage. A tripartite commission (government, labor,
 and business) studied the minimum wage in 1992. On January 1, 1993, the mini-
 mum wage was increased 20.5 percent (to $0.94 per hour from $0.78 per hour) in
 the districts of Panama, Colon, and San Miuelito and for workers in financial serv-
 ices. The real purchasing power of the minimum wage increased by 9.3 percent, the
 largest real increase since 1972. The Ministry of Labor is charged with enforcing
 the minimum wage, although it lacks sufficient human and financial resources to
 execute its legal mandate fully. For example, labor leaders in the Canal area allege
 that contractors operating there pay hourly wages below the $2.90 required under
 Decree 52 of 1979 and Decree 3 of 1980 which cover employees of companies in-
 volved in the maintenance, protection, and use of the Canal.
 The Government sets and enforces occupational health and safety standards. An
 occupational health section in the Social Security System (CSS) is responsible for
 conducting periodic inspections of especially hazardous employment sites, such as
 those in in the construction industry, as well as inspecting health and safety stand-
 ards in response to union or worker requests. Workers who file requests for health
 and safety inspections are legally protected from dismissal. They also have the right
 to remove themselves from situations that present an immediate health or safety
 hazard without jeopardizing their employment. They are generally not allowed to
 do so if the threat is not immediate, but may request a health and safety inspection
 to determine the extent and nature of the hazard.
 The Ministry of Labor is responsible for enforcing health and safety violations and
 generally does so. The standards are fairly encompassing and generally emphasize
 safety over long-term health hazards, according to organized labor sources. An ex-
 ample is the dust hazard in the cement and milling industries; health concerns in
 these industries did not appear to be effectively addressed. Panama does not have
 a large industrial sector. The construction industry is the largest employer, and
 available figures in 1993 did not indicate an unusually high rate of accidents.
