PANAMA
The report on Panama is a thorough and accurate account of the human rights situation in that country. It covers the major areas of concern, including the use of excessive force by poUce to break up peaceful demonstrations; the practice of "temporary disappearances" or incommunicado detention which authorities refuse to acknowledge; the arrest of political opponents; abusive conditions and treatment in detention; and the excessive influence erted by the Panama Defense Forces (PDF) over the judiciary. Eadh of these areas is covered with notable care and sensitivity.
One useful addition to this year's report which was absent in the last is the description of the extensive system of administrative courts run by the executive branch with no judicial review. Many of these courts are run by magistrates who are named by mayors and, for the most part, lack any legal or judicial training. The magistrates hear a tremendous volume of civil and criminal complaints. These courts are empowered to order detention of up to one year or to impose Hnes of up to $600. Their decisions can be appealed only to the mayor, not to any judicial authority.
The 1988 report contains tougher language regarding the militar/s dominance of the nominally civilian goverment than has been used previously. Last year's report described then-President Eric Arturo Delvalle as "subservient to the PDF." This year's report describes the government of Delvalle's successor, Manuel SoUs Palma, as a "de facto military dictatorship headed by General Manuel Antonio Noriega." We fully agree with this characterization of the Solis Palma administration, but note that the Delvalle re^me fit the description as well.
Both dvilian presidents came to office as a result of machinations by the PDF after their predecessors were determined to be threats to General Noriega's interests. Delvalle served as Vice President until Noriega forced then-President Nicolas Ardito Barletta to resign for having ordered an investigation
133
Critique
into a political murder allegedly ordered by Noriega in 1985. As president, Del-valle served as faithful e^^cutor of Noriega's wishes, presiding over sweeping repression of a resurgent political opposition in 1987. It was not until grand juries in the United States indicted Noriega on drug-trafGcking charges in February 1988 that Delvalle broke with his erstwhile military benefactor, seeking imsuccessñilly to fìre Noriega as PDF chief. As the State Department notes, Delvalle was himself then sacked by questionable means by the National Assembly. The less harsh treatment of Delvalle than of Solis Palma reflects current U.S. policy which continues to recognize Delvalle as the "lawful, constitutional" president of Panama, despite the fact that he now lives in hiding and carries out no government functions.
134
