 PANAMA
 Panama's Constitution establishes a representative democracy
 with three branches of government, executive and legislative
 branches elected by direct secret vote for 5-year terms, and
 an independent judiciary. The current Government won the May
 1989 elections but was prevented from taking office when the
 military dictatorship of Manuel Noriega annulled the results.
 Elected executive branch officials were sworn into office on
 December 19, 1989, prior to the collapse of the Noriega regime
 in the wake of U.S. military action against his forces on
 December 20. The National Electoral Tribunal subsequently
 announced the previously suppressed results of the legislative
 elections, and most Legislative Assembly members were seated
 on March 1, 1990. Repeat elections were scheduled for early
 1991 for nine seats for which winners could not be determined
 on the basis of available tally sheets.
 In the period immediately following the U.S. military action,
 U.S. forces acted to restore and maintain civil order, filling
 the vacuum created by the dissolution of the Panama Defense
 Forces (PDF). A new civilian-controlled police force,
 responsible to the Minister of Government and Justice, was
 quickly established. Composed mainly of former PDF personnel,
 the Public Force incorporated its first group of new recruits
 in September. The separate organizations that comprise the
 Public Force include the National Police, National Maritime
 Service, and National Air Service. Many ex-members of the PDF
 who were closely identified with the Noriega regime were
 excluded from the Public Force, and the Government continued
 its demilitarization efforts by retiring senior, mid-level,
 and junior former PDF officers during the course of the year.
 There were no charges of grave abuse leveled against the
 Public Force during 1990. However, a small number of former
 PDF personnel, including some who were on active duty with the
 Public Force, engaged in an armed takeover of police
 headquarters on December 4-5 and demanded changes in treatment
 and benefits accorded the police.
 Panama's free enterprise, service-oriented economy began to
 recover from the serious reverses suffered during the Noriega
 regime. Urban unemployment, estimated at approximately 35
 percent in the first quarter of 1990, was reduced to below 20
 percent. Economic growth picked up from an estimated 1 or 2
 percent in the first quarter to some 6 or 7 percent for the
 first half, and remained strong through the close of the
 year. In August the Government adopted a comprehensive
 economic program to promote sustained recovery, increase
 economic efficiency and job opportunities, and restore normal
 relations with domestic and foreign creditors. The Government
 resumed current payments to the International Monetary Fund
 (IMF), World Bank, and Inter-American Development Bank in May,
 and the IMF board approved a Fund-monitored program for Panama
 in September.
 During 1990, the Government made a number of efforts to
 eradicate systems and practices of the Noriega regime that had
 contributed to a record of serious human rights violations,
 including launching a program to educate the police force on
 its responsibilities to the public. Government officials
 maintained communication with domestic and foreign human
 rights organizations, and international organizations were
 welcomed by and had access to the authorities. Principal
 human rights concerns during 1990 included an inefficient and
 overloaded criminal justice system (including prolonged
 
 
 716
 PANAMA
 preliminary detention and pretrial detention), continuing
 credible reports of abuse of detainees by the security forces,
 and severe limitations on union activity in public offices,
 banks, and export processing zones where businesses enjoy
 special incentives. In addition, ongoing government
 investigations of alleged criminal activities by former
 officials of the Noriega regime were accompanied in some cases
 by warrants for preventive detention, other apparently
 punitive actions against those groups, and the dismissal of
 significant numbers of government employees.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing
 There were no cases of political killings reported during
 1990. The Government opened investigations into political
 murders that took place under the military dictatorship.
 These investigations included the 1985 murder of Dr. Hugo
 Spadafora, a former minister of health and fierce critic of
 Noriega, and the reported-summary executions of 11 PDF members
 in the aftermath of the October 1989 military coup attempt
 against Noriega. There also were several arrests of
 ex-government officials or members of the security forces
 accused of participating in extrajudicial executions of
 detainees. Former members of the PDF were held pending
 completion of investigations into their alleged participation
 in the Spadafora killing, and 25 suspects were indicted,
 including former high-ranking officers in the PDF.
 Authorities were investigating other ex-PDF officers or issued
 warrants for their arrest in connection with their alleged
 participation in the summary executions. Judicial proceedings
 were also under way against 18 persons suspected of
 involvement in the murder of U.S. citizen Raymond Dragseth by
 Noriega's security forces during Operation Just Cause.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no confirmed cases of politically motivated
 disappearance during 1990. The Panamanian People's Human
 Rights Coordinating Board (COPODEHUPA) and a second
 organization, the Relatives of Panamanians Killed on December
 20, charged that the Government and U.S. military authorities
 had covered up the disappearance of hundreds or thousands of
 Panamanians allegedly killed or arrested during the December
 1989 military action. Both Panamanian and U.S. authorities
 denied the allegations, and independent investigations by
 international human rights organizations turned up no credible
 evidence to substantiate the charges. The body of a student,
 previously uncounted as a casualty, was exhumed from a shallow
 grave in November 1990 and identified with the assistance of
 government officials. His brother told journalists that the
 student had been shot by pro-Noriega paramilitary personnel on
 December 23, 1989.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 The Constitution prohibits measures which could damage the
 physical, mental, or moral integrity of prisoners or
 detainees, but these prohibitions were sometimes violated in
 practice during 1990. Media and human rights groups charged
 
 
 717
 PANAMA
 that cases of physical abuse of detainees continued to occur.
 In fact, police on occasion gratuitously punched and hit
 detainees in the course of an arrest. The Government
 discontinued the use of solitary confinement cells used by the
 deposed military regime to punish special prisoners.
 Violent disturbances sometimes occurred in the country's penal
 centers because of severe overcrowding and other
 inadequacies. As one step toward correcting existing
 problems, the 1991 budget funded 41 new positions for civilian
 officials in the correctional system. Charges by local groups
 of human rights violations involving police use of shotguns
 loaded with birdshot against student demonstrhtors in August
 1990 prompted the Government to amend guidelines for methods
 of crowd control.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 The Constitution stipulates that all arrests must be carried
 out with a warrant issued by the relevant authorities, except
 when a person is apprehended during the commission of a crime;
 that the detainee is to be informed immediately of the reasons
 for arrest or detention; and that the detainee has a right to
 immediate legal counsel, to be provided by the State for the
 indigent. The Constitution further provides for judicial
 review of the legality of detention'and mandates the immediate
 release of any person found to have been detained or arrested
 illegally. A suspect may not legally be detained for more
 than 24 hours without being charged and brought before a
 magistrate, after which a prosecutor has 60 days to complete
 the investigative file for judicial review. The judge, in
 turn, has an additional 20 to 30 days to render a decision as
 to whether a trial is warranted.
 During 1990, detainees were frequently held for longer than
 the 90-day limit prior to a judicial decision on the merits of
 the case. In addition, many of those whose cases were sent to
 the courts for trial had been held for prolonged periods
 before being sentenced or released. Pretrial detention of
 criminal suspects for as long as 5 years (including holdover
 cases from the Noriega period) was by no means uncommon, and
 qome prisoners had reportedly been held without trial for
 longer than the maximum period established for the crimes of
 which they were accused. Further, prisoners at the Coiba
 Island penal facility reportedly included inmates who had
 completed their sentences and had not been released. As of
 July 30, the 11 jails or detention centers of the Panamanian
 penal system had a combined population of approximately 3,224
 people. Of these, only some 20 percent had been tried and
 sentenced.
 Violations of these rights were due to a shortage of judges,
 prosecutors, public defenders, and investigative personnel,
 their often inadequate professional competence, and a sharp
 increase in an already overwhelming judicial caseload. In the
 first 9 months of 1990, approximately 17,000 criminal
 accusations were added to the overburdened justice system. In
 an effort to address these problems, judicial officers visited
 penal facilities to review pending cases, set trial dates, and
 issue writs of release for those whose sentences were nearing
 completion and those who had already been held for lengthy
 periods without trial. In addition, 4 new judges and 10
 administrative officers were appointed during the year to
 assist in clearing the backlog of pending cases in the Panama
 City area.
 
 
 718;
 
 PANAMA
 Illegal detentions by Panamanian police followed a massive
 government-authorized search for weapons in certain
 residential areas of the capital at the start of the year;
 detainees were held while investigations were conducted to
 support charges brought at a later date. For example, on
 March 9, in the Hollywood area of Panama City, 736 persons
 were arrested, of which 473 were later released. Of the
 remaining 263, 7 were held for robbery; 16 for burglary; 38
 for narcotics trafficking; and 27 for murder. On March 13,
 the National Police conducted a sweep of the San Miguelito
 district and arrested 165 persons. The police conducted
 another sweep on April 6, in the Tocumen and Old Panama
 districts, which resulted in the detention of 152 persons, 44
 of whom were held and charged with various crimes. According
 to the Panamanian Committee for Human Rights, no warrants were
 obtained prior to these sweeps. However, there is no evidence
 that persons who were detained or otherwise affected filed any
 court challenges over the legality of the searches.
 There were no reports in 1990 of forced exile.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The judiciary is one of three separate branches of
 government. The nine Supreme Court magistrates aro appointed
 to 10-year terms by the executive branch and confirmed by the
 Legislative Assembly. The magistrates in turn appoint   -
 Superior Court judges, while the latter appoint lower court
 judges of their respective jurisdictions. Constitutional
 safeguards provide a degree of protection against undue
 political influence in the judicial process, as does the
 judicial career system, which is intended to prevent the
 removal of judges for non-professional-reasons. In 1990 the
 Government replaced many judges for their legal or
 professional abuses during the Noriega years.
 At the local level, a system similar to that of justices of
 the peace is in use. These judges (corregidores) are
 appointed by municipal mayors and exercise jurisdiction over
 minor civil cases in which they may impose sentences of up to
 2 years. The system has been harshly criticized by the legal
 community because these judges need not be (and normally are
 not) attorneys, operate outside the jurisdictional control of
 the courts, and often engage in corrupt practices. Their
 actions are not regulated by the Code of Criminal Procedure,
 nor are their decisions subject to appeal. There is also
 another group of "night" or "police" judges, who have
 jurisdiction over minor cases brought in at night. Like their
 counterparts in the municipal system, judges in the police
 courts are beyond the jurisdiction of the regular courts,
 operate without reference to the criminal code, and lack
 training as attorneys. The Supreme Court in 1990 sought
 legislation to incorporate the municipal courts into the
 regular judicial system, and there was attention given to the
 elimination of the night courts entirely or, at a minimum, to
 bringing them under judicial authority. These reforms were
 awaiting legislative action in 1991. Other procedural
 changes, proposed by the Supreme Court to expedite the
 judicial process, received legislative approval toward the end
 of 1990.
 The Constitution provides that persons charged with crimes
 have the right to counsel and are presumed innocent until
 proven guilty. The Government is constitutionally obliged to
 provide public defenders for the indigent, but this guarantee
 
 
 719
 PANAMA
 is in practice routinely infringed because of the shortage of
 public defense attorneys. In an effort to resolve the
 problem, the Government included funding in its 1991 btdget
 for 15 new public defenders, which would still leave the
 judicial system 5 short of the 36 public defenders required by
 law.
 A new judicial code, which became effective on April 1, 1987,
 provides for public trials based on oral testimony and
 argument. This system was still not in widespread use in
 1990, however, and most trial procedures were conducted with
 written presentations by the prosecution and defense without
 the presence of the accused.
 As of the end of 1990, there were no persons imprisoned in
 Panama specifically on the basis of political beliefs or
 opposition to the Government. Approximately 15 to 20 persons
 arrested in the wake of.the December police uprising were
 being held on charges of consipiracy against the Government
 and intent to violate the order of the state.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The Constitution provides for the inviolability of the home
 and communications. Personal documents may not be examined or
 a private residence entered and searched except by written
 order of a competent authority for a specific purpose. There
 were no known violations or complaints of violation of
 correspondence in 1990. Critics of the Government charged
 that the Intelligence Directorate of the Public Force tapped
 the telephones of opposition politicians in 1990 in violation
 of an absolute constitutional prohibition against such
 activity. The Government admitted tapping some telephones and
 interpreted the Constitution as permitting such measures in
 situations involving national security.
 The Panamanian Committee for Human Rights (CPDH) accused the
 Government and U.S. military authorities of conducting illegal
 searches, during the period immediately after the U.S.
 military action and the cessation of hostilities, in
 connection with massive anticrime sweeps against low-income
 residential areas. The CPDH alleged that the searches were
 made without justification or sufficient evidence and were
 conducted in a selective, discriminatory manner. The
 Government responded that the sweeps were connected with
 efforts to round up some of the many weapons that were known
 to have been distributed to residents in these areas by the
 Noriega regime and were made on the basis of information
 supplied to Panamanian law enforcement officials and deemed to
 be credible.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Panama's Government declared its commitment to press freedom
 soon after taking office. Early in 1990 the President issued
 an executive decree canceling a particularly severe gag law
 which had been imposed by the Noriega regime. In March a
 commission was formed representing the press, Government,
 church, and universities to produce recommendations on what,
 if any, press legislation was needed. The Government gave
 assurances that the group's recommendations would be made
 available for public discussion prior to any decisions in the
 
 
 720
 PANAMA
 matter. By year's end, a draft press law developed by the
 Ministry of Government and Justice had been presented to a
 committee for revision and was to be submitted to the Cabinet
 Council and Legislative Assembly in 1991. The Government,
 while professing to support a free press, was determined to
 enforce some regulation of the news media. Among the
 provisions of the draft law are requirements that would
 restrict the practice of journalism to Panamanian citizens
 with a university degree in journalism or in social
 communication with a specialization in journalism. Also in
 1990, President Endara and other officials filed criminal
 libel charges against several journalists and briefly detained
 one, in accordance with existing Panamanian law.
 Three daily newspapers closed by the military regime resumed
 publication in 1990. A fourth daily, which had been seized by
 the military regime and run by its supporters, was returned to
 the original owners and commenced publishing-under their
 control. A fifth daily, the publisher of which was an ally of
 the Noriega regime, continued to operate without impediment.
 A number of newspapers in opposition to the current
 administration published freely, if sporadically. Foreign
 journalists worked and traveled throughout Panama, and the
 population had access to foreign communications media.
 Three commercial television stations-two of which were
 national networks--operated in Panama in 1990, as did an
 educational station .located at the University of Panama.
 Negotiations continued over the resumption of broadcasting by
 a fourth commercial station, also a national network, which
 had ceased to broadcast shortly after the removal of the
 Noriega regime. Satellite broadcasts.were available by cable
 to subscribers. Panama has 82 privately owned-radio stations,
 which broadcast a wide variety of political and other
 commentaries and perspectives.
 The Government, which assigns operational frequencies to
 electronic media through the Ministry of Government and
 Justice, canceled the licenses for use of four radio
 frequencies in September, citing violations of legal
 technicalities. The Panamanian Radio Broadcasters Association
 said the decision was unconstitutional; the-affected stations'
 owners claimed the action was punitive, prompted by their
 links to the Noriega regime. The criticism appears justified
 because the Government has failed to punish the same technical
 violations by owners allied with the current Government.
 In 1990, academic freedom was recognized at both public and
 private universities; instructors and professors were free to
 teach with no restrictions or limitations other than those
 that for reasons of public order are established in the
 university charter.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 The Constitution provides for the rights of peaceful assembly
 and-association, and in 1990 the Government generally
 respected those rights. No authorization was needed for
 outdoor-assembly, although prior notification for
 administrative purposes was required. Panamanians had the
 right to form and organize political parties, associations,
 and professional or civic groups of any type without
 government interference; but the right to organize unions was
 seriously restricted (see Section 6).
 
 
 PANAMA
 c. Freedom of Religion
 The Constitution provides for religious freedom. During 1990
 there were no governmental restrictions on the free exercise
 and proselytization of religious beliefs. Although Roman
 Catholicism is predominant, there is no state religion.
 Religious leaders continued to speak out during the year on
 public issues and criticized various government actions
 without threat of retaliation or punishment. Religious
 ministers are constitutionally prohibited from holding public
 office except as related to social assistance, education, or
 scientific research.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 The Constitution grants Panamanians the right to move freely
 within the country, and to emigrate and return. These rights
 were generally respected in 1990. Panamanian human rights
 organizations criticized the imposition of a curfew and the
 installation of checkpoints that the Government of Panama and
 U.S. forces imposed immediately following the U.S. military
 action. These measures, lifted at the end of January, were
 defended by the Government as necessary to ensure public
 safety in the face of sharply increased crime and civil
 disorder in Panama City during that period.
 Panama traditionally has provided refuge to persons of widely
 differing ideological persuasion, along with those seeking
 safety from civil conflict in their home countries. In 1990
 there were no known cases of forcible repatriation of refugees
 or asylees. The Government in 1990 refused safe conduct to a
 small number of former officials of the Noriega regime who had
 claimed asylum in foreign embassies, claiming that they must
 stand trial in Panama on charges of nonpolitical criminal
 activity. However, four participants in the December seizure
 of police headquarters who sought asylum in embassies were
 permitted to leave the country, and the other three asylees in
 this category were expected to depart early in 1991.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 The Constitution-provides for a representative democracy with
 direct popular election of the President, Vice Presidents, and
 legislators every 5 years. Technical arrangements for and
 supervision of elections is the responsibility of the National
 Elentoral Tribunal, headed by three magistrates, one nominated
 by each of the three branches of government.
 Suffrage is a right and duty for all citizens; there is no
 penalty for noncompliance. Voting is by secret ballot and is
 free, equal, and universal. Panamanians enjoy the right to
 join any political party, to propagate their views, and to
 vote for candidates of their choosing without interference
 from the Government. These rights were-respected by the
 Government in 1990.
 Parties representing a wide spectrum of political views were
 active in Panama in 1990. The Christian Democratic Party,
 National Republican Liberal Movement (MOLIRENA), Arnulfista
 Party, and Authentic Liberal Party, members of the ruling
 coalition, held a majority of the seats in the Legislative
 Assembly. The remaining seats were occupied by members of the
 Democratic Revolutionary Party (PRD), the ruling party during
 
 
 722
 PANAMA
 the period of military government. The PRD and other parties
 that had supported the Noriega regime continued to operate, as
 opposition parties. In order to obtain legal recognition and
 participate in elections, a new party must present a petition
 of 30,000 signatures representing all the country's provinces.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 Several local human rights organizations, including church and
 secular groups, operated without restrictions in Panama in
 1990. These organizations carried out a full range of
 activities, including investigations and dissemination of
 findings. The Government invited the Inter-American
 Commission on Human Rights (IACHR) of the Organization of
 American States to visit Panama in July 1990. Leading members
 of the executive branch, including the President and Foreign
 Minister, met with members of the IACHR and with leaders of
 domestic human rights groups. Foreign-nongovernmental human
 rights organizations were also active in Panama. Both
 domestic and foreign-based organizations were frank in their
 criticisms of existing problems. For its part, the Government
 was sensitive to allegations of abuse and endeavored to
 investigate the charges and institute remedial training
 programs for public employees and the police.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 The Constitution prohibits discrimination on the basis of
 race, illegitimacy, social class, sex, religion, or political
 views. Owing to traditional bias and general economic
 conditions, Panamanian women generally do not enjoy the same
 economic opportunities as men. Panamanian law does not
 recognize community property, and divorced or deserted women
 are often left destitute. Although the Cohstitution mandates
 equal pay for equal work, wages paid to women are lower than
 those for equivalent work performed by men and increase at a
 slower rate.
 According to local officials of the Catholic Church, violence
 against women and children in the family is a serious problem;
 however, there are few published statistics. A 1985-86 study
 by Dr. Carmen Anthony and Gladys Miller, funded jointly by the
 Government and the University of Panama entitled "Exploratory
 Study on the Physical Mistreatment of the Panamanian Woman,"
 used data gathered from hospitals. The study concluded that
 the problem was serious and needed to be addressed by the
 Government and social agencies. Both the Catholic Church and
 the Ministry of Social Welfare have programs directed at the
 problem. Church officials state that their program mainly
 serves poorer women, because upper class women tend to seek
 private medical assistance.
 Panama is a racially mixed country. The traditional monopoly
 of power by persons of European descent effectively ended with
 the ouster of the civilian government by the military in
 1968. People of mixed race are politically active and serve
 *in senior civilian positions in the Public Force, but in 1990
 were underrepresented in senior positions in the Government.
 The law does not discriminate against any social, religious,
 or cultural group. However, naturalized citizens may not hold
 
 
 PANAMA
 certain categories of elective office, and the Constitution
 reserves retail trade to native Panamanians.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 In general, Panamanian workers have the right to form and join
 unions of their own choosing, but several important areas are
 excluded from this right, including most of the public sector,
 the banking industry, and the Colon Free Zone. Workers in the
 public sector who are not permitted to unionize do have the
 right to form representative associations, and several of
 these exist. Approximately 40 to 45 percent of Panamanian
 workers are organized into nearly 300 unions, which are
 grouped under 5 labor centrals and several independent
 federations. Organized labor, largely coopted by the previous
 regime, is no longer identified with or controlled by the
 Government or political parties. Unions are permitted to
 affiliate with international bodies, and the three major
 international trade union organizations-the International
 Confederation of Free Trade Unions (ICFTU), the World
 Confederation.of Labor, and the Communist-controlled World
 Federation of Trade Unions--have affiliates among the
 Panamanian unions. There are no known restrictions on travel
 abroad or attendance at International Labor Organization (ILO)
 conferences. Foreign representatives of international labor
 organizations are free to carry out their professional
 activities in Panama.
 Workers, except in the public sector, the banking industry,
 the Colon Free Zone, and those employed by U.S. forces and the
 Panama Canal Commission, have the right to strike. Several.
 minor strikes occurred following the new Government's
 annulment of the previous regime's decree banning strikes.
 Among these was a strike by port workers at Bocas del Toro,
 which was settled peacefully. There were also a number of
 worker protests, including 1-day protests by public employees
 and teachers demanding back pay and raises and another in
 which truckers blocked border customs posts. Government-labor
 tensions led to a general strike on December 5, which was
 followed by significant dismissals of union or association
 officials in various state enterprises and ministries.
 Changes in labor law and practice (see Section 6 b.)
 associated with government efforts to reform the economy
 created increasing labor unrest in 1990. The Government
 argued that these modifications were essential to attract
 investment and strengthen the country's ability to compete on
 the world market and provide employment opportunities. The
 unions contended that the changes violated their rights and
 deprived them of established benefits; the unions were
 supported in their claims by the American Federation of Labor
 and Congress of Industrial Organizations (AFL-CIO) and the
 ICFTU, both of which wrote letters of protest to the
 Government. The situation was exacerbated when the unions
 staged a mass demonstration on December 4 and a general strike
 on December 5. These events coincided with the forcible
 seizure of police headquarters by disgruntled current and
 former police officers the evening of December 4. The
 Government responded by submitting proposed legislation to
 dismiss any public employee who participated in the strike.
 In public statements by the executive branch and the text of
 the bill as originally drafted, the strike was described as
 neither justified nor "contemplated by law" and was explicitly
 linked to the December 4-5 seizure of police headquarters.
 The law as approved made no mention of the strike or the
 alleged complicity in the seizure of the police
 
 
 724
 PANAMA
 headquarters but authorized the dismissal of any public
 employee, including union officials, who engage in acts
 against democracy and the constitutional order. The law
 provided no effective means to appeal such firings. The
 Government dismissed nearly 1,000 public employees, many of
 them union officials, for their participation in the December
 5 strike. At year's end, the dismissal law (Law 25) faced
 constitutional challenge before the Supreme Court.
 The Government did not follow legally mandated procedures to
 support its claim that the strike was illegal. Under labor
 law, only a court may determine the legality of a strike, and
 such a ruling was neither sought nor issued. Additionally,
 prior existing law gives employees 24 hours to return to the
 job after a ruling that a strike is illegal and reserves
 disciplinary actions to strike participants who do not obey
 the court order.
 Consideration of Panama at the ILO in 1990 showed a marked
 contrast: complaints that had arisen-under the previous
 regime were satisfactorily resolved by the current Government,
 just as new complaints were being filed against that
 Government. Among the former were two longstanding complaints
 filed with the Committee on Freedom of Association (CFA), one
 by a group of labor organizations, the other by the
 International Organization of Employers. In both cases, the
 current Government took action to resolve the issues to the
 full satisfaction of the CFA, which praised the Government for
 its cooperation.
 The new complaints included one filed with the CFA in April
 1990, by the ICFTU, on behalf of the public sector
 associations (FENESEP), charging the Government'with"
 violations of public employee rights, including massive
 dismissals and detentions, closure of the union offices, and a
 campaign to pressure FENESEP members to resign their union
 membership; According to the complaint, the Government
 campaign to fire public employee association members was
 particularly aimed at persons in leadership positions who had
 actively collaborated with the Noriega regime. The firings
 were based on the Government's "Decree No. 1," relating to
 participation in so-called "dignity battalions" and "defense
 committees," paramilitary organizations created by Noriega-to
 further his own partisan interests. Another complaint was
 filed at the ILO in December in response to the promulgation
 of Law 25 and the further dismissals of public employees.
 The 1990 report of the ILO's Committee of Experts (COE)
 repeated earlier criticisms of Panamanian law, including: the
 requirement of 50 workers to form a union; the requirement
 that 75 percent of union members be Panamanian; automatic
 removal from office of union officials who are dismissed from
 their jobs; the exclusion of public servants from coverage by
 the labor code and, consequently, from the right to organize
 and bargain collectively. The COE noted the assurances of the
 new Government that it would fully apply ILO Convention 87 on
 freedom of association, which Panama has ratified. However,
 the Government has not corrected any of the provisions
 objected to by the ILO.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 Panamanian law provides workers with the right to organize and
 bargain collectively, but these rights do not apply to workers
 
 
 PANAMA
 in most of the public sector, in the Colon Free Zone, or in
 the banking sector. Despite these exclusions, the Government
 has allowed the formation of employee associations. In
 addition, Law 8 permits the formation of unions and collective
 bargaining in a few state enterprises, including the telephone
 and electric companies. However, Law 8 is currently under
 constitutional challenge before the Supreme Court. The
 challenge, presented by a private citizen, asserts that Law 8,
 among other alleged constitutional violations, creates a
 privileged class of public employees, contrary to the
 principle of equal pay for equal work.
 The right of collective bargaining was further restricted by
 laws enacted by the legislature late in the year affecting the
 right of collective bargaining. The first law, passed in
 October, extended existing collective bargaining agreements
 for I to 2 years beyond their.expiration dates, unless there
 is joint agreement by owner-management and employees to
 negotiate a new agreement; relieved new companies and
 companies without a collective bargaining agreement from the
 obligation to bargain for 3 years; authorized the Government
 to suspend collective agreements for up to 6 months "when
 special circumstances" prevent continued operations; and
 authorized the Government to order binding arbitration of any
 disputes that "cause serious economic difficulties." The
 other law, passed in December, relieved employers in the newly
 established export processing zones of the obligation to
 bargain for the first 4 years of operation; imposed binding
 arbitration of-certain disputes; and relaxed restrictions on
 layoffs and expanded the grounds on which employers can fire
 workers. Both laws entered into force before the end of 1990.
 The law prohibits antiunion discrimination by employers.
 Disputes or complaints may be brought to a conciliation board
 in the Ministry of Labor for resolution. Nevertheless, there
 are growing numbers of complaints of harassment of union
 members employed in the private sector intended to promote
 resignations from or refusal to join unions. Labor leaders
 cite cases in which certain businesses with organized work
 forces used the brief period of public disorder in late 1989
 to close down operations entirely and dismiss all workers,
 later reopening with new employees and no union. Employees at
 one of Panama's largest export industries, which operates
 under the modified labor regulations designed to promote
 investment, report that workers are routinely dismissed
 immediately prior to the completion of 2 years' work, when
 they would become permanent employees and receive full labor
 code protection; that efforts to establish a union have been
 met by the dismissal of many union organizers and
 sympathizers; and that the Ministry of Labor has rejected
 arbitrarily the group's request to form a union. The
 rejection is being appealed in the courts.
 The law does not provide a mechanism for arbitration, although
 a tripartite (labor, management, and government) negotiating
 system was in use in 1990 and in practice made the Government
 the final arbiter. Aside from the mandatory arbitration
 provided for in the export zone legislation, the Government
 instituted generally applicable mandatory arbitration in cases
 of "severe economic disruption" to an enterprise or at the
 request of labor. The vagueness of the grounds for mandatory
 arbitration was of concern to labor, which considered the
 ambiguity to be a means of suppressing the right to strike.
 
 
 726
 PANAMA
 c. Prohibition Against Forced or Compulsory Labor
 The labor code prohibits forced or compulsory labor, and
 during 1990 there were no reports of either practice.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 The labor code prohibits the employment of children under the
 age of 14, or under the age of 15 if the child has not
 completed primary school. The code also prohibits the
 employment of persons under the age of 18 in night work.
 Children between the ages of 12 and 14 may perform farm or
 domestic labor as long as the work is light and does not
 interfere with the child's schooling. Enforcement of these
 provisions is to be triggered by a complaint to the Ministry
 of Labor, which can order the illegal employment to be
 terminated. However, because of continuing economic problems
 in 1990, some children were being employed in various
 businesses in violation of existing law.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 Panama has a comprehensive labor code which, in theory,
 provides extensive rights and benefits to workers. Under the
 code, the maximum hours in the workweek are 48. The law
 establishes a minimum wage rate for most categories of labor
 and requires substantial bonuses for overtime work. The
 minimum wage in urban areas is 77 cents per hour ($148 per
 month based on the 48-hour workweek), although a recent study
 indicated that real average monthly earnings were somewhat
 higher ($162). The study also suggested that the minimum
 monthly income to provide basic support for a family of four
 was $400. Hence, even with both adults working at the minimum
 wage, the income would be insufficient to provide a decent
 standard of living. At the end of 1990, the Government was
 studying the minimum wage with the intent of revising it, but
 no results of the study were yet available.
 The labor code also establishes numerous health and safety
 standards for all places of employment. The Ministry of
 Labor, which is responsible for insuring that employers comply
 with these regulations, has not deployed enough inspectors and
 resources to enforce these laws effectively, with the result
 that violations occur frequently. The continuing poor
 economic situation in 1990 deterred many employees from
 reporting violations of the labor code, for fear of losing
 their jobs.
 
 
 727
