 PANAMA
 Panama's Constitution proyides for a representative democracy
 with direct popular'election of the president, legislators,
 and municipal representatives; an'independent judiciary; and a
 broad range of civil and individual rights. Elections in 1984
 were the first national elections since a 1968 coup in which
 the military overthrew a civilian government. .After a
 controversial.4ote count marked by irregularities.'and by
 oppositioncharqes'.of fraud, a coalition of civillan political
 parties backed by the Pinam~nian Defense F6rces (PDF) took
 office, with Nicolas Ardito-Barletta assuming the presidency.
 Barletta resigned in 1985 under pressuie from the PDF and
 political leaders of the governing coalition. First Vice
 President Eric Arturo Delvalle then assumed the presidency.
 While theConstitution provides for civilian rule, in practice
 the PDF dominabes-overnment and national politics..
 In early June, ihe.PDF's retired Deputy Commander, Colonel
 Roberto Diaz-Herrera, made serious charges against PDF
 Commander Gene)alI-Manuel.Antonio Noriega and others.inthe
 PDF, including involvement in the still'unresolved 1985 murder
 of regime cF t.icHug "Spadafora,'election fraud in 1984, and
 general colriitioh.' These'ac6stions sparked regime
 opponents, led by an organization called the Civilian
 Crusade--a coalition of pivip.clubs, professional and business
 associations-"ndq'hurchgroups-into ftaging a series of
 peaceful street gatherings and parades to demand Noriega's
 ouster. The polit.cal. unrest which followed persisted
 throughout.,phe. kmaiider of  he'year. While the Government
 tolerated sQ'e f thee.d'emonstrations, it frequently broke
 them up by* fgre"i4cluding.'he use.of tear'gas, truncheons,
 and shotgub   _H" hndreds of-dem6nstraorswere injured, some
 serious'lym, by.shotguh 'pellets, and.hundreds more were detained
 for participating in demonstrations. Armed bands of
 progovernment civilians also attacked opposition car caravans
 and marches. In some instances, suspected government- agents
 in plainclothes were involved in attacks on demonstrators.
 Eyewitnesses reported that progovernment civilians were
 responsible for extensive property destruction and two deaths
 from gunfire.
 In June the Government imposed a state of emergency which
 suspended kgy individgal liberties for 19 days. Two
 oppositioni radio statio is  rere 6losed during.the emergency,
 and in July the Government closed virtually all opposition
 media. The.Government has ignored.due process at. times and
 has often held detainees incommunicado. The Government failed
 to provi'de a'mephanism to provide information on arrests to
 family members and the public. This lack of information led
 many to' kear that friends and family were missing or dead. It
 has also used arrest war ants o-n exaggerated charges to
 intimidate opposition and Civilian Crusade activists.
 Government officials claimed demonstrators broke store windows
 and burned tires and cars. In some instances members of the
 PDF were injured by stone-throwing demonstrators.
 In December, President Delvalle pardoned a number of persons
 accused'of political offenses. In the final week of 1987 the
 LegislativeAssembly issued an amnesty covering certain
 political crlmds-illegedly committed between June 21 and
 December 24. The lattbr move was also'intended to permit
 banned bppositiop newspapers and radio, stations to reopen in
 the first week of 1988.
 
 
 564
 PANAMA
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 At least two people were killed in 1987 as a result of
 political unrest, both of them at the hands of apparent
 progovernment elements. The first of these deaths occurred
 August 30, when a young man was killed by gunshot while
 driving a delivery truck which became caught up in an
 opposition caravan. It was reported that assailants fired
 randomly, killing the victim. Noting the presence of
 government coalition legislators and the Mayor of San
 Miguelito at the scene of the melee, oppositionists charged
 that members of the Government directed the attack on the
 opposition demonstration. The Government denied this charge.
 The second death occurred September 13, when armed men in
 civilian clothing opened fire on a Crusade-sponsored march,
 fatally wounding a middle-aged Crusade activist. Eyewitnesses
 claimed that off-duty PDF members in civilian clothes were
 among those firing at the crowd.
 While the Government's responsibility for these killings
 cannot be firmly established, circumstantial evidence
 suggests, at a minimum, that they were the work of
 progovernmment gangs. In addition, there were reports
 concerning the composition of armed progovernment bands which
 opened fire on opposition car caravans in other instances.
 Eyewitnesses have identified radical leaders of progovernment
 political parties as members of these groups. A third man was
 fatally shot July 26 by a member of the PDF, but few consider
 his death to have been politically motivated.
 b. Disappearance
 No disappearances were reported in 1987.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 In 1987 the PDF repeatedly responded to peaceful antigovernment
 demonstrations with shotgun fire, rubber truncheons, and tear
 gas. Some observers estimate that over 1,000 people sustained
 birdshot injuries during unrest between June and November.
 Six people sustained serious eye injuries, including blindness
 in at least one case, and seven suffered serious injury to
 internal organs. Birdshot victims included a 13-year-old who
 suffered serious eye injuries when he was shot during
 demonstrations in early June. On Jyne 11, two girls, a
 14-year-old and'a 9-year-old, suffered serious internal
 injuries when they were fired at by PDF patrol units. The PDF
 repeatedly fired tear gas at crowds in the streets, into homes,
 and, in one case, into a church.
 Panamanians detained during opposition demonstrations reported
 that they suffered degrading treatment while in jail. They
 gave accounts of strip-searches, conducted in a harsh and
 degrading manner, upon arrival at the jail and being robbed of
 most possessions. Members of the PDF routinely beat political
 demonstrators upon arrest, with occasionally serious
 consequences, including trauma to internal organs. In
 mid-July, there were mass arrests of opposition demonstrators
 
 
 565
 PANAMA
 at a rally whi6h the Government had banned. Those arrested at
 this time were apparently deliberately placed with hardened
 criminals, resultihg in severe beatings and robbery. Common
 criminals str.ipped the demonstrators down to their underwear,
 robbing'thet of their clothing and jewelry. 'Prisoners
 complained that'authorities failed to remove and register
 valuables and purposely placed hardened ciiminals in the'same
 cells as demonstrators to frighten and intimidate them.
 Throughout their stays, which lasted in most cases not more
 than 4 days,'many detaifiees were subjected to repeated threats
 that bhy wduld be sexually abused and that they would be sent
 to Coiba Island, a penal facility for'hardened criminals.
 Many detainees reported ithessing a bruEal homosexual attack,-
 which strengthened the credibility of rape threats by common
 criminals.who'shared cells with the demonstrators. The
 Government' fiimlj denied charge.s that" nyone was mistreated
 while in jail but admittedthat common criminals had access to
 the demonstra'tors a       ..  .
 Panama City's jail, built-in 1925 to &ccommodate 225, housed
 over 700 criziinal prisbnefs at midyear.' Following roundups of
 hundreds of opposition demonstrators and bystanders in July,
 jail conditions deteri6rated under the strain of severe'
 overcrowding. 'rison authorities-forced'about 500 persons
 into a detention cell suifable for less than 100 prisoners.
 This lack of space forced'detineds to stand; sit* or -squat,
 making s]eep-imIosible.'In additiod, the sanitation
 facili~ies were  overtaied, resulting in prisoners being forced
 to stand'oe-sit in their dwn feces. rAcc6rding to Panamanian
 press reporEs','7ob" dommon crimial'*who weie serving sentences
 in vari&6o  j ail;'-afid others whose legaAl processes had been at
 a standset�l fof a lng period were' released i'n December.
 Several persons claimed that they were E6rfuied aC the Carcel
 Modelo by members of the G-2 military intelligence unit,
 including one repQrt '6f elegtric 'shock befng adniinistered to
 sensitive parts of the body.
 d. Arbitrary Ariest, Detention;" Exile, or Forced Labor"
 The Constitutioh establishes the right of a detainhed person to
 a judicial dedrimiination-of the'legality of his detention'and
 requires arrest warrants, except for persons arrested during
 the commission'of a crime. A suspect mai'not legally be.
 detained for more than 24 hours'without being charged and
 brought before a magistrate. The police are required to.
 inform accused persons immediately of the reasons for their
 detention;' During the 19-day state of emergency decreed in
 June, these rights were formally suspended, and they were
 often disregarded after the state of emergency was lifted.
 After being charged with a criminal offense; an accused person
 may be held for as long as necessary for authorities to
 conduct the investigation and bring the case to trial. The
 judicial system suffers from a chronic backlog, frequently
 resulting.fh incarceration periods of up to 3 years for
 prisoners awaiting trial. Time spent in jail awaiting trial
 counts toward completion of the final sentence for those
 convicted.
 Most of the hundreds of people detained during opposition
 demonstrations were arrested openly and charged with
 disrupting public order, sedition, or other related offenses.
 Many were apparently never formally charged. Most of these
 protestors were held in-detention for periods of time ranging
 from a few hours to 4 days. Occasionally, protestors were
 
 
 566
 PANAMA
 held for longer periods. Authorities told some detainees they
 had been sentenced to terms of several months in the Coiba
 Island penitentiary, but all demonstrators were eventually
 released and charges were dropped. In addition to mass
 arrests during demonstrations, nearly 100 people were singled
 out for politically motivated harassment ranging from arrest
 warrants on obviously exaggerated charges to incommunicado
 detention.
 Colonel Roberto Diaz Herrera, the retired Deputy Commander of
 the PDF, and 45 followers were detaihed in late July following
 a PDF raid on Diaz's Panama City residence. Most were released
 without charge, but Diaz and seven bodyguards were charged
 with attempting the armed overthrow of the Government. They
 were held in pretrial detention on this charge, a nonbailable
 offense, to which they pleaded guilty December 8. Diaz and
 his followers were each sentenced to 5-year terms, but Diaz
 departed Panama for Venezuela in late December after receiving
 a pardon. Of his seven codefendants, six were granted
 provisional liberty after sentencing, and a seventh remained
 in custody at the end of the year on a homicide investigation.
 In another well-known case, five leaders of the Civilian
 Crusade fled Panama after remaining in hiding for weeks to
 avoid arrest on charges of armed attempt to overthrow the
 Government. They were originally charged with sedition
 (without arms), a bailable offense. However, the Government,
 after issuance of the original warrants, subsequently searched
 Crusade headquarters, and, although no arms were found (only
 an unattributed pamphlet describing how to make a molotov
 cocktail), the charges were increased to the more serious (and
 non-bailable) offense of armed.sedition. The Crusade leaders
 fled Panama rather than face prosecution and likely pretrial
 incarceration on these charges.
 On October 20, Alberto Conte, a prominent advertising
 executive and political activist, was arrested at Omar
 Torrijos Airport upon his return from the United States, where
 he had testified regarding the political crisis in Panama
 before a Senate panel. Conte was immediately taken to night
 court and charged with'sedition without benefit of legal
 counsel. He was released after several days without charges.
 On December 16, President Delvalle announced plans for a
 general pardon or amnesty for alleged political offenders,
 stating that those who left the country for political reasons
 during the last half of 1987 could return. The details of
 this proposal were, however, unclear as of the end of 1987.
 In late December the Government published a list of those
 granted amnesty, which had missing from it some of the
 Government's foremost opponents.
 Critics of the Government claim that because the judicial
 branch is heavily influenced by the PDF, judicial review in
 political cases does not provide effective safeguards against
 arbitrary government actions.
 Other arbitrary arrests also took place in 1987. Aurelio
 Barria, president of the Chamber of Commerce and leader of the
 Crusade was detained in June by the PDF, who placed a hood
 over his head, strip-searched him, and verbally abused him
 before his release. Barria was charged with no criminal
 offense at this time. On September 13, in violation of his
 diplomatic immunity, a senior U.S. Embassy officer was
 detained by the PDF while observing an opposition demonstration
 
 
 567
 PANA4A
 and was held incommunicado for 8 hours. On October 7, nine
 U.S. servicemen and a U.S. citizen employee of the Panama
 Canal Commission (the.U.S. Government -agency created in
 implementation of the 1977 Panama Canal Treaty to operate the
 Panama Canal through 1999) were arbitrarily detained in Panama
 City without ciiminal charges. At least one of the U.S.
 servicemen was beaten upon arrest. All of those arrested in
 the incident were-Teleased without charges after having been
 held incommunicado'for approximately 10 hours. On October 20,
 Roberto Arosemena Jaen, a University of Panama professor and
 political activist, was arrested, beaten, -threatened with
 death, 'nd accused of planning terrorist acts. He was taken
 .to the penal facility at:-Coiba Island-without charge, and
 after 10 days' incarceration, was'released without explanation.
 Some 50 people picked up in connection with an October 22
 rally attempt by the Civilian Crusade were also sent to Coiba
 Island. Cases such as these. have led -to the widespread belief
 that the judicial system is politicized and is.not -independent
 of the Government. Oppositionists charge the judicial branch
 with collaborating with the PDF to silence criticism of the
 regime.
 Forced labor is not practiced.
 .e. Denial of Pair Public Trial
 Although the right to a fair trial was suspended temporarily
 during the state of emergency, it is provided for in the
 Constitution-and persons charged with crimes under normal
 circumstances are presumed innocent until proven guilty, and
 have the right to counsel. Under the law, a suspect may be
 .detained fox no longer than 24 hours without being charged and
 brought, be)o're a magistrate. After being charged, a person
 may b ;Jgl for as long-as zmecessary for authorities to
 conduetn investigation and bring the case to trial. In
 practice, the judicial system usually meets the requirement to
 charge an arrested.person within 24 hours, but criminal case
 backlogs, have. resulted ihn.6ng- delays--usually months,
 sometimes years--for cases to-,reach trial. The local bar
 asSbciation and-national university law school offer legal
 counsel at nominal fees. "The Government provides public
 defenders for indigent defendants but.only after the pretrial
 phase. The new judicial~cdde, which became effective April 1,
 provides for public trials based on oral testimony and
 .argument. Because the new-system has not yet been fully
 implemented, most trial procedures are still conducted with
 written presentations by the prosecution and defense, without
 the presence of the accused. The documents produced are
 available for examination by both sides. Ingeneral, the
 burden of proof tests on the pro~ecutor. The right to appeal
 a verdict is available to the prosecution and the defense.
 The Constitution provides a number of safeguards designed to
 keep the judiciary independent: the SupremeCourt is charged
 with upholding the Constitution and laws; magistrates are
 barred frdm simultaneously holding other public offices or
 otherwise participating in politics; Supreme Court magistrates,
 who are nominated by the President and ratified by the
 Legislative Assembly; nominate all lower court judges. The
 Attorney General, appointed by the President and ratified by
 the Legislative Assembly, appoints superior court district
 attorneys, who in turn nominate circuit district attorneys.
 In practice, however, these safeguards have not resulted in an
 independent juaiciary. Credible observers charge that the
 
 
 568
 PANAMA
 most serious obstacle to obtaining a free and fair trial lies
 not in the system as it is designed but in the influence of
 the PDF over the judiciary. They maintain that the PDF not
 only interferes with the outcome of specific trials but that
 in practice, it appoints judges and transfers or dismisses
 those judges who are not responsive to PDF interests.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 In general, privacy of the family is respected, membership in
 political organizations is voluntary, and people are free to
 associate with whomever they choose. The 19-day state of
 emergency in June suspended the right of the inviolability of
 private correspondence. Although that right has been formally
 restored, some opponents of the Government charge that mail is
 tampered with or diverted and that telephone calls are
 monitored. Under the Constitution, judicial warrants must be
 issued before officials may enter homes. Because the judicial
 system is heavily influenced by the PDF, warrants to search
 homes of Government opponents have been freely granted.
 Threats of home searches by the intelligence arm of the PDF
 are regularly employed as harassment and intimidation
 measures. In September, the PDF staged an apparently
 warrantless search of the residence of an official of the
 Panama Canal Commission.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 The Constitution provides for freedom of speech and press, and
 Panama has traditionally enjoyed a free media which engaged in
 spirited and open criticism of the Government. The Government
 responded to the political crisis which began in June 1987 by
 imposing progressively harsh media curbs. The Government
 formally suspended the right to free expression during the
 June state of emergency. Two opposition radio stations were
 closed, and print media were placed under government
 censorship. At that time, the Government also temporarily
 interfered with local distribution of the Miami Herald
 newspaper. While opposition newspapers were not formally
 closed at this time, they'refused to publish in protest
 against the censorship rules. When the state of emergency was
 lifted, opposition radio stations remained closed, but the
 opposition press resumed free publication, openly criticizing
 the Government. In'late July, the Government formally closed
 opposition newspapers for an indefinite period. In the course
 of the crisis, the Government expelled foreign journalists,
 including correspondents for Cable-News Network and Reuters.
 It also set limits on local television news coverage and
 harassed local journalists. At least one Panamanian
 journalist said he received threats against his life before
 fleeing the country. In other cases, family members of
 opposition journalists have been threatened with loss of
 government jobs and have had their homes searched. The
 silencing of opposition newspapers was particularly
 significant in light of the opposition's limited access to
 electronic media. As of December, the only local newspaper
 not adhering to a strict proregime line was the
 semi-independent Estrella de Panama.
 On December 16 President Delvalle announced the Government's
 intention to permit the reopening of opposition media. At the
 end of the year, the Legislative Assembly passed a limited
 
 
 569
 PANAMA
 amnesty measure designed to permit banned opposition media to
 reopen in the early portion of 1988.
 Although editorial policy has varied, no television station
 expresses a clearly oppositionist viewpoint, and opposition
 figures own only, 5 of the more than 70 radio stations in
 Panama.. Tko television stations which exercised some
 independence in their coverage of local events received
 letters from the Ministry of Government and Justice citing the
 controversial libel law (Law 11 of 1978) and urging the
 stations to avoid future broadcasts- containing "false
 statements." One station immediately ceased local coverage.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 The Constitution provides for the right of peaceful assembly.
 This right -was formally suspended for 19 days during the June
 state of. emergency and later under a presidential decree
 banning demonstrations. After lifting the state of emergency
 in June, the Government redefined its policy on demonstrations
 a number of times. As of December, the policy provided for a
 24-hour advance notice requirement for any public
 demonstration, and a prohibition on certain activities which
 had been particnlar trademarks of opposition demonstrations-
 since June, such as horn honking, obstructing the flow of
 traffic, and throwing white confetti in the streets. In
 practice, however, the Government has -often allowed the
 opposition to demonstrate peacefully without attempting to
 interfere. At other times--most notably in early June and on
 July 10--the PDF responded to such protests with force,
 including the.use-of tear gas,- rubber truncheons, and shotgun
 pellets. Protests by students, traditionally marked by
 rock-throwing and property destruction, have brought
 particularly swift and strong reactions from the PDF.
 On Octoben 22.thePDF pravented-a, scheduled Crusade
 demonstration -from taking place.by deploying thousands of
 combat .ready jroops in Panaffi City on the day of the event.
 The Government also resorted to an assortment-of harassment
 techniques--an arrest campaign, telephone threats,. and other
 tactics of intimidation-for several days prior to October
 22. Panamanian professional, social, and civic groups have
 traditionally been allowed to meet without interference, but
 as the activities of these groups became politicized from-June
 onward under the banner of the Civilian Crusade, the Government
 began a campaign of harassment, issuing arrest warrants
 against leaders and raiding the Chamber of Commerce (which
 served as Crusade headquarters) and the offices of the
 Panamanian Association of Business Executives. In addition,
 on July 1," a med ptogovernment bands raided the headquarters
 of the opposition Christian Democratic Party, destroying files
 and setting a small fire. On the same day, the headquarters
 of the ruling PRD Party were also attacked by a group of
 unidentified students.
 Panama's organized labor movement is small but well
 established. Workers enjoy a wide range of benefits under the
 law. The rights to establish unions, to bargai-r collectively,
 and to strike are generally unrestricted in the private sector
 as well as in certain public sector agencies specified by law.
 According to Labor Ministry statistics, about 17 percent of
 the employed work force belong to unions. Most public sector
 employees' are not permitted to form unions or to strike, but
 they may establish representative associations and have access
 to government dispute tesolution procedures. A source of
 
 
 570
 PANAMA
 concern among democratic labor leaders is the limitation
 placed on the right of employees in the Colon Free Zone and
 the offshore banking sector to organize unions.
 The Government. has not interfered with the right of labor
 organizations to strike or to engage in political protests,
 and has been tolerant of periodic illegal walk-outs by public
 employees. Elections within Panamanian labor organizations,
 as well as employer and professional associations, are
 generally democratic and free from government interference.
 These organizations are unrestricted in their right to
 affiliate with international bodies, and their members may
 freely participate in political parties and other aspects of
 Panamanian political life. Many employees are, however,
 reportedly forced to join their employer's political party.
 The Government periodically consults with organized labor and
 employer groups on a range of public policy issues, and both
 sectors are entitled by statute to representation on important
 government boards, such as those governing the social security
 fund and the vocational training institute.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 The Constitution ensures religious freedom to all. There is
 no state religion. There are no restrictions on the free
 exercise of religious beliefs, including proselytizing, and a
 broad range of religious groups operates freely in Panama.
 Religious beliefs are not an issue for any of the national
 political parties.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 The Constitution permits Panamanians to move freely within the
 country and to emigrate. Freedom of movement was formally
 suspended under the state of emergency, although the PDF made
 no effort during the emergency to restrict travel within the
 country. Oppositionists charged that after the lifting of the
 state of emergency, PDF members manning checkpoints along the
 highways continued to interfere with freedom of movement.
 Prior to the Crusade's attempted mass rally October 22, the
 PDF impeded residents of the provincial town of David
 attempting to travel to Panama City to participate in the
 scheduled event.
 The Constitution prohibits compulsory exile and extradition of
 Panamanian nationals. Some persons who went into exile under
 previous regimes have returned and resumed full participation
 in Panamanian society. Panama has accepted refugees of widely
 differing ideological persuasions, and hundreds of displaced
 persons and exiles from other countries reside in Panama.
 Several hundred Salvadorans originally sponsored by the
 Government of Panama are now supporting themselves in a
 resettlement village. Several thousand Cubans are in Panama
 seeking immigration-to the United States or other countries;
 there has been an increase in the number of Nicaraguans
 entering Panama as well. No cases of forcible repatriation of
 political exiles occurred in 1987.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Although Panama is nominally a representative democracy, the
 PDF dominates government and politics in Panama. The 1984
 elections, the first direct presidential and legislative
 
 
 571
 PANAMA
 elections in 16 years, have constituted a source of friction
 between the Government and the opposition ever since the
 controversial Vote count/came to a close. In June, accusations
 by retired PDF Colonel Diaz Herrera of electoral fraud by the
 military in the 1984 elections renewed the controversy and
 further rbilforced the feelihg of many Panamanians that the
 PDF engiieeifed the current Government's election victory by
 tampering with the vote count. An opinion poll conducted in
 July 1987 by a Gallup affiliate showed that 77 percent of
 Panaman'ia ns interviewed believed the 1984 elections were
 dishonest. The next general elections are scheduled for 1989.
 The PDF controls national politics in part through the
 governing Democratic Revolutionary Party (PRD), which refers
 to itself as the civilian arm of the PDF. The PRD has an
 absolute'majority (34 of 67) in the Legislative Assembly.
 Together with allied parties it controls about two-thirds of
 the votes in that body. President Eric Arturo Delvalle, who,
 as (then) Vice President, assumed the presidency in 1985 after
 the resignation of President Nicolas Barletta, is widely
 perceived as subservient to the PDF. Critics of the judicial
 system see it as responsive to the PDF. Government employees
 report that they are pressured to join the political Party of
 the individual who heads :the jgericy in which'they work. A
 number o government wor]ers who participated in Civilian
 Crusade 'rallies  iere subsequently fired from their jobs.
 There have also been credible charges that supervisors
 pressure gbvernment employees to participate in official
 demonstrations, sometimes withholdig.paycheck  unless
 employees make an appearance-at a scheduled7'progovernment
 rally. This was reportedly so in the case of a progovernment
 rally in front of the U.S. Embassy on June 30, which ended in
 a rock-throwing altack on the Embassy and other U.S. Mission
 buildings by a small group of professional assailants.
 Before the politicai crisis which began in June, the
 Government generally tolerated the organized political
 opposition,'a'llowing members t.o particpdte in Legislative
 Assemblydebates and to criticize the Government'in the
 opposition press. With the onset of the political crisis in
 June, however, this tolerafioi turned into harassment:
 attacks bn the opposition in the governmet-dontrolled press
 increased, one party's headqarters were raided by police,
 there were 4ttacks by pro-government gangs on businesses owned
 by opposition figures, and an opposition party leader was
 summoned to the Attorney General's office to answer
 questions. .As noted previously, leaders of the recently
 formed opposition Civilian Crusade faced more serious
 sanctions.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nondovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 In 1987 the Government granted a visiting U.S. Government
 human rights offier  ppointmenfs with the Foreign Minister,
 President Delv11, _the Chief Jistice of the Supreme Court,
 and PDF, prison, :and police officials. She also spoke with
 inmates at the city jail and interviewed victims of birdshot
 wounds and electric shock. Representatives of the U.S.-based
 Physicians Committee for Human Rights visited Panama during
 1987 but found that most Government officials did not respond..
 to their requests for meetings. The first of two Americas
 Watch delegations received similar treatment--the Government
 denied their requests to visit the city jail and to arrange
 
 
 572
 PANA14A
 appointments with government officials. Some time later,
 however, government officials granted a second delegation from
 Americas Watch a lengthy meeting with the Attorney General.
 Several private human rights groups operate in Panama. Since
 the political crisis which began in June 1987, these groups
 have collected detailed data about individual cases of abuse,
 acted as advocates for detainees, observed major opposition
 demonstrations, and actively voiced their concern about human
 rights violations. While the Government made little effort to
 cooperate with these groups, it did not single out leaders for
 harassment or persecution, despite their open criticism of the
 regime's human rights conduct.
 Human rights organizations claim that PDF influence over the
 judiciary has resulted in major impediments to documentation
 and investigation of human rights abuses. These groups state
 that while the Government did not overtly obstruct their
 efforts to document victims' cases, it assumed a nonresponsive
 posture towards their investigations. Repeated requests for
 investigations of rights violations, prison visits, and
 meetings with judicial authorities went unanswered, but no
 attempt was made to prevent released prisoners from meeting
 with or relating their stories to investigators. The Panama
 Chamber of Commerce served as the headquarters of the Civilian
 Crusade, which operated a human rights committee from the
 Chamber's building. Many reports of human rights violations
 were seized along with other Crusade materials when the
 Attorney General's office raided the Chamber of Commerce
 August 4.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 The Constitution prohibits discrimination on the basis of
 race, birth out of wedlock, social class, sex, religion, or
 political views. Women are accorded equal political rights
 under Panamanian law and hold a number of important positions
 in the Government. The 67 members of the Legislative Assembly
 include four women, one of whom served as the Assembly's first
 vice president in the 1986-87 session. Of the 134 alternate
 legislators, 23 are women. Three independent agency directors
 and one vice-minister are women. Women also serve as Chief
 Justice of the Supreme Court, president of the three-member
 Electoral Tribunal, and director of the El Renacer
 Rehabilitation Center. The mayors of Panama City and San
 Miguelito are also women. Several women's organizations, such
 as Unidad and Accion Feminina, are active in Panamanian
 politics.
 Due to traditional bias and general economic conditions,
 Panamanian women do not enjoy the same opportunities for
 advancement as do men. Panamanian law does not recognize
 community property, and divorced or deserted women have been
 left destitute. Female employment in urban Panama is
 concentrated in traditionally low-paying service jobs.
 Although the Constitution mandates equal pay for equal work,
 wages paid to women are lower than those for equivalent work
 performed by males and increase at a slower rate.
 Comparatively fewer women than men participate in the labor
 force, and their participation seems to fluctuate as the job
 market expands and contracts. Government statistics showed
 that in 1980 women made up about 27 percent of the economically
 active work force, a slight decline-from 1978. According to
 the 1980 census, women slightly outnumber men in the
 
 
 573
 PANAMA
 professional and technical fields, are twice as likely as men
 to be clerical office workers, and.are grossly underrepresented
 at the managerial and administrative levels. Many female heads
 of households in.the.country's poo-rer areas are obligated to
 work for: the Government, usually as street cleaners, in order
 to receive government support-funds. The labor code gives
 pregnant employees. 12 weeks of-mandatory maternity leave and
 the right to-return to their jobs.
 Panama is a racially mixed country; The traditional monopoly
 of power by persons of European descent was effectively ended
 with the ouster of the civilian government by the National
 Guard in.1968. Blacks, Asians, and people of mixed race are
 active, politically and-are represented in senior civilian
 positions in the executive branch, the PDF, and-in the
 .legislature, where .there are'also five Indians. Prominent
 among the minorities which retain some degree of separate
 identity are English--speaking blacks of West Indian ancestry,
 Jews, Arabs, Greeks, Chinese, Edst Indians, and North
 Americans, Despite their small number-s,-all of these groups
 play major roles in Panama's urban-economy. There is no
 discrimination in law against these or any other social,
 religious, .or cultural groups; however, naturalized citizens
 are forbidden to hold certain categories of elected office,
 and retail trade is constitutionally restricted to native
 Panamanians. While innumerable exceptions exist, Caucasians,
 Asians, and persons-of mixed race tend to be better off
 economically and to occupy higher positions in government than
 do blacks.and Indians;,however,-the latter groups participate
 fully inqboth the public and private sectors. Indian tribes
 receive government assistance, particularly in the areas of
 public health, welfare, and education. They are not restricted
 to theirctribal areas,.but most remain there by choice,
 reflecting longstanding resistance to assimilation. Indians
 enjoy full voting rights and all other rights of Panamanian
 citizenship, as well as limited self-government in tribal
 areas_ -They play significant roles in the governments of four
 provinces    -
 -CONDITIONS OF LABOR
 Panama has a.comprehensive labor code which gives extensive
 rights and benefits to workers. The maximum workweek is 48
 hours. The law has established a minimum wage for most work
 categories and requires substantial bonuses to be paid for
 overtime. Although labor code'reforms in 1986 released
 employers from the obligation to pay certain bonuses and
 overtime premiums, employers continue to be legally required
 to provide-workers with compensation adequate for a decent
 life. qLaboris prohibited for children under 14, or under age
 15 if the child has not completed primary school. Both
 hazardous work and night work -are prohibited for persons under
 age 18. Children between ages 12 and 14 may perform farm or
 domestic labor- as long as the work is light and does not
 interfere with schooling. The labor code details numerous
 health and safety standards for all places of employment. The
 Ministry of Labor and Social Welfare is responsible for
 ensuring compliance with these regulations, but in many cases
 they are not strictly enforced.   -
 
 
 574
