 PANAMA
 Political power in Panama is shared between the military and a
 fragmented, multiparty civilian body politic. Ultimate power
 has long rested in the National Guard (now Panama Defense
 Forces) which in 1968 overthrew an elected civilian President.
 Current President Ricardo de la Espriella succeeded to the
 Presidency from the office of Vice President in July 1982 when
 his predecessor resigned under pressure from both military and
 civilian leaders. In August 1983 General Manuel Antonio
 Noriega became commander-in-chief of the Guard (now renamed the
 Panama Defense Forces under a September 1983 revision of its
 30-year old organic law).
 Panama has moved during 1983 toward restoring direct popular
 elections for President, Vice President, legislature, and local
 offices in 1984. A national electoral census was conducted on
 December 12, 1982, and the electoral code has been revised.
 Amendments to the 1972 Constitution, providing for these
 elections and strengthening the judiciary and protection of
 guaranteed rights, were approved by an overwhelming majority in
 a nationwide referendum in April 1983. Fourteen parties,
 representing a broad range of political opinion (including the
 Communist People's Party), are already registered and at least
 three others are in the process of registering.
 Public debate flourished during 1983, and criticism of
 government programs and policies continued in the media. There
 were no newspaper closures in 1983. The opposition paper La
 Prensa was the object of a violent demonstration in June 1983
 in which one employee was slightly injured, there was no
 evidence of government involvement in this incident.
 The Government is taking further steps to improve
 administration of criminal justice and the prison system,
 especially in response to charges of flagrant abuses of the
 human rights of inmates by prison officials.
 In 1983 there was a small decline in real gross national
 product because Panama's trade-based economy has not yet
 benefited from the upturn in the world economy. Unemployment
 is probably about 20 percent, more than twice the official
 figure.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Unlawful and Arbitrary Deprivation of Life
 On March 20, 1983 nine prisoners, seven Colombians and two
 Panamanians, were killed by National Guard officials at the
 Coiba Island Penal Colony, allegedly while trying to escape.
 No charges are known to have been lodged against the Guard as a
 result of an investigation by the prosecutor's office. The
 commander at Coiba was later transferred to other duties.
 In another incident in May 1982, guards shot and killed an
 American citizen, also while allegedly trying to escape from
 Coiba. The Government reported in October 1983 that criminal
 charges have been filed against the three guards implicated in
 the shooting death.
 
 (650)
 
 
 651
 opposition groups sharply criticized the critical wounding in
 October 1983 of a student who allegedly refused to identify
 himself to police on constitutional grounds and was shot while
 driving away. The Panamanian Defense Forces detained the two
 policemen involved, suspended them from duty, and transferred
 them to the custody of the prosecutor's office, where they were
 indicted. The publicly announced suspension of these Defense
 Forces members from the police service was the first known
 instance of such action.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no known cases of disappearance of apprehended
 persons in 1983 nor have there been reports of clandestine
 arrests or detention. There are no quasi-official or
 extra-legal security forces in Panama.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 Although the Constitution prohibits measures that harm the
 physical, .mental, or moral integrity of persons under
 detention, during 1983 there were some allegations of the
 police beating detainees. There have also been unconfirmed
 reports that prisoners and suspects have been illegally sent to
 Coiba to work on the local harvest while awaiting trial.
 Very crowded and poor living conditions in prison result from
 lack of economic rescurces rather than government policy or an
 intent to degrade prisoners. For instance, the Panama City
 Jail, built in 1925 to house 225 prisoners, now has over 600
 inmates; most sleep on the floor. Supplemental foodstuffs and
 other prison services not normally provided may be purchased by
 those able to afford them.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 The Constitution provides for habeas corpus and requires
 warrants for arrest, except for those arrested while committing
 a crime. The Constitution does not allow preventive
 detention. The 1983 amendments to the Constitution strengthen
 procedural safeguards for arrested individuals. The police
 must bring charges against the accused at the time he is
 arrested or served with a summons. Failure to make such
 charges personally to the accused has led to invalidation of
 sentences. Those under arrest must be also immediately
 informed of their constitutional rights. A suspect may be held
 for no more than 24 hours following arrest without being
 charged and brought before a magistrate. Some opposition
 groups have claimed that detainees may be held incommunicado up
 to a week after arrest before being brought before a
 magistrate, but there are few confirmed instances of this
 occurring.
 An accused may be held in custody after being charged for as
 long as it takes to conduct the investigation and bring the
 case to trial. Pretrial detention, especially for people from
 lower economic classes, can last up to eight months in some
 cases. Such time is credited against any sentence imposed
 following conviction.
 
 
 652
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Persons charged with crimes are presumed innocent until proven
 guilty and have the right of counsel. The local Bar
 Association provides a public defender service for the
 indigent. The administrative code mandates public trials based
 on oral testimony and argument and gives the accused the right
 to be present. In most criminal cases, however, the court
 process allows for written presentations by the prosecution and
 defense without the presence of the accused. The documents
 produced are available for examination by both sides.
 According to authorities, the burden of proof rests on the
 prosecutor, but the right to appeal the verdict is available to
 the prosecution as well as to the defense. A new
 administrative code was promulgated in 1982, and a new penal
 code was enacted in 1983. A revision of the judicial code was
 nearing completion by the end of 1983.
 Panamanian and foreign observers have noted that juvenile
 delinquents are occasionally tried and incarcerated as adults,
 especially when they are considered to be hardened criminals.
 Although the Constitution prohibits self-incrimination, there
 also have been charges that juveniles and poor people with
 criminal records have been detained and pressured during
 interrogation to confess to crimes they may not have
 committed. Other reported practices--publicly criticized in
 the Panamanian press by government officials and private
 citizens--include summary proceedings and convictions for
 misdemeanors by "night court" judges without duly prescribed
 defense counsel.
 The Supreme Court is charged to uphold the Constitution and the
 laws, and magistrates and judges are legally independent. The
 new constitutional amendments have strengthened the financial
 independence of the judiciary by automatically giving it two
 percent of government revenues. The article on the judiciary,
 itself was extensively redrafted to help strengthen its
 independence from the executive branch by making explicit its
 right to rule on and anul administrative acts. Magistrates are
 also now barred from simultaneously holding other public office
 or otherwise participating in politics.
 There is no military jurisdiction over civilians in Panama. A
 new national defense law, drafted in 1983, provides the legal
 framework for the transformation and professionalization of the
 old National Guard into the National Defense Forces of Panama.
 In late December 1983 the Panamanian Supreme Court unanimously
 declared unconstitutional four articles of this law. These
 articles would have allowed among other things the uncommutable
 detention for up to 40 days of persons who resist arrest or
 fail to accompany Defense Forces officers when so ordered, as
 well as permitted the Defense Forces to demand information
 connected with national defense or public security from public
 and private entities, companies, and individuals. These
 provisions had earlier drawn widespread criticism both in and
 outside Panama. The Panama Defense Forces have no code of
 military justice; its members are subject to civilian law, of
 which the new Defense Forces Organic Law is part.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The Government does not normally intrude on or otherwise
 interfere with private family life.
 
 
 653
 Under the Constitution, judicial warrants must be issued before
 officials may enter homes. There were occasional reports in
 1983 that police violated this guarantee by entering without
 warrants. There have also been reports that telephones are
 tapped in selected cases by the Panama Defense Forces on
 grounds of national security.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Rights, Includings
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 The Constitution guarantees freedom of speech, press, and other
 forms of communication without censorship. There is no
 interference with academic freedom. Views of opponents of the
 present Government are made known through their speeches and by
 press and radio. The opposition newspaper, La Prensa, and
 radio and television commentators publicly criticize government
 programs and policies. Opponents also freely criticize public
 activities of Panamanian civilian officials, although because
 of self-censorship there is little direct criticism of the top
 leaders of the Panama Defense Forces.
 In 1982, La Prensa suffered vandalism by unidentified
 individuals after all newspapers were forced to close for a
 week by the commander of the Guard following the resignation of
 the former President. The Government has refused to compensate
 La Prensa shareholders for this damage, alleging that the
 damage was done by La Prensa itself. There was one
 demonstration outside its premises in June 1983 to protest the
 newspaper's charges of corruption in the use of government
 medical funds.
 The other six newspapers exercise considerable self-censorship,
 especially regarding the Guard and its leadership, and are
 circumspect in airing opposition and leftist points of view.
 Three government-owned papers, which often took strongly
 leftist positions, moderated their rhetoric after the Commander
 of the Guard closed them for a week in 1982. Government-
 inspired changes of editors in two of them in 1983 have further
 moderated the views of these papers. There is no censorship of
 foreign newspapers, magazines, books, cable television
 programming, or artistic works.
 A 1978 press law placed in the hands of a government-dominated
 board the power to judge the professional competence of
 practicing journalists or those seeking to enter the
 profession. Under the terms of this law, the Government
 suspended in 1983 the rights of one newsman critical of
 government officials. The Inter-American Press Association
 criticized the law for interfering with freedom of the press.
 In October 1983 the Supreme Court declared the press law
 unconstitutional and ruled that most categories of employees
 working for newspapers and in the electronic media need not
 obtain licenses to work.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 According to the Constitution, demonstrations on public
 property require 24 hours' advance notice to the authorities,
 but this formality is not always insisted upon. There have
 been no cases of banned demonstrations; those carried out
 spontaneously by teachers, students, and opposition groups
 during 1983 were not stopped. A peaceful march of
 
 
 654
 "Reaffirmation for Democracy" drew many thousands of people in
 September 1983. The Constitution guarantees the right of
 peaceful assembly without arms and for a legitimate purpose.
 Authorities can control the exercise of this right if it
 interferes with traffic, threatens public order, or violates
 the rights of third parties. When violence and property
 destruction have occurred, police have intervened and restored
 order, usually without excessive use of force but not always in
 a timely manner. Tear gas has been used on occasion, and in
 one case mothers protesting the assignment of their children to
 schools far from their homes were dispersed from in front of
 the Education Ministry when police set off tear gas cannisters.
 In October 1983 two American priests were detained, questioned,
 and released by the Defense Forces for participating in a
 Guaymi Indian march in the capital. The Americans were told
 that as priests and foreigners they should not have participated
 in the march. Professional, social, and political groups, as
 well as trade unions, meet without interference.
 Panama has a strong and longstanding labor movement and liberal
 labor code, and union rights are generally respected. There
 are both political and apolitical labor organizations in
 Panama. Two of the strongest unions are branches of the
 American Federation of State, County, and Municipal Employees
 and a third is the regional branch of the National Maritime
 Union of America, both unions in the United States. Union
 elections are democratic, fair, and free from government
 interference. Consultation with unions about government
 policies, particularly employment issues, is institutionalized
 through a national commission that includes representatives of
 the major labor organizations. Both collective bargaining and
 strikes are constitutionally guaranteed rights of workers,
 although government regulations restrict or forbid this right
 for certain government employees. Moreover, the Labor Ministry
 implements these laws in such a way as to impede or discourage
 organization of employees in the Colon Free Zone and the
 offshore banking industry, which is a source of concern for the
 democratic international trade union movement.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 The Constitution guarantees religious freedom to all, and there
 is no state religion. There are no restrictions on the free
 exercise of religious beliefs, including proselytizing, and a
 broad range of religious groups operate freely in Panama.
 d. Freedom of Movement within the Country, Foreign Travel,
 Emigration, and Repatriation
 The Constitution permits Panamanians to move freely within the
 country and to emigrate, and these rights are honored in
 practice. It also prohibits compulsory exile. Some civilian
 exiles from previous regimes have returned and resumed full
 participation in Panamanian society. Exiles remaining abroad
 have been publicly urged to return to Panama.
 Panama has accepted displaced persons of widely differing
 ideological persuasions, and hundreds of displaced persons and
 self-imposed exiles reside in the country. Several hundred
 Salvadorans originally sponsored by the Government of Panama
 are now supporting themselves in a resettlement village. No
 cases of forcible repatriation of political exiles occurred in
 1983.
 
 
 655
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights:  The Right of Citizens to
 Change Their Government
 While ultimate power has long rested with the National Guard,
 Panama's constitutions have traditionally provided for its
 government by a president with strong executive powers. The
 National Guard, declaring its intention to leave public
 administration to civilians, supported 1983 amendments to the
 1972 Constitution which removed the Guard from a role in
 government which had been effectively equivalent to that of the
 three traditional branches. The September 1983 change in the
 Defense Forces Organic Law also subordinated the Defense Forces
 to the President. Under the revised Constitution, elections on
 a direct popular basis have been scheduled in May 1984 for the
 President and the two Vice Presidents. Sixty-seven legislators
 will be elected to reconstitute, for the first time since 1968,
 a national legislative body directly elected on a geographical
 basis. Elections for regional and local officials will be held
 in June. The new Panama Defense Forces commander and other top
 military officials have pledged that the Defense Forces will
 favor no candidate in the 1984 elections. Outside the Defense
 Forces, influence is informally exerted to varying degrees by
 interest groups such as business, professions, labor, the
 information media, and political parties.
 The Panamanian people, who have not had a direct Presidential
 election since 1968, have been promised one in 1984 and expect
 it. Support for this process is almost universal and elections
 are expected to proceed as scheduled. A long-established
 Electoral Tribunal has completed work on a new Electoral Law
 approved this year. It has issued regulations for the
 elections and conducted a national electoral census to produce
 current voter registration lists.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Non-governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The Government has espoused human rights causes in the
 Organization of American States, the United Nations, and
 elsewhere. A Human Rights Committee formed in Panama in 1978
 continued to operate freely in 1983. Amnesty International did
 not cover Panama in its 1983 report. Freedom House in 1983
 rated Panama by its criteria "partly free."
 ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND CULTURAL SITUATION
 Declining infant mortality and death rates reflect improvement
 in public health. Infant mortality dropped to 23.2 per 1,000
 live births in 1983.   In 1981, there was one doctor per 1,000
 persons. Life expectancy at birth was 70.4 years in 1980. The
 annual population growth rate declined to 2.5 percent in 1980.
 Panama's total population in 1983 was estimated at 2,058,000.
 In 1981, 82.8 percent of the population had access to safe
 water. The ratio of calorie supply available for consumption
 relative to nutritional requirements was calculated at 101
 percent in 1977. Access to education has improved as well.
 All children attend grade school; the adjusted primary school
 enrollment ratio was 115 percent. The overall adult
 
 
 656
 literacy rate was estimated at 85 percent in 1979, although the
 rate in rural areas was much lower.
 Under the Constitution citizens are guaranteed a right to own
 property, as well as to avail themselves of economic benefits,
 programs, or services of the state, without regard to sex,
 social origin, birth, race, religion, or political opinion.
 Panamanian constitutions, however, traditionally have limited
 the rights of naturalized Panamanians and aliens to participate
 in retail commerce.
 Recent economic performance has been weak, largely as a result
 of deteriorating regional and worldwide conditions. Real per
 capita gross domestic product was estimated at $1,908 in 1981.
 Nevertheless, approximately 20 percent of the country's
 population live in extreme poverty--unable to provide for basic
 necessities. Although a larger percentage of the poor is found
 in rural areas, the trend toward urbanization has increased the
 number of poor in cities as well.
 Official figures probably underestimated unemployment at about
 9 percent for 1979, and the current rate is said to be nearly
 20 percent and probably higher in certain areas.
 Panama's social system and legal code accord equal treatment to
 women and to men. The Constitution prohibits discrimination on
 the basis of race, birth, social class, sex, religion, or
 political ideas. It also gives pregnant employees 12 weeks
 mandatory maternity leave and the right to return to their jobs.
 Women are accorded equal political rights under Panamanian law
 but participate in politics to a lesser extent than men, a
 reflection of traditional roles and values. A minority of
 women plays an active role in political and governmental
 affairs, and hold a number of important positions. Thirty of
 the 505 members of the present National Assembly of Community
 Representatives are women, and one of its nine vice presidents
 is a woman. Women also serve as the Minister of Education, the
 president of the ruling party, one of the three members of the
 electoral tribunal, three of Panama's nine provincial governors
 (including the Governor of Panama Province), one of the nine
 Supreme Court justices, and the heads of the Post Office and
 Customs Service. Several women's organizations, such as Unidad
 and Accion Feminina, are active in Panamanian politics.
 Panamanian women enjoy full social freedom but in general still
 do not have the same opportunities for advancement as do men.
 This reflects both traditional values and the current difficult
 economic climate. As Panamanian law does not recognize
 community property, divorced or deserted women can be and on
 occasion are left destitute. The Government estimated in 1977
 that 14 percent of the female work force was unemployed and 44
 percent underemployed; the comparable figures for men were 10
 and 18 percent, respectively.
 Female employment in urban Panama is concentrated in the
 service sector, where wages are generally lower. Although the
 Constitution mandates equal pay for equal work, wages paid to
 women are frequently lower than those for equivalent work
 performed by males and increase at a slower rate.
 Comparatively fewer women than men participate in the labor
 
 
 657
 force, and their participation seems to fluctuate as the job
 market expands and contracts. Government statistics showed
 that in 1978 women made up about 29 percent of the economically
 active work force.
 Panama is a racially mixed country. The traditional monopoly
 of power by persons of European descent was effectively ended
 with the ouster by the National Guard of the civilian president
 in 1968. Blacks, orientals, and mestizos are now active
 politically. They are well represented at senior levels of
 Government and the Panama Defense Forces, and they dominate the
 National Assembly.
 Prominent among the minorities which retain some degree of
 separate identity are English-speaking blacks of Antillean
 descent, Jews, Arabs, Greeks, Chinese, East Indians, and North
 Americans. All of these groups play roles in Panama's urban
 economy well out of proportion to their numbers. There is no
 discrimination in law against these or any other social,
 religious, or cultural groups, except that naturalized citizens
 are forbidden to hold certain categories of elected office, and
 retail trade is constitutionally restricted to native
 Panamanians. While innumerable exceptions exist, Caucasians
 and mestizos tend to be better off economically and occupy
 higher positions in Government than blacks and Indians;
 however, the latter groups participate fully in both the public
 and the private sectors.
 Indian tribes receive government assistance, particularly in
 the areas of public health and welfare, and education. They
 are not restricted to their tribal areas, but most remain there
 by choice, reflecting longstanding resistance to assimilation.
 Indians enjoy full voting rights and all other rights of
 Panamanian citizenship and are politically active. About
 one-third of the present National Assembly is Indian because in
 sparsely populated areas they constitute the majority.
 One-third of Panama's districts are headed by Indians, and they
 play significant roles in the governments of four provinces.
 Panama's Kuna Indians mostly reside in a self-governing,
 semiautonomous district, the Comarca of San Blas, established
 in 1953. Others, the Embers (Choco) and Guaymi Indians, have
 been struggling for years to obtain their own self-ruled tribal
 homelands, as well as a greater degree of cultural and economic
 autonomy. In November 1983, a law was passed by the
 Legislative Assembly to establish such a district for the
 Embers Indians in what is currently Darien Province. The more
 numerous and geographically widespread Guaymi Indians of
 western Panama also made progress in 1983 toward obtaining
 their own district. In negotiations toward the creation of a
 Guaymi homeland, government negotiators narrowed differences
 with Guaymi spokesmen, and agreement on most issues reportedly
 has been reached. However, significant differences still exist
 over the size of the Guaymi homeland, and further negotiations
 on this point are expected in 1984.
 
 
 658
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: PANAMA
 1981     1982     1983
 ..........................................................
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL...         10.6     13.0     7.4
 LOANS ..................   6.4      8.1      3.8
 GRANTS .............        4.2       4.9      3.6
 A.AID  ....      .......   .....  8.7    11.7      6.3
 LOANS ..................   6.4      8.1      3.8
 GRANTS .............         2.3      3.6      2.5
 (SEC.SUP.ASSIST.)...         0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.FOOD  FOR  PEACE .......       1.9      1.3      1.1
 LOANS ..................   0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ..............        1.9      1.3      1.1
 TITLE  I-T OTAL ..........      0.0       0.0      0.0
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS .....        0.0       0.0      0.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR .....        0.0       0.0      0.0
 TITLE  II-TOTAL .........        1.9      1.3      1.1
 E.RELIEF.EC.DEV & WFP.         0.0       0.0      0.1
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY .....         1.9      1.3      1.0
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST...          0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS ..................   0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............        0.0       0.0      0.0
 PEACE CORPS ......        0.0      0.0       0.0
 NARCOTICS ........        0.0       0.0      0.0
 OTHER ............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL...         0.4      5.4       5.5
 LOANS ..................   0.0      5.0      5.0
 GRANTS .............        0.4       0.4      0.5
 A.VAP  GRANTS ..........       0.0       0.0      0.0
 B.CREDIT FINANCING ....        0.0       5.0      5.0
 C.INTL MIL.ED.TRNG ....         0.4      0.4      0.5
 D.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK...         0.0       0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS ........        0.0       0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. & MIL...         11.0     18.4     12.9
 LOANS ..................   6.4      13.1     8.8
 GRANTS.............         4.6       5.3      4.1
 OTHER  US  LOANS ..........      0.0       0.0      0.0
 EX-IM BANK LOANS .......        0.0       0.0      0.0
 ALL  OTHER ................     0.0      0.0      0.0
 ..........................................................
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1981     1982     1983     1946-83
 TOTAL .........   74.5     126.9    137.1   1104.7
 IBRD              45.5     24.4     85.0    470.6
 IFC                0.0      0.0      0.0      8.3
 IDA                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 IDS               28.5     99.0     52.0     595.3
 ADB                0.0      0.0      0.0       0.0
 AFDB               0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 UNDP               0.5       3.5      0.0     26 1
 OTHER-UN           0.0       0.0      0.1      4.4
 EEC                0.0      0.0      0.0       0.0
 
 
