PANAMA
The State Department's chapter on Panama is an excellent smrey of the human rights problems in that country. It is thorough, careful and balsmced, and, in general, comes to the same conclusions that we have drawn in our reporting. The report proNides a detailed description of the abuses arising out of the political crisis that began in June 1987, such as the shooting, beating and jailing of demonstrators. The report also accurately discusses the faults in the administration of justice in Panama, including the influence exerted by the Panama Defense Forces over the judiciary, with a resulting denial of the right to a fair trial, and the issuance of search warrants as a means of p>olitical harassment. We differ with the report on only a few points.
Without mentioning Eduardo Enrique Carrera by name, the report describes his killing on July 26,1987 at the hands of the police, but states that "few consider his death to have been politically motivated." In fact, while there are indeed conflicting accounts of this death, several people, including the victim's relatives, appear to believe that it was a political killing. According to The New York Times, in an August 4,1987 article by Stephen Kinzer, Carrera's relatives stated that he was shot after a member of a group of protesters he was with shouted "Down with Noriega!" As quoted in The Times, police authorities owned up to the killii^, but stated that Carrera and other protesters had attacked them. Amnesty International, in an accoimt drawn from eyewitnesses, but published after the Country Reports, also described the killing as politically motivated.
The report treads lightly in its description of the 1984 elections, in which Nicolas Ardito Barletta is widely reported to have become President as a result of fraud by the Panama Defense Forces. The State Department takes no stand itself on whether fraud was committed, but merely quotes accusations leveled by opposition groups. The State Department thus avoids stating all that it knows about the situation. Several credible news accounts have reported that
113
Critique
the U.S. Embassy in Panama cabled the State Department at the time of the elections wth "conclusive evidence" that the Defense Forces chief, General Manuel Antonio Noriega, had ordered the military to alter the election results so as to put Barletta in power. Despite this evidence. Secretary of State George Shultz attended Barletta's inauguration, and the Administration reportedly rejected a suggestion from the Embassy that it withhold recognition from the Barletta government.
In its discussion of the judiciary, the report does not mention the extensive system of administrative law courts run by the executive with no judicial review. Particularly detrimental to the rule of law in Panama, many of these courts are run by magistrates {correffdores) who are named by mayors and, for the most part, lack any legal or judicial training. The magistrates hear a tremendous number of civil and criminal complaints. One division, the police court, is the only system of justice many Panamanians know. Its magistrates are empowered to order detention of up to one year or to impose fines of up to $600. Their decisions can be appealed only to the mayor, not to any judicial authority.
Finally, the report understates the degree of cooperation that Americas Watch received from Panamanian authorities during several visits in 1987. According to the report, government officials denied our requests for appointments with government officials with the exception of "a lengthy meeting with the Attorney General." In fact, Americas Watch representatives sent to Panama on several occasions in 1987 found the authorities generally cooperative in arrai^ng interviews and answering any and all questions. A delegation of three attorneys representing Americas Watch met with many senior officials, not only the Attorney General, but also then-Education Minister Manuel Solis Palma, who is now the Minister in Charge of the Presidency; a Supreme Court justice; and scores of prosecutors from the Attorney General's office.
114
