 PANAMA
 Although Panama has a civilian President, the Panamanian
 military continues to dominate national politics. Nicolas
 Ardito Barletta, Panama's first directly elected president in
 16 years, was unable to complete a year in office. Under
 extreme pressure from the country's military leadership and
 from his own ruling party, he stepped down on September 28;
 First Vice President Eric Arturo Delvalle became Panama's fifth
 president in three years.
 The belief was widespread that the results of the 1984
 elections, in which Barletta was declared the winner by a scant
 1,713 votes, were rigged. Barletta failed to forge a national
 consensus on handling Panama's heavy foreign debt and
 overcoming its economic recession. Finally, in the aftermath
 of the September murder of Hugo Spadafora. Barletta was caught
 between opposition demands for a special inquiry and PDF
 resistance to the idea by the Panama Defense Forces (PDF)..
 Panama continues to be confronted by economic difficulties. It
 is estimated that 1985 economic growth again will show a per
 capita decrease.. Unemployment continues around twenty
 percent. The Barletta government had some initial success in
 attaining a new standby agreement with the International
 Monetary Fund. However, agreement on a second structural
 adjustment loan from the World Bank has been delayed by the
 Government's inability to obtain domestic political agreement
 on structural economic reforms.
 Panama's Constitution guarantees broad individual and civil
 rights, and in most spheres of life these rights are exercised
 freely.   Opposition media are active, although they allege
 official harassment, especially of radio and TV. The civil and
 human rights climate in Panama has been marred by the removal
 of the elected president and by two violent incidents in which
 there have been allegations of PDF complicity: the kidnapping
 and beating of a prominent opposition political figure, and the
 brutal murder of'Spadafora.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 Dr. Hugo Spadafora, a former Vice-Minister of Health and a
 guerrilla leader, fought in Guinea-Bissau and on both sides in
 Nicaragua. Spadafora had been a bitter critic of PDF Commander
 Noriega, whom he accused of involvement in drug traffic.
 According to his family, Spadafora had planned to return to
 Panama City from Costa Rica, where he was living, on September
 13. He never arrived. The following day a headless body was
 found in Costa Rica near the Panamanian border. Fingerprints
 identified it as Spadafora's.
 The PDF's immediate public reaction was to deny having any
 record that Spadafora ever re-entered Panama and to posit that
 he had been killed by an unknown guerrilla group. However, a
 report of the Costa Rican Organization for Judicial
 Investigation states that Spadafora was seen by witnesses
 entering Panama September 13 and that other witnesses saw him
 being removed from a bus by a PDF member. These events were
 also confirmed by several witnesses in Panama, according to a
 report made public by Panama's Attorney General October 24.
 
 
 641
 PANAMA
 Opposition leaders and the Spadafora family demanded that an
 independent commission be appointed to investigate the crime,
 saying that a regular investigation by the Attorney General
 would only whitewash the PDF. The Archbishop of Panama and the
 Papal Nuncio espoused the cause. .(In response, the
 PDF-controlled newspaper Critica warned the Nuncio against
 "meddling" in Panama's internal affairs.) Numerous
 professional, business, civic, labor, and political groups also
 expressed lack of confidence in the official investigation.
 President Barletta claimed that he did not have the
 constitutional right to appoint an investigative body
 independent of the Attorney General, but a few days prior to
 his ouster he recommended that the Attorney General consider
 appointing a special advisory committee. PDF Commander Noriega
 publicly stated his opposition to the formation of such a
 committee, and oppositionists charge that this was why he moved
 against Barletta.
 Both Spadafora and Mauro Zuniga, an opposition leader kidnapped
 the previous month by unknown assailants (see below), had the
 inscription "F-S" on their backs. This link raises the
 possibility that some sort of death squad may be operating in
 Panama. Some speculate that "F-8" is the successor of the
 infamous Seventh Force, a pro-government squad that was active
 during the 1984 elections.
 b. Disappearance
 On August 21, 1985, Dr. Mauro Zuniga, the head of the umbrella
 opposition group COCINA (National Civil Coordinating
 Committee), was abducted at gunpoint from a restaurant in
 Santiago, Veraguas Province. Some hours later, Zuniga was
 found along the side of the road in the far western Province of
 Chiriqui, badly beaten but alive. His abductors did not
 identify themselves or make any demands. The only lead was the
 inscription "F-8 terrorist" which had been scratched on his
 back with a ball point pen. The opposition press blamed the
 PDF intelligence unit for the kidnapping. The PDF promised a
 full and prompt investigation, but to date there have been no
 leads or arrests in connection with the case.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment
 or Punishment
 The Constitution prohibits measures that harm the physical,
 mental, or moral integrity of persons under detention. While
 opposition sources occasionally complain about the treatment of
 detainees, there is no indication of widespread or systematic
 abuse of prisoners.
 Overcrowding in Panama's prisons continues to be a major
 problem. This is attributed to a lack of economic resources.
 The average population of the Central Men's Prison in Panama
 City, built in 1925 to accommodate 225, is now well over 700,
 and most detainees sleep on the floor. Supplemental foodstuffs
 and other prison services not normally provided may be
 purchased by those able to afford them. There have been
 occasional newspaper articles decrying the conditions in the
 prisons and charging that they constitutue a violation of
 internationally recognized human rights.
 
 
 642
 PANAMA
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 The Constitution provides for habeas corpus and requires
 warrants for arrest, except for those arrested while committing
 a crime. The 1983 amendments to the Constitution strengthened
 procedural safeguards for arrested individuals. The police
 must inform an accused person immediately of the reasons for
 his detention and of his constitutional and legal rights.
 Failure to make such charges personally to the accused has led
 to invalidation of sentences.
 The Constitution states that a suspect may be detained for no
 more than 24 hours without being charged and brought before a
 magistrate. However, on August 8, 1985, Michael Petrovsky, a
 U.S. citizen, and Pedro Rognoni were detained by the
 investigative branch of the PDF (the Departamento Nacional de
 Investigaciones, or DENI) and accused of masterminding an
 alleged cocaine-smuggling scheme. The lawyer for the two filed
 a writ of habeas corpus, charging that they had been arrested
 without a warrant as required by the Constitution, and that the
 Government had no proof that a crime had been committed since
 the cocaine had apparently left the country. The Supreme Court
 denied the writ, ruling that DENI had sufficient, though
 unspecified, evidence to hold Rognoni and Petrovsky. After two
 months of detention without charge, Petrovsky was released on
 October 15, 1985. Rognoni remains in custody.
 Some opposition groups have claimed that detainees are held
 incommunicado for up to a week after arrest before being
 brought before a magistrate, but there were no confirmed
 instances of this in 1985. An accused may be held in custody
 after being charged for as long as it takes to conduct the
 investigation and bring the case to trial. In some cases,
 primarily involving people of lower economic classes, pretrial
 detention has lasted as long as eight months. Such time is
 credited against any sentence imposed following conviction.
 Under Panama's criminal code, a convict may be required to
 perform labor on public works projects if the sentencing judge
 so specifies. The prisoner's sentence is reduced by two days
 for every day spent in such work. This is the only legal
 provision for compulsory labor.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Persons charged with crimes are presumed innocent until proven
 guilty and have the right of counsel. The local bar
 association provides a public defender service for the
 indigent. The current court process allows for written
 presentations by the prosecution and defense without the
 presence of the accused. The documents produced are available
 for examination by both sides. According to authorities, the
 burden of proof rests on the prosecutor, but the right to
 appeal the verdict is available to the prosecution as well as
 to the defense. A new penal code was enacted in 1983, and a
 revision of the judicial code is under way. The proposed
 judicial code mandates public trials based on oral testimony
 and argument and gives the accused the right to be present.
 Panamanian and foreign observers have noted that juvenile
 delinquents are occasionally tried and incarcerated as adults,
 especially when they are considered to be hardened criminals.
 Although the Constitution prohibits self-incrimination, there
 have been media reports that juveniles and poor people with
 
 
 643
 PANAMA
 criminal records have been detained and pressured during
 interrogation to confess to crimes they may not have
 committed. Other reported practices -- publicly criticized in
 the Panamanian press by government officials and private
 citizens -- include summary proceedings and convictions for
 misdemeanors by "night court" judges without duly prescribed
 defense counsel. A credible report stated that 251 of the 547
 prisoners at the penal island of Coiba had been sentenced by
 "night court" judges and that all but four had been convicted
 and sentenced on the same night they were arrested. Many of
 these prisoners had been given the maximum sentence of one year.
 The Supreme Court is chartered to uphold the Constitution and
 the laws, and magistrates and judges are legally independent.
 The constitutional article on the judiciary itself was
 extensively redrafted to help strengthen its independence from
 the executive branch by making explicit its right to rule on
 and annul administrative acts. Magistrates are also now barred
 from simultaneously holding other public office or otherwise
 participating in politics. However, there are widespread
 charges that the judiciary is subservient to the PDF.
 Panamanian opposition groups believe the Spadafora and Zuniga
 cases have strengthened that view.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home,
 or Correspondence
 Private family life generally is respected. Under the
 Constitution, judicial warrants must be issued before officials
 may enter homes.
 Both government and opposition media have reported that many
 government employees are forced to join the political party of
 the individual who heads the agency in which they work or face
 dismissal. As cabinet shifts occur, these employees often
 change political affiliations. There have also been frequent
 and credible charges that government employees are required to
 take part in official demonstrations.
 Section 2   Respect for Civil and Political Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 The Constitution guarantees freedom of speech, press, and other
 forms of communication. There is no interference with academic
 freedom. The views of government opponents are made known
 through their speeches, and through the press and radio. The
 main opposition newspaper, La Prensa, the tabloid Extra, and
 various radio commentators publicly criticize government
 programs and policies. Opponents also freely and often
 vehemently criticize Panamanian civilian and military
 officials, including the President and the Commander of the
 PDF. In the context of President Barletta's forced resignation
 the opposition papers La Prensa and Extra again came under
 considerable pressure. During the night of September 27-28,
 PDF intelligence personnel surrounded La Prensa. Nevertheless,
 La Prensa's normal edition of the 28th was delivered, albeit
 late. However, the opposition tabloid Extra claims all 7,000
 provincial editions of that date were confiscated. The city
 edition went out without incident.
 In the extremely tense atmosphere after the Spadafora murder,
 opposition columnist Guillermo Sanchez Borbon went into hiding
 after announcing that military intelligence intended to arrest
 
 
 644
 PANAMA
 him. His column did not appear for several days. Other
 opposition press employees have spoken of incidents of
 intimidation, particularly telephone threats. In mid-October
 television and radio commentators were warned by a high-ranking
 member of the PDF not to criticize the military establishment
 and to reduce or eliminate coverage of the Spadafora case. One
 opposition commentator permanently canceled his radio
 broadcast, citing official pressure. In this same period,
 there were unusual sporadic interruptions of electric power
 during opposition radio and TV news broadcasts on the occasion
 of opposition protest demonstrations.
 The three newspapers of the ERSA media group are responsive to
 directives from the PDF and Government. Absent guidance,
 however, individual columnists write freely about a wide range
 of topics. ERSA became a center of attention in March of 1985
 when the Inter-American Press Association (IAPA), which was
 holding its annual meeting in Panama at the time, passed a
 resolution calling for the return of the ERSA papers to their
 previous owners, who include opposition leader Arnulfo Arias.
 The papers had been expropriated following the 1968 military
 coup that led to the rise of the late General Omar Torrijos.
 Employees of ERSA replied by holding a mock funeral for IAPA,
 an event that received broad coverage in all three ERSA dailies.
 Law 11 of 1978, which allows for the closing of newspapers and
 the jailing of owners without due process, continues in force
 despite requests by the opposition media and the Inter-American
 Press Association that it be repealed.
 Opposition groups have experienced serious problems gaining
 access to the electronic media, with all but one Panamanian
 television station and over 90 percent of radio stations
 controlled either by the Government or by pro-government
 groups. Opposition groups assert that they are unable to
 acquire radio or television licenses from the Government.
 In the course of a particularly bitter election in the banana
 workers' union of Bocas Del Toro Province in February 1985, the
 opposition radio station "Ondas Del Caribe" was bombed. No one
 was charged in the incident. The station was later fined
 heavily for having hired an illegal Nicaraguan technician. In
 June 1985 a government station in Bocas Del Toro, Radio Teribe,
 was severely damaged by arson. Again, no charges have been
 filed in the case.
 There is no censorship of foreign newspapers, magazines, books,
 or cable television programming.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 The Constitution guarantees the right of peaceful assembly.
 Twenty-four hours' advance notice but not government permission
 is required for open-air meetings. Professional, social and
 political groups meet without interference in Panama.
 Panama has a well-established organized labor movement and a
 liberal labor code, and union rights are generally respected.
 Panama has both politically aligned and independent labor
 organizations. One of the strongest groups is a local of the
 American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees
 (AFSCME), and a second is the regional branch of the National
 Maritime Union, both AFL-CIO affiliates. Union elections are
 democratic and generally free from government interference.
 
 
 645
 PANM
 The Government periodically consults with the major labor
 organizations on a range of public policy issues. Both
 collective bargaining and strikes are constitutionally
 guaranteed worker rights, although government regulations
 restrict or forbid these practices for certain public sector
 employees. However, the Government appears not to have taken
 action against public employees of various agencies who struck
 during 1985. The rights to organize and strike are likewise
 restricted for employees in the Colon Free Zone and the
 offshore banking industry, which is a source of concern within
 the democratic trade union movement internationally.
 A controversial issue in 1985 was the perceived need to reform
 the labor code in order to stimulate investment. No
 legislative proposals have as yet been publicized, and it is
 unlikely that any legislation would pass that would adversely
 affect internationally recognized worker rights.
 The PDF has taken strong measures against certain
 demonstrators. In May 1985, the PDF used riot police and
 combat-equipped troops to break up a demonstration by residents
 of two neighborhoods that were to be affected by the
 construction of a new garbage dump. The riot police reportedly
 used clubs, rubber hoses and cattle prods indiscriminately,
 even beating a legislator who represented the area in the
 Legislative Assembly. The demonstration was broken up when
 regular troops armed with tear gas, shotguns, and M-16 rifles
 arrived. The Minister of Government and Justice, the nominal
 civilian head of the PDF, denied that he had ordered the riot
 police to attack the demonstrators. He said that the commander
 on the scene was responsible for taking whatever measures he
 deemed necessary.
 The PDF did not interfere with the funeral of Hugo Spadafora or
 with a large rally and march led by the Spadafora family and
 opposition groups October 9 to protest alleged PDF involvement
 in the murder and to demand a special investigative commission.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 The Constitution guarantees religious freedom to all, and there
 is no state religion. There are no restrictions on the free
 exercise of religious beliefs, including proselytizing, and a
 broad range of religious groups operates freely in Panama.
 Religious beliefs are not an issue in any of the national
 political parties.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel,
 Emigration, and Repatriation
 The Constitution permits Panamanians to move freely within the
 country and to emigrate, and these rights are honored in
 practice. It also prohibits compulsory exile and extradition
 of Panamanian nationals to other countries. Some persons
 exiled by previous regimes have returned and resumed full
 participation in Panamanian society. Exiles choosing to remain
 abroad have been publicly urged to return to Panama. Panama
 has accepted displaced persons of widely differing ideological
 persuasions, and hundreds of displaced persons and self-imposed
 exiles from other countries reside in Panama. Several hundred
 Salvadorans originally sponsored by the Government of Panama
 are now supporting themselves in a resettlement village.
 Perhaps as many as several thousand Cubans are now in Panama
 awaiting onward emigration; there has been a sharp increase in
 
 
 646
 PANAMA
 the number of Nicaraguans entering Panama as well. No cases of
 forcible repatriation of political exiles occurred in 1985.
 However, the influx of displaced--and largely disadvantaged--
 persons from Central America has resulted in newspaper articles
 warning of a "migration bomb." In August, PDF Commander
 Noriega pledged that the PDF would do all in its power to close
 the borders to illegal aliens from Central America.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 The 1984 general elections, the first direct presidential and
 legislative elections in 16 years, have continued to be a
 source of discontent. It is now widely accepted in Panama that
 Nicolas Ardito Barletta did not win the elections in 1984, but
 rather that the PDF engineered his victory by tampering with
 the vote-counting procedures. This perceived lack of
 legitimacy made it difficult for Barletta to operate
 effectively, The leading role of the PDF in removing him
 confirmed the widely-held view that Barletta was not
 independent of the military establishment.
 The circumstances surrounding Barletta's departure call into
 question the results of the process of transition from military
 rule to democratic civilian government. On this subject PDF
 Commander Noriega was quoted by the Spanish paper El Pais as
 saying, "The Panamanian Defense Forces have a role of guidance
 toward complete democracy. This is a period of transition.
 ...We attempted to leap toward full democracy, but that leap
 did not lie within the scope of national realities.
 On the other hand, the Legislative Assembly elected in 1984 is,
 with a few notable exceptions, a legitimately elected body.
 There are opposition complaints that the majority Partido
 Revolucionario Democratico (PRD), which is considered to be
 controlled by the PDF, consistently manipulates debate and
 unjustly declares opposition legislators out of order when they
 try to speak. However, there are numerous occasions when the
 opposition side of a debate comes through in radio and print
 media coverage. There have also been a number of sharply split
 votes, with the PRD winning only by dint of its one-vote margin
 of absolute majority.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The Government has espoused human rights causes in the
 Organization of American States, the United Nations, and
 elsewhere. A private human rights committee formed in Panama
 in 1978 continued to operate freely in 1985 and expressed
 concern over the local political and human rights situation.
 Articles and editorials critical of the PDF's record on human
 rights and listing specific violations appear frequently in the
 opposition press, many signed by the members of the human
 rights committee.
 Amnesty International Report 1985, which covers events in 1984,
 did not mention Panama. Freedom House rates Panama "partly
 free."
 
 
 647
 PANAMA
 ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND CULTURAL SITUATION
 Panama's total population in 1985 was estimated at 2,180,000;
 the annual population growth rate rose to 2.1 percent in 1985
 (from 1.8 percent in 1984). Real per capita gross domestic
 product was estimated at $2,075 in 1984, falling from $2,120 in
 1983.
 Recent economic performance has been weak, largely as a result
 of deteriorating regional and worldwide conditions.
 Approximately 22 percent of the country's population live in
 extreme poverty, unable to provide properly for basic
 necessities. Although a large percentage of the poor is found
 in rural areas, the trend toward urbanization has increased the
 number of poor in cities as well. Current estimates of
 unemployment rise to 20 percent, with estimates as high as 50
 percent in the district of San Miguelito and the city of Colon.
 Infant mortality rose to 24.5 per 1,000 live births in 1985
 (from 20.1 in 1984). Life expectancy at birth was 71.4 years
 in 1985. In 1980, 82 percent of the population had access to
 safe water (100 percent urban, 65 percent rural). The ratio of
 calorie supply available for consumption relative to
 nutritional requirements was calculated at 102 percent in
 1977. All children attend grade school; the adjusted primary
 school enrollment ratio was 113.66 percent in 1982. The
 overall adult literacy rate was estimated at 87.10 percent in
 1980, although the rate in rural areas was put at 61.8, while
 the urban rate was 93.7.
 Panama has a comprehensive and complex labor code which
 provides liberal benefits to workers. Labor is prohibited for
 children under 14, or under 15 if the child has not completed
 primary schooling. All types of hazardous and night work are
 prohibited for children less than 18 years of age. Children
 from 12 to 14 are permitted to do farm work or domestic work as
 long as the work is light and does not interfere with
 schooling. The maximum work week is 48 hours, and the law
 requires that substantial bonuses be paid for overtime. The
 labor code requires compensation sufficient for a decent life
 for all work performed. The labor code contains extensive and
 detailed health and safety rules for all places of employment.
 The Ministry of Labor and Social Welfare attempts to ensure
 conformity, but its limited resources hamper strict enforcement.
 Panama's social system and legal code accord equal treatment to
 women and men. The Constitution prohibits discrimination on
 the basis of race, birth, social class, sex, religion, or
 political views. Women are accorded equal political rights
 under Panamanian law. Women play an active role in political
 and governmental affairs, and hold a number of important
 positions. The 67 members of the new legislature include four
 women. Of the 134 alternate legislators, 23 are women. Three
 independent agency heads are women. Women also serve as the
 president of the ruling party, one of the three members of the
 electoral tribunal, and the Chief Justice of the Supreme
 Court. Several women's organizations, such as UNIDAD and
 Accion Feminina, are active in Panamanian politics. While
 Panamanian women enjoy full social freedom, they still do not
 have the same opportunities for advancement as do men. This
 reflects both traditional bias and the current difficult
 economic climate. As Panamanian law does not recognize
 community property, divorced or deserted women can be and on
 occasion are left destitute.
 
 
 648
 Female employment in urban Panama is concentrated in the
 .service sector, where wages are generally lower. Although the
 constitution mandates equal pay for equal work, wages paid to
 women are frequently lower than those for equivalent work
 performed by males and increase at a slower rate.
 Comparatively fewer women than men participate in the labor
 force, and their participation seems to fluctuate as the job
 market expands and contracts. Government statistics showed
 that in 1978 (the latest available), women made up about 29
 percent of the economically active work force. Particularly in
 the poorer areas such as San Miguelito, many women are heads of
 households obligated to work for the government, usually as
 street cleaners, in order to receive government support funds.
 The labor code gives pregnant employees 12 weeks mandatory
 maternity leave and the right to return to their jobs.
 Panama is a racially mixed country. The traditional monopoly
 of power by persons of European descent was effectively ended
 with the ouster of the civilian president by the National Guard
 in 1968. Blacks, Asians, and mestizos are now active
 politically, and are represented at senior levels of Government
 and the Panama Defense Forces, and in the new legislature,
 where there are also five Indians.
 Prominent among the minorities which retain some degree of
 separate identity are English-speaking Blacks of Antillean
 descent, Jews, Arabs, Greeks, Chinese, East Indians, and North
 Americans. All of these groups play roles in Panama's urban
 economy well out of proportion to their numbers. There is no
 discrimination in law against these or any other social,
 religious, or cultural groups, except that naturalized citizens
 are forbidden to hold certain categories of elected office, and
 retail trade is constitutionally restricted to native
 Panamanians. While innumerable exceptions exist, Caucasians,
 Asians, and mestizos tend to be better off economically and
 occupy higher positions in Government than Blacks and Indians;
 however, the latter groups participate fully in both the public
 and private sectors. Indian tribes receive government
 assistance, particularly in the areas of public health and
 welfare, and education. They are not restricted to their
 tribal areas, but most remain there by choice, reflecting
 longstanding resistance to asssimilation. Indians enjoy full
 voting rights and all other rights of Panamanian citizenship
 and are politically active. They play significant roles in the
 government of four provinces. In October of 1984 President
 Barletta, in keeping with a campaign promise, named a Kuna
 Indian Vice Minister of Health, the first time an Indian has
 held cabinet rank in Panama. He became Vice Minister of
 Government and Justice (which controls Indian affairs) in the
 cabinet shuffle following President Barletta's ouster.
 Panama's Kuna Indians mostly reside ina self-governing, semi-
 autonomous district, the comarca of San Blas, established in
 1953. The Embera (Choco) Indians, who live in Darien Province,
 eastern Panama, gained government approval for their own
 homeland in 1983 when a law was passed establishing their
 autonomous district or comarca. The Ministry of Government and
 Justice has completed and passed to the legislature for action
 a proposed law creating a comarca for the numerous and widely
 spread Guaymi Indians of western Panama. The Guaymi are
 reportedly not satisfied with the geographic limits of the
 proposed comarca, which would encompass an area of mostly poor
 land on which only one-third of the Guaymi now live; the law is
 expected to be debated in the Legislative Assembly.
 
 
 649
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: PANAMA
 1983     1984     1985
 u--- ---- -.......  --- --- --- -- --- --- ------- --.. .. .- . . .. .   ------
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL...,         7.4     12.0     74.5
 LOANS .................     3.8      5.0      7.9
 GRANTS ...............      3.6      7.0     66.6
 A.AIO .....................     6.3     10.7     74.3
 LOANS .................    3.8       5.0      7.9
 GRANTS ...............      2.5       5.7     66.4
 (SEC.SUPP.ASSIST.)...         0.0      0.0      50.0
 B.FOOO FOR PEACE .......         1.1      1.3      0.1
 LOANS .................    0.0       0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................     1.1      1.3      0.1
 TITLE I-TOTAL ..........         0.0      0.0      0.0
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS .....        0.0       0.0      0.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR .....        0.0       0.0      0.0
 TITLE  II-TOTAL .........       1.1       1.3      0.1
 E.RELIEF.EC.DEV & WFP.         0.1       0.3      0.1
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY .....        1.0       1.0      0.0
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST...          0.0      0.0      0.1
 LOANS .................    0.0       0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................    0.0       0.0      0.1
 PEACE CORPS ......        0.0      0.0       0.0
 NARCOTICS ........        0.0      0.0       0.0
 OTHER .............       0.0      0.0       0.1
 II.NIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL...          5.5     13.5     10.6
 LOANS ............,...     5.0       5.0      0.0
 GRANTS ...............      0.5       8.5     10.6
 A.MAP GRANTS ..........        0.0       8.0     10.0
 B.CREDIT FINANCING ....         5.0      5.0      0.0
 C.INTL MIL.EO.TRNG ....         0.5      0.5      0.6
 D.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK...          0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS........         0.0       0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. & NIL...        12.9      25.5     85.1
 LOANS .................    8.8      10.0      7.9
 GRANTS ................    4.1      15.5     77.2
 OTHER US LOANS ..........         0.0      0.2      0.0
 EX-IM BANK LOANS .......        0.0       0.0      0.0
 ALL  OTHER ..............        0.0      0.2      0.0
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1983     1984     1985     1946-85
 .......----.. ......----... .....----.... ....---....---- - - ---
 TOTAL ........   137.7     82.6     137.3   1321.0
 IBRD               95.0    74.2      51.0    595.8
 IFC                0.0      0.0      37.5     45.8
 IDA                0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 1OB               52.0      8.4      48.7    648.2
 AOB                0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 AFOB               0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 UNOP               0.6      0.0       0.0     26.7
 OTHER-UN           0.1      0.0       0.1      4.5
 EEC                0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 
 
 650
