 PANAMA
 Panama is legally a representative democracy with a
 Constitution which mandates the direct popular election of
 the President, legislators, and municipal representatives;
 establishes an independent judiciary; and guarantees broad
 civil and individual rights. In practice, however, the Panama
 Defense Forces (PDF), despite constitutional proscriptions on
 their political activity as an institution, continue to
 dominate national politics.
 On September 28, President Eric Arturo Delvalle completed one
 year in office. As First Vice President, Delvalle assumed the
 presidency after Nicolas Ardito Barletta was forced from the
 office by the PDF and political leaders of the governing
 coalition. The 1984 general elections, which brought the
 Barletta-Delvalle slate to office, remain a source of friction
 between the Government and opposition parties. The prolonged
 vote tabulation process was marked by irregularities and drew
 charges of fraud from the opposition coalition, which
 ultimately rejected the electoral tribunal's count as invalid.
 Since mid-1984, Panama has been confronted with overriding twin
 fiscal problems: a heavy external debt burden and a large
 government budget deficit. In March 1986, at the urging of its
 international creditors, the Government passed a reform package
 which reduced tariff protection of domestic industry, loosened
 the country's restrictive labor code, and established tax and
 export incentives in the agricultural sector.
 There was no progress in 1986 toward a solution of the
 September 1985 murder of regime opponent Hugo Spadafora.
 However, there were no political murders during the year.
 The most serious erosion of human rights in 1986 occurred in
 the area of media freedom. While the Constitution guarantees
 broad civil rights, and while an active opposition press
 exists, during 1986 the Government applied a controversial
 libel law unevenly to punish opposition media for certain
 criticisms of the Government and the PDF.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section I Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 No political killings occurred during 1986. Some media have
 suggested official involvement in the July death, ruled a
 suicide, of Rotary president Serafin Mitrotti. Mitrotti was
 not known asan opponent of the Government. The September 1985
 murder of Hugo Spadafora, a critic of PDF Commander Manuel
 Antonio Noriega, also remains a source of tension between the
 Government and the opposition. On December 19, 1985, the
 Attorney General formally closed his investigation of the
 Spadafora case and sent the file to the Fourth Superior Court
 in Chiriqui Province for the investigation of charges of
 complicity in the murder against three members of the PDF.
 In February 1986, the Court dismissed these charges and
 effectively closed the case. It appears unlikely that it will
 be reopened, despite the efforts of the Spadafora family and
 opposition elements to keep public attention focused on it.
 
 
 588
 PANAMA
 b. Disappearance
 No disappearances were reported in 1986.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 The Constitution prohibits measures that harm the physical,
 mental, or moral integrity of persons under detention.
 Although there is no indication of systematic abuse of
 prisoners, there have been credible reports of instances of
 PDF abuse of detainees. For example, both opposition and
 other media reported that agents of the PDF's intelligence
 branch struck and kicked 10 members of the Christian Democratic
 Youth Movement detained-October 8 for their role in the seizure
 of the office of the Legislative Assembly president. The
 opposition press has reported three other instances of PDF
 abuse of detainees during 1986: the tabloid Extra reported
 February 22 that an epileptic was beaten by three members of
 the PDF; La Prensa reported August 12 that a complaint was
 filed against a PDF junior officer for beating a father and
 son after illegally entering their home; La Prensa reported
 September 27 that a law school student was admitted to a
 clinic in critical condition due to a beating by PDF members
 after he was arrested for participating in the September 26
 occupation of the Social Security Fund offices.
 Overcrowding in Panama's prisons continues to be a major
 problem. This is attributed to a lack of funding and an
 overburdened judicial system. The average population of the
 Central Men's Prison in Panama City, built in 1925 to
 accommodate 225, is now well over 700. Prisoners must "rent"
 beds from other inmates or sleep on the floor. Food rations
 are basic, largely rice. Supplemental foodstuffs and other
 prison services not provided may be purchased by those able to
 pay. There have been occasional newspaper articles criticizing
 the conditions in the prisons and charging that they violate
 internationally recognized human rights.
 The El Renacer Rehabilitation Center, formerly the Canal Zone
 Prison, has recently undertaken a number of reforms, including
 better treatment of prisoners in terms of diet and physical
 and mental health. There have also been improvements in
 building maintenance and staff discipline and a general effort
 to make the facility a true "rehabilitation center."
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 The Constitution establishes the right of a detained person to
 a judicial determination of the legality of his detention and
 requires warrants for arrest, except for persons arrested
 during the commission of a crime. A suspect may be detained
 for no more than 24 hours without being charged and brought
 before a magistrate. The police must inform accused persons
 immediately of the reasons for their detention and of their
 constitutional and legal rights. Failure to comply with these
 constitutional provisions has led to invalidation of sentences.
 However, constitutional guarantees are not always honored.
 For example, opposition columnist Guillermo Sanchez Borbon was
 detained for several hours on February 18 after presenting
 himself at the public prosecutor's office to give testimony on
 libel charges growing out of the Spadafora murder case. He
 was never informed of the reasons for his detention. Sanchez
 was released after a few hours when friends and supporters
 
 
 589
 PANAMA
 posted $5,000 bail. He subsequently printed an account of his
 experiences while detained, including threats of physical
 abuse by other inmates.
 In a letter to the editor of The New York Times, a U.S.
 citizen, Jack Sachs, detailed his illegal detention by the
 investigative branch of the PDF. Mr. Sachs, traveling in
 Panama on private business, was detained on July 10, held for
 nearly 5 days without being charged or informed of the reasons
 for his detention, and was refused permission to telephone his
 family or the U.S. Embassy. On July 14, despite a judge's
 finding that there was no legal basis for holding him, Sachs
 was turned over toPanamanian Immigration officials rather
 than being released from custody. He was deported the
 following day, again without being informed of the reason for
 this action.
 After being charged with a criminal offense, an accused person
 may be held for as long as necessary for authorities to conduct
 the investigation and bring the case to trial. The judicial
 system suffers from a chronic backlog, frequently resulting in
 prison stays of up to I year for detainees awaiting trial.
 Much of the overcrowding in the prisons is a result of the
 large number of such detainees. Time spent in jail awaiting
 trial counts toward completion of th6 final sentence for those
 convicted.
 There have been reliable and frequent reports that defense
 attorneys ask clients for funds to bribe judicial authorities
 to move their clients' cases forward on court dockets or to
 secure their release from jail without benefit of a court
 order. There have also been credible reports that detainees
 secure release by bribing prison and immigration officials.
 The possibility of conditional release from custody on bail
 exists for persons accused of most crimes. The most
 noteworthy exception is for international narcotics
 trafficking; an individual accused of this crime is explicitly
 denied recourse to bail.
 Under Panama's criminal code, a convict may be required to
 perform labor on public works projects if the sentencing judge
 so specifies. The prisoner's sentence is reduced by 2 days for
 every day spent in such work. There is no other legally
 sanctioned compulsory labor.
 The Constitution prohibits punishment by exile.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Persons charged with crimes are presumed innocent until proven
 guilty and have the right to counsel. The local bar
 association and national university law school offer legal
 counsel at nominal fees. The Government provides public
 defenders for indigent defendants but only after the pretrial
 phase. Although the criminal code provides for public trials
 based on oral testimony and argument, in practice most trial
 procedures are conducted with written presentations by the
 prosecution and defense without the presence of the accused;
 the defendant is rarely present during the trial procedure.
 The documents produced are available for examination by both
 sides. In general, the burden of proof rests on the
 prosecutor. The right to appeal a verdict is available the to
 prosecution and the defense. Homicide cases differ from
 normal procedure in that the accused is present and is tried in
 
 
 590
 PANAMA
 an open courtroom. A guilty verdict and sentencing in homicide
 cases results in automatic appeal.
 Although the Constitution prohibits self-incrimination, there
 have been charges that juveniles and poor people with criminal
 records have been detained and pressured during interrogation
 to confess to crimes they may not have committed. Other
 reported practices--publicly criticized in the Panamanian
 press by government officials and private citizens--include
 summary proceedings and convictions for misdemeanors by police
 magistrates or night court judges without duly prescribed
 defense counsel. Although crimes tried before police
 magistrates are considered to be minor offenses, these courts
 have the authority to impose burdensome penalties on those
 found guilty. The magistrate courts may sentence a person to
 corrective detention for up to 1 year, restrict a person's
 freedom of movement by house arrest, and impose fines up to
 $600. The sentences of police courts may be appealed in some,
 but not all, cases to the next higher official in the police
 hierarchy, usually the mayor or governor.
 The Supreme Court is chartered to uphold the Constitution and
 the laws. Magistrates are barred from simultaneously holding
 other public office or otherwise participating in politics.
 Supreme Court magistrates, who are nominated by the President
 with the consent of the Legislative Assembly, nominate all
 lower court judges. The President, with the consent of the
 Legislative Assembly, appoints the Attorney General. The
 Attorney General appoints superior court district attorneys,
 who in turn nominate circuit district attorneys. Many legal
 authorities, including one Supreme Court magistrate, have
 publicly questioned the integrity of the judicial system.
 Opponents of the Government have charged that the Supreme
 Court is subservient to the PDF.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home or
 Correspondence
 Privacy of the family generally is respected. Under the
 Constitution, judicial warrants must be issued before officials
 may enter homes. Members of the opposition have reported
 receiving anonymous telephone calls threatening them and their
 families. They attribute these calls to the intelligence
 branch of the PDF.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 The Constitution guarantees freedom of speech and press, and
 both the progovernment and opposition press exercise these
 freedoms. The Panamanian media regularly report criticism of
 government officials and policies expressed in the Legislative
 Assembly and by the general public.
 Nevertheless, there was some erosion of freedom of expression
 in Panama in 1986. The Government, specifically the Ministry
 of Government and Justice (MGJ), has repeatedly applied a
 controversial libel law (Law 11 of 1978) against opposition
 journalists and newspapers. Law 11 permits sanctions ranging
 from public admonition and fines to the closing of media
 outlets. The Ministry's rulings can be appealed to judicial
 authority on procedural but not substantive grounds. The main
 opposition daily La Prensa and the tabloid Extra, which
 frequently criticize government officials and policy, have
 
 
 591
 PANAMA
 found themselves increasingly under pressure; the MGJ has
 required them to substantiate their reporting--and on one
 occasion an editorial--with "evidence," or suffer
 administrative sanction.
 On May 27, the Minister of Government and Justice announced a
 government campaign to regulate the media and ensure that all
 were complying with Panamanian law. The MGJ issued two
 judgments against the progovernment Renovation Press (ERSA)
 group in 1986 and over a dozen against the opposition. In
 January, the MGJ fined the ERSA publication La Republica $500
 for printing an inaccurate article about a local civic
 leader. In early June, the MGJ fined ERSA journalist Carlos
 Nunez $2,500 for his article carried by progovernment Critica
 charging that a Panamanian citizen had been denied exit from
 the country by court order. At the same time, the MGJ warned
 Critica to cease publishing caricatures of political
 personages.
 The MGJ's pressure has focused primarily on two opposition
 journalists--Guillermo Sanchez Borbon and Miguel Antonio
 Bernal--and two opposition media outlets--La Prensa and Radio
 Mundial. As noted, Sanchez was detained without charges for
 several hours on February 18. He was summoned to appear again
 at the prosecutor's office on July 9, but instead sought asylum
 at the Venezuelan Embassy, departed Panama, and remains in
 voluntary exile. Sanchez said he had been warned by a
 Government source that if he appeared he would be jailed again,
 this time without bail.
 Bernal also was summoned to the public prosecutor's office on
 July 9 to respond to a calumny charge filed by the Minister of
 the Presidency. Upon finishing his statement, Bernal was
 arrested. He was released several hours later, after
 supporters posted the maximum $5,000 bail. Earlier in the year
 the MGJ had revoked "for life" Bernal's radio broadcasting
 license and fined him $2,500 for his alleged inability to
 substantiate statements he made during an April 15 broadcast
 on Radio Mundial characterizing Panama as a "center of
 narcotics trafficking." The MGJ's fine was the maximum
 permissible under Panamanian law. The Supreme Court denied
 Bernal's appeal of the judgment, stating that he had not
 exhausted the administrative means available for appeal.
 Acting under the provisions of Law 11, the MGJ issued a formal
 citation demanding that the opposition daily La Prensa
 substantiate statements in its July 9 editorial charging that
 the administration of justice in Panama is corrupt and an
 instrument of state power. This citation was noteworthy
 because it applied to a statement of judgment rather than of
 fact. La Prensa presented what it considered the evidence
 supporting its editorial opinion and subsequently challenged
 the constitutionality of Law 11. Another opposition paper,
 Extra, joined the challenge after it too was fined for
 antigovernment statements. On December 18, the Supreme Court
 ruled that Law 11 is constitutional, a decision which could
 have a significant negative impact on freedom of expression in
 Panama.
 The opposition's access to the electronic media is limited.
 Opposition figures own no television stations in Panama, and
 only five radio stations. Opposition groups charge that they
 are unable, for political reasons, to acquire radio or
 television licenses from the Government.
 
 
 592
 PANM
 On May 22, the MGJ closed Radio Mundial, the only opposition-
 owned radio station in the capital, stating that the station
 was operating on an unauthorized FM frequency, one it had been
 using for nine years. Radio Mundial was owned by opposition
 politician Carlos Ivan Zuniga and included among its
 commentators well-known opposition legislators. Zuniga
 subsequently completed a number of modifications to bring the
 station into compliance with broadcast regulations. The :
 Government permitted Radio Mundial to resume broadcasting on
 October 18.
 The MGJ also closed another Zuniga-owned station, Radio 10, in
 an interior province, again for unauthorized use of a
 frequency. The closing came in the midst of a Radio 10
 campaign urging listeners to participate in a rally in Panama
 City for Hugo Spadafora.
 Official pressure on the opposition media can be applied in
 other ways. On January 29, the state electricity company,
 IRHE, cut off power to the sensationalist tabloid El Siglo.
 The newspaper claimed that its electricity payments were
 current. Semi-independent La Estrella de Panama printed El
 Siglo's editions until power was restored. On April 9, IHRE
 cut power to three radio stations owned by the brother of a
 progovernment, but independent, legislator, stating that the
 stations had been "misbilled," and were $15,000 in arrears on
 their electric bill. The "misbilling" was discovered by IHRE
 shortly after one station featured an interview with the
 Spadafora family attorney. Although IRHE accepted
 responsibility for the error, it offered no special
 arrangements to settle the account. By contrast, three
 months' grace was accorded the Government's Democratic
 Revolutionary Party (PRD) after the opposition Christian
 Democratic Party discovered and publicized that the PRD was
 $121,720 in arrears with IHRE.
 There were incidents of physical violence directed largely
 against opposition journalists and media, none of which has
 been solved. On January 12, unidentified persons fired
 shotguns and damaged an automobile parked at La Prensa owned
 by the newspaper's legal advisor. On March 16, the
 transmission tower of progovernment Radio Poderoso Stereo, in
 the interior city of Aguadulce, was sabotaged, resulting in
 $25,000 damage. Similarly, on March 25, dynamite was
 discovered wired to the transmission tower of opposition Radio
 Belen in Santiago, Veraguas. On May 3, Christian Democratic
 (PDC) legislator and radio commentator Carlos Arellano Lennox
 suffered facial burns when an unknown assailant threw a caustic
 substance at him. On June 29, an automobile belonging to
 Emilio de Leon, legal advisor for Extra and leader of the
 opposition Molirena Party, was firebombed and destroyed.
 The three newspapers of the ERSA group are responsive to
 directives from the Government. Absent guidance, however,
 individual columnists write freely about a wide range of
 topics. The Inter-American Press Association recently
 reissued its call for the return of the ERSA papers to their
 previous owners. These papers were expropriated by the PDF
 following the 1968 military coup that brought the late General
 Omar Torrijos to power.
 There is no academic censorship and no censorship of foreign
 newspapers, magazines, books, or cable television programing.
 
 
 593
 PANAMA
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 The Constitution guarantees the right of peaceful assembly.
 Twenty-four hours advance notice, but not government
 permission, is required for open-air meetings. Professional,
 social, and political groups meet without interference.
 The PDF did not interfere with the political events
 commemorating Hugo Spadafora's death. The Spadafora family
 organized a 300-kilometer march in March 1986, a June 23 rally
 at the Attorney General's office to denounce PDF Commander
 Noriega's alleged complicity in the murder, and a memorial
 mass on September 13.
 Panama's organized labor movement is small but well
 established. Both the Constitution and the labor code
 guarantee fundamental worker rights, and workers enjoy a wide
 range of benefits under the law. The rights to establish
 unions, to bargain collectively, and to strike are generally
 unrestricted in the private sector as well as in certain
 public sector agencies specified by law. According to Labor
 Ministry statistics, about 17 percent of the employed work
 force belong to unions. In March 1986, the umbrella National
 Council of Organized Workers (CONATO) carried out a 10-day
 general strike protesting the government's-reform of the labor
 code. The Government declared the strike illegal but took no
 punitive action against the protesters. Some labor
 organizations later charged that workers at several enterprises
 were dismissed for having absented themselves from their jobs
 to participate in the protest. Most public sector employees
 are not permitted to form unions or to strike, but they may
 establish representative associations and have access to
 government dispute resolution procedures. In practice, the
 Government has frequently shown tolerance toward illegal work
 stoppages at public institutions. A source of concern among
 democratic labor leaders is the limitation placed on the right
 of employees in the Colon Free Zone and the offshore banking
 sector to organize unions.
 Elections within Panamanian labor organizations, as well as
 employer and professional associations, are generally
 democratic and free from government interference. These
 organizations are unrestricted in their right to affiliate to
 international bodies, and their members may freely participate
 in political parties and other aspects of Panamanian political
 life, although many employees are allegedly forced to join
 their employers' political party. The Government periodically
 consults with organized labor and employer groups on a range
 of public policy issues, and both sectors are entitled by
 statute to representation on important government boards, such
 as those governing the Social Security Fund and the Vocational
 Training Institute, and on mediation-conciliation panels.
 Because of political differences between the labor sector and
 the Government over reform of the labor code, CONATO refused
 to exercise its legal prerogative to designate Panama's worker
 delegate to the International Labor Organization (ILO)
 conference in June 1986; it nonetheless filed a complaint with
 the ILO challenging the Labor Ministry's subsequent invitation
 to an independent labor group to name the worker delegate.
 The ILO credentials committee rejected the CONATO complaint.
 During the March demonstrations and strikes protesting the
 Legislative Assembly's reform of the labor code, the riot
 police shot and killed a young man mistaken for a looter.
 Several of the protesting workers' groups cited this death as
 
 
 594
 PANAMA
 a manifestation of PDF violence against the strikers. The
 young man's quick burial was criticized as a PDF attempt to
 prevent large gatherings at his funeral.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 The Constitution guarantees religious freedom to all; there is
 no state religion. There are no restrictions on the free
 exercise of religious beliefs, including proselytizing, and a
 broad range of religious groups operates freely in Panama.
 Religious beliefs are not an issue for any of the national
 political parties.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 The Constitution permits Panamanians to move freely within the
 country and to emigrate, and these rights are honored in
 practice. It also prohibits compulsory exile and extradition
 of Panamanian nationals. Some persons exiled by previous
 regimes have returned and resumed full participation in
 Panamanian society. Exiles choosing to remain abroad have
 been officially urged to return to Panama.
 Panama has accepted refugees of widely differing ideological
 persuasions, and hundreds of displaced persons and exiles from
 other countries reside in Panama. Several hundred Salvadorans
 originally sponsored by the Government of Panama are now
 supporting themselves in a resettlement village. Several
 thousand Cubans are in Panama awaiting immigration to the
 United States; there has been an increase in the number of
 Nicaraguans entering Panama as well. No cases of forcible
 repatriation of political exiles occurred in 1986.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 The 1984 general elections, the first direct presidential and
 legislative elections in 16 years, constitute a continuing
 source of friction between the Government and the political
 opposition. It is widely accepted that the PDF engineered the
 current Government's election victory by tampering with the
 vote count. The next general elections are scheduled for 1989.
 The PDF remained the dominant political force in the country.
 There have been numerous allegations that it controls the
 governing Democratic Revolutionary Party (PRD) and interferes
 in the legislative process. There is strong evidence that the
 PDF played the dominant role within the PRD in the selection
 of the 1986-87 president of the Legislative Assembly. The
 PRD by itself has an absolute majority (34 of 67) in the
 Legislative Assembly; together with allied parties it controls
 about two-thirds of the votes in that body.
 Both progovernment and opposition legislators speak on the
 assembly floor. However, the opposition has charged that the
 PRD frequently manipulates debate so as to limit time available
 to the opposition. To express dissent, opposition legislators
 have absented themselves from the Assembly during key votes.
 Their views are fully reported in the opposition press;
 opinions of the governing coalition parties are carried in the
 ERSA press.
 Both the Government and opposition media have reported that
 many government employees are forced to join the political
 
 
 595
 PANAMA
 party of the individual who heads the agency in which they
 work or face dismissal. There have also been frequent and
 credible charges that government employees are pressured by
 their supervisors to take part in official demonstrations.
 Minority groups, including women, blacks.-and Indians, are
 represented in the Legislative Assembly, and participate in
 the political process.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The Government has espoused human rights causes in the
 Organization of.American States, the United Nations, and
 elsewhere. A private human rights committee, formed in Panama
 in 1978, continued to operate freely in 1986 and expressed
 concern over local political and human rights. Articles and
 editorials critical of the PDF's record on human rights,
 listing specific violations, appear frequently in the
 opposition press, many signed by members of the committee.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 The Constitution prohibits discrimination on the basis of
 race, birth out of wedlock, social class, sex, religion, or
 political views. Women are accorded equal political rights
 under Panamanian law and hold a number of important positions.
 The 67 members of the Legislative Assembly include 4 women,
 one of whom was elected to serve as First Vice President for
 the 1986-87 legislative session. Of the 134 alternate
 legislators, 23 are women. Four independent agency directors
 are women. Women also serve as Chief Justice of the Supreme
 Court, one of the three members of the Electoral Tribunal, and
 Director of the El Renacer Rehabilitation Center. Several
 women's organizations, such as UNIDAD and Accion Feminina, are
 active in Panamanian politics.
 However, Panamanian women do not have the same opportunities
 for advancement as do men. This reflects both traditional
 bias and the current difficult economic climate. Because
 Panamanian law does not recognize community property, divorced
 or deserted women have been left destitute.
 Female employment in urban Panama is concentrated in the
 service sector, where wages are lower. Although the
 Constitution mandates equal pay for equal work, wages paid to
 women are lower than those for equivalent work performed by
 males and increase at a slower rate. Comparatively fewer
 women than men participate in the labor force, and their
 participation seems to fluctuate as the job market expands and
 contracts. Government statistics showed that in 1980 women
 made up about 27 percent of the economically active work
 force, a slight decline from 1978. According to the 1980
 census, women slightly outnumber men in the professional and
 technical fields, are twice as likely as men to be clerical
 office workers, and are grossly underrepresented at the
 managerial and administrative levels. Particularly in the
 poorer areas, many women are heads of households obligated to
 work for the government, usually as street cleaners, in order
 to receive government support funds. The labor code gives
 pregnant employees 12 weeks mandatory maternity leave and the
 right to return to their jobs.
 
 
 596
 PANAMA
 Panama is a racially mixed country. The traditional monopoly
 of power by persons of European descent was effectively ended
 with the ouster of the civilian president by the National Guard
 in 1968. Blacks, Asians, and persons of mixed race are now
 active politically and are represented at senior levels of
 government, the Panama Defense Forces, and in the legislature,
 where there are also five Indians.
 Prominent among the minorities which retain some degree of
 separate identity are English-speaking Jews, Arabs, Greeks,
 Chinese, East Indians, and North Americans. All of these
 groups play roles in Panama's urban economy well out of
 proportion to their numbers. There is no discrimination in
 law against these or any other social, religious, or cultural
 groups; however, naturalized citizens are forbidden to hold,
 certain categories of elected office, and retail trade is
 constitutionally restricted to native Panamanians. While
 innumerable exceptions exist, Caucasians, Asians, and persons
 of mixed race tend to be better off economically and to occupy
 higher positions in government than Blacks and Indians;
 however, the latter groups participate fully in both the
 public and private sectors. Indian tribes receive government
 assistance, particularly in the areas of public health and
 welfare and education. They are not restricted to their
 tribal areas, but most remain there by choice, reflecting
 long-standing resistance to assimilation. Indians enjoy full
 voting rights and all other rights of Panamanian citizenship,
 as well as limited self-government in tribal areas. They play
 significant roles in the governments of four provinces. The
 Vice Minister of Government and Justice, who controls Indian
 Affairs, is a Kuna Indian.
 CONDITIONS OF LABOR
 Panama has a comprehensive labor code which gives extensive
 rights and benefits to workers. The maximum work week is 48
 hours, and the law establishes a minimum wage for most worker
 categories and requires substantial bonuses to be paid for
 overtime. Although the 1986 labor code reforms released
 employers from the obligation to pay certain bonuses and
 overtime premiums, employers continue to be legally required
 to provide workers with compensation adequate for a decent
 life. Labor is prohibited for children under age 14, or under
 age 15 if the child has not completed primary school.
 Hazardous and night work is prohibited for persons under
 age 18. Children between ages 12 and 14 may perform farm or
 domestic labor as long as the work is light and does not
 interfere with schooling. In addition, the labor code details
 numerous health and safety standards for all places of
 employment. The Ministry of Labor and Social Welfare is
 responsible for ensuring compliance with these regulations,
 but limited resources hamper strict enforcement of some labor
 code provisions.
 
 
 597
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 "(U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: PANAMA
 1984     1985     1986
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL...        12.0      74.5     33.3
 LOANS .................    5.0       7.9      7.5
 GRANTS ................    7.0      66.6     25.8
 A.AIO ...... ..............    10.7     74.3     33.3
 LOANS .................    5.0       7.9      7.5
 GRANTS ...............      5.7      66.4     25.8
 (SEC.SUPP.ASSST.)..          0.0      50.0     13.2
 B.FOOO FOR PEACE .......         1.3      0.1      0.0
 LOANS .................    0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ...............      1.3      0.1      0.0
 TITLE  I-TOTAL ...........0               0.0      0.0
 qEPAY. 14 S-LOANS .....        0.0       0.0      0.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR.....         0.0       0.0      0.0
 TITLE lI-TOTAL .........         1.3      0.1      0.0
 E.RELIEF.EC.DEV & WFP.         0.3       0.1      0.0
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY .....        10        3.0      0.0
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST...,         0.      0.1      0.0
 LOANS .................     0.0       0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................     0.0       0.1      0.0
 PEACE CORPS ......        00.0               0.0
 NARCOTICS ......          0.0       0.0      0.0
 OTHER ..............    00        0.1      0.0
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL,..         13.5     10.6      8.2
 LOANS ...............        5.0      0.0      3.8
 GRANTS,     ............    .8.5     10.6      4.4
 A.MAP GRANTS..........         8.0      10.0      3.8
 S.CREOIT FINANCING ....        5.0       0.0      3.8
 :.INTL MIL.EO.TR4G....         0.5       0.6      0.6
 D.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK...         0.0       0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS ........        0.0       0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. & NIL,,.         25.5     85.1     41.5
 LOANS  .....  .....     ... 10.0      7.9     11.3
 GRANTS .............    .. 15.5     77.2     30.2
 OTHER  US  LOANS ..........       0.2      0.0      0.0
 EK-IM BANK LOANS .......        0.0       0.0      0.0
 ALL OTHER .................      0.2      0.0      0.0
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1?84     1985     1986     1946-86
 TOTAL .........   82.6    137.4      23.,2  1344.3
 IBRD              74.2      51.0      0.0    595.8
 IFZ                0.0     37.5      23.2     69.0
 I0A                0.0      0.0       0.0      0,0
 lOB                8.4     48.7       0.0    648.2
 ADS                0.0       0.0      0.0      0.0
 AFDO               0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 UNDP               0.0      0.1       0.0     26.8
 OTHER-UN            0.0     0.1       0.0      4.5
 EEZ                0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 
 
 598
