 PANAMA
 Panama is a representative democracy with an elected executive composed of a
 president and two vice presidents, an elected 72-member legislature, and an ap-
 pointed judiciary. President Ernesto Perez Balladares, elected in May 1994 at the
 head of a multiparty coalition, is the chief executive. T~Jhe judiciary is independent,
 but subject to corruption.
 Panama has had no military forces since 1989. The Legislative Assembly amended
 the Constitution in 1994 to abolish a standing military. The amendment contains
 a provision for the temporary formation of a "special plice force" to protect the bor-
 ders in case of a "threat of external aggression." The Panamanian National Police
 (PNP), under the executive branch's Ministry ofemovement and Justice, are re-
 
 
 sponsible for law enforcement. The Judicial Technical Police (PTJ), under the judi-
 cial branch's Public Ministry, perform criminal investigations in support of public
 prosecutors. National Maritime Service and National Air Service forces also perform
 police functions along the coasts and at the Tocumen International Airport respec-
 tively. Credible reports of corruption within both the PNP and PTJ contributed to
 some police dismissals. All police forces are responsive to civilian authority and are
 headed by appointed civilian directors. There were reports of instances of abuse by
 some members of the security forces.
 The service-oriented economy uses the U.S. dollar as currency although it is called
 the Balboa. Gross domestic product grew less than 2 percent in 1996, the seventh
 consecutive year of growth, although the growth rate has declined each of the past
 4 years. Poverty is pervasive, with great and increasing income disparities between
 rich and poor. A year-end survey estimated unemployment at 14.7 percent and
 underemployment at 19.6 percent, together affecting over one-third of the popu-
 lation.
 Principal human rights abuses continued to be prolonged pretrial detention; an
 inefficient and often corrupt criminal justice system, undermined by low wages and
 poor working conditions; ilegal searches; and overcrowded, decrepit prisons. The po-
 lice generally performed in a professional and restrained manner, even during nu-
 merous student and worker protests that sometimes turned violent. However, there
 were reports that police used excessive force  ainst detainees; prison guards also
 beat prisoners. There were instances of political pressure on the media. Discrimina-
 tion against women and indigenous people persists. Violence against women re-
 mained a serious problem, compounded by society's unwillingness to recognize it.
 The Government modified a decree that had initially severely restricted worker
 rights in export processing zones, but the decree still makes no specific reference
 to unions and requires mandatory arbitration of disputes.
 The Government continued to prosecute some persons responsible for abuses com-
 mitted during the 21 years of dictatorship from 1968 to 1989. In November 1995,
 a jury convicted a former military noncommissioned officer for the murder of two
 unarmed civilians during the 1989 U.S. Operation Just Cause. The Government's
 determination to mete out justice for past human rights violations was called into
 question during a rancorous debate over an amnesty bill in May. The proposed
 beneficiaries included human rights violators, common criminals, and even con-
 victed murderers; eventually, the Legislative Assembly postponed consideration of
 the bill indefinitely. On December 29, the Assembly approved a bill to create the
 first office of the Defender of the People, or human rights ombudsman.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no reports of political or
 extrajudicial killings.
 The Construction Workers Union continued to claim that one of the four citizens
 killed during labor protests in 1995 was a victim of police brutality. According to
 the PNP, evidence to date indicates that the man was shot, but it cannot be deter-
 mined with certainty that it was a plice gun that fired the fatal bullet.
 After an investigation of the July 1995 shooting of a police officer by two fellow
 officers, the PNP discharged the two in October and at year's end they faced trial
 on charges of murder.
 The Government continued to prosecute approximately 20 cases of persons respon-
 sible for abuses committed during the 21 years of dictatorship from 1968 to 1989.
 In a few cases that ended in acquittal, the Government appealed the decisions to
 a higher court. In one of three known cases that had yet to go to trial, a former
 meber of the Panama Defense Forces (PDF) charged with a 1985 kidnaping asked
 the authorities to speed up his trial, after more than 7 years in detention.
 In November 1995, two related, high-profile murder cases finally came to trial:
 Those of Raymond Dragseth, a U.S. citizen school teacher, and Fernando Brath-
 waite, a Panamanian contract employee of the US. Embassy-unarmed civilians
 killed by former strongman Manuel Noriega's PDF during Operation Just Cause. On
 the night of December 20, 1989, members of a PDF antiterrorist unit (UESAT)
 forced Dragseth from his home in a private residential area; police officers grabbed
 Brathwaite, identified only by his embassy badge, at gunpoint on the street in an-
 other part of town. Both men   e     n to a police station where they were beaten
 and kept bound and gagged through the following day. On the night of December
 21, PDF sergeant Juan Barria Jimenez drove the two men into the country and shot
 them. In November 1995 a jury convicted Barria of the two murders and sentenced
 him to 20 years' imprisonment. The jury also convicted Cesar Augsto Roldan, a
 
 
 523
 UESAT squad member, of illegal detention. However, the authorities released
 Roldan some months later because, as provided under the law in certain cases, he
 had already served a majority of his sentence while in pretrial detention.
 The Government's determination to mete out justice for past human rights viola-
 tions was called into question during a rancorous debate over an amnesty bill in
 May. A list of 951 proposed beneficiaries put forward by the ruling party included
 the names of human rights violators, common criminals, and even convicted mur-
 derers. The University of Panama closed for almost a week as students took to the
 streets to protest the amnesty bill. In quelling the disturbances police responded in
 measured fashion, although some students were injured, mainly from exposure to
 tear gas. Amnesty International, opposition parties, and the general public also re-
 jeted the bill, leading the Legislative Assembly to postpone consideration of it in-
 definitely.
 b. DisappearancesThere were no reports of  itically motivated disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or  cgraing Treatment or Punishment.
 The Constitution prohibits use of measures that could harm the physical, mental,
 or moral integrity of prisoners or detainees.The police generally performed in a pro-
 fessional and restrained manner, although on occasion there were reports of inci-
 dents involving excessive use of force. There also were reports that police still use
 physical violence to control detainees, particularly during the initial arrest, interro-
 gation, and holding phases.
 Corruption among polie offiers continues to be a problem, although the Director
 of the PNP vowed he would not tolerate it and has made public some occasional
 firings of polie involved in corruption. The authorities fired four police officers who
 failed to turn in $60,000 from a robbery and held them for trial. Another officer was
 fired in October for unspecified criminal acts, and the authorities dismissed 90 re-
 cruits from the Police Academy earlier in the year when background checks revealed
 they had prior ties to criminal youth gangs or organized cnme.
 In November a court tried 12 defendants, including 2 former PTJ agents and 1
 former PNP officer, for attempting to steal 225 kilograms of cocaine from drug traf-
 fickers in June 1995. This case notwithstanding, the head of the Office of Profes-
 sional Responsibility of the PTJ says her office has seen a decline in misconduct
 cases, which she attributes to an influx of higher quality agents. There were no doc-
 umented cases of physical abuse of citizens by the PTJ.
 The PTJ and the PNP have offices of professional responsibility that act as inter-
 nal affairs organs to hold offiers accountable for their actions. Both have staffs of
 independent investigatrs and administrative authority to open internal investiga-
 tion which, upon completion, go to their respective inspectors general for submis-
 sion to review boards. The review boards, in turn, recommend to the service's direc-
 tor the appropriate action; the service director has the final authority to determine
 the disposition of each case. Penalties may include reduction in rank, dismissal, and
 in severe cases, criminal prosecution.
 Through November the PTJ investigated 85 cases of all categories of misconduct;
 there were no dismissals. The PNP through October opened 510 investigations into
 misconduct by police and forwarded 5 cases to the courts for possible action. Of the
 709 cases closed through October (including 199 cases still open from previous
 years), 38 resulted in dismissals, 46 in other disciplinary action, and 11 in rep-
 rimands. The rest of the cases were either dismissed administratively, or the police
 in question were absolved of any wrongdoing.
 In early August, the PNP clashed with Kuna Indians in the eastern part of Pan-
 ama province in a dispute concerning land rights. Demanding that the Government
 remove non-Indian farmers from land claimed by the tribe an armed gup of
 Kunas blocked the Pan American Highway. The authorities caled in the PNPto re-
 open the road, and they exchanged fire with some of the protesters. Police claim
 four officers were wounded, while the Kuna say three of the protesters were injured.
 In October police wounded and captured two members of the Ngobe-Bugle tribe
 who were sniping at cars on a road in Chiriqui province. The snipers seriously
 wounded at least one motorist, and the incident likely was connected to a protest
 against an exploratory copper mining project in the area. The two accused snipers,
 while recovering under detention in a hospital, alleged that police denied them visits
 from family members and lawyers (see Section 5).
 In December the National Assembly began consideration of a bill to established
 an Organic Law for the National Police. The bill includes specific guidelines for PNP
 use of force including deadly force; sets up norms for selection and promotion of offi-
 cers, contributing to PNP professionalization; and seeks to depliticize the PNP by
 prohibiting officers' participation in certain political activities. (The police have been
 operating under a legal cde dating from the Noriega years and a 1991 presidential
 decree regulating the use of force.) Local human rights organizations welcomed the
 
 
 proposed clarifications, noting they had received calls during the year from police
 officers unsure of proper uses of force in controlling and subduing suspects. Some
 police officers, however, opposed a clause in the bill which would require the PNP
 director to be a civilian.
 Conditions in many prisons throughout the country remain deplorable and a
 threat to prisoners' heal-th. Most prisons were built in the 1950's or before and are
 dilapidated and overcrowded; medical screening or care is inadequate; escape at-
 tempts are frequent; and riots and murders are common. The Government opened
 three new prisons in 1996 and closed and demolished the notorious La Modelo pris-
 on. The prison system has so many problems that the Government had a hard time
 filing the position of Director of National Corrections, which was vacant for several
 months until a new director took office in September.
 The National Corrections Department (DNC), under the Ministry of Government
 and Justie, still larely depends on PNP officers, who are not properly trained for
 ,prisen duty, to supply its guard force. Civilian correction officers or "custodians"
 handle inmates witin La Joya, Renacer, and the Central Women's Prison. (The lat-
 ter facility uses only female guards.) The DNC has authority to discipline its own
 prison guards with either criminal or civil sanctions, depending on the severity of
 the abuse. In practice, however, few prisoners or detainees have sought redress for
 alleged abuse by prison guards. DNC authorities have no direct control over PNP
 officers at prisons, however, creating a serious command and coordination problem.
 For example, in a widely publicized beating of prisoners by PNP guards at La
 Modelo prison in Jul         eportedly acted on outside command from police su-
 pervisors, bypassing DNC officials entirely.
 The numtr of trained guards is inadequate to ensure proper security, given the
 large number of prisoners and generally overcrowded conditions. The first formal
 training class of approximately 140 corrections officers graduated from the PNP Po-
 lice Academy. In its 1996 budget request, the DNC asked for funding for 277 new
 positions, but none were approved. Effective prison management also is ham-
 ped by the lack of consistent national operating guidelines; individual prison di-
 rectors are free to establish their own procedures without effective central control
 or oversight. Given the high turnover rate among directors, this system leads to in-
 ternal admstrative confusion and increases directors' susceptibility to corruption
 and abuse of authority.
 There wr    c     ereports of corruption and abuse of prisoners by guards.
 Former inmates and family members of inmates of La Modelo prison alleged that
 some prison guards participated in selling and distributing illicit drugs within the
 prison. They also alleged that guards accepted bribes to allow knives to b smuggled
 into prisoners for use  battles among rival gangs. There were reports from nearly
 every prison of riots or ang battles; in numerous such incidents prisoners were
 killed or wounded. Guards frequently used buckshot and tear gas, fired at close
 range, to quell prisoner disturbances or halt escape attempts. Use of buckshot in-
 jured numerous prisoners and, in at least one case, other guards.
 While a new case tracking system has shown a decrease in case delays in the
 courts and with the public prosecutors, the DNC's own statistics indicate that a ma-
 jority of prisoners have yet to be sentenced. Through November, of 5,907 inmates
 nationwi   or whom information was available, 1,586 had received final sentences;
 99 others had been sentenced but were on appeal. The remaining 4,222 were await-
 ing trial or final sentencing. Total reported prison population as of December 2 was
 7,308 inmates, compared with a total prison design capacity of 5,151.
 The Government enacted measures in 1995 to speed the pace of prosecutions, in-
 cluding allowing prisoners to waive their preliminary hearing and go directly to trial
 if they wish (thuts avoiding the often months-long wait between the two proceed-
 ings). However, these measures appear to have been largely ineffective in moving
 cases more expeditiously. In pubc statements during the year, both the Minister
 of Government and Justice and the President highiighted this area as one in dire
 need of additional reform.
 Until its closing at the end of November, La Modelo prison continued to have a
 prison population many times greater than its desiged capacity. Conditions were
 reportedy so overcrowded that prisoners literally were living in the bathrooms,
 some with overflowing toilets. In the main gallery, hammocks were stacked five
 high. On July 27, a deadly battle between rival gangs in La Modelo provoked severe
 beatings by prison guards, some of which were  lmed and publicized. President
 Perez B alladares reacted by ordering La Modelo emptied and demolished; the Mi-
 ister of Government and Justice fired La Modelo's director, as well as 12 guards
 identified as taking part in the beatings.
 La Modelo prison, condemned by the Catholic Archbishop as a "cemetery of the
 living," was opened to the public and media for tours December 3-5. In a ceremony
 
 
 525
 on December 10, International Human Rights Day President Perez Balladares
 pushed the plunger to blow up the vacant structure. In his remarks, the President
 termed the prison a national disgrace, acknowledging that it had been the site of
 grave human rights abuses of common criminals and political prisoners alike.
 The prison situation in Colon remained grim, with high crime and incarceration
 rates mirroring the lack of economic opportunity in Colon city and province. The
 President inaugurated Nueva Esperanza prison in April, a former cold storage facil-
 ity converted to a prison to relieve the terrible overcrowding in Colon prison. How-
 ever, rival prisoner gang members were not properly separated upon transfer to the
 new facility, and in June violence among prisoners provoked a riot that left four
 dead, many injured, and extensive damage to the new facility.
 Transfer of La Modelo prisoners to other facilities worsened the conditions at
 those facilities. The Government expanded the maximum security cellblocks at La
 Joya prison to allow it to absorb inmates from other overcrowded prisons, prin-
 cipally those formerly in La Modelo. As of November, this relatively new 1,000-bed
 facility housed 1,194 inmates and detainees; an additional 1,041 inmates were
 housed in an adjacent minimum- to medium-security facility. The DNC also put in
 place a classification program to categorize inmates according to risk, an important
 step in light of the transfer of dangerous maximum security inmates from La
 Modelo, a system which the DNC plans to extend to all prisons nationwide.
 Conditions on Coiba Island Penal Colony continued to be deplorable. Of the 679
 prisoners, 451 await trial or final sentencing, and the majority reportedly will have
 served almost two-third of their potential sentences before reaching trial. Prisoners
 suffer from malnutrition and shortages of potable water, and medical care is prac-
 tically nonexistent. Coiba has a civilian administrator, but its guard force still con-
 sists of police guards instead of civilian corrections officers. Geographic isolation and
 lack of communications have separated detainees from their attorneys and caused
 many to miss trials. Escapes from Coiba are reported common. The Government
 began transferring prisoners out of Coiba as a py steptoclosing it, but fol-
 lowing the decision to close La Modelo prison, Coiba has become a key holding facil-
 ity for transferred La Modelo inmates. The Government acknowledges it must keep
 Coiba open, but as yet has made no prvisions to upgrade or maintain the facility.
 Conditions at women's prisons in Panama City and Chiriqui province were notice-
 ably better. Even so, female prisoners, especially those in the primary detention
 area, reportedly suffered from overcrowding, poor medical care, and lack of basic
 supplies for personal hygiene.
 At the Juvenile Detention Center, the Attorney General in September ordered an
 investigation into conditions after the Center fired an official who alleged that there
 were incidents of abuse of juvenile detainees. Both male and female minors are
 housed in the same facility, although in separate buildings.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The Constitution stipulates that arrests
 must be carried out with a warrant issued by the appropriate authorities. Excep-
 tions are permitted when an officer apprehends a person during the commission of
 a crime, or when disrespect by the individual toward the officer prevents the officer
 from carrying out his duty. The law requires the arresting officer to inform the de-
 tainee immediately of the reasons for arrest or detention and of the right to imme-
 diate legal counsel, to be provided by the State for the indigent.
 The Constitution also provides for judicial review of the legality of detention and
 mandates the immediate release of any person detained or arrested illegally. The
 Constitution prohibits police from detaining suspects for more than 24 hours with-
 out bringing them before a competent judicial authority. In practice, the authorities
 often violated the 24-hour time limit by several days. Under law the preliminary
 investigation phase may last 8 days to 2 months, and the follow-on investigation
 phase another 2 to 4 months, depending on the number of suspects. However, exten-
 sions of these limits are frequently granted by the courts, leaving the accused in
 detention for an extended period without having been formally charged.
 Extended pretrial detention continued to be one the most serious human rights
 problems, in part a consequence of the elaborate notification phase in criminal
 cases. According to DNC statistics, pretrial detainees composed approximately 71
 percent of the prison population, down slightly from 78 percent in 1995. Almost 25
 percent of the total prison population is under detrntion beyond legally permissible
 time limits. According to public defenders, the average period of pretrial custody for
 a defendant-was approximately 16 months; pretrial detention in excess of the mai-
 mum sentence for the alleged crime was common. A legal mechanism exists to hold
 the Government financially accountable in cases where a detainee spends more than
 1 year in jail but subsequently has all charges dismissed at a preliminary hearing.
 The dismissal must be either because the act of which the detainee was accused is
 not ruled a crime or because there is no evident to link the suspect to the crime.
 
 
 526
 
 Although this redress procedure is not extremely complicated, few former detainees
 have sought redress for their time in detention.
 In October the authorities arrested a group of 134 protesters from the radical
 Colon civic action group "Reaction Three,-who staged a violent protest at the Min-
 istry of Housing, causing extensive damage. A judge sentenced the protesters to 20
 days' onfinement; 89 men were sent to Coiba Island prison, while 45 women were
 detained at the Central Women's prison. Human rights groups denounced the Gov-
 ernment's decision to send the male detainees to Coiba, given the atrocious living
 conditions and its inaccessibility to family members and lawyers. The Supreme
 Court declared that the detention was legal but that the Government had acted im-
 prperly in sending the male detainees to Coiha. The authorities deported one "Re-
 action Three" leader to Colombia; he subsequently accused police of having beaten
 him and taken his mney, but the charges could not be substantiated.
 The Constitution prohibits exile and there were no reports of forced exile.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The Constitution provides for an independent judi-
 ciary; however,the judiciary is susceptible to corruption. The President appoints
 nine Supreme Court magistrates to 10-year terms, subject to Legislative Assembly
 confirmation. The Supreme Court magistrates appoint appellate (Superior Tribunal)
 judges, who, in turn, appoint circuit and municipal court judges in their respective
 Jurisdictions. The Attorney General, who heads the Public Ministry jointly with the
 Solicitor General, appoints the superior and circuit-level prosecutors. Appointments
 are supposed to be made under a merit-based system, but the tp-down appointment
 system lends itself to political tinkering an undue interference by higher-level
 judges in lower-level cases in which they have no jurisdiction.
 At the local level, mayors appoint administrative judges who exercise jurisdiction
 over minor civil and criminal cases in which they may impose fines or sentences of
 up to 1 year. This system has serious shortcomings. For example, defendants lack
 adequate procedural safeguards, the officials need not be (and normally are not) at-
 torneys, and some engage in corrupt practices. In reality, appeal procedures are
 nonexistent. More affluent defendants tend to pay fines while poorer defendants go
 to jail, one of the chief factors leading to current prison overcrowding.
 The Constitution provides that persons charged with crimes have the right to
 counsel, to be presumed innocent until proven guilty, to refrain from incriminating
 themselves or close relatives, and to be tried only once for a given offense. If not
 under pretrial detention, the accused may be present with counsel during the inves-
 tigative phase of the proceeding. Judges can order the presence of pretrial detainees
 for the rendering or amplification of statements, or for confronting witnesses. Trials
 are conducted orally with the accused present, but with little new evidence pre-
 sented beyond that in the case file compiled by the public prosecutor. The Constitu-
 tion and Criminal Procedure Code provide for trial by jury at the defendant's elec-
 tion, but only in criminal cases where at least one of the charges is murder.
 The Constitution obliges the Government to provide public defenders for the indi-
 gent. Many public defenders are not appointed until after the investigative phase
 of the case, a serious disadvantage for the defendant since it is during this stage
 that the prosecutor produces and evaluates the bulk of the evidence and decides
 whether to recommend trial or the dismissal of charges. Nevertheless, many more
 public defenders than in past years were assigned to cases prior to commencement
 of the investigative phase, significantly improving the defense's opportunity to
 present exculpatory evidence. Public defenders' caseloads remained staggering, aver-
 aging 410 cases per attorney in 1995. Only 1 new public defender has been hired
 since 1992, making a total of 36 nationwide, while the caseload increased 74 percent
 since then. This heavy workload undermined the quality of representation, with
 -many prisoners meeting their public defender for the first time on the day of their
 trial.
 Trial activity was hampered by budgetary shortfalls. Additionally, according to
 various independent sources, the judicial system was undercut by narcotics-related
 judicial corruption. Citizen complaints about corrupt practices by Supreme Court
 Justice Jose Manuel Faundes led to formal charges by the Attorney General that
 he imprperly influenced cases. The Legislative Assembly investigated wrongdoing
 by Faundes during special Judicial Sessions in August and September, which re-
 sulted in a decision to initiate impeachment proceedings against him. The case
 against Faundes included charges that he abused his authority and accepted cash
 payments in exchange for lenient sentencing and treatment of certain prisoners, in-
 cluding narcotics traffickers.
 The Attorney General also investigated other judicial branch and Public Ministry
 officials for improprieties. In November President Perez Balladares made sweeping
 public accusations of corruption in the judicial branch, alleging that a majority of
 citizens believe justice is "bought and sold" in the country; the President proposed
 
 
 527
 the creation of a new office to review court decisions. Two Supreme Court Justices
 denounced the President's broad accusations and challenged the executive to present
 concrete evidence of specific cases of corruption.
 In June the lawyer for an accused narcotics trafficker revealed that two narcotics-
 tainted donations had reached President Perez Balladares' 1994 election campaign.
 The President promptly and publicly admitted the funds had entered his campaign
 but insisted that he was personally unaware of their origin at the time. At the
 President's behest, the Attorney General conducted an investigation, subsequently
 declaring that no evidence of criminal wrongdoing had been found.
 There were no reports of political p risoners. Advocates of the amnesty bill (see
 Section l.a.) claimed that its beneficiaries were political prisoners and others
 charged with, or convicted of, political crimes. Closer scrutiny, however, revealed
 that many potential beneficiaries were common criminals (including some violent of-
 fenders). The Attorney General, who opposed the legislative amnesty, declared at
 the time that there were no political prisoners or politically motivated prosecutions
 pending.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Famy, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Constitution provides for the inviolability of the home, private papers, and tele-
 phonic communications. The authorities may not enter private residences except
 with the owner's permission, or by written order from the appropriate authority or
 specific purposes. (These may include entry to assist the victims of crime or disaster,
 or to conduct lawful health and safety inspections.) In practice, however, there were
 credible complaints that the police failed to follow legal requirements and instead
 conducted indiscriminate searches of private residences. The authorities may not ex-
 amine private papers and correspondence, except as properly authorized by com-
 petent legal authority and in the presence of the owner, a family member, or two
 neighbors.
 Despite the view of some that the Constitution prohibits all wiretapping, the Gov-
 ernment maintains that wiretapping with judicial branch approval is legal. Under
 the guidelines established by antinarcotics legislation passed in July 1994, the Pub-
 lic Ministry may engage in undercover operations, including "videotaping and re-
 cording of conversations and telephonic communications." The Supreme Court may
 ultimately decide whether wiretapping is constitutional and, if so, under what cir-
 cumstances. However, media publication of unauthorized taped phone conversations
 during the Faundes impeachment hearings suggest that wiretapping is not un-
 known.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of speech
 and the press, and the Government generally respects these rights in practice. Six
 national daily newspapers, 3 commercial television stations, 2 educational television
 stations, and over 95 radio stations provide a broad choice of informational sources;
 all are privately or institutionally owned. Close relatives of the President control one
 major television station and have close political and economic ties with the manage-
 ment of another. While many media outlets took identifiable editorial positions, the
 media carried a wide variety of political commentaries and other perspectives, both
 local and foreign.
 Panamanian and foreign journalists worked and traveled freely throughout the
 country, and the population had access to foreign media. After tense verba sparring
 with journalists over coverage of narcotics traffickers contributing to political cam-
 paigns, the President eventually accepted the legitimacy of tough investigative jour-
 nalism on this issue. In August he forced Second Vice President Virzi to apologize
 publicly after calling journalists "clowns."
 There were some cases of government harassment of journalists, such as barring
 individual journalists from covering government events and pressure on the man-
 agement of certain television stations to modify their programming. After the scan-
 dal caused by the July filming of prisoner beatings at La Modelo prison, some jour-
 nalists reported being harassed by police who wanted to prevent them from entering
 adjacent apartment buildings to do additional filming. The Government has legai
 authority to prosecute media owners and reporters for criminal libel and calumny,
 but has not used it. Informal pressure on the media was more common.
 A special executive branch authority has discretionary powers to administer the
 libel laws, which provide for fines and up to 2 years in prison. Under the statute,
 opinions, comments, or criticism of government officials acting in their official capac-
 ity are specifically exempted from libel prosecution, but a section of the law alows
 for the immediate discipline of journalists who show "disrespect" for the office of cer-
 tain government officials. While this section of the law was not used during the
 year, its existence inhibits some writers' self-expression.
 
 
 528
 In November a court cleared the associate director of daily La Prensa of libel
 charges brought by President Perez Balladares over remarks in a November 1993
 newsa _r olumn aboutparty leaders, including Perez Balladares. Also in Novem-
 ber, the Public Prosecutor's offic summoned another La Prenaa journalist to make
 sworn statements in a libel case brought by the Minister of Public Works over alle-
 gations of wrongdoing in 1991 reported in a La Prensa article.
 The press laws provide for the establishment of a censorship board. There were
 no reports of the board taking an restrictive actions in 1996, although one legisla-
 tor publicly complained that the beard has not done enough to control allegedy of-
 fensive content of radio and television programs.
 The law provides for academic freedom, which was freely exercised in both public
 and private universities.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution provides for
 the rights of peaceful assembly and association, and the Government generally re-
 spects these rights in practice. No authorization is needed for outdoor assembly, al-
 thoughprior notification for administrative purposes is required.
 Several times during the year the Government responded to student unrest at the
 University of Panama by sending PNP riot police to the campus periphery. In Octo-
 ber the police entered the campus directly to deal with protesters. Students and
 some university staff reacted angrily to the police presence and accused them of ex-
 cessive use of force. Overall, police response to student protests was restrained, de-
 spite considerable interference with public order when the protests spill over onto
 major thoroughfares, blocking vehicle traffic and threatening passersby. Police
 showed similar restraint while monitoring large protest marches during the year by
 civil servants and members of indigenous tribes.
 Citizens have the right to form associations and professional or civic groups with-
 out government interference. They may form and organize political parties freely,
 although new parties must meet strict membership and organizational standards in
 order to gain official recognition and participate in national campaigns. On Decem-
 ber 8, the presidents of eight small p}arties in the process of formation jointly de-
 nounced the Electoral Tribunal for allegedly creating intentional obstacles to impede
 c. Freedomn of Religion.-The Constitution, although secifically recognizing Ca-
 tholicism as "the reigion of the majority of Panamam~ans,T provides for free exercise
 of all religious beliefs, provided that 'Christian morality and public order' are re-
 spected. The Government imposes no limitations in practice. Clerics are constitu-
 tionally prohibited from holding public office, except as related to social assistance,
 education, or scientific research.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Constitution provides for these rights, and the Government re-
 spects them in practice. A 9:00 p.m. curfew for minors under 18 years of age in the
 Panama City and San Miguelito districts of Panama province, imposed in 1992, re-
 mained in effect. Police enforcement of the curfew was uneven, with strictest compli-
 ance focused on high-crime areas.
 The immigration authorities in November deported to Colombia a group of 88 mi-
 grants (mostly women and children), who reportedly had fled into the border prov-
 ince of Darien to escape killings and harassment by paramilitary groups and leftist
 guerrillas. The authorities determined that the Colombians were not entitled to ref-
 ugee status because they could be resettled in other regions of Colombia and repa-
 triated the group. Subsequently, however, Amnesty International criticized the move
 and called on the Government to halt any further deportations, claiming that the
 Colombians were indeed entitled to refugee status and merited protection.
 The Government cooperates with the office of the United Nations High Commis-
 sioner for Refugees and other humanitarian organizations in assisting refugees. The
 Government honors the principle of first asylum, but the issue did not arise in 1996.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 The Constitution provides for a representative democracy with direct popular elec-
 tion by secret ballot of the President, two vice presidents, legislators, and local re-
 resentatives every 5 years. The President is currently limited to a single term, a -
 though President Perez Balladares' supporters have suggested he may be interested
 in having the Constitution amended to permit him to run for a second term. The
 independent National Electoral Tribunalarranges and supervises elections. The
 Government respected the rights of its citizens to join any political party, propagate
 their views, and vote for candidates of their choice.
 There are no legal barriers to participation by women or people of African, Asian,
 or indigenous descent, but their presence in senior leadership positions in govern-
 
 
 ment or political parties is not proportionate to their numbers within society.
 Women hold 5 of 72 Legislative Assembly seats and 1 of 11 Cabinet positions. The
 Legislative Assembly's vice president is a woman; as are the provincial governors
 of Panama and Colon, and the mayor of Panama City. In 1994 a woman ran for
 President and finished second with over 28 percent of the vote.
 The Governmentprovides semiautonomous status to several indigenous groups in
 their homelands, including the San Bias, Madugandi, and Darien Embera-Wounaan
 reserves. The San Bias groups have two representatives in the Legislative Assem-
 bly, proportionate to their share of the population. Locally, the reserve is governed
 by tribal chiefs, who meet in a general congress twice a year. Neither the
 Madugandi nor the Embera-Wounaan reserve has its own dedicated legislators, but
 each has a separate governor.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Human rights organizations, including both religious and secular groups, gen-
 erally operated without government restrictions. These organizations carried out a
 full range of activities, including investigations and dissemination of their findings.
 Human rights advocates generally had   e access to government officials while in-
 vest' ating complaints. Amnesty International's criticism of the ruling party's pro-
 posed amnesty bill was widely publicized.
 On December 29, the Legislative Assembly approved a bill to create an office of
 "Defender of the People," or a human rights ombudsman. The new office is to be
 an appendage of the Legislative Assembly, with privileges and immunities com-
 parab [e to those of a legislator. The ombudsman has broad powers to investigate
 complaints of human rights abuses, but no coercive authority, depending instead on
 moral suasion. The Assembly modified the original bill to require that the successful
 ombudsman candidate be approved by only a simple majority vote, not by two-thirds
 as originally contemplated. While this will likely simplify the aproval process, op-
 position critics say it could make the incumbent susceptible to political manipulation
 by the ruling party.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution prohibits either special privileges or discrimination on the basis
 of race, birth status, social class, sex reli *on, or political views. Nevertheless, soci-
 ety, particularly the upper class, stiil har ors many prejudices based primarily on
 race, sex, and social status.
 Women.-Domestic violence against women continued to be a serious problem,
 and local justices processed thousands of domestic violence cases. The reputable
 Center for the Development of the Woman estimated that victims report as few as
 20 percent of sexual assaults to judicial or law enforcement authorities. The Foun-
 dation for the Promotion of the Woman, among other women's advocacy groups and
 government agencies, operated programs to assist victims of such abuse.
 In addition to domestic violence, sexual harassment is a serious threat to the
 equpal status of women in society. A reliable report from the Latin American Com-
 mittee for the Defense of Women revealed in 1995 that up to 70 percent of female
 government employees had been sexually harassed in the workplace, 42 percent by
 their immediate supervisors and 18 percent by even more senior supervisors. In
 1995 officials relieved several academics and administrators of their positions at the
 University of Panama for sexual harassment.
 Women generally do not enjoy the same economic opportunities as men. Until
 1995 the law did not recognize property in common, and divorced or deserted women
 are often left destitute. The new Family Code promulgated in 1995 recognizes for
 the first time joint or common property in marriages. However, the Government has
 not committed sufficient funding to provide enough judges and administrative re-
 sources to enforce the new code's provisions.
 The Constitution mandates equal pay for equal work, but wages paid to women
 are often lower than those for equivalent work performed by men and increase at
 a slower rate. A 1994 U.N. report noted that women occupy only 4 percent of the
 managerial positions in Panama. Although statistics are lacking, there are credible
 reports of hiring practices based on age and "attractiveness." A Government Em-
 ployees Union leader claimed in September that the Government fired 150 women
 from their civil service jobs because they were pregnant, and had only reinstated
 10 of them.
 A number of private women's rights groups, including groups for indigenous
 women, concentrate on disseminating information about women's rights, countering
 domestic abuse, enhancing employment and other skills, and pressing for legal re-
 
 
 530
 forms. Indigenous women vocally criticized male government administrators and
 politicians or overlooking their rights. At a formal gathering of Kuna women in San
 Bias in October, partipants complained that male tribal leadra ignore the inter-
 ests and opinions of women, and alleged that domestic abuse of Kuna women is a
 serious but underreported problem.
 Children.-Education of-children is compulsory through the equivalent of ninth
 grade. The Government furnishes basic health care for children through local clinics
 run by the Ministry of Health; a central Children's Hospital in Panama City oper-
 ates on government funds as well as private donations.
 The Superior Tribunal for Minors and Superior Tribunal for Families are judicial
 authorities charged with overseeing the protection and care of minors, but the Gov-
 ernment has no specific office charged with protecting children's rights. A women's
 advocacy group reported in 1994 that 72 percent of children are bern from nonsta-
 ble, short-term relationships. Many children suffer from malnutrition, neglect, and
 inadquate medical care. A government nutrition survey released in November
 found that among children entering first grade nationwide in 1994, 24 percent were
 malnourished. Urban areas showed the lowest levels of malnourisment while the
 highest levels were registered among indigenous groups, led by a 71.2 percent rate
 for Kuna children in San Blas.
 Juvenile courts report a high incidence of juvenile delinquency in major urban
 areas. The Family Code, in forc e  I1995, plaed juvenile ourt authority, includ-
 ing rehabilitation programs, orpuhan care authority, and juvenile detention author-
 ity, under the Supreme Court. It also clarified reporting authority and strengthened
 preventive protection powers in suspected juvenile-abuse cases. While it also aimed
 to create a mechanism to record and report suspected domestic violence cases in-
 volving minors, budgetay shortfalls hampered the new bureaucracy's efforts to im-
 plement the repor gtin program.
 People With Disabiities.-The Workers with Disabilities Office of the Department
 of Labr and Social Welfare is responsible for government policy and support for
 citizens with disabilities and for placing qualified disabled workers with employers.
 The office was in charge of implementing a June 1993 executive order thatprovidd
 employers with tax incentives for hiring people with disabilities but has had only
 minimal success. Although some public buildings and retail stores have access
 ramps for disabled people, no law or regulation compels the installation of ramps
 or other facilitated-access features in public or privatebuildings.
 Indigenous PeoplaIndigenous people number approximately 194,000 (8 percent
 of the population and theoretically have the same p oitical and legal rights as other
 citizens. The Constitution protects the ethnic identity and native languages of india-
 enous people, requiring the Government to provide bilingual literacy programs n
 indigenous communities. Indigenous people have legal rights and take p art in deci-
 sions affecting their lands, cultures, traditions, and the allocation of natural re-
 sources. The Famiy Code recognizes traditional indigenous cultural marriage rites
 as the equivalent of a civil ceremony. The Ministry of Government and Justice
 maintains a Directorate of Indigenous Policy. The Legislative Assembly also has an
 Indigenous Affairs Commission to address charges that the Government has ne-
 glected indigenous needs.
 Despite legal protection and formal equality, indigenous people generally endure
 relatively higher levels of poverty, disease, malnutrition, and illiteracy than the rest
 of the population. Discrimination is widespread. Since indigenous populations infre-
 quently master Spanish well enough to use appropriate legal terminology, they often
 have difficulty understanding their rights under the law and defending themselves
 in court. The indigenous p~opulation, particularly Ngobe-Bugle, has grown increas-
 ingly vocal in requesting that the Government grant it more autonomy by creating
 more indigenous reserves or expanding existing ones. A general standoff has existed
 between Government and indigenous reserve status negotiators. Ngobe-Bugle
 grups complained that private landholders restricted access to claimed tribal lands.
 The Govenent supported the landholders' claims that legal leases were still in ef-
 fect based on prior indigenous members' sales of the property to private individuals.
 In August polce clashed with Kuna Indian protesters over demarcation of indige-
 nous lands in the eastern part of Panama province; several protesters and police of-
 ficers were injured (see Section d.c.).
 Members of the Ngobe-Buge tribe continued to pressure the Government into
 granting them official demarcation of a semiautonomous tribal reserve, a demand
 ta t te triboe has pursued unsuccessfully over the last 20 years. The Ngobe-Bugle
 also demanded that the Government cancel a concession for exploratory copper min-
 ing on indigenous lands in Chiriqui province, holding several demonstrations there
 followed by a symbolic march to Panama City to press their demands in October.
 The protesters met with government officials, including President Perez Balladares,
 
 
 531
 but refused to participate in separate government-appointed commissions to study
 the demarcation issue and the mining concession, claiming that the Government
 was not bargaining in good faith. Under heavy media pressure to resolve the dis-
 pute, the Executive Branch on December 2 presented a bill to the Legislative As-
 sembly to create a Ngobe-Bugle semiautonomous region covering approximately
 694,000 hectares spread across Chiriqui, Bocas dl Tor, and Veraguas provinces.
 Ngobe-Buge activists originally denounced the bill because it reduced their original
 land claim and left the mining concession intact, but prtests subsided after an As-
 smbly committee a pp roved the first few articles of the bill._
 National/Racial/Ethnic Minorities.-The law    prohibits discrimination against
 any social, religious, or cultural group; however, naturalized citizens may not hold
 certain categories of elective office. There is someevidence that a constitutional pro-
 vision reserving retail trade to Panamanian citizens originally was directed at Chi-
 nese immigrants, but government officials have stated that it serves as a barrier
 to prevent foreign retail chains from operating in the country. The measure is not
 enforced in practice, however. Chinese, Middle Eastern, and Indian residents, as
 well as citizens of Chinese and Indian descent, operate much of the retail trade, par-
 ticularly in urban areas.
 Leaders of the over 100,000-member East Asian and South Asian communities
 credibly claimed that Panamanian elites treat Panamanian-resident Chinese and In-
 dians as well as citizens of Asian origin as second-class citizens.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-Private sector workers have the right to form and
 join unions of their choice, subject to registration by the Government. A Labor Code
 reform package signed in 1995 significantly increased workers' ability to establish
 unions. The reforms streamline the accreditation and registration process for
 unions, reduce the minimum size from 50 to 40 workers and cut the Government's
 required response time on applications from 2 months to 15 days. In the event the
 Government does not respond within this time frame, the union will automatically
 be recognized and accorded all rights and privileges under the law.
 Neither the Government nor the political parties control or financially support
 any unions. During debate on the Labor Code, militant labor unions took to the
 streets to agitate against its passage. The unions claimed that one of their number
 who was killed during the unrest was a victim of police abuse. The police said that
 available evidence did not show that the fatal bullet was fired from a police weapon
 (see Section L.a.).
 According to Ministry of Labor statistics, approximately 10 percent of the total
 employed labor force is organized. There are 257 active unions, grouped under 6
 confederations and 48 federations representing approximately 73,300 members in
 the private sector.
 The 1994 Civil Service Law permits most government workers to form public em-
 ployee associations and federations and establishes their right to represent members
 in ollective bargaining with their respective agencies. It als provides most workers
 with the right to strike, except for certain government workers in areas vital to pub-
 lic welfare and security, such as the police and health workers and those employed
 by the US. military forces and the Panama Canal Commission. The Government
 fired striking air traffic controllers in November, on the grounds that they had
 abandoned their positions and left the public in danger. Public sector workers are
 lobbying the Government to have their associations accorded formal "union" status.
 The new Labor Code addressed some longstanding concerns of the International
 Labor Organization (ILO). The code no longer makes labor leaders automatically in-
 eligible to keep their union positions if they are fired from their jobs.
 There were fewer private sector strikes in 1996, although unions protested and
 challenged in court a series of cabinet decrees governing labor and management re-
 lations in Export Processing Zones (EPZ's--see Section 6.b.).
 Union organizations at every level may and do affiliate with international bodies.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The Labor Code provides
 most workers with the right to organize and bargain collectively, and unions widely
 exercise it. The law protects union workers from antiunion discrimination and re-
 quires employers to reinstate workers fired for union activities. The Ministry of
 Labor has mechanisms to resolve complaints against antiunion employers. The Civil
 Service Law allows most public employees to organize and bargain collectively and
 grants them a limited right to strike. The Labor Code establishes a conciliation
 board in the Ministry of Labor to resolve labor complaints and provides a procedure
 for arbitration.
 Employers commonly hire temporary workers to circumvent onerous labor code re-
 quirements for permanent workers; such temporary workers receive neither pen-
 
 
 532
 sions nor other benefits. The practice of blank contracts is, according to union
 sources, becoming more widespread. The new labor legislation addresses this prob-
 lem by requiring all companies to submit copies of all labor contracts for permanent
 workers to the Labor Ministry and by requirg the Labor Ministry to conduct peri-
 odic inspections of companies' work forces and review all contracts to ensure that
 they are in order. The new code also authorizes the Labor Ministry to levy fines
 against companies not in cornpliance with the law.
 In .January and February, the Government issued cabinet decrees governing labor
 relations in export processing zones (EPZ's), as a means of attracting investment
 into areas vacated under the terms of the Panama Canal Treaty. The ori  al decree
 limited a brad swath of labor rights, including the right to strike an to bargain
 collectively. The second decree modified the first, and restored most worker rights
 in EPZ's. However, it provides for collective bargaining with "representatives of em-
 ployees" but makes no spcific mention of trade unions; it reuires mandatory arbi-
 tration of disputes, and alows for participation on the tripartite (government, labor,
 and industr. arbitration commission by an unrepresentative worer delegate.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The Labor Code prohibits forced
 or compulsory labor, and neither practice was reported.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The Labor Code prohibits the em-
 ployment of children under 14 years of age as well as those under 15 years if the
 child has not completed primary school; children under age 16 cannot work over-
 time; those under 18 years cannot perform night work. Children between the ages
 of 12 and 15 may perform farm or domestic labor as long as the work is light and
 does not interfere with the child's schooling. The Ministry of Labor enforces these
 provisions in response to complaints and may order the termination of unauthorized
 employment. The Government has not enforced child labor provisions in rural areas,
 claiming insufficient staff. According to an ILO report, 11,600 children between the
 ages of 10 and 14 are in the labor force-primarily in farm or domestic labor.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The Labor Code establishes a standard work
 week of 48 hours and provides for at least one 24-hour rest period weekly. It also
 establishes minimum-wage rates for specific regions and for most categories of labor.
 The minimum wage, last increased in January 1993, is $1.00 per hour in the dis-
 tricts of Panama, Colon, and San Miguelito, and for workers in financial services.
 It is not enough to support a worker and family above the poverty level in the rel-
 atively high-cost economy. Most workers formally employed in urban areas earn the
 minimum wage or above, but most workers in the large informal sector earn below
 the minimum wage. Unions have repeatedly alleged that contractors operating in
 the Panama Canal area pay less than the required minimum wage. The Ministry
 of Labor does not adequately enforce the minimum wage law, due to insufficient
 personnel and financial resources.
 The Government sets and enforces occupational health and safety standards. An
 occupational health section in the Social Security System is responsible for conduct-
 ing periodic inspections of especially hazardous employment sites, such as those in
 the construction industry, as well as inspecting health and safety standards in re-
 sponse to union or worker requests. The law protects from dismissal workers who
 file requests for health and safety inspections. Workers also have the right to re-
 move themselves from situations that present an immediate health or safety hazard
 without jeopardizing their employment. They are generally not allowed to do so if
 the threat is not immediate, but may request a health and safety inspection to de-
 termine the extent and nature of the hazard. The Ministry of Labor is responsible
 for enforcing health and safety violations and generally does so. The standards are
 fairly encompassing and generally emphasize safety over long-term health hazards,
 according to organized labor sources. Health problems, however, continue in the ba-
 nana industry as well as in the cement and milling industries.
