 PANAMA
 Panama is currently a de facto military dictatorship headed by
 General Manuel Antonio Noriega, who has continued to exercise
 control over the Panamanian Defense Forces (PDF) since he was
 ordered dismissed from his post as PDF Commander in late
 February by President Eric Arturo Delvalle. Panama's
 Constitution provides for a representative democracy with
 direct popular election of the president and legislators, an
 independent judiciary, and a broad range of civil and
 individual rights. In practice, however, the military has
 dominated the nation's civilian political structures since a
 1968 coup in which the military overthrew a civilian
 government; General Noriega has controlled the PDF since
 1983. National elections which were held in 1984 were the
 first direct elections of the president since 1968. After a
 controversial vote count marked by irregularities and charges
 of fraud, a coalition of civilian political parties backed by
 the PDF took office, with Nicolas Ardito Barletta as
 President, Eric Arturo Delvalle as First Vice President, and
 Roderick Esquivel as Second Vice President. Barletta resigned
 in 1985 under pressure from the PDF and political leaders of
 the governing coalition. First Vice President Eric Arturo
 Delvalle then assumed the Presidency.
 On February 4, 1988, federal grand juries in Tampa and Miami
 returned indictments of General Noriega on drug trafficking
 and drug money laundering charges.' On February 25, President
 Delvalle dismissed Noriega from command of the PDF. Noriega
 defied the order, and on February 26 the National Assembly--in
 a process marked by charges that a quorum was not present and
 that authorizations to vote by proxy had been forged--voted to
 impeach Delvalle and Vice President Roderick Esquivel,
 disregarding both substantive and procedural provisions of the
 Constitution. The Assembly then purported to install the
 Education Minister, Manuel Solis Palma, as Minister in Cbarge
 of the Presidency. Delvalle went into hiding February 27, but
 refused to surrender the office of the Presidency. Throughout
 the extended political crisis which has followed, the United
 States has continued to recognize the Government headed by
 President Delvalle as Panama's lawful, constitutional
 Government.
 Panama's security and police establishment both fall under the
 PDF, which consists of some 15,000 members, containing army,
 air force, navy, and police components.
 The continuing political crisis has had a deep impact on
 Panama's service-oriented economy, which is sensitive to
 public and international confidence. It is projected that
 Panama's 1988 gross domestic product may have dropped by As
 much as 20 percent.
 On March 16, a group of PDF officers-attempted an unsuccessful
 military effort against General Noriega. In response, the
 regime imposed a national state of emergency, and closed
 opposition newspapers, radio, and television for the second
 time in less than a year. It also detained many of the
 participants in the military effort to oust Noriega. In late
 March and early April, the Civic Crusade, an opposition
 coalition of civic groups, professional and business
 associations, and church groups, staged a national strike that
 effectively paralyzed the economy for 2 weeks. The regime
 responded with a campaign of intimidation, arrests, and
 harassment to discourage opposition activities. Under the
 
 
 658
 PANAMA
 state of emergency, constitutional rights were suspended. The
 PDF repeatedly used tear gas, baton charges, birdshot, and
 water cannon to break up peaceful antiregime protests. In
 September increasing frustration over the continuing-political
 and economic crisis led to labor and student unrest. The
 political ferment which began in mid-1987 continued through
 1988, despite increasing regime repression and a virtually
 total ban on opposition and independent media.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 There was one known death as a result of political unrest
 during 1988. On March 16, during a demonstration in Panama
 City, Alcides Vasquez, a 26 year-old watchman, received serious
 wounds in the neck from birdshot, thought to have been fired
 by proregime forces. Vasquez died from these wounds on March
 21.
 b. Disappearance
 In late September, the regime launched a wave of arrests and
 detentions of political opponents. Information on the
 whereabouts of many of the detainees- was kept from family
 members and lawyers, and habeas corpus applications and
 appeals for the protection of constitutional rights were
 ignored. The Panamanian Human Rights Committee took the
 position in mid-October that 16 of these persons were still
 missing.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 In 1988 the PDF repeatedly responded to peaceful
 antigovernment demonstrations with birdshot, rubber
 truncheons, water cannon, and tear gas. Hundreds of people
 were beaten or sustained other injuries at the hands of the
 PDF in protests, principally in the weeks following the
 dismissal order of Noriega by President Delvalle. On numerous
 occasions armed pro-Noriega bands fired shotguns and other
 firearms at random at buildings in pro-opposition
 neighborhoods. Several people sustained serious eye
 injuries. In late August, during a university demonstration
 that led to a particularly harsh regime reaction, nursing and
 medical students set up a makeshift first aid post inside a
 college building to treat wounded students. Reports indicated
 over 30 casualties were birdshot victims. The PDF routinely
 beat political demonstrators upon arrest. Police fired tear
 gas not only at crowds in the streets, but also into private
 homes and businesses. In early September, a group of students,
 parents, and faculty occupied the Instituto Nacional high
 school to demand its reopening after the regime closed it due
 to student disturbances. On September 18, the PDF, aided by
 armed proregime gangs, stormed the school, using a battering
 ram against the gate, firing tear gas and live ammunition, and
 beating students and parents alike. Several students
 attempting to flee ran to upper floors of the building and
 jumped from windows to the street. Several of these students
 were seriously injured, including at least three who broke
 both legs. Eyewitnesses said protestors, including some with
 serious injuries, were beaten by proregime forces and then
 
 
 659
 PANAMA
 dragged to police vehicles. Persons who sustained injuries
 during political demonstrations frequently avoided seeking
 medical attention at state hospitals for fear of exposing
 themselves to detention.
 Many of those detained during opposition demonstrations
 reported that they suffered degrading treatment in detention.
 They gave accounts of strip searches upon arrival at the jail
 and of being robbed of most of their possessions. Some jailed
 protestors were held incommunicado and placed in cells with
 hardened criminals. During their detention, which was usually
 of short duration (but occasionally for longer periods, as in
 one case where a demonstrator was held for 6 weeks), some
 detainees were subjected to threats of sexual abuse and of
 transfer to Coiba Island, a penal facility for hardened
 criminals. Human rights sources reported the case of a young
 man accused of involvement in a subversive plot against the
 regime who was beaten and tortured by electric shock. The
 same sources reported that the PDF then detained the man's
 father (who suffered from a heart condition), stripped him
 naked, and placed him in a small room, forcing him to stand
 with his arms against a wall for 10 hours with spotlights
 trained on him while his captors interrogated him. The man
 reportedly collapsed, and was later released without being
 charged. Another person (again, a father detained following
 his son's arrest) told of receiving identical treatment at the
 PDF's hands in September.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 The Constitution establishes the right of a detainee to a
 judicial determination of the legality of the detention and
 requires a warrant for arrest, except for persons arrested
 during the commission of a crime. A suspect may not legally
 be detained for more than 24 hours without being charged and
 brought before a magistrate. Police are required to inform
 accused persons immediately of the reason for their detention.
 After being charged with a criminal offense, an accused person
 may be held until authorities conduct the investigation and
 bring the case to trial.
 In practice, during 1988 the regime systematically disregarded
 constitutional and other due process mechanisms for protection
 of the accused when these provisions interfered with efforts
 to quell political opposition. The regime did not hesitate to
 engage in routine mass arrests of demonstrators and others
 identified with the political opposition.
 The judicial system suffers from a chronic backlog, frequently
 resulting in incarceration for up to 3 years for prisoners
 awaiting trial, a group which constitutes a large portion of
 the prison population. Time spent in jail awaiting trial
 counts toward completion of the final sentence for those
 convicted.
 Most of the hundreds of people detained during opposition
 demonstrations were arrested openly and charged with sedition,
 disrupting public order, or related offenses. However, many
 were never formally charged. A standard practice was to hold
 political demonstrators for short periods of time, generally
 up to 24 hours, and then summarily sentence them to 365 days'
 incarceration or a $365 fine. Some detainees were told that
 they would be summarily sentenced to terms in the Coiba Island
 penitentiary. At the end of December, human rights observers
 estimated that there were approximately 35 persons still in
 
 
 660
 political detention, including some 15 PDF officers held in
 connection with the March 16 attempt to oust Noriega.
 In addition to mass arrests during demonstrations, other
 regime opponents were singled out for politically motivated
 harassment ranging from arrest warrants on obviously
 exaggerated charges to incommunicado detention. In some
 cases, prisoners have been moved from one place of detention
 to another, while authorities denied to attorneys and family
 members that they were being held. The regime also resorted
 to detention and harassment of family members and friends of
 persons it wanted to detain but who might have gone into
 hiding or left the country. Some of these, including several
 leaders of the opposition Civic Crusade and their allies, were
 forced into exile. At the end of 1987, over 20 opposition
 leaders and many less prominent oppositionists and their
 families remained in exile, fearing PDF reprisals if they
 returned to Panama.
 Approximately 15 military officers were detained following the
 failed military effort of March 16 to force Noriega to comply
 with President Delvalle's dismissal order. The officers were
 originally held incommunicado, and reports indicated that some
 suffered serious physical abuse, both upon initial detention
 and on a continuing basis thereafter. Family members were
 eventually allowed occasional visits. These detainees are
 reportedly moved frequently among various prisons throughout
 Panama, and some are believed to be held in solitary
 confinement. As of December, the participants in the March 16
 effort remained in custody without formal charge.
 In another case, Civic Crusade leader and spokesman Carlos
 Ernesto Gonzales de la Lastra and a fellow activist were
 detained February 1 and charged with "conspiracy against the
 economic stability of the state." They were released a few
 days later, after paying $10,000 bail each. On March 28,
 Gonzales de la Lastra went to a PDF detention facility to
 assist fellow members of the Crusade who had been detained
 when the PDF dispersed a peaceful antiregime march. Upon
 being identified, he was beafen by police and arrested on
 charges similar to those for which he was originally arrested,
 his previously paid bail notwithstanding. Gonzales de la
 Lastra subsequently went into exile in Venezuela. On
 September 22, Alberto Conte, a prominent businessman and
 leader of the Civic Crusade, was detained at his office by the
 PDF, which failed to produce an arrest order as required by
 law. He was held incommunicado for 7 days before being
 permitted to see his wife briefly. Attempts by his family to
 locate him and establish his well-being during this period
 were rejected by the authorities. The Supreme Court rejected
 an application for habeas corpus brought on his behalf. In
 late December Conte was freed, but immediately sent into
 involuntary exile in the United States. Roberto Brenes,
 another leader of the Civic Crusade, was arrested without
 charge on December 20, held incommunicado overnight, and
 forcibly exiled to the United States the next day. Other
 detentions have included that of Dominador Kaiser Bazan, a
 businessman, former Ambassador to the United States, leader of
 the Republican Party, and Foreign Minister in the post-
 February 26 Delvalle Cabinet. Bazan was arrested on September
 17, on the eve of a convention of the Republican Party, and
 charged with usurpation of public functions and attempting to
 commit a crime against the security of the State. He was
 released on $10,000 bail on September 21 in good condition.
 In another instance, New York businessman and Crusade activist
 
 
 661
 PANAMA
 Carlos Alfaro was detained by PPF security forces on October 6
 while departing Panama after a short visit. He was held for
 some 36 hours during which period he was interrogated and
 beaten. After the episode, Alfaro, a permanent resident of
 the United States, was released without charge and permitted
 to leave Panama. Aristides de Icaza, owner and director of
 Radio Exitosa radio network and an opposition leader, was
 detained and interrogated by the PDF at Panama's Torrijos
 airport on his return from a trip to Miami on December 29. He
 was then deported to Miami on December 30. Authentic
 Panamenista Party member Jose del Carmen Serracin, arrested by
 the PDF in September and held since then, was released and
 sent into exile to Miami on January 1, 1989.
 During-.the year the PDF engaged in some 400 incidents of
 harassment of U.S military personnel and dependents in
 Panama. There have been several cases where the PDF beat
 servicemen, and in one case, an armed individual suspected of
 having PDF connections is alleged to have raped the spouse of
 a U.S. soldier. Other instances of harassment and abuse have
 been directed against personnel of the Panama Canal Commission
 (PCC), the U.S. government agency which operates and
 ae.inisters the Panama Canal. No arrests of PDF personnel
 have been made in any of these cases.
 With regard to forced or compulsory labor, see Section 6.c.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The Constitution provides that persons charged with crimes are
 presumed innocent until proven guilty and have the right to
 counsel. The local bar association and National University
 law school offer legal counsel at nominal fees. The Government
 provides public defenders for indigent defendants, but only
 after the pretrial phase. A new judicial code, which became
 effective April 1, 1987, provides for public trials based on
 oral testimony and argument. Because the new system has yet
 to be fully implemented, most trial procedures are still
 conducted with written presentations by the prosecution and
 defense without the presence of the accused. The documents
 produced are available for examination by both sides. In
 general, the burden of proof rests on the prosecution. The
 right to appeal a verdict is available to the prosecution and
 the defense.
 The Constitution provides a number of safeguards designed to
 maintain the independence of the judiciary: the Supreme Court
 is chartered to uphold the Constitution and laws; magistrates
 are barred from simultaneously holding other public office or
 otherwise participating in politics; Supreme Court magistrates,
 who are nominated by the President and ratified by the
 Legislative Assembly, nominate all lower court judges. The
 Attorney General, appointed by the President and confirmed by
 the Legislative Assembly, appoints Superior Court District
 Attorneys, who in turn nominate Circuit District Attorneys-. A
 system of magistrates, named by mayors, deals with a high
 volume of minor civil and criminal cases. Magistrates are
 empowered to impose fines of less than $600 and to order
 detentions of up to 1 year, and their decisions can be
 appealed only to the mayor and not to any judicial official.
 In practice, these legal safeguards have not ensured an
 independent judiciary. The courts are easily controlled by
 the Panamanian military and by regime politicians who control
 the appointment of magistrates. The most serious obstacle to
 
 
 662
 PANAMA
 obtaining a free and fair trial lies not in the system as it
 is designed, but in the influence of the PDF over the
 judiciary. The PDF not only interferes with the outcome of
 specific trials but, in practice, appoints judges and
 transfers or dismisses judges who do not respond to PDF
 directives. This influence extends to the appellate as well
 as the trial system.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Some regime opponents charge that mail is tampered with or
 diverted and that telephone calls are extensively monitored.
 Under the Constitution, judicial warrants must be issued
 before officials may enter homes, but because the judicial
 system is heavily influenced by the PDF, warrants to search
 homes of regime opponents have been freely granted. In
 addition, the PDF and their supporters frequently searched
 homes and detained individuals without obtaining or producing
 appropriate warrants or court orders. Threats of home
 searches by the intelligence arm of the PDF are regularly
 employed as a means of intimidation.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 The Constitution provides for freedom of speech and press, and
 Panama has traditionally enjoyed free media which engaged in
 spirited and open criticism of the Government. The Government
 responded to the 1987 political crisis by imposing harsh media
 curbs, and by intermittent suspension and reopening of
 opposition media during the latter half of the year.
 Opposition newspapers were permitted to reopen for a time in
 January, with radio stations following in February. However,
 in late February, the PDF occupied and closed down four
 opposition newspapers and four radio stations. These
 newspapers, and all of the closed radio stations with the
 exception of one, remained closed as of December. In February
 the regime also halted the local distribution of foreign news
 publications.
 On a number of occasions in 1988 the regime expelled foreign
 news correspondents. Julia Preston of the Washington Post
 arrived in Panama on January 10 but was refused entry into the
 country and put on a return flight to the United States.
 While the stated reason for refusing Preston entry was her
 lack of appropriate documentation, she possessed the same
 travel documents which other journalists customarily-use to
 gain admission to Panama. Later in January, the Government
 expelled Sam Dillon of the-Miami Herald. On February 13,
 Cable News Network (CNN) correspondent Larry Lamotte and two
 members of a CNN crew were expelled for allegedly biased
 reporting. On March 28, the PDF staged a raid at a Civic
 Crusade headquarters at a downtown Panama City hotel and
 arrested numerous members of the media, along with Crusade
 leaders.
 Throughout the year, the regime pressured local television
 stations to modify their news coverage to suit its policies,
 and continued to harass local journalists. In some cases,
 family members of opposition journalists were threatened with
 loss of government jobs and had their homes searched. The
 silencing of opposition newspapers was particularly
 significant in light of the opposition's limited access to
 
 
 663
 PANAMA
 electronic media. As of the end of 1988, the only local
 newspaper not under complete regime control was the semi-
 independent (though proregime) Estrella de Panama. Although
 editorial policy has varied, no television station expresses a
 clearly oppositionist viewpoint, and opposition figures own
 only 5 of the more than 70 radio stations in Panama. Reliable
 reports indicate that self-censorship is exercised, in varying
 degrees, in all media that continue to operate.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 The Constitution provides for the right of peaceful assembly,
 but interference with this right on a systematic basis was a
 key means of regime repression of opposition activity during
 the year. Throughout 1988 regime policy on demonstrations
 required a 24-hour advance notice and a prohibition on certain
 activities which have, since mid-1987, been trademarks of
 opposition demonstrations, such as horn-honking, obstructing
 the flow of traffic, and throwing white confetti. The PDF
 resorted to harassment and random detentions to disrupt
 protests. On occasion it preemptively deployed large numbers
 of riot police and groups of armed proregime supporters in
 civilian clothing around demonstration sites to discourage
 protesters from gathering. The PDF responded to many peaceful
 protests with the use of tear gas, baton charges, birdshot,
 and water cannon. In an exception to regime policy on public
 demonstrations, there was general tolerance for the mass
 outdoor gatherings which accompanied the funeral of Dr.
 Arnulfo Arias Madrid, former president of Panama and head of
 the opposition Authentic Panamenista Party (PPA). It was
 estimated that more than 100,000 Panamanians participated in
 the August 15 funeral of Arias, during which many participants
 engaged in antiregime chanting and sign-waving.
 Panamanian professional, social, and civic groups have
 traditionally been allowed to meet without inverference, but
 as the activities of these groups became politicized, the
 regime began a campaign of harassment, issuing arrest warrants
 against leaders and continuing to keep the Chamber of Commerce,
 which served as Civic Crusade headquarters, closed. On March
 28, the regime promulgated Decree 26, which prohibited
 nonprofit groups (which range from charities and religious
 orders of the Catholic Church to civic service clubs such as
 the Lions Club and the Red Cross) from supporting or engaging
 in any activity the regime considered to threaten the security
 of the State. Many of these organizations had been involved
 in civic and other activities in support of basic freedoms,
 which the regime has considered opposition political activity.
 By December, however, no known actions under Decree 26 had
 been taken against any nonprofit groups.
 For a discussion of freedom of association as it applies to
 labor unions, see Section 6.a.
 c. Freedom of religion
 The Constitution provides for religious freedom for all. There
 is no state religion. Although Roman Catholicism is the
 predominant religion among Panamanians, there are no
 restrictions on the free exercise of religious beliefs,
 including proselytizing, and a broad range of religious groups
 operate freely in Panama.
 
 
 664
 PANAMA
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 The Constitution permits Panamanians to move freely within the
 country and to emigrate. However, freedom of movement was
 frequently curtailed in the weeks following President
 Delvalle's order dismissing Noriega. PDF members manning
 checkpoints searched vehicles and asked for passenger
 identification, at times detaining persons with-surnames
 associated with leaders in the opposition.
 Panama has accepted refugees of widely differing ideological
 persuasions, and hundreds of displaced persons and exiles from
 other countries reside in Panama. No cases of forcible
 repatriation of political exiles occurred in 1988.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Although Panama is nominally a representative democracy, it is
 in fact a military dictatorship. The PDF dominates government
 and politics in Panama. Manuel Solis Palma, installed
 February 27 as the regime's Chief Executive, has been
 subservient to the PDF. The PDF controls national politics in
 part through the governing Democratic Revolutionary'Party
 (PRD), its political arm. The PRD has had an absolute
 majority (34 of 67) in the Legislative Assembly since the
 elections of 1984, and through alliances with other parties,
 it controls a number of other seats. As noted above, the
 regime has taken numerous steps to hinder the organizational
 efforts of its political opponents. In September armed gangs
 under suspected PDF control used strong-arm tactics to expel
 members of the antiregime majority of the Republican Party
 from an important party meeting. As a result, a proregime
 minority was able to dominate the meeting. In January the
 regime-appointed Electoral Tribunal had ratified a proregime
 minority takeover in the antiregime Liberal Party.
 Under these conditions, and given the ban on opposition and
 independent media, many observers doubt that a free election
 is currently possible in Panama, or that the current regime
 would step down if it lost such a vote. National elections
 are scheduled for May 1989.
 Women are accorded equal political rights under Panamanian
 law. The 67 members of the Legislative Assembly include 4
 women. Of the 134 alternate legislators, 23 are women. Three
 independent agency directors and one vice-minister are women.
 Women also serve as Chief Justice of the Supreme Court,
 president of the three-member Electoral Tribunal, and mayors
 of Panama City and San Miguelito.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 Several private human rights groups operate in Panama. Since
 the political crisis which began in June 1987, these groups
 have collected data about individual cases of abuse, acted as
 advocates for detainees, observed opposition demonstrations,
 and voiced their concerns about human rights violations.
 While the Government made little or no effort to cooperate
 with these groups, it has not made a practice of singling out
 their leaders for harassment or persecution. However, the
 regimes's practice of intimidation and general human rights
 
 
 PANAMA
 violations, coupled with an unwillingness on the part of the
 judiciary to protect the constitutional rights of those
 accused of political offenses, have inhibited human rights
 activism.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status.
 The Constitution prohibits discrimination on the basis of
 race, birth out of wedlock, social class, sex, religion, or
 political views. Due to traditional bias and general economic
 conditions, Panamanian women do not enjoy the same economic
 opportunities as men. .Panamanian law does not recognize
 community property, and divorced or deserted women are often
 left destitute. Female employment in urban Panama is
 concentrated in traditionally low-paying service jobs.
 Although the Constitution mandates equal pay for equal work,
 wages paid to women are lower than those for equivalent work
 performed by males and increase at a slower rate. According
 to the 1980 census, women slightly outnumber men in the
 professional and technical fields, are twice as likely as men
 to be clerical office workers, and are underrepresented at the
 managerial and administrative levels. Many female heads of
 households in the country's poorer areas are obligated to work
 for the Government, usually as street cleaners, in order to
 receive government support funds.
 Panama is a racially mixed country. The traditional monopoly
 of power by persons of European descent was effectively ended
 with the ouster of the civilian government by the military in
 1968. People of mixed race are active politically and are
 represented in senior civilian positions in the executive
 branch, in the PDF, and in the legislature, where there are
 also five Indians. Prominent among the minorities which
 retain some degree of separate identity are English-speaking
 Blacks, Jews, Arabs, Greeks, Chinese, East Indians, and North
 Americans. Despite their small numbers, all of these groups
 play major roles in Panama's urban economy. There is no
 discrimination in law against these or any other social,
 religious, or cultural groups. However, naturalized citizens
 are forbidden to hold certain categories of elected office,
 and retail trade is constitutionally restricted to native
 Panamanians. While innumerable exceptions exist, Caucasians,
 Asians, and persons of mixed race tend to be better off
 economically and to occupy higher positions in government than
 do Blacks and Indians.
 Indian tribes receive government assistance, particularly in
 the areas of public health, welfare, and education. They are
 not restricted to their tribal areas, but most remain there by
 choice, reflecting longstanding resistance to assimilation.
 Indians enjoy full voting rights and all other rights of
 Panamanian citizenship, as well as limited self-government in
 tribal areas. They play significant roles in the governments
 of four provinces.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 Workers enjoy a wide range of benefits under the law. The
 rights to organize labor unions and to strike are generally
 unrestricted in the private sector as well as in certain
 public sector agencies specified by law. According to Labor
 Ministry statistics, about 17 percent of the employed work
 
 
 666
 PANAMA
 force belong to unions. Elections within Panamanian labor
 organizations, as well as employer and professional
 associations, are generally democratic and free from
 government interference. These organizations are unrestricted
 in their right to affiliate with international bodies, and
 their members may freely participate in political parties and
 other aspects of Panamanian political life.
 Most public sector employees are not permitted to form unions
 or to strike, but may establish representative associations
 and have access to government dispute-resolution procedures.
 In August the Federation of Public Sector Employees (FENASEP)
 staged work stoppages and a large protest march without regime
 interference. Further job actions by FENASEP members followed
 in September. The electrical and port workers' unions (the
 strongest and most militant of the public sector unions) were
 also involved in labor disputes in September. The regime
 responded to these labor actions by firing over 100 of the
 workers involved, and by detaining some 40 union members,
 including union leader Isaac Rodriquez (who had been in hiding
 for more than 3 months earlier in the year for charges
 stemming from a previous job action, and whom the regime
 subsequently detained and then exiled to Spain). During this
 time, senior military officers were placed in charge of the
 national port authority and the electrical company. At one
 point during the port strike, troops were used to occupy the
 Pacific Ocean ports of Balboa and Vacamonte. Reports indicate
 the regime threatened antiregime public sector workers with
 dismissal if they persisted in job actions. There have been
 reliable reports of actual politically motivated firings in
 the public sector work force.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 The right to organize unions and bargain collectively is well
 established legally and is extensively exercised in practice.
 However, there are limitations on the right of employees in
 the Colon Free Zone and the offshore banking sector to
 organize unions.
 The Government periodically consults with organized labor and
 employer groups on a range of public policy issues, and both
 sectors are entitled by statute to representation on important
 government boards, such as those governing the social security
 fund and the vocational training institute.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 Forced labor, which is prohibited by the Panamanian
 Constitution, is not practiced.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 Labor is prohibited for children under age 14, or under age 15
 if the child has not completed primary school. Both hazardous
 work and night work are prohibited for persons under age 18.
 Children between ages 12 and 14 may perform farm or domestic
 labor as long as the work is light and does not interfere with
 their schooling.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 Panama has a comprehensive labor code which gives extensive
 rights and benefits to workers. The maximum workweek is 48
 hours. The law has established a minimum wage for most work
 
 
 667
 PANAMA
 categories and requires substantial bonuses to be paid for
 overtime. Although labor code reforms in 1986 released
 employers from the obligation to pay certain bonuses and
 overtime premiums, employers continue to be legally required
 to provide workers with compensation adequate for a decent
 standard of living. The economic downturn resulting from the
 political turmoil which has persisted since mid-1987 has
 caused many employers to reduce work hours and/or employee pay
 in order to cut expenses and stay in business. Many workers
 preferred the nonenforcement of certain labor code provisions
 to a permanent loss of their jobs.
 The labor code details numerous health and safety standards
 for all places of employment. Pregnant employees receive 12
 weeks'.mandatory maternity leave and the right to return to
 their jobs. The Ministry of Labor and Social Welfare is
 responsible for ensuring compliance with these regulations,
 but limited resources hamper strict enforcement of some labor
 code provisions.
 
 
 668
