 PERU
 Peru is a multiparty republic with a dominant executive branch headed by Presi-
 dent Alberto Fujimori. Fujimori was reelected to a second 5-year term in free and
 fair elections on April 9 under provisions of a new Constitution enacted in 1993. The
 President's party also won control of the new Congress and holds 67 of its 120 seats.
 The police and military share security duties. Since 1980 much of their effort has
 been directed against Sendero Luminoso and other terrorist groups. These groups
 have now declined as a major internal threat, and terrorist attacks took place with
 less frequency than in previous years. Although members of the security forces com-
 mitted human rights abuses, levels were lower than in previous years. The Sendero
 Luminoso and other terrorists were responsible for numerous killings.
 Peru's economy is rapidly changing its emphasis from heavy regulation to an ex-
 treme market orientation. Government controls on capital flows, prices, and trade
 have been eliminated. The Government has privatized most state enterprises, and
 those remaining are scheduled to be sold by the end of 1996. The current gross do-
 mestic product is estimated at $32.5 billion. Major exports include minerals (prin-
 cipally copper), fishmeal, and textiles. Illegal exports of processed coca are thought
 to have earned about $600-$800 million in past years. As in 1994, Peru was pro-
 jected to report a favorable balance of payments in 1995 due to continued large cap-
 ital inflows of direct and portfolio investments despite the growing trade deficit. Un-
 employment is around 9 percent, but more than half of the economically active pop-
 ulation work in the informal sector of the economy, which largely operates beyond
 government supervision and taxation. The percentage of the population officially de-
 fined as poor declined from over 50 percent to about 45 percent. Roughly half of the
 poor live in extreme poverty.
 As government counterinsurgency policies became increasingly effective and the
 threat from Sender Luminoso declined, the human rights situation continued to
 improve. There was a marked decrease in the number of extrajudicial killings and
 disappearances attributable to the security forces. Despite this improvement, lack
 of accountability and due process, prolonged detention, trial delays, and torture re-
 mained problems; emergency zone status-which provides for the suspension of cer-
 
 
 tain constitutional guarantees in areas of high terrorist activity-remained in effect
 in Lima and several other provinces, affecting 44 percent of Peru's 23.5 million peo-
 ple. Congressional passage of the Amnesty Law on June 14 absolved those in the
 security forces who committed human rights abuses while combating terrorism from
 May 1980 to June 1995. The summary manner in which this and other laws were
 passed, without full notice and debate in the country's unicameral Parliament, re-
 vived concerns about an authoritarian approach to governance. In October a Su-
 preme Court tribunal upheld the constitutionality of the Amnesty Law in the 1991
 Barrios Altos massacre case.
 The Government continued to detain up to 600 persons on terrorism charges
 based on unsubstantiated accusations by terrorists who repented before November
 1, 1994; many of these detainees have already been held for years with their cases
 unresolved. Nongovernmental human rights oanizations represent approximately
 700 individuals believed to have been wrongfully charged with terrorism and trea-
 son. Civilian terrorism trials by "faceless" judges were due to end on October 15,
 but Congress passed new legislation in early October extending their use for 1 more
 year. The Government continued efforts to improve prison conditions, but these re-
 main inadequate. The Congress passed a law in July defining the duties of the con-
 stitutionally mandated "Defender of the People" (a human rights ombudsman). How-
 ever, it has not yet named someone to the position. Violence against women and
 children and discrimination against minorities and the disabled are problems.
 Sendero Luminoso and members of the Tupac Amaru Revolutionary Movement
 (MRTA) were responsible for 232 killings, including 7 deaths from car bomb attacks.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extra* dicial Killing.-Since 1980 Peru has suffered a
 bloody guerrilla war waged by the terrorist groups Sendero Luminoso and the Tupac
 Amarn Revolutionary Movement (MRTA). Sendero activity decreased dramatically
 in 1995 and security forces continue to arrest the remaining Sendero terrorists.
 Statistics compiled by the National Coordinating Committee for Human Rights
 (Coordinadora), an umbrella group of forty nongovernmental human rights organiza-
 tions, showed that the security forces were responsible for one extrajudicial killing.
 This figure is much smaller than the 39 killings reported for 1994 and substantially
 smaller than the number of killings which took place at the height of the insurgency
 in 1992, when the Coordinadora estimated that the security forces were responsible
 for 114 extrajudicial killings.
 Joel Huaman Garcia, age 19, was detained by police in Cerro de Pasco on May
 26 and died in custody the following day. An autopsy showed that Huaman had died
 from torture and beatings. Police officers Edson Condor Arredondo, Rolando Huere
 Ore, and Wilson Torralva Davila face criminal charges for Huaman's killing. In
 Ucayali department, in the only death the Coordinadora considered extrajudicial
 (others were due to torture and beatings), 16-year-old Indalecio Pomatanta Albarcan
 died on April 6 as a result of burns after naval personnel tried to arrest him at
 home on April 2. Navy personnel acknowledged abandoning Pomatanta after the
 burning incident. They claimed that Pomatanta as well as one of their own men suf-
 fered burns after accidentally being drenched by fuel near an open fire. A group of
 soldiers beat to death 21-year-old Wilder Alex Osorio in May in Pasco department.
 In September Jose Eugenio Chamaya Rumacharis died in police custody after they
 subjected him to water torture in a Lima police station. The Public Ministry is in-
 vestigating the actions of two police officers in the Chamaya case.
 The passage of the Amnesty Law on June 14 created considerable concern over
 military and police impunity for past abuses. This law, which granted amnesty from
 prosecution to those who committed human rights abuses during the war on terror-
 ism from May 1980 to June 1995, as well as to those who participated in the No-
 vember 1992 coup attempt, was presented and passed by the Congress in one night
 with no time provided for national debate. The law also cleared the records of secu-
 rity force personnel who had already been convicted of human rights abuses, includ-
 ing the eight military perpetrators of the 1992 La Cantuta massacre, who were sen-
 tenced in 1994 but released by military authorities a few days after the Amnesty
 Laws passage. In addition, 10 police officers were granted amnesty on June 16 for
 their role in the 1986 Lurigancho prison massacre, in which some 200 prisoners
 died. Relatives of the La Cantuta massacre victims announced in late October that
 the military had agreed to pay them over 1 million dollars as an indemnity in ac-
 cordance with a decree issued by the military court which sentenced the perpetra-
 tors of the massacre.
 
 
 505
 First-instance Judge Antonia Saquicuray ruled on June 16 that the Amnesty Law
 did not apply to the 1991 Barrios Altos massacre case, in which military personnel
 killed 15 people including an 8-year-old child. She also disallowed an effort by law-
 yers for the accused to have a civilian investigation of the case dropped. After a su-
 perior court overturned her ruling, relatives of the massacre victims appealed the
 superior court decision to the Supreme Court, which in a divided decision in October
 upheld the constitutionality of the Amnesty Law. In response to Saquicuray's ruling,
 the Congress passed a controversial law on June 28 which stated that the judiciary
 had no right to review the constitutionality of the Amnesty Law.
 In two cases a civilian superior court denied requests by military and police offi-
 cers for amnesty, ruling that their crimes were not committed in the course of
 antiterrorist activities. On August 14, a superior court in Puno decided that the Am-
 nesty Law did not apply to four military officers convicted in civilian courts of the
 assault and armed robbery of civilians near Juli and Ayaviri in December 1992. In
 September a superior court in Callao ruled that the Amnesty Law did not apply to
 the five police officers charged in the 1991 killings of umversity student Carlos
 Rodriguez Pighi and brothers Emilio and Rafael Gomez Paquillari. Three of the po-
 lice officers were sentenced to 15 to 18 years in 1994; the other two were never ar-
 rested and are believed to have fled the country.
 The Congress never concluded its investigation of the extrajudicial killings which
 _occurred in 1994 in Huanuo as a result of the army's "Operation Aries." The Public
 Ministry's investigation into these killings was effectively closed when Congress
 passed the Amnesty Law.
 In February then Justice Minister Fernando Vega stated to the United Nations
 Human Rights Commission that during the previous 7 years, 108 officers and 453
 noncommissioned officers had been punished for committing human rights abuses.
 Of these, Vega said that 28 officers and 151 noncommissioned officers were given
 prison sentences.
 In the few areas of Peru where it continues to operate, Sendero Luminoso contin-
 ues to assassinate civilians who oppose it.
 b. Disappearance.-The Coordinadora is investigating whether 4 more disappear-
 ances occured in Huanuco department, in addition to the 10 cases of disappearance
 it recorded during the year. Either number represents a vast improvement over the
 mid- and late-1980's and early 1990's, at the height of the Sendero Luminoso insur-
 gency, when the military and police caused hundreds of persons to disappear. The
 use since 1992 of military courts to try those accused of terrorism has resulted in
 a high conviction rate and has contributed to a significant decrease in disappear-
 ances and extrajudicial killings. Of the nine disappearance cases, seven occurred in
 Ucayali department and two in Lima department, both emergency zones where the
 insurgents have been most active. In addition, a few disappearances from previous
 years came to light in 1995.
 The seven disappearances in Ucayali department involved persons detained by
 naval personnel in front of witnesses. For example, Marcial Hernandez Melgarejo
 was detained together with Wilder Ahuanari Canayo on February 13 in Caserio
 Raya Rio Aguaytia. While Ahuanari was later released, Hernandez has not been
 seen or heard from since his detention. Despite the credibility of these disappear-
 ance reports, navy authorities in Ucayali assert that they know of no instance dur-
 ing 1995 in which navy personnel have been responsible in any manner for the dis-
 appearance of any citizen.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 Although the Constitution prohibits torture and inhuman or humiliating treatment,
 torture and brutal treatment of detainees are common. Eyewitnesses and human
 rights monitors reported that government security forces still routinely tortured sus-
 pected subversives at military and police detention centers.
 Torture most often takes place in the period immediately following detention. The
 law permits police to hold terrorism suspects incommunicado for 15 days, and for
 another 15-day perid in cases of treason. Human rights groups report that the inci-
 dence of torture is high during this time, partly because detainees are not allowed
 access to family or an attorney except when giving sworn statements to the public
 prosecutor.
 Besides beatings, common methods of torture included electric shock, water tor-
 ture, asphyxiation, and the hanging of detainees by a rope attached to their hands
 tied behind the back. Common forms of psychological torture included sleep depriva-
 tion and death threats against both detainees and their families. Interrogators fre-
 quently blindfold their victims during torture to prevent them from later identifying
 their abusers.
 Credible sources reported that torture by security forces in emergency zones is
 still common. In Ucayali department, Tomas Flores Huanio was allegedy beaten
 
 
 506
 and tortured for several days after being detained on April 19 for possession of co-
 caine base at the naval base in Contamana, before being taken to a hospital on
 April 23. The following day Flores was taken to a civilian jail despite still suffering
 from injuries related to torture. Navy personnel assert, however, that Flores was not
 tortured, but had injured himself by banging his head on an object in his detention
 cell.
 Reports of police and military rape of female detainees occurred, and cases from
 previous years continued to come to light. While the number of those raped by secu-
 rity personnel during the past year is difficult to determine, credible reports indicate
 the total number of female detainees raped during the past few years to be in the
 hundreds. According to CEAPAZ, a nongovernmental human rights organization, in
 one 1993 prison rape in La Merced, a pregnant 15-year-old detainee, who had un-
 wittingly married an MRTA terrorist, was infected with AIDS by a member of the
 security forces. Despite the April antiterrorism legislation which required that an
 adolescent be transferred to a  venile detention facility, the victim remained de-
 tained as an adult terrorist in Huamancacca prison in Huancayo department until
 her release in September. She received no medical attention for her AIDS condition
 while she was in prison, and those responsible for her rape have not been punished.
 After being absolved of terrorism charges and released in October from Picsi prison
 in Chiclayo, environmentalist Maria Elena Faronda claimed that two female detain-
 ees in Picsi prison had been raped by security force personnel during the past year.
 Many victims of Sendero Luminoso terrorism also showed signs of torture. Credi-
 ble accounts indicate that Sendero tortured people to death by slitting throats,
 strangulation, stoning, and burning. Mutilation of the body was common.
 Conditions for many prisoners continued to be inadequate, even though the Gov-
 ernment continues to make a costly and extensive effort to improve existing penal
 facilities, construct new penitentiaries, and ameliorate the physical conditions of de-
 tention. The renovation of Castro Castro Prison in Lima and Yanamayo Prison in
 Puno department in 1994 helped alleviate severe overcrowding in the prison system
 and improved the physical conditions in which many inmates lived. Nonetheless,
 prisoners in many facilities continued to experience unsanitary conditions, poor nu-
 trition and health care, and occasionally harsh treatment by both prison staff and
 fellow inmates. Picsi prison near Chiclayo, for example, holds twice the number of
 inmates for which it was designed and still has no running water. Illegal drugs are
 in abundance, and tuberculosis and AIDS are reportedly at near-epidemic propor-
 tions in Lima's Lurigancho prison, the country's largest, containing just over 24 per-
 cent of the male prison population. The police chief at Lurigancho prison announced
 publicly in December that there were 7 prisoners with AIDS and 37 with tuber-
 culosis receiving daily medical attention.-He admitted that some of the prisoners
 had contracted7 their illness while in prison. Detainees held temporarily in
 windowless cells in Lima's Palace of Justice are not allowed outside for exercise and
 fresh air and are taken to the bathroom only once a day. Basic food, health care,
 and basic bedding are often not provided by the prison authorities.
 Corruption continued to be a problem among prison staff, who were implicated in
 offenses such as sexual blackmail, selling narcotics and weapons, and arranging es-
 capes. Twenty-six employees of the National Penitentiary Institute (INPE) were
 fired in October because they helped three criminals escape from Callao Prison on
 September 6. In addition, four INPE employees were dismissed in October for using
 undue violence against a group of journalists who were covering the aftermath of
 the September 6 prison escape. Prisoners often have to bribe guards to get a mat-
 tress and report that guards subject inmates to beatings, torture, and degrading
 treatment. In some prisons mothers who are detained for terrorism, many of them
 later found innocent by the courts after years of detention, are allowed to see their
 children and new-bern infants only once every 3 months for only half an hour.
 The authorities continued to permit International Committee of the Red Cross
 (ICRC) representatives to visit detainees in any place of detention, including pris-
 ons, jails, police stations, and military bases. The Government provided the ICRC
 with regular access to Ecuadorian soldiers detained by the Peruvian military during
 and after the January-February border conflict, and the ICRC facilitated prisoner
 transfers between Peru and Ecuador in March, June, and August.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The Constitution, Criminal Code, and
 antiterrorist legislation delineate the arrest and detention process. However, a num-
 ber of constitutional protections are suspended in emergency zones. For example, so-
 curity forces do not need an arrest warrant; they may legally hold incommunicado
 those detained for treason or terrorism and deny them access to an attorney during
 the interrogation period, except when giving formal statements.
 In areas not subject to a state of emergency, the law requires a judicial warrant
 for arrest, unless a perpetrator is caught in the act. In addition, the Organic Law
 
 
 507
 of the National Police is contrary to the Constitution. It permits detention of an in-
 dividual for any investigation. Authorities must arraign persons arrested within 24
 hours (a law they frequently violate according to informed observers), except in
 cases of terrorism, drug trafficking, or espionage, for which the limit is 15 to 30
 days. If the military is the detaining authority, it must turn over detainees to the
 civilian police within 24 hours (or as soon as practicable in remote areas). The mili-
 tary regularly disregarded this law.
 The Public Ministry continued to inaugurate branch offices of the National Reg-
 istry of Detainees throughout Peru. The registry, first opened in February 1994,
 records the names of those detained for terrorism and treason by the police and
 military (in emergency zones). However, relatives and human rights groups fre-
 quently complain that registry information is incomplete and that the police and the
 military have not been providing information to the registry in a timely manner.
 A 1993 modification to antiterrorism legislation authorized first-instance and su-
 perior court judges to order the unconditional release of terrorism defendants if
 there is insufficient evidence to bring a case against them. However, in practice,
 judges have rarely applied this law; rather, persons accused of terrorism sometimes
 must wait until their cases have been reviewed and dismissed by the Supreme
 Court before they are freed, a process that often lasts more than a year. Another
 1993 modification to the antiterrorist laws restored a detainee's right to a prompt
 judicial determination of the legality of the detention ("habeas corpus"). In practice,
 however, this has proven to be ineffective. According to human rights attorneys,
 judges have denied most requests for such hearings.
 New problems emerged in cases where those who were declared innocent of ter-
 rorism several years earlier were ordered rearrested due to problems with the judi-
 cial case record. This usually occurred when a case fie included several individuals.
 For example, nine persons, including six University of San Marcos law students,
 were acquitted of terrorism in 1993, and two others in the same file, graphic editor
 Pedro Valdez Bernales and law student Filomeno Encarnacion Nieto, were found
 guilty and sentenced to 20 years in prison. Wheh the Supreme Court reviewed the
 case in late 1994, mistakes were found in the case record and the case was sent
 back to the superior court. As a result, arrest warrants were issued for all the indi-
 viduals in the case file, including those found not guilty 2 years earlier. Carlos Isla,
 the only one still in Peru, was rearrested on May 14. The others had fled the coun-
 try. On June 2, the superior court found all of those in the case file who were alive
 not guilty, including Pedro Valdez, who had served 3 years in prison. Filomeno
 Encarnacion had died on April 24 from tuberculosis, which he had contracted in
 prison; he was also suffering from AIDS. In its June 2 decision, the Court ruled that
 since Encarnacion was not present it would reserve judgment until it had proof of
 his death.
 According to INPE statistics as of June, 76 percent of the country's prison popu-
 lation-almost 16,000 of the amost 21,000 prisoners--consisted of accused persons
 awaiting trial. The average delay between arrest and trial in civilian cases as well
 as on criminal or terrorism charges was between 26 and 36 months. However, those
 tried on treason charges by military courts generally wait no longer than 40 days
 between the time of detention and the beginning of the trial.
 The Constitution does not permit exile, and the Government did not practice in-
 voluntary exile of its citizens. General Rodolfo Robles, who had been in voluntary
 exile in Argentina, returned to Peru in June after the passage of the Amnesty Law
 which, in addition to granting amnesty to human rights abusers, also forgave mili-
 tary officers for antigovernment activities. Others, such as former President Alan
 Garcia, apparently fled from what appeared to be legitimate criminal charges.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-Throughout Peruvian history, the judicial branch
 rarely has been fully independent of the executive. However, the 1993 Constitution
 contains a number of provisions, including an improved system for naming judges,
 that provides for a significantly more independent judiciary. By December 1994, a
 judicial honor tribunal had completed its review of the Lima judiciary and prosecu-
 tors, having dismissed a large number of provisional judges and prosecutors who
 were deemed unqualified.
 The 1993 Constitution also provided for several new judicial institutions to help
 create a more effective and independent system of justice: an Office of the Defender
 of the People (a human rights ombudsman); a Tribunal of Constitutional Guaran-
 tees (which would rule on the constitutionality of legislation and government ac-
 tions); the National Judiciary Council (a permanent, independent entity in charge
 of testing, naming, confirming, and periodically evaluating and disciplining the
 country's judges and prosecutors); and a Judicial Academy (to train judges and pros-
 ecutors).
 
 
 While the Congress did finally pass a law defining the duties of the Defender of
 the People in early May, it was withdrawn due to objections by some congressmen
 and President Fujimori that it gave the Defender too much potential authority to
 investigate the military. On July 13 the Congress passed a revised law which elimi-
 nated mention of the armed forces and laid out a procedure for confidential security-
 related material to be passed to the Defender only if a pproved by the Ministers of
 Defense or Interior, or by the Foreign Minister. Although President Fujimori signed
 this law, the Congress did not approve with the required two-thirds vote either of
 the two candidates for Defender submitted to it in mid-December.
 Efforts to name the members of the Tribunal of Constitutional Guarantees stalled
 because members of the outgoing Congressional Constitutional Committee could not
 agree on its candidates. The new Congress has not yet decided on these nominations
 either, instead, it has created a commission and charged it with naming both the
 members of the Tribunal of Constitutional Guarantees and the Defender.
 In office since January, the National Judiciary Council is an autonomous body
 made up of seven members elected by such institutions as the Supreme Court
 judges, the Supreme Court prosecutors, the country's bar associations, and deans of
 pub ic and private law schools. The Council appointed two highly respected new Su-
 preme Court prosecutors in September, and began work on evaluating candidates
 to fill some 1,500 judicial vacancies around the country currently held by provisional
 officers.
 The Peruvian system of justice is generally based on the Napoleonic Code. Judi-
 cial proceedings comprise three stages. The first is before an examining judge; the
 second is conducted by a superior court which tries and sentences the defendant;
 and the third is before an appeals court. A Public Ministry prosecutor investigates
 arrests and criminal complaints and then submits an opinion to a first-instance
 judge, who decides whether to indict. Following study of the case, the judge renders
 a verdict, which is then reviewed by a superior court prosecutor. The superior court
 prosecutor then submits an advisory opinion to a superior court judge, who holds
 a trial. Virtually all civilian court convictions are appealed to the Supreme Court.
 Defendants have the right to be present at their trial, although there were in-
 stances of trials in absentia of fugitives (however, a 1993 modification to
 antiterrorism laws eliminated convictions in absentia). Although there were trials
 in absentia, they did not lead to convictions, but to acquittals or judgments held in
 reserve until the defendant was in custody. Defendants have the right to counsel,
 but the Government often does not provide indigents with qualified attorneys.
 Proceedings in military courts which hear terrorism and treason cases do not
 meet internationally accepted standards for due process. Military trials are closed
 to the public and are carried out in secrecy. Defense attorneys do not have access
 to evidence, nor can they interview police or military witnesses (to protect their
 identities) prior to or during the trial. Many military judges are active duty line offi-
 cers with no legal background. Military tribunals in theory must pass judgment
 within 10 days. A case may be appealed to the War Council, which has 10 days to
 make a decision. A final appeal to the Supreme Council of Military Justice must
 be acted on within 5 days. However, this calendar is subject to delays. Human
 rights groups charge that military judges have sentenced some defendants before
 their lawyers were even notified that the trial had begun.
 According to Supreme Council of Military Justice statistics, between 1992 and Au-
 gust 1995, faceless military tribunals tried 1,031 cases of treason. In those cases in
 which a verdict was reached, these tribunals sentenced 267 individuals to life sen-
 tences, 217 persons to 30 years or less, 179 cases were sent to civilian court terror-
 ism trials, and 24 persons were absolved of all charges. In a public statement on
 August 11, President of the Supreme Council of Military Justice Guido Guevara
 Guerra stated that the military justice system was willing to review any case of a
 conviction for treason in which procedural errors could be proved.
 The Government did not abolish trials of terrorism cases on October 15 by anony-
 mous superior court tribunals, as it had originally announced. Human rights groups
 are concerned about cases sent by the military justice system to the civilian courts
 even when there is no evidence to prove the defendant guilty of treason or terror-
 ism, since a terrorism trial must begin all over again. For example, Jesus
 Chacaltana, a medical doctor detained in January, was found innocent of treason
 by a faceless military tribunal in April. The Supreme Council of Military Justice,
 however, ruled in September that he must still be tried for terrorism by a civilian
 court even though there was no evidence connecting him to terrorist organizations.
 In December the Congress passed the Criminal Procedures Code legislation. This
 legislation will institute new accusatorial, investigative, and trial procedures. In-
 formed observers claimed that the Government postponed passage of the new Code
 because the National Police oppose provisions that would grant more investigative
 
 
 509
 authority to prosecutors; because the armed forces oppose a provision that would
 allow prosecution of military personnel in civilian court for crimes such as murder
 that do not come under the Military Code of Justice; and because the Public Min-
 istry was not prepared in terms of budget or personnel to put the new Code into
 practice.
 There were no reports of political prisoners. Members of Sendero Luminoso and
 those detained on charges of terrorism-however arbitrary in some instances--are
 not considered political prisoners.
 fE Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Constitution requires security forces to have a judicial warrant to enter a private
 dwelling, but this requirement is suspended in the emergency zones, and security
 forces in those areas routinely conduct searches without a warrant. There were fre-
 quent credible reports of illegal telephone monitoring.
 A number of rural communities--with arms, training, and encouragement from
 the army-have organized self-defense forces, or rondas, to protect themselves
 against terrorist and bandit incursions. These have had a noticeable impact on curb-
 ing Sendero's activity in certain areas of the country. In some parts of Peru, rondas
 have existed for centuries as a form of social organization to protect communities
 from invaders and rustlers. However, military authorities organized many of the
 newer rondas and sometimes coerced peasants into participating.
 As a regular practice and to a far greater degree, Sendero has forced peasants
 to join its military ranks, often for extended periods, and to participate in terrorist
 attacks and executions.
 g. Use of Excessive Force and Violations of Humanitarian Law in Internal Con-
 flicts.-With the internal conflict winding down, reports of use of excessive force by
 the military have declined significantly from previous years. However, there were
 reports of excessive use of force by the military in counterinsurgency operations
 against terrorists in Ucayali, San Martin, and Huanuco departments. During oper-
 ations in San Martin and Huanuco departments, reports continued of arbitrary de-
 tentions by the military in communities where Sendero Luminoso had entered and
 terrorized residents.
 During the January-February border conflict with Ecuador, several citizens were
 killed or injured by mines planted along the border in the densely populated coastal
 areas during the war. Soldiers also suffered many casualties from unmarked and
 unmapped mining in the upper Cenepa Valley.
 Although both the army and Sndero Luminoso committed serious human rights
 abuses in Peru's internal conflict, the latter was responsible for many more heinous
 acts. Sndero frequently used arbitrary violence against civilians and nonmilitary
 targets. It continued to detonate powerful bombs in public places, indiscriminately
 killing and injuring bystanders, and persisted in its practice of entering villages and
 killing residents at random. Many of the victims were unarmed women and chil-
 dren. Snder Luminoso and MR A were considered responsible for 232 killings, in-
 cluding 7 deaths from bomb attacks which also injured 44 people. In armed con-
 frontations, Sndero never took prisoners or attended to the wounded; its normal
 aim was to kill as many people as possible. Sendro also practiced forced military
 conscription of children; one of those arrested for planting a small explosive device
 in Lima was only 15 years old.
 Among the other high-profie Sendero attacks was a car bomb explosion on May
 24 in front of a hotel in the Miraflores section of Lima, which killed five civilians.
 On July 1, a Sendero car bomb exploded in front of the home of cdngressional Vice
 President Victor Joy Way, causing severe damage and killing two police officers. Al-
 though Snder planted explosive devices near several embassies in Lima in March,
 no injuries were sustained. A gunfight between security forces and MRTA terrorists
 in Lima on the evening of November 30 resulted in the death of one member of the
 security forces and three MRTA terrorists.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of speech
 and of the press. The Government generally respected these provisions, although
 the Government uses its economic power in the form of newspaper advertising pur-
 chases to influence the press and is selective in allowing access to government
 newsmakers, events, and information in order to exert some control over the views
 expressed.
 The media represent a wide spectrum of information and opinion, with 22 daily
 newspapers, 10 television stations, 3 cable systems, and 120 radio stations in Linma
 alone. The media regularly criticize the Government and its policies, although that
 criticism has noticeably lessened in the last 3 years. The Government owns a daily
 
 
 510
 
 newspaper, a television network, and two radio stations, none of which are espe-
 dally influential.
 Opposition political parties have access to the media. Television stations, although
 generally progovernment, provide regular access to opposition figures on a variety
 of news and public affairs programs. The print press is divided between popular,
 largely apolitical tabloids and more comprehensive editorial-bearing papers which at
 times articulate positions in opposition to the Government's policies.
 The enactment of Decree Law 26470 in June effectively eliminated the applicabil-
 ity to the media of the 1993 Constitution's "habeas data" prvision. This measure
 had given any citizen a legal right and mechanism to demand "rectification" for arti-
 cles or reports he or she considered libelous. Many journalists viewed this provision
 as a potential tool to censor and harass the press. As a result of these concerns,
 the Congress had voted overwhelmingly in August 1994 to remove from the Con-
 stitution the portion of the "habeas data" clause related to the press. This action
 was praised by local journalists, as well by the Inter-American Press Society (SIP)
 which called the vote "an important step towards full observance of press freedom."
 Since the changes affected the Constitution, the measure did not become law until
 Congress ap proved it a second time in a separate legislative session and the Presi-
 dent signed the measure.
 During the January-February border conflict with Ecuador, journalists com-
 plained about government restrictions. The Peruvian military rarely allowed jour-
 nalists access to the combat zone and reportedly destroyed videotapes produced by
 journalists in the war zone. Nevertheless, critics of government performance during
 the conflict enjoyed full access to the press which regularly reported their views.
 Three retired military officers, General Carlos Mauricio, General Walter Ledesma,
 and Navy Captain Luis Mellet, were charged with "disloyalty" and "insulting the
 nation" and detained in April and May for publicly criticizing the military's han-
 dling of the war with Ecuador. Ledesma and Mellet were released after serving brief
 sentences; but Mauricio, whose charges related to the release of classified informa-
 tion, was sentenced to 14 months in prison. Mauricio was released as a result of
 the June 14 Amnesty Law, which also forgave retired military officers who had pub-
 licly criticized the military's handling of the border conflict. Several journalists were
 arrested by local authorities throughout the year in the course of their work. La
 Republica journalist Clemente Quinto Panez was jailed for 2 days in La Oroya after
 uncovering and reporting the involvement of state mining company officials in a se-
 ries of robberies there. Yashin Salas, also of La Republica, was arrested by
 Yurimaguas police while photographingapickup truck loaded with supplies for co-
 caine processing. Luis Laos Fascioli of E Comercio was detained by customs agents
 who, in full view of a local magistrate in Bujama, twice tried to seize the reporter's
 camera.
 Two of the best known cases of imprisoned journalists are those of Jesus Alfonso
 Castiglione and Javier Tuanama Valera. Castiglione, the former director of Radio
 Amistad in Huacho, was sentenced to 20 years in prison for terrorism despite a lack
 of evidence and pleas by international human rights organizations. Tuanama, the
 former managing editor of the Tarapoto daily Hechos has been detained for 5 years
 on various terrorism charges, despite twice being acquitted, once on a charge that
 he took part in a terrorist act committed after the date of his detention in 1990.
 The Government exercised substantial influence over the media through the
 placement of advertisements. Some media owners claimed that the Government also
 encourages private advertisers to boycott opposition publications and uses tax inves-
 tigations to harass them. Many media owners are involved in other economic activi-
 ties that require government licensing or involve bidding on government contracts.
 Opposition media access to government information has been restricted. Govern-
 ment press offices have refused to send news releases and other information to some
 magazines and often limited opposition media access to official transportation when
 the President visited remote parts of Peru or traveled abroad.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution expressly
 provides for the right of peaceful assembly and association, and authorities normally
 respect them in practice, except in areas under a state of emergency (where the
 right of assembly is suspended). Public meetings in plazas or streets require ad-
 vance permission, which may be denied only for reasons of public safety or health.
 Municipal authorities usually approved permits for demonstrations in Lima and
 nonemergency zones.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for freedom of religion, and the
 Government respects this provision in practice. The Constitution recognizes Roman
 Catholicism "as an important element in the historical, cultural, and moral develop-
 ment of the nation" but also establishes the separation of church and State. Conver-
 
 
 511
 sion to other religions is respected, and missionaries are allowed to enter and pros-
 elytize.
 Sendero Luminoso rejects religion and continues to threaten and intimidate reli-
 gious workers. Members of the Mormon Church, in particular, continued to receive
 threats and were victims of extortion by Sendero.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country.-The Constitution provides for the
 right of free movement and there are no political or legal constraints on foreign
 travel or emigration. However, the authorities can restrict people with pending
 criminal and, in some cases, civil charges from leaving the country. Freedom of
 movement is suspended in the emergency zones but is generally permitted under
 the army's supervision. Nonetheless, the authorities may detain travelers in an
 emergency zone at any time. Passengers on public transportation are controlled at
 check points throughout the country.
 The Constitution prohibits the revocation of citizenship; repatriates (both vol-
 untary and involuntary) are not treated any differently from other citizens. Peru
 has provisions for granting asylum and refugee status, although the procedures
 have been used by only a few in recent years, principally Cubans. Refugees are not
 forced to return to countries in which they fear persecution.
 Sendero still occasionally tries to interrupt free movement within the country.
 However, in 1995 a weakened Sendero did not conduct any "armed strikes." During
 such operations civilians are typically told to stay home or risk reprisals.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 The Constitution provides for the right of citizens to make and amend the laws
 and replace the officials that govern them, and citizens exercise this right in prac-
 tice. The law bars only groups that advocate violent overthrow of the Government
 from participating in the political process. Voting by secret ballot is mandatory for
 all citizens between the ages of 18 and 70; however, prisoners and members of the
 armed forces and the police are ineligible to vote. Legal opposition parties represent
 a wide variety of opinion and ideology.
 Running for a second term under provisions of the 1993 Constitution, President
 Fujimori was reelected to a 5-year term on April 9 with 65 percent of the vote over
 12 other candidates. Voters also selected 120 members of the unicameral Congress.
 Fujimori's Cambio 90/Nueva Mayoria party won 67 seats in the new Congress.
 Twelve opposition parties won the remaining 53 seats.
 There was tampering with ballots just prior to the election in Huanuco and sev-
 eral other provincial towns. However, quick action by the Organization of American
 States (OAS) election monitors and judicial and electoral authorities prevented such
 tampering from affecting the vote. The OAS election observer mission and a re-
 spected nonpartisan observer group, Transparencia, concluded that the elections
 were fair. Concerns were raised however, about the large number of congressional
 list tabulation forms that were declared invalid because they were not filled out
 properly by election workers.
 Women and minorities participate fully in government and politics. There are 11
 female members of Congress; President Fujimori's July inauguration highlighted the
 swearing-in of the Congress's first female president. The Congress's three-person
 preparatory committee was composed entirely of women for the first time in Peru-
 vian history. In addition, 2 of the 14 Cabinet Ministers and several vice ministers
 are women, as are the Attorney General and a Supreme Court Justice.
 Asians hold leadership positions in government; President Fujimori is from an
 Asian ethnic minority. There are several indigenous congressmen, and a recent vice
 president was a Quechua speaker. There are some indigenous prosecutors, and one
 of the presidential candidates was a Quechua speaker from Ancash. However, it is
 rare for indigenous peaple, who represent 30 percent of the population, to reach the
 highest leadership levels in either the public or private sectors. Until recently dis-
 crmination has often led to exclusion of members of these groups from leadership
 positions in government and business. Members of the black minority have no lead-
 ership role in government, and there are no black members of Congress.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 The Government allowed numerous nongovernmental organizations (NGO's) dedi-
 cated to monitoring and advancing human rights to operate freely, although govern-
 ment officials continued to criticize them. The military often restricted the ability
 of local and international human rights workers to investigate human rights abuses-
 the Government usually ignored human rights groups' requests for information and
 prohibited many human rights monitors--except the ICR-from visiting some pris-
 
 
 512
 
 ons. Verbal attacks by the Government against both domestic and international
 human rights monitors reflected its continuing suspicion of international NGO's in
 particular for bringing human rights abuses to public attention. Legitimate fears of
 physical attack by Sendero severely limited the ability of human rights monitors to
 carry out their work.
 Most Peruvian human rights NGO's are independent and generally objective in
 their views. Several private human rights groups joined in 1985 to form an umbrella
 organization known as the National Coordinating Committee for Human Rights, or
 Coordinadora. The Coordinadora maintains a policy of not mixing politics with
 human rights (its individual members may do so, but not in the Coordinadora's
 name), and its members are recognized as thorough and impartial observers. The
 Coordinadora had no dialog with the Government during the past year except on
 the issue of Peruvians detained in Ecuador during the 1995 border war. The dialog
 between the Coordinadora and the Government stalled in 1994 as a result of
 Congress's action in the La Cantuta case.
 Human rights groups repeatedly denounced Sendero Luminoso as the greatest vi-
 olator of human rights in Peru, while simultaneously documenting the many viola-
 tions by the security forces. Documentary evidence indicates that Coordinadora
 members have been balanced in their denunciations of abuses by both sides. Never-
 theless President Fujimori and other government officials continued to accuse
 human rights groups of defending terrorism and criticizing only government abuses.
 Amnesty International added to the debate when it referred in its 1994 report on
 Peru (released in mid-1995) to Peruvian terrorists as "political prisoners." President
 Fujimori denounced Amnesty International for this on July 10.
 On July 10, the offices of the Human Rights Commission (COMISEDH), a mem-
 ber of the Coordinadora, were broken into, and files relating to those believed to be
 falsely accused of terrorism and to human rights abuses committed by security
 forces were rifled. Attorney Tito Guido Gallegos Gallegos of Juli, in Puno depart-
 ment, received a letter in July from a group calling itself the "Patriotic Military
 Front," which threatened to kill him if he did not stop opposing the amnesty of mili-
 tary officers. A human rights attorney involved in the Barrios Altos case received
 an anonymous telephonic death threat in July related to her involvement in that
 case.
 On November 16 a funeral wreath was delivered to the offices of the pro-human
 rights association APRODEH. Attached to the wreath was a list of 10 individuals,
 including human rights activists, members of Congress, and relatives of La Cantata
 massacre victims. Their names were listed under the words "in memorium," and
 after the names was written "in remembrance by the Colina community." Shortly
 afterwards, the Defense Minister announced the retirement of military personnel
 convicted in the La Cantuta massacre who had received amnesty in June.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution provides for equal rights for all citizens and specifically prohibits
 discrimination based on ethnic origin, race, gender, language, religion, opinion, or
 economic condition. Nevertheless, discrimination against women, the disabled, and
 minorities continued. Even so, women have emerged as a key force on the Peruvian
 political scene. Discrimination based on sexual orientation is frequent.
 Women.-Violence against women, including rape and spousal abuse, is a chronic
 problem, according to local women's groups and law enforcement offices. On average
 there were over 300 complaints of violence against women per month, according to
 these sources. In the last 10 years, there were over 60,000 reported cases of violence
 against women nationwide; many additional cases, however, go unreported. While
 there are no reliable statistics, groups which work with victims believe spousal
 abuse and rape to be at a very high level. Victims frequently are reluctant to come
 forward, and women's groups complain of police indifference and the pervasive as-
 sumption that if a women was raped she probably enticed the man.
 There are special police stations in Lima and other major cities where police-
 women deal directly with abused women. They report a rising number of complaints
 of domestic violence. In addition, women's groups have established legal aid and
 health centers for women. Judicial authorities take legal action against perpetrators
 of domestic violence. However, one of the reasons that special women's police sta-
 tions were established was that regular policemen often do not take seriously accu-
 sations by women against their husbands. Although the Government has passed
 strong legislation against domestic violence, it is not always implemented at lower
 levels, especially outside the major cities.
 
 
 513
 The Constitution grants women equality, and laws on marriage, divorce, and
 property rights do not discriminate against women. Nevertheless, tradition often im-
 p edes access by women to leadership roles in major social and business institutions.
 Sexual harassment in the workplace continues to be a common problem. One
 study by a women's rights organization showed that 62 percent of working women
 knew of cases of sexual harassment in the workplace.
 Children.-The Government made efforts to address children's human rights and
 welfare; however, much work still needs to be done. President Fujimori frequently
 has emphasized the need to improve education at all levels, but the Government
 does not have sufficient funds for public schools. Millions of children continue to suf-
 fer from malnutrition and live in extreme poverty.
 The issue of children serving in the military was highli hted by the death of a
 14-year-old soldier from a gangrene infection during the January-February border
 conflict with Ecuador. The military denied that it recruited 14-year-olds and claimed
 that the child had volunteered at the start of the border conflict. Nevertheless, the
 child's relatives in Lima publicly asserted that he had been forced into military serv-
 ice. There were also reports of other soldiers as young as 15 being injured during
 the conflict. It is unclear how many soldiers under the age of 18 serve in the mili-
 ta  .Lima there are thousands of orphaned, homeless, and abandoned children, and
 many of them are forced to work in the informal economy to support themselves.
 One study indicated that more than 200,000 children under the age of 16 were
 working in order to survive. Violence against children is a serious pro lem. Accord-
 ing to some estimates, approximately half of all rapes are perpetrated against mi-
 nors. The 1995 suicide of a couple infected with AIDS, who had four young children,
 focused public attention on the growing need for homes for those orphaned as a re-
 sult of AIDS-related deaths.
 New legislation in April discontinued the practice of adult terrorism trials for
 those under age 18 and ordered that underage prisoners be moved to juvenile deten-
 tion facilities. However, cases continued to come to light of persons under 18 who
 are held in adult prisons.
 People With Disabilities.-Although the Constitution states that disabled persons
 "have the right to respect of their dignity and to a regime of protection, attention,
 readaptation, and security," the Government has few resources available for assist-
 ing the disabled or preventing discrimination against them. Little legislation and
 few accommodations exist for people with disabilities, such as wheelchair ramps on
 streets and in buildings, or laws mandating access for them, although in any case
 few among the physically disabled have wheel chairs. The number of those disabled
 is believed to bhe very high as a result of the years of violence during the Sendero
 and MRTA insurgencies. Disabled persons face discrimination when seeking employ-
 ment and many are reduced to begging in the streets. The publicity surrounding the
 success of Peru's team at the 1995 International Special Olympics focused public at-
 tention on the problems of Peru's disabled.
 Indigenous People.-The 1993 Constitution prohibits discrimination based on race
 and guarantees the right of all citizens to speak their native language. Nevertheless,
 Peru a large indigenous population faces pervasive discrimination and social preju-
 dice. Because of geographic isolation, government centralization, lack of organiza-
 tion, and social marginalization, indigenous people in general are unable to partici-
 pate in decisions affecting their lands, cultures, traditions, and the allocation of nat-
 ural resources. In jungle areas, colonists, coca growers, guerrillas, and business in-
 terests steadily encroach on native lands, many seeking to exploit natural resources.
 The largest indigenous groups are those speaking Quechua and Aymara, which are
 recognized as official languages. However, there are dozens of smaller native lan-
 guage groups. Indigenous people lack access to public services in many inland areas
 while business investment is concentrated on the coast.
 As a result of the January-February border war with Ecuador, public attention
 was focused on the 45,000 Agaruna-Huambisa people who inhabit areas near the
 Upper Cenepa Valley where fighting took place. A number of Aguaruna-Huambisa
 villages were evacuated during the fighting and several hundred Aguaruna-
 Huambisa tribesmen participated in the conflict as guides and couriers. There were
 reports that some A4uaruna-Hua         mbisa ommunit members we  ressed into serv-
 ice. Aguaruna-Huanbisa leaders have complainedabout the lack of consultation by
 the Government on matters affecting  eng land tenure, ana poor
 living conditions.
 Sender Luminoso has been the most egregious violator of indigenous rights. At
 the end of 1994, between 8,000 and 10,000 Ashaninkas in the central jungle area
 remained displaced and as many as 3,000 were in areas under Sendero control. Dur-
 ing that year, 1,500 displaced Ashaninkas were resettled in stable communities.
 
 
 514
 During 1995 displaced groups of Ashaninkas continued to be reincorporated into
 such communities.
 National/Racial/Ethnic Minorities.-Peru's population includes several small ra-
 cial minorities, the largest of which are blacks of African descent and Asians.
 Blacks, who tend to be concentrated along the coast, face particularly pervasive dis-
 crimination and social prejudice and are among the poorest groups in Peru. They
 are excluded from leadership roles in government military, and business institu-
 tions. Both the navy and the air force reportedly have unwritten policies that ex-
 clude blacks from the officer corps. According to Peru's two black human rights
 groups, poice routinely detain persons of African descent on suspicion of committing
 crimes for no other reason than the color of their skin, and police rarely act on com-
 plaints of crimes against blacks. The Government has taken no action to remedy
 these problems.
 Although Peru's Asian population has traditionally been subjected to discrimina-
 tion, this has changed during the past decade as Peru has looked toward Asia as
 a growth model and as the Asian community has achieved financial success. A part
 from President Fujimori, who is of Japanese descent, many other Asians now hold
 prominent leadership positions in business and government.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-It is estimated that only 5 percent of the total work
 force of 8.5 million belong to organized labor unions. More than half of all workers
 are in the informal sector of the economy. Workers do not need prior authorization
 to form a trade union, nor, by law, can employment be conditioned on union mem-
 bership or nonmembership. Existing unions represent a cross-section of political
 opinion. Although some unions have been traditionally associated with political
 groups, the law prohibits unions from engaging in explicitly political, religious, or
 profit-making activities. There are no restrictions on membership in international
 bodies. Several major labor unions and confederations are affiliates of international
 labor groups, including the International Labor Organization (ILO) and the Inter-
 national Confederation of Free Trade Unions. The several union leaders who ran
 unsuccessfully for Congress in 1995 all did so as individuals, without union sponsor-
 ship.
 In June Congress approved a new Employment Law, which all of the main union
 confederations publicly criticized for violating the rights of unions including freedom
 to bargain collectively and the right to work. Unions also complained that the new
 law eliminates the compulsory reinstatement of dismissed workers when it is proven
 that they were unjustly dismissed. At present such workers only have the right to
 a year's pay as indemnification. In September the head of the Coordinating Union
 Board, which is composed of the three main union confederations, complained pub-
 licly that the new Employment Law had led to the dismissal of approximately 3,000
 workers since it was enacted. The Coordinating Union Board filed a complaint with
 the ILO regarding the new law.
 This new law, which treats both men and women equally, superseded earlier leg-
 islation which had provided special working conditions for women. Among the bene-
 fits women workers lost were the guarantee of an hour each day for breastfeeding
 of children up to 1 year of age, and the requirement that employers with more than
 25 female employees provide a nursery. In practice, the new Labor Code has had
 a negative impact on the right of association by making it easier for companies to
 fire workers involved in union activities.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The 1993 Constitution recog-
 nizes the right of public and private workers to organize and bargain collectively.
 However, these rights must be exercised in harmony with broader social objectives.
 Labor regulations promulgated prior to the 1993 approval of the new Constitution
 provide that workers can form unions based on profession, employment, or geo-
 graphic location. The regulations exclude temporary, probationary, apprentice, or
 management employees from union membership. They require a minimum of 100
 members to form trade unions by branch of activity, occupation, or for various occu-
 pations; and a minimum of 20 workers to form a union within a company. They also
 limit the number of union officials, the amount of time they may devote to union
 business on company time, and require them to be active members of the union. No
 legal provisions require employers who commit antiunion discrimination to reinstate
 workers fired for union activities.
 Labor regulations set the number of union representatives who can participate in
 collective bargaining negotiations (a minimum of 3, a maximum of 12) and establish
 the negotiating timetable. The management negotiating team cannot exceed the size
 of the workers team; both sides may have attorneys and professional experts in at-
 tendance as advisers. A majority of all workers in a company, whether union mem-
 
 
 515
 bers or not, must approve a strike by a secret ballot. A second vote must be taken
 upon petition of 20 percent or more of the workers. The labor movement criticized
 provisions of the new Labor Code which facilitate an employer's ability to dismiss
 employees as impeding workers' right to bargain collectively. However, there are ap-
 parently no restrictions that would prohibit unions from negotiating a higher stand-
 ard than the base line of protection provided for workers by the law. To become an
 official collective bargaining representative, a union must represent 20 workers.
 Labor regulations also permit companies unilaterally to propose temporary
 changes of work schedules, conditions, and wages and to suspend for up to 90 days
 collective bargaining agreements if obliged to do so by an unexpected event or eco-
 nomic conditions, provided they give 15 days' notice to employees. If workers dispute
 the proposed changes, the Labor Ministry must resolve the dispute based upon cri-
 teria of "reasonableness" and "economic necessity." In such cases employers must
 authorize vacation time and in general adopt measures that avoid aggravating the
 employment situation.
 A conciliation and arbitration system resolves disputes, but union officials com-
 plain that their proportionate share of the cost of arbitration can exceed their re-
 sources. (In the past, business and government entities had covered these costs.)
 Union officials arso state that increasing numbers of companies utilize a policy of
 hiring workers on temporary, personal services contracts to prevent union affili-
 ation. The new law restricts such hiring to 20 percent of the company's workforce.
 Regulations on this point are still being formulated by the Labor Ministry. This is
 a continuing subject of contention between organized labor and employers and is one
 of the concerns that labor continues to raise in international forums. Employers
 deny the accusation of antiunion bias and assert that labor stability provisions of
 the law have made long-term commitments to workers too expensive.
 Special regulations permitting greater flexibility in application of the Labor Code
 in export and duty free zones provide for the use of temporary labor as needed, flexi-
 bility in labor contracts, and a wage system based upon supply and demand. As a
 result, workers in duty free zones are unable to unionize. Duty free zone employers
 do not engage in illegal activities to prevent unionization.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The Constitution prohibits forced
 or compulsory labor, as well as imprisonment for debt. However, there are periodic
 reports of the practice of forced labor in remote Andean mountain and Amazonian
 jungle regions of the country. In response to a complaint riled with the ILO, the
 Government in 1994 acknowledged the existence of such practices and asserted it
 had taken measures to end abuses. However, reports of forced labor, including that
 of children in gold mines in the remote Madre de Dios department, continued to
 emerge. Forcedlabor is not a problem in urban~areas.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-Education through primary school
 is compulsory and iree. Ahigh percentage of school-age children nevertheless work
 rather than attend daytime classes, with only a small number of such children at-
 tending classes at night. Given Peru's widespread poverty, children work in the in-
 formal economy without government supervision of wages or conditions from a very
 early age to help support their families. A recent Government labor study found
 that 8 percent ofthe workforce was between the ages of 6 and 14. The Government's
 Nationa Institute of Family Welfare cooperates with the United Nations Children's
 Fund and the Inter-American Development Bank to assist and rescue street chil-
 dren and other child laborers.
 The minimum legal age for employment is 16. The new Labor Code raised the age
 from 21 to 25 years for the special youth labor provisions, which allow employers
 to pay lower salaries as part of a program to provide new workers with specialized
 training. The new Labor Code also increased the period of apprenticeship from 18
 to 36 months. In addition, workers covered by these provisions now may make up
 30 percent (increased from 15 percent) of a company's work force.
 Child labor is heavily used in the agricultural sector and in informal gold mining,
 but not in other major export industries, such as petroleum and fisheries. Recent
 studies by NGO's found that approximately 4,500 workers younger than 18 ears
 of age work in harsh conditions in the informal Madre de Dios gold mines. Many
 of these workers are under the age of 15, and some are as young as 11. These child
 laborers were recruited from their families through a system known as "enganche"
 in Puno, Juliaca, Sicuani, Abancay, and Cuzco, through which they are provided
 free transportation to the mine and reportedly agree to work for at least 90 days
 before being paid. The Government has not exercised control over these employment
 agencies, and employers do not comply with labor code provisions relating to juve-
 niles. Children who work in the informal gold mines lack proper medical care, must
 work long hours, and are often subjected to beatings, mistreatment, and rape. There
 are also reports of these mine workers not being paid.
 
 
 516
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The Constitution provides that the State pro-
 mote social and economic progress and occupational education. It states that work-
 ers should receive a "just and sufficient! wage, to be determined by the Government
 in consultation with labor and business representatives and "adequate protection
 against arbitrary dismissal." The current minimum wage is about $57 (Sf130) per
 month and is generally considered inadequate to support a worker and family. A
 considerable portion, half according to some estimates, of the country's work force
 make only the minimum wage.
 The Constitution also provides for a 48-hour workweek, a weekly day of rest, and
 yearly vacation. It prohibits discrimination in the workplace. While occupational
 health and safety standards exist, the Government lacks the resources to monitor
 or enforce compliance. Employers and workers generally agree upon compensation
 for industrial accidents on an individual basis. The Government introduced reforms
 in 1993 eliminating the need to prove culpability in order to obtain worker's com-
 pensation for injuries. There are no provisions for workers to remove themselves
 from dangerous work situations without jeopardy to continued employment.
