PERU
The 1991 report on Peru is informative in several respects. It acknowledges serious violations of human rights and humanitarian law on the part of both the armed opposition and the security forces. It provides useful information on the restriction of legal rights in areas under a state of emergency. It gives well-deserved and much-needed recognition of the impartiality of human rights organizations in Peru. Perhaps most importantly, on several key issues the report looks beyond government statements and the law to point out what happens in practice.
Nevertheless, the report has some major shortcomings. First, it downplays violations committed by the Peruvian security forces, particularly in light of the report's treatment of violations committed by Sendero Luminoso, the largest and most violent armed opposition force in Peru. Second, the report's suggestion that the human rights situation in Peru is improving is questionable, and fails to take into account the increasing militarization of the conflict in Peru. The report thus leaves the reader with the general impression that the armed insurgents commit numerous, atrocious abuses; that the security forces commit some violations in response; but that the situation is starting to improve. The reality in Peru during 1991 was otherwise: both insurgent and security forces committed numerous, atrocious abuses, and some signs suggest that this situation will continue, and could deteriorate, in 1992.
The report downplays violations committed by the Peruvian security forces in several ways. First, it almost certainly understates the number of extrajudicial executions committed by the Peruvian security forces. It does this through a selected use of statistics: the report cites figures provided by the National Coordinating Committee for Human Rights (the Coordinadora) showing that Sendero committed 85% of the assassinations and executions in Peru in 1991 while the security forces committed 10%. These figures refer only to deaths established to have occurred outside of armed conflict. The report does not explain, however, that most politically related deaths in Peru in 1991 were reported as having occurred in combat; nor does it mention the fact that the vast majority of the deaths reported as combat-related are caused by
270
Peru
the security forces. In fact, according to the Coordinadora's figures, 41% of all those killed in politically related violence in Peru in 1991 were listed as "subversives" killed in battle by security forces. As the Senate Commission on Violence and Pacification has pointed out in its annual reports, it is often impossible to confirm security forces' accounts of a death as combat-related. Peruvian human rights groups report that many such deaths are actually summary executions of individuals labelled "subversives" by the security forces.
The report also understates security force violations by providing little detail about them, particularly when compared to its descriptions of Sendero violations, which are specific and graphic. For example, in the section on political and other extrajudicial killing, the report states that "Sendero routinely employs gruesome killing tactics, including the mutilation of victims' bodies, brutal beatings, castration and other sexual abuse, murder of children, and forcing family members to witness torture and killings." While this statement is accurate, none of this detail is provided on killings by the security forces, many of which were equally brutal. The report merely refers to "probable military killings" and. "murders" implicating the police. Similarly, in the section on torture, the report states that "Sendero uses particularly brutal methods to torture victims to death, including slitting throats, strangulation, stoning, and burning. Mutilation of the body is common both before and after death." Again, while this is true of Sendero, it is equally true of the army and the police. Yet the report simply mentions "torture" by these groups, without elaboration.
The report also provides far more detail on Sendero victims than it does on security force victims. For example, the following is a complete list of people identified in the report as having been killed by the security forces: "Î4 peasants including women and children ... in Santa Barbara"; "a medical student and two teenaged brothers"; and "an accused drug trafficker." Contrast the following (partial) list of identified Sendero victims: "eight members of one family, including two minor children"; "seven members of a civil defense group"; "11 peasants"; "the mayor of Pachacamac"; "four women, active in the free milk distribution program, and five children in Ayacucho"; "foreign
271
Peru
religious and development workers . . . , including a Canadian citizen employed by World Vision, a church-affiliated development organization"; "an Australian nun. Sister Irene McCormick"; "three local community leaders"; "three Japanese development workers"; "two Polish priests"; and "an Italian parish priest." Admittedly, a longer list of Sendero victims would be consistent with the fact that Sendero killed more civilians in 1991 than the security forces did. However, the extreme disparity in both the lengths of the above lists, and the amount of personal detail provided on victims, suggests an effort by the State Department to focus outrage on Sendero and thereby detract from the accountability of the government.
Finally, the report downplays security force violations by failing to assign clear responsibility for them. Here again, the report is unbalanced. It does not hesitate to flatly charge Sendero with specific crimes. For example, the report states: "Sendero regularly assassinates persons perceived to be opponents." Later: "Sendero shot the mayor of Pachacamac and then dynamited his body while forcing his wife and children to watch"; "a Sendero column killed four women and five children in Ayacucho." The wording of these sentences, including the use of active verbs {Sendero "shot," "killed," "assassinate[d]") indicates that the State Department is certain Sendero committed the crimes. In contrast, references to security force crimes are much less accusatory. For example, the report refers to "credible reports" of summary executions, disappearances, arbitrary detentions, torture and rape by the military and police. It states "[tjhere were several notable cases of probable military killihgs in 1991"; later on the page it states "[pjolice personnel were implicated during 1991 in several murders" (emphasis added). These statements are misleading to the extent that they equivocate at all regarding the security forces' participation in such crimes: there is no doubt that the Peruvian army and police illegally detained, executed, tortured and raped many (not "several") people in 1991. The report should use the same affirmative tone in describing violations committed by the security forces that it uses when describing abuses of Sendero.
212
Peru
The report attempts to put the best face on the terrible human rights situation in Peru by suggesting that things are improving. It cites a decline in "disappearances" at the end of 1991 as evidence for this proposition, but this evidence is unconvincing. While it is true that average monthly "disappearances" declined from August until the end of the year, this is partly due to a particularly high number of "disappearances" in July (45). Also, when the report was issued (in early February 1992), human rights groups in Peru were still receiving information on "disappearances" at the end of 1991. The final figures may not show as great a decline as the report indicates. However, even if the figures do show this, it would be inappropriate to focus on what may turn out to be only a temporary fluctuation when overall violations remain alarmingly high. Indeed, the last few months of 1991 were marked by several massacres by military and paramilitary groups, including the killing of 16 people in the Barrios Altos neighborhood of Lima in November and the killing of 30 people in Tocache in October.
The other significant shortcoming in the report is its silence on the Peruvian government's increasing reliance on military measures to combat the insurgency. Surprisingly, the report makes no mention of the flood of presidential decrees in November related to national defense. If enacted, the decrees would among other things:
•	Bring all of the state's economic resources -- including the educational system ~ under the control of the political-military commands in the emergency zones;
•	Authorize the military to confiscate any private property in the name of national defense and draft any citizen to participate in civil defense patrols anywhere in the country;
•	Authorize the military to enter universities, hospitals and prisons anywhere in the country without the permission of civilian authorities;
•	Bring all police forces and civil defense patrols under the control of the military;
273
Peru
•	Authorize members of the intelligence services to enter any home or office without a warrant and seize any information or documents;
•	Require private citizens to provide information to a newly formed intelligence agency or risk prosecution; and
•	Criminalize unauthorized publication of a broadly defined class of information related to national defense.
The texts of some decrees remain secret. At the end of 1991, the Peruvian Congress was still considering the decrees. (Under Peruvian law, the Congress can modify or overturn presidential decrees.) If enacted, the decrees would shift substantial power to the military and could jeopardize important rights designed to protect against abuse of that power. The failure to even mention the decrees and discuss their possible impact is a major omission in the report.
The report also fails to recognize the significance of President Fujimori's speech before a group of military officers on Armed Forces Day in September. It mis characterizes the speech by introducing it with the following sentence: "President Fujimori regularly spoke out demanding greater respect for human rights." The speech in fact contained no such "demand." On the contrary, it emphasized the army's vanguard role in defeating terrorism without a hint of criticism of the military's human rights record. Indeed, human rights is referenced principally in the context of an attack on Peru's human rights organizations. The president referred to these groups as "fronts" for terrorists, and charged them with seeking to damage the image of the armed forces while ignoring violations committed by Sendero. This charge, which was repeated in several of President Fujimori's speeches in 1991, is particularly dangerous in Peru, where a number of human rights monitors have been attacked and "disappeared." The Armed Forces Day speech could have been interpreted by some in the military as an invitation to commit such acts.
274
Peru
Another important trend that the report does not fully recognize is the increasing violence associated with the civil patrols. While it acknowledges that the patrols have committed some killings, it should have also pointed out that many peasants were killed in 1991 by Sendero for forming civil patrols, and that many were killed by the military for refusing to form civil patrols.
The report contains a few other less significant omissions. It does not follow up on some important developments from previous years, as required by the State Department's instructions for the preparation of the reports. For example, it fails to mention the announcement in February 1991 by the Public Ministry that an army sergeant would be charged with the September 1990 murder of 18 peasants in Chilcahuaycco, Huanta. Nor does it discuss the status of the large number of "disappearance" cases that remain unresolved, as required by a recent amendment to the instructions.
The report also omits mention of the Congress' rejection in February 1991 of a key presidential decree issued at the end of 1990. The decree at issue would have established that military and police forces in emergency zones were to be considered on duty at all times. If enacted, the decree would have made all crimes committed by the security forces in the emergency zones automatically subject to prosecution in military rather than civilian courts. In practice, this would have insured impunity for all abuses committed by the security forces in the emergency zones. Repeal of this decree was thus highly significant and should have been mentioned.
Despite the above criticisms, the report has a number of positive features worthy of note. On several important points, the report looks beyond the law on the books or the government's version of events to discuss actual practice. For example, it notes the frequent violation of a detainee's right to an attorney and to be released after 15 days if no charge is brought; the virtual absence of criminal proceedings against members of the security forces; and the military's failure to reveal the identities, offenses or sentences of individuals claimed to have been punished for abuse of authority. The report credits Peruvian human
275
Peru
rights groups with being "generally credible observers, investigating and reporting on human rights abuses to the extent possible, regardless of the perpetrator." This is an important recognition, particularly in light of President Fujimori's attacks on these groups. The report's description of prison conditions is forthright, as it has been in previous years. Finally, the discussion on discrimination against Peru's indigenous and black populations is important and accurate.
276
