Peru
Peru’s progress in carrying out the recommendations of its truth commission,
which reported in August 2003 on human rights violations
committed during the country’s twenty-year internal conflict (1980-
2000), has been disappointingly slow. Movement toward prosecuting
state officials responsible for the worst human rights violations has been
obstructed by military courts. Civilian prosecutors have advanced significantly
in only a small number of cases.
The inefficiency and inaccessibility of Peru’s justice system, coupled
with local government corruption and lack of transparency, have contributed
to outbreaks of violence in rural areas, such as the lynching of a
controversial mayor. Police use lethal force unjustifiably in dealing with
public protests, sometimes with fatal consequences. Longstanding problems
like torture and inhumane prison conditions continue to give cause
for concern. Journalists in provincial towns and cities are vulnerable to
physical attack and intimidation for criticizing local authorities.
Confronting the Past
Military courts insist on retaining jurisdiction over cases in which military
personnel are implicated, a major obstacle to justice. In June 2004,
the prosecutor investigating the “disappearance” and extrajudicial execution
in 1992 of nine students and a teacher from the University of La
Cantuta stated that military courts should have jurisdiction in the trial
of Gen. (Rtd.) Nicolás Hermoza Ríos, who was army commander at the
time of the crime. In August 2004 the Supreme Council of Military
Justice, Peru’s highest military tribunal, affirmed its prior ruling in
August 1994, acquitting Hermoza, another military official, and former
intelligence chief Vladimiro Montesinos of the crime. The following
day, the Constitutional Court ruled that Peru’s Constitution did not
permit violations of human rights committed by military personnel to be judged in military courts. Human rights lawyers are now pressing for
the Cantuta case to be reopened in the ordinary courts.
In other cases, bureaucratic inefficiency, insufficient resources, and a
lack of skilled investigators have contributed to delays. For example, a
protracted investigation into circumstances of the 1986 prison massacre
of El Frontón, which began in October 2002, continues to face serious
difficulties two years later. Human rights lawyers representing relatives
of the 122 prisoners who died in the massacre have questioned the identification
of twenty-six bodies carried out by the Medical Legal Service
(SML). Due to these delays, as of November 1, 2004, the prosecutor
had yet to open a criminal investigation.
The special prosecutor’s office mandated to investigate 159 cases of
“disappearance” under a friendly settlement with the Inter-American
Commission on Human Rights, as well as forty-three cases referred to
it by Peru’s truth commission, has filed charges in only five cases. None
of the defendants is currently in detention. A local prosecutor in Junín
charged General Pérez Documet, then military chief of Junín province,
with the abduction and torture in 1991 in Huancayo of Luis Alberto
Ramírez Hinostroza. Ramírez subsequently received repeated death
threats and, in August 2004, was shot and wounded by unidentified
assailants close to his home.
Another prosecutor charged with investigating human rights violations
committed during the government of President Fujimori (1990-2000)
has made greater progress. More than forty former agents of the Colina
group, a death squad responsible for “disappearances” and extrajudicial
executions in the early 1990s, are currently detained awaiting trial.
Local Corruption and Access to Justice
Although Peru is largely free of the political violence which wracked the
country in the 1980s, there were serious outbreaks of violence in 2004 when irate townspeople vented their grievances against controversial
local authorities, or when supporters of the authorities attacked critics.
In a report published in September 2004, Peru’s national human rights
ombudsman named seventy-seven municipalities affected by conflicts
between townspeople and local governments. In April 2004, a furious
mob lynched Cirilo Robles, the mayor of Ilave, Puno, who was accused
of corruption. Another government official was seriously injured.
During the same month, men armed with planks, machetes, and other
weapons attacked townspeople in Lagunas, on the Peruvian Amazon,
injuring more than forty, some seriously. The townspeople had surrounded
the town hall to prevent the mayor from evading an accounting
audit. Local government corruption and the failure of the Peruvian
justice system to investigate effectively allegations of corruption and
abuse of power were contributory factors in such outbreaks of violence.
Use of Excessive Force to Quell Demonstrations
According to the nongovernmental National Human Rights
Coordinating Group, eleven demonstrators have died as a result of
excessive use of lethal force by the police and army since the government
of President Toledo took office in 2000. In October 2004, members
of the national police shot and killed two coca growers in San
Gabán, Puno who were protesting the government’s failure to pay coca
producers for the cultivation of alternative crops. Eight others suffered
gunshot wounds.
Torture and Prison Conditions
Criminal suspects held for interrogation in police stations are frequently
tortured. Conditions in some prisons continue to be harsh. The
Peruvian nongovernmental human rights group COMISEDH
(Comisión de Derechos Humanos) documented thirty-three cases of
torture between January and November 2004. Nine of the victims died. 
Human rights groups have urged the government to close down the
remote, high-altitude prisons of Challapalca, in Tacna, and Yanamayo,
in Puno. After a visit to Challapalca prison in August 2002 the Inter-
American Commission on Human Rights published a damning report
stating that conditions there were inhumane, and that among other
physical abuses new arrivals had been beaten and tortured with electric
prods. So far, the Peruvian government has failed to implement the
commission’s long-standing recommendation that the prison be closed,
although the number of prisoners held there has been reduced. About
eighteen were still being held there as of November 2004.
Attacks on Journalists
Journalists and radio commentators in Peru’s provinces are vulnerable
to physical attack, intimidation, and harassment for criticizing local
authorities. This pattern of abuse has been constant for many years and
shows the precariousness of respect for press freedom in many Peruvian
cities. In February 2004, Antonio De La Torre Echeandía, a journalist
for Radio Orbita, was stabbed to death by two men who attacked him
with knives while he was returning from a party in the town of Yungay.
A few days earlier, De la Torre had broadcast accusations against local
government officials. In March, the mayor, who was suspected of having
ordered the assassination, was arrested and detained in the Huaraz
prison. However, police delayed carrying out arrest warrants against two
others implicated in the murder, including the mayor’s daughter. In
September, journalist César Castro Cano was stabbed and wounded in
Cusco, where he had been investigating alleged mismanagement by a
local government official.