Peru
The 1 992 Peru report covers most of the significant human rights events during 1992. Because of the overall quality of the report, most of the criticisms below are modest ones. The most significant criticisms concern the report's failure to highlight sufficiently the threat to due process rights posed by the post-coup changes in the judicial system.
In addition, the report suffers from a tendency to minimize government human rights violations by comparing them with what the State Department says are the more numerous and brutal acts of violence by Sendero Luminoso (Shining Path), Peru's largest guerrilla group. While we recognize that the State Department is correct in stating that Sendero members commit numerous brutal acts which violate the rights of their victims, the practice of combining Sendero atrocities with a discussion of government action mires the report in the fundamental conceptual error -- present in other country reports as well -- of treating incidents of non-governmental violence as human rights violations. They are not. However, they are serious crimes punishable under domestic law as well as the separate body of humanitarian law established primarily under the Fourth Geneva Convention. The State Department should be careful to acknowledge that human rights law applies only to governments, which retain the right and responsibility to prosecute insurgents under their criminal law for acts of homicide, assault, etc.
International humanitarian law, applicable to both sides in an armed conflict, is material to discussion of guerrilla abus-
es. Although the instructions for the preparation of the reports appear to call for a localized discussion of this theme where armed conflict exists, the State Department curiously fails to include this section with regard to Peru (in contrast to other countries such as Guatemala where internal conflict is far less active or widespread). Its dispersal of guerrilla atrocities tnroughout the report under the category of human rights violations dilutes the essential and unique nature of laws designed to prevent governmental abuses. While Sendero's abuses are obviously a critical component of the political context in which government human rights violations occur, they should be recognized as legally distinct and treated in a separate category.
While acknowledging numerous abuses by the security forces, their description as "excesses" is misleading. Many violations by the army and the police would more accurately be described as premeditated and systematic.
The report frequently backs away from assigning responsibility for violations to the security forces. It refers to "credible reports" and "claims" of human rights monitors instead of stating its own conclusions. In contrast, it does not equivocate in assigning responsibility for violence to guerrilla groups, even as it mis-characterizes them as human rights violations. This subtle difference in wording makes abuses committed by the security forces seem somehow less concrete than violence committed by the guerrillas.
Aside from mischaracterizing Sendero
294
Peru
killings as human rights violations, the report employs selective logic in discussing this issue. The State Department volunteers that killings by Sendero are probably underreported because they occur in remote areas. However, when discussing security forces violations, it maintains that the remoteness of areas where killings occur makes it "difficult or impossible to verify" claims of extrajudicial executions. The State Department cannot have it both ways on this point. Inaccessibility to information in remote areas most probably causes official statistics to understate killings by both Sendero and the security forces. The report itself acknowledges an analogous point in the section on detention: "the number of detainees actually turned over to civilian authorities is thought to be small in comparison to the number of persons thought to have actually been detained." Clearly, the military's reticence to acknowledge detentions would imply an underreporting of extrajudicial killings.
The report acknowledges that most disappearances are attributed to the security forces, and points out that civil patrols are also increasingly involved in disappearances. The report accurately states that many of the civil patrols are often organized, and sometimes imposed, by the military. It should also have mentioned the fact that members of civil patrols have been a prime target of Sendero violence, which places added responsibility on officials who organize and/or compel civilians to assume a quasi-combat posture.
The report credits frequent reports of torture by the security forces. In an apparent attempt to be even-handed, it
also states that "many victims of Sendero terrorism show signs of having been tortured," citing cases of killings by slitting throats, strangulation, stoning and burning victims. These acts should be classified as executions, not torture.
As for the nature of violations, the report identifies Sendero victims by category --teachers, clergy, engineers, development and human rights workers, political activists and public servants. In contrast, security forces victims are referred to as "persons alleged to be members of Sendero Luminoso," "terrorists" oratone point "innocent civilians." The failure to categorize victims of security forces violations (e.g., teachers, students, journalists, defense lawyers, unionists and witnesses to other killings) obscures the fact that many victims are chosen by the security forces for the nature of their profession and the forces' perception that such occupations place the victims in opposition to the government. For example, the now famous "enemies lists" issued by the National Intelligence Service denounced journalists and respected human rights activists on the basis of their professional activities.
One example of the State Department's conflation of guerrilla violence with human rights violations is the inclusion of Sendero's particularly egregious homicide of community leader Maria Elena Moyano. Although a condemnable illustration of Sendero's blatant disregard of others' lives, its inclusion in this section of the report is misplaced, absent a clear acknowledgement of the distinction between human rights violations and criminal offenses by non-governmental entities.
295
Peru
The report discusses the lack of progress in several important cases from last year, including the massacre of 17 persons in Barrios Altos and the killing of 14 peasants in Santa Barbara. The report also follows up on the investigation into the 1991 letter bomb attack on human rights lawyer Dr. Augusto Zuniga Paz and on the trial of police officers for the killing of two teenaged brothers in Callao. This follow-up is welcome. Beyond this case however, the report should have called greater attention to the lack of accountability in Peru. Virtually no progress has been seen on a host of human rights cases (a good number of which continue to be the subject of attention by the U.S. Congress). Against a backdrop of widespread violations, the failure to investigate and prosecute those responsible is a serious problem which the State Department should highlight.
The report points out a number of key weaknesses in Peru's criminal justice system, often looking behind the laws on the books to describe how the system fails in practice. However, it fails to convey the dire nature of most of the 1992 developments stemming from President Fujimori's post-coup decrees, and omits reference to certain key events. For example, the report notes that Supreme Court judges were dismissed after April 5, but fails to mention that within days over 100 judges and prosecutors were summarily dismissed, with this number climbing to several hundred by year's end. While corruption was cited by the government to justify these acts, the opposition political affiliations of many of the victims, and the lack of any process by which the decisions could be reviewed, belied the government's claims
of reform.
The report states that the "vast majority" of human rights complaints forwarded to the public prosecutor's office are not adequately investigated because of lack of cooperation or obstruction by the security forces. It states that the security forces are unable or unwilling to investigate themselves, and points out that prosecution of its members for human rights violations is rare. The report contains a good description of how prosecution in the civil criminal justice system is preempted by military courts. This device is a principal guarantor of impunity for members of the army and police who commit human rights abuses.
The report discusses violation of several rules designed to protect detainees. For example, it notes that the right to have a member of the Public Ministry present during interrogation is often violated. It also notes the elimination, by presidential decree, of the requirement that an attorney be present during the initial stages of detention and interrogation in treason cases. These developments are particularly ominous, since, as the report points out, "torture often takes place in the period immediately following detention."
There were some positive developments in 1992 related to detention practices, including greater access by the International Committee of the Red Cross, and operation of a registry of detainees. These developments are also noted in the report, although Red Cross access extends only to those prisoners charged with terrorism, a distinction not noted by the report. The State Department should
296
Peru
have pointed out, however, that the army frequently undermines these safeguards and effectively nullifies habeas corpus procedures, by denying that it is holding someone until turning the person over to police. In addition, the report should have noted that the detainee registry slated for the Public Ministry is not yet operational. The only functioning registry covers those persons charged with terrorism who are in the custody of the Ministry of Defense. Since the Defense Ministry claims to be holding very few persons, in contrast to the Interior Ministry which admits to holding more detainees, the utility of the registry to date is of less significance than accorded by the report.
The report mentions some of the due process concerns associated with the new expedited procedures under which "treason" cases are tried in the military courts but omits others. These procedures permit, as noted by the report, prolonged pretrial detention by police; severely restrict a defendant's ability to confront witnesses against him or herself; and interfere with the right to defense counsel. Moreover, the process is extremely rapid, and trials are conducted in secret by the military, which also acts as arresting agent and prosecutor. However, the discussion of detention practices neglects to mention that in terrorism and treason cases the police, and in some areas the military, are empowered to arrest without a warrant or prompt post-arrest opportunity for judicial review. The report's assertion that a judicial warrant is required for arrest in areas not subject to a state of emergency is thus somewhat misleading. In the cases which are tried in civilian courts by anonymous judges, backlogs mean that an individual may
spend eight months or a year before a judge will review the matter and order release from arbitrary arrest. Fundamental protections, such as a petition of habeas corpus, which is nonderogable under the Inter-American Convention on Human Rights, to which Peru is a state party, are forbidden for persons charged with terrorism and treason.
The report criticizes Decree Law 25475, incorrectly referred to in the report as a Legislative Decree; like others issued by President Fujimori after April 5, it bore only the signatures of his cabinet ministers, as the legislature had been suspended. The decree, which criminalizes "apology for terrorism," has implications far beyond journalism. The State Department should be aware that any political opposition, or human rights activism, can fall within its overbroad provisions. The report might have noted that when applied to Peruvians living outside the country, it carries a 12-year prison term and loss of Peruvian nationality. This vaguely-worded decree has been used to imprison journalists, students and others for the mere possession of written materials dealing with the guerrilla movement. Indeed, the terrorism and treason decrees violate a number of Peru's obligations under the American Convention, including the duties to allow public criminal proceedings; to provide a competent, independent and impartial tribunal; to allow adequate time to prepare a defense; and to afford a meaningful opportunity to examine and cross-examine witnesses. In such cases, for example, police agents, who are often the sole or primary sources of evidence against the accused, do not appear in court, and may not therefore be cross-examined by defense counsel.
297
Peru
Under international law, none of these judicial guarantees may be suspended during states of emergency. The report should have mentioned these departures from international law.
Aside from these omissions, the report does not express the concern that seems warranted by the potential threat these changes pose to due process rights. The State Department may justifiably welcome the increased expeditiousness of the new criminal justice system in terrorism cases, but not at the expense of fundamental fairness. The report should acknowledge the long-term threat these changes pose to the right to a fair trial. The new procedures for terrorism and treason cases may be transforming Peru's criminal justice system into a conviction machine to be used to suppress political dissent. For example, the discussion of accusations against Carlos Chipoco is inexplicably vague. The State Department is aware that the basis for the government's inclusion of Mr. Chipoco on the list of Sendero collaborators was his human rights work, in particular his efforts with Americas Watch on a Peruvian case before the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights. The State Department reportedly advised Peruvian officials that prosecuting Mr. Chipoco would be ill-advised, and opposed by the U.S. government on human rights grounds. The government's decision not to press formal charges owed more to international pressure than to fairness or tolerance for dissent. However, the report mentions only that "human rights groups expressed concern" about such practices. Given the gravity of the accusations and their potential consequences, the report should not dilute its reporting in this manner.
Next year's report should pay closer attention to the adverse effects the 1992 judicial changes have on due process rights. This is particularly important, since one of the new Congress's first acts in January 1993 ratified virtually all of President Fujimori's terrorism and treason decrees, confirming them as superseding any constitutional provision to the contrary.
Interestingly, the report is relatively neutral on President Fujimori's "auto coup" of April 5, despite the fact that the U.S. government strongly criticized the coup at the time and suspended all but humanitarian aid in response. The report mentions the dismissal of a number of judges and the detention of opposition politicians, journalists and labor leaders, but fails to put these events into context by not acknowledging that these acts were politically motivated and were probably approved, if not ordered, by President Fujimori himself.
The report is candid again this year in its assessment of Peruvian prisons, which it describes as "appalling." The report provides detail to back up this characterization. On the other hand, the report omits important facts about the May storming of the Canto Grande prison. It states that the authorities stormed the prison after guerrilla inmates "had gained control of their respective cell blocks." This wording suggests that the assault was an immediate response to a sudden forcible seizure of part of the prison. In reality, however, the guerrillas had controlled and operated these sections of the prison for years, in large part because the government had abdicated its responsibility to operate such facilities in a minimally
298
Peru
acceptable manner. The government was thus not responding to an emergency situation, and the loss of life may have been unnecessary. And while the report credits authorities with "restraint" during the operation, the Inter-American Commission investigated the incident and described it more as an offensive action by the government. The Commission's report on the incident cites inmate testimony indicating that inmates were shot while surrendering. While it is difficult to confirm these accounts, the State Department should have discussed them, and provided an explanation for discounting such testimony.
Except for its passive treatment of the Chipoco matter, the discussion of human rights monitors in Peru is commendable. Human rights groups are described as "widely considered to be credible, thorough, and impartial observers." The report criticizes President Fujimori for charging that human rights groups serve the ends of terrorism by not forcefully condemning violations by the guerrillas. Finally, the State Department suggests that government charges linking certain human rights workers to Sendero were false. This support of human rights monitors in Peru is welcome, particularly since it is certain to be unpopular among some sectors in the Peruvian government.
A serious omission is the report's failure to describe and assess the Fujimori government's announcement of an intention to withdraw from the American Convention on Human Rights in order to apply the death penalty to terrorist crimes. Although the withdrawal has not taken place, the announcement is noteworthy by itself. A second 1992 propos-
al, which has received serious consideration in 1993, suggests reinterpreting the current constitutional provision governing the death penalty for treason in external warfare to extend to persons involved in guerrilla activities. This proposal is intended to allow Peru to claim non-violation of the American Convention's prohibition on expansion of the death penalty, and if passed, would in all likelihood lead to ex post facto applications. This proposal should be condemned as a patent violation of Peru's treaty obligations.
299
