 PERU
 Peru has a freely elected democratic government, with an
 executive branch, a bicameral legislature, and a judiciary.
 Alberto Fujimori, leader of the reform party Cambio 90, was
 inaugurated President in July 1990, succeeding Alan Garcia
 Perez of-the American Popular Revolutionary Alliance (APRA).
 Public security responsibilities are-shared by the police and
 the military. The Interior Ministry and its police services
 have the primary counterterrorist role in the capital city of
 Lima and in the 70 percent of the national territory not under
 a state of emergency. The military leads the effort to combat
 subversion in the emergency zones. At year's end, 48 provinces
 and parts of 11 others were under a state of emergency. A
 state of emergency designation places all executive branch
 authority in the hands of the local military commander,
 suspends restrictions on arbitrary detention and the
 requirement for search warrants, and restricts the rights of
 movement and assembly. The number of provinces declared in
 emergency for at least part of the year decreased in 1991, the
 first reduction since the insurgency began in 1980. An
 estimated 45 percent of Peru's population of 22 million,
 including those in the capital, Lima, lived under a state of
 emergency during 1991. In Lima the police, not the military,
 took the lead in combating the insurgency. The police and the
 military in the emergency zones are under the authority of the
 emergency zone commander, not civilian authorities.
 Peru has a mixed economy that combines elements of domestic
 market capitalism with state ownership of major industries.
 Minerals extraction and processing account for the bulk of
 foreign exchange earnings. President Fujimori's administration
 has pursued a rigorous economic stabilization and structural
 adjustment program with severe fiscal austerity and tight
 monetary policy. It has also instituted a number of
 market-oriented reforms and has begun to privatize state-owned
 firms. Although the program has reduced inflation and is
 expected to produce long-term benefits, the immediate cost was
 an even deeper recession and social hardship.
 The chief causes of human rights violations in Peru remain the
 terrorist activities of the Sendero Luminoso (Shining Path)
 Maoist guerrillas and, secondarily, the Government's difficulty
 in mounting a disciplined response. According to the Peruvian
 Congress' Commission on Pacification, chaired by Senator
 Enrique Bernales, 3,180 people, including combatants and
 civilians, were killed in overall terrorist-related violence in
 1991, an 8 percent decrease from 1990's all-time high. In the
 category of deaths outside of combat, Peruvian human rights
 observers have noted that Sendero was responsible for the
 majority of assassinations and executions of civilians
 throughout the country in 1991. Sendero committed 85 percent,
 the security forces 10 percent, and paramiltary groups 3
 percent of the political and other extrajudicial killings in
 which the perpetrators were identified. Sendero regularly
 assassinates persons perceived to be opponents or merely
 uncooperative, from government leaders and other officials to
 religious workers and peasants. In 1991 Sendero and the
 pro-Cuban terrorist group Tupac Amaru Revolutionary Movement
 (MRTA) both consolidated their control over parts of Peru's
 major coca-growing region, the Upper Huallaga Valley (UHV), and
 Sendero increased its activity in the large slum areas
 surrounding Lima and other major urban centers.
 
 
 709
 PERU   "
 There continued to be credible reports of summary executions,
 disappearances, arbitrary detentions, torture, and rape by the
 military and police. Most of these abuses occurred in the
 emergency zones. However, the country's leadership undertook a
 concerted effort to improve respect for human rights in 1991.
 Statistics from the National Coordinating Committee for Human
 Rights (Coordinadora) and the Public Ministry (an autonomous
 office of the attorney general)" showed a significant decrease
 in the number of unresolved disappearances beginning in
 August/September. Late in 1991, the Fujimori administration
 authorized the unlimited access of civilian prosecuting
 attorneys to all military facilities throughout the country to
 determine the presence and condition of persons reported to be
 detained. Similarly, in September the Ministries of Interior
 and Defense granted the International Committee of the Red
 Cross (ICRC) access to all police facilities and to all
 military installations of units which conduct counterterrorism
 operations, including those in the emergency zones. The ICRC
 also has regular access to lists of military detainees.
 Military and police forces incorporated formal human rights
 components into regularly scheduled and special training
 courses; the ICRC and local human rights groups were invited to
 participate in these courses. The military and the police
 investigated and charged several of their members with murder
 and other serious crimes in the Santa Barbara and Callao murder
 cases (see section l.a.). However, though the security forces
 claim that there were significant numbers of dismissals for
 various types of abuses, the commencement of criminal
 proceedings against human rights violators has been rare.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section I Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing
 The Coordinadora estimated that Sendero was responsible for a
 total of 749 political and other extrajudicial killings of
 civilians in 1991; security forces for 91; the MRTA for 18; and
 paramilitary forces for 23. There were an additional 34
 killings by unidentified terrorists,-and 158 other killings by
 unknown perpetrators.' For the first time in 5 years, political
 and other extrajudicial killings decreased in 1991 by 14
 percent. Due to the isolation of many rural areas where
 Sendero is most active, the number of victims is underreported.
 Sendero Luminoso continued its campaign of assassinating
 teachers and clergy, engineers, development and human rights
 workers, Indian peasants, and political candidates, as well as
 Government, police, and political party officials. It also
 continued to terrorize and indoctrinate rural peasants and
 increased its activity in the large slum areas surrounding Lima
 and other urban centers. Sendero routinely employs gruesome
 killing tactics, including the mutilation of victims' bodies,
 brutal beatings, castration and other sexual abuse, murder of
 children, and forcing family members to witness torture and
 killings. For example, in April Sendero murdered eight members
 of one family, including two minor children, and in September,
 Sendero brutally beat, castrated and burned the bodies of seven
 members of a civil defense group. In Yanaz, Cajamarca on
 September 23, a Sendero column of approximately 30 convoked a
 "popular assembly", accused the villagers of failure to
 collaborate with Sendero and machine-gunned 11 peasants.
 
 
 710
 PERU
 Sendero often attacked regional, municipal, and local
 authorities to disrupt and destroy civilian government presence
 and influence. In May 1991, Sendero shot the mayor of
 Pachacamac and then dynamited his body while forcing his wife
 and children to watch. He was one of more than 35 local
 elected or appointed officeholders assassinated during 1991.
 Development workers and providers of food assistance were also
 prime Sendero targets during the year. In May a Sendero column
 killed four women and five children in Ayacucho; the women were
 active in the free milk distribution program. Foreigners,
 particularly foreign religious and development workers, were
 also targeted by Sendero, including a Canadian citizen employed
 by World Vision, a church-affiliated development organization;
 an AiAstralian nun, Sister Irene McCormick, and three local
 community leaders; three Japanese development workers; two
 Polish priests, and an Italian parish priest.
 A second terrorist group, the MRTA,, continued to expand beyond
 its original-base of operations in Lima into several rural
 zones. Although the MRTA chiefly engages in the destruction of
 property .through selective bombing, MRTA attacks killed at
 least 139 people in 1991.
 while many rondas (peasant self-defense groups) actively worked
 in a variety of legitimate fields, including community
 development and self-defense, there were also credible reports
 that some rondas, which are often organized and equipped by the
 military, committed serious human rights abuses, including the
 torture and extrajudicial killing of terrorist suspects or even
 of ronda members of rival communities.
 There were several notable cases of probable military killings
 in 1991, and rondas participated in some of them. Witnesses
 charge that a mixed army/ronda patrol was responsible for the
 killing of 14 peasants including women and children, whose
 bodies were found in an abandoned mine in Santa Barbara,
 Huancavelica. The military subsequently investigated and
 charged in military court five noncommissioned officers and a
 commissioned officer variously with murder, torture and rape;
 the case was pending at year's end.
 Police personnel were implicated during 1991 in several
 murders, including the killing while in police custody of a
 medical student and two teenaged brothers. Five
 noncommissioned officers were dismissed from the police force
 and were in jail at year's end awaiting trial in civilian
 courts. Detention orders against four superior officers and
 one noncommissioned officer were vacated by order of a civilian
 court, but the suspects remained under investigation. On
 October 16, the Minister of Interior publicly dismissed 33
 police officials for crimes including homicide, extortion, and
 robbery. Nine of the dismissed officials, accused of the
 torture and killing of an accused drug trafficker while in
 police custody, were remanded to the civilian courts
 (see Section l.c.).
 In most other notable human rights abuse cases implicating the
 security forces, however, no judicial action was taken to
 investigate and charge the perpetrators. A March 15 letter
 bomb attack on human rights lawyer Dr. Augusto Zuniga Paz
 remained unresolved. The November 3 massacre of 17 persons in
 the Barrios Altos neighborhood of Lima, by a group of
 unidentified, armed men, remains under investigation. With few
 exceptions, the security forces have been unable to investigate
 thoroughly and credibly cases in which their own members may be
 
 
 711
 PERU
 implicated. The Peruvian Code of Military Justice contains no
 language for dealing with cases of killing, kidnaping, or
 torture--only "negligence" and "abuse of authority". However,
 it does allow military courts to use relevant portions of the
 civilian panal code to try crimes which are not covered under
 the Code of Military Justice. Military officials assert that a
 number of enlisted men and officers were held within the
 military justice system on charges relating to human rights
 violations. For the most part, such assertions were difficult
 to confirm because the military courts sealed relevant
 records. In July the Minister of Defense announced that 71
 military personnel had been punished for abuse of authority,
 including human rights violations. However, neither the
 identities of these individuals, the nature of.their offenses,
 nor the exact sentences imposedhave been made public.
 The military in at least three cases in 1991 used its court
 system to preempt investigations into cases of military abuses;
 under the law, the accused in a military court cannot
 subsequently be tried in civilian courts for the same offense.
 The pending civilian court cases against army Sergeant Jhonny
 Zapata Acuna ("Centurion") for the 1990 massacre of 17
 civilians in Chilcahuaycco, Ayacucho remained at a standstill
 while a military court processes the case slowly. The Supreme
 Council of Military Justice found Lt. Col. Victor la Vera
 Hernandez ("Javier Landa Dupont") and Capt. Amador Vidal
 Sambento ("Ojos de Gato") not responsible for the November 1988
 murder of journalist Hugo Bustios.
 b. Disappearance
 The Public Ministry reports that the majority of the formal
 complaints of disappearances* implicated the security forces-
 In 1991 the Public Ministry reported 279 new disappearances.
 The Coordinadora reported 300 new disappearances in 1991,
 including 52 new 1991 cases reported in January 1992. However,
 disappearances were down sharply during the last 5 months of
 1991. According to Coordinadora and Public Ministry figures,
 unresolved disappearances averaged 33 and.29 per month
 respectively from January through July, but fell to an ayerage
 of 14 and 16 per month, respectively, from August through
 December.
 Most 1991 disappearance cases involved army detention of
 persons suspected of terrorist links in the emergency zones;
 the vast majority of disappearances were reported in the
 violence-torn departments of San Martin, Junin, and Ayacucho.
 Based on the testimony of survivors, it appears that most
 victims are taken to military bases for interrogation. Some
 are executed by the armed forces, while others are turned over
 to the civilian court system to be released for lack of
 incriminating evidence or imprisoned on terrorism charges. An
 unknown number of "disappeared" persons are unaccounted for
 because they joined the ranks of the MRTA or Sendero, either
 voluntarily or involuntarily. It is believed that the number
 of persons "disappeared" or forcibly recruited by Sendero is
 underreported.
 According to witnesses and family members, Manuel Pacotaype,
 Mayor of Chuschi, Ayacucho, along with three other men, were
 detained on March 14 by members of the National Police and
 taken to the military barracks at Pampa Cangallo. They have
 not been seen since.
 
 
 PERU
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 Although the Constitution prohibits torture and inhuman or
 humiliating treatment, charges of brutal treatment of detainees
 are common. Human rights groups charge that suspected
 subvergiyes held by the government security forces were
 routinely tortured at military detention centers; lawyers and
 others familiar with the police and judicial system concur.
 It does not appear that suspects are tortured at Peru's main
 counterterrorism detention center, run by DIRCOTE, the Police
 Counterterrorism Directorate, in Lima. In 1991 there were
 reliable accounts from released detainees, however, of torture
 or mistreatment by some other elements of the police and
 military. There continued to be credible reports of rape by
 elements of the security forces in the emergency zones.
 When torture occurs, it often takes place in the period
 immediately following detention. The 1987 terrorism law
 requires that persons detained for terrorism be interrogated
 only in the presence of a defense attorney and a Public
 Ministry prosecutor. In these cases, a court indictment must
 be sought within 15 days of arrest or the prisoner must be
 released. Reliable reports of violations of these standards
 occur frequently in the emergency zones.
 Many victims of Sendero terrorism also show signs of having
 been tortured before death. Torture of those victims often
 follows a brief "popular trial," normally held in the presence
 of rural villagers as a method of intimidation. Sendero uses
 particularly brutal methods to torture victims to-death,
 including slitting throats, strangulation, stoning, and
 burning. Mutilation of the body is common both before and
 after death.
 Peruvian prison conditions are appalling. Prisoners are
 exposed to unsanitary facilities, poor nutrition and health
 care, as well as harsh treatment by both prison staff and
 fellow prisoners. In contrast with 1990, when more than 65
 inmates in Lima's prisons died due to severe malnutrition, no
 such deaths occurred in 1991. Corruption is rampant among
 prison staff, who have been implicated in a multitude of
 offenses, from sexual blackmail and the selling of narcotics
 and weapons to inmates, to arranging prison escapes. Certain
 prison cellblocks have fallen under Sendero or MRTA control and
 guards refuse to venture into them. President Fujimori
 continued his program of phased release of unconvicted prison
 inmates awaiting trial, especially those who have already been
 in custody for a time greater than the sentence of the crime
 with which they have been charged.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 The Constitution, the Penal Code, and antiterrorist legislation
 clearly delineate the arrest and detention process. However,
 most if not all of these protections are suspended in practice
 in those areas under a state of emergency.
 In areas not subject to a state of emergency, a warrant
 approved by a judge typically is required for arrest, unless a
 perpetrator is caught in the act. Persons arrested must be
 arraigned within 24 hours, except in cases of drug trafficking,
 terrorism, or espionage, for which the limit is 15 days.
 Detainees have the right to choose their own attorney, or the
 
 
 713
 PERU
 Government must provide counsel at no cost. Arrested persons
 are entitled to have an attorney present when they make
 statements to the police. Under the 1987 terrorism law, police
 must also notify the detainee's family and human rights groups
 of an arrest, although in practice this is not consistently
 done. Police detention centers do not.maintain publicly
 available registers detailing detentions, charges, transfers
 and releases of detainees. The ICRC, however, has access to
 local police detention records and to the national military
 registry of detainees. It is expected that a national listing
 of detainees held by both the military and police for terrorism
 and other security crimes will be operational within the next
 year. There is no functioning bail system; a form of
 provisional liberty is available, more in theory than in
 reality, for persons not accused of terrorism, espionage, or
 narcotics offenses.
 Arrest procedures are different in the emergency zones. The
 armed forces do not need an arrest warrant, and detainees are
 often denied access to an attorney during'interrogation and to
 family members during their imprisonment. All detainees,
 including those in the emergency zones, have the right to seek
 judicial determination of the legality of their detention, but
 this right is often disregarded by military commanders in the
 emergency zones. Of the detainees held by the military inside
 the emergency zones, human rights groups know of very few who
 were turned over to civilian authorities for prosecution.
 Incommunicado detention of suspects was a common practice by
 combatant forces--Government and terrorist alike--operating in
 the emergency zones. Dozens of persons of whose detention the
 government's security forces had denied knowledge nonetheless,'
 later were found to have been held in military detention
 centers.
 In August the Government issued a legislative decree granting
 civilian public prosecutors access to all military barracks and
 detention centers, including those in the emergency zones. The
 decree specifies that the prosecutor may privately interview a
 detainee immediately upon his detention and examine him or her
 for signs of physical abuse. Where applicable, the prosecutor
 may order the prisoner remanded into the civilian court
 system. If remanded to the courts, the prosecutor is to
 accompany the prisoner and require a formal medical examination
 upon delivering him into civilian judicial custody. A public
 prosecutor must be present at the release of any prisoner from
 military detention. By year's end, public prosecutors had
 entered a number of military installations in the emergency
 zones checking for detainees, but none were found. In
 September ICRC personnel began unannounced visits to numerous
 military and police places of detention following the
 Government's decision to permit such access. In August the
 Ministry of Defense instituted a national registry of detainees
 held by the military forces.
 The Constitution prohibits forced involuntary exile, and there
 have been no known cases of it in the past 10 years.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The legal system is based generally on the Napoleonic Code.
 Defendants have the right to be present at the trial, at which
 verdicts are rendered by a judge or a panel of judges following
 an investigation and the filing of charges. Sentences may be
 appealed, and judges may send casbs back to lower courts for
 additional investigation. Supreme Court judges, 28 in all, are
 
 
 714
 PERU
 nominated by the President from slates supplied by an advisory
 committee and must be approved by the Senate. Many judges on
 the Superior and Supreme Courts are active in political
 parties, and there are occasional claims that decisions have
 been politically motivated.
 Courts face severe backlogs, a product of inefficiency, archaic
 case law and criminal procedural law, and the sharp increase in
 terrorism cases. There are too few public defenders for the
 large caseloads. There is an estimated backlog of between
 250,000"and 300,000 criminal cases. Human rights groups have
 documented hundreds of cases of persons who have been detained
 without bail while awaiting trial for periods of up to 4
 years--in a few cases more than twice that long. There were
 also widespread charges of corruption and the suborning of
 judges, police and witnesses at all stages of the judicial
 process.
 The vast majority of human rights complaints made to the Public
 Prosecutor's office during the past 10 years have not been
 investigated adequately due to lack of police and military
 cooperation, resources and official support. Provincial
 prosecutors attempting to investigate complaints in the
 emergency zones have been threatened, obstructed, and refused
 information by members of the armed forces. Following a
 presidential decree in September, access and support for human
 rights prosecutors has improved, but the security forces
 cooperation with civilian prosecutor investigations is still
 limited. The prosecutors themselves have sometimes not been
 aggressive in pressing investigations.
 Senders and MRTA threats and intimidation of judges handling
 terrorism cases also account in part for the low conviction
 rate of accused terrorists. Since 1981 only 492 people have
 been tried and convicted for terrorism; according to the Public
 Ministry, this represents a conviction rate of only 10
 percent. The extremely low rate of conviction in terrorism
 cases contributes to police/military frustration with the
 judicial process and to public tolerance of abuses committed by
 security forces operating against presumed terrorists. In
 September President Fujimori announced a human rights policy
 that mandated the establishment of special courts, personnel
 and securitymeasures for terrorist cases, but by year's end
 there had been little implementation.
 The Supreme Court decides whether military or police offenders
 are tried in civilian courts or in a separate military court
 system. The military generally asserts its jurisdiction in
 cases involving its personnel, and the Supreme Court typically
 rules in its favor. Under Peruvian law, those tried in
 military courts may not be retried for the same offense in
 civilian courts. Military courts have usually failed to
 investigate and convict military personnel implicated in human
 rights violations. Army Sergeant Jhonny Zapata Zcuna
 ('El Centurion") was charged in civilian court for the October
 1990 massacre of 17 persons at Chilcahuaycco, Ayacucho.
 However, the civilian court trial remained blocked as of year's
 end while a parallel process proceeds in the military courts.
 Army captain Amador Vidal Sambento and Comandante Victor la
 Vera Hernandez.were charged in civilian court for the November
 1988 killing of journalist Hugo Bustios Saavedra, but military
 courts asserted jurisdiction and found the accused not guilty.
 In February the Supreme Court annulled a habeas corpus petition
 in the Ernesto Castillo disappearance case (see Section 1.b.);
 
 
 715
 PERU
 This was one of the few such petitions that had been upheld by
 the lower courts since 1983.
 There were two notable cases in 1991 in which the security
 forces cooperated with proceedings to hold several of their
 members accountable for serious human.rights violations. Five
 noncommissioned police officers were arrested and charged in
 civilian courts with the killing in July of three youths in
 Callao. Detention orders against four superior officers and
 one noncommissioned officer involved in the cases were vacated
 by order of a civilian court judge, although the four remained
 under investigation. Five noncommissioned officers and an
 officer, were charged in military court variously with murder,
 torture and rape in the Santa Barbara case (see Section l.a.)
 following a military investigation. Proceedings were still
 pending at year's end. Military trials may be closed to the
 public at the discretion of the ruling magistrate, and little
 is known about specific cases. In January 1990 both military
 and civilian courts closed the investigation into the 1988
 Coyara massacre case of 28 villagers. In late 1991, the
 Inter-American Court of Human Rights agreed to take the case.
 The Government has indicated that it will respect the Court's
 ruling. A December 1990 government decree requiring that
 security personnel charged with crimes in connection with their
 service in the emergency zones be-tried in military courts was
 subsequently overturned by Congress.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The Constitution stipulates that the police need a judicial
 warrant to enter a private dwelling, and this requirement is
 generally respected. The requirement is suspended in the
 emergency zones, however, and security forces in those areas
 routinely conduct searches of private homes without warrants.
 Credible reports of illegal telephone wiretaps remain common
 and the subject politically controversial.
 With army training and encouragement, a number of rural
 communities organized rondas to protect themselves against
 terrorist and bandit incursions. While in parts of the nation
 rondas have existed for centuries as a form of social
 organization and to protect residents from invaders and
 rustlers, many of the newer rondas, were actively organized, and
 sometimes imposed, under the directions of the military
 authorities. Many peasants joined rondas voluntarily to defend
 against Sendero, and many leaders are locally elected.
 However, in some areas there were credible reports of peasants
 forced to join rondas. Sendero was also credibly accused of
 regularly forcing peasants to join its military ranks, often
 for extended periods, requiring their involvement in terrorist
 attacks and executions.
 g. Use of Excessive Force and Violations of Humanitarian
 Law in Internal Conflicts
 Peru has signed the two protocols additional to the Geneva
 Conventions relating to the protection of victims of
 international and noninternational armed conflict in July
 1989. In September 1991, the Government authorized access of
 the ICRC to all military facilities engaged in antisubversive
 operations. The authorization includes the right to interview
 detainees privately. By year's, end, the ICRC had made 114
 visits to 75 police stations and 95 visits to 77 military
 installations without hindrance.
 
 
 716
 PERU
 According to the Senate's Bernales Commission, 3,180 people,
 including combatants and civilians, were killed in terrorist-
 related violence in 1991. This is an 8 percent decrease in
 terrorist-related violence from 1990's all-time high. The
 Beruales figure includes 334 police and military, 1,287
 civilians, 1,522 terrorists, and 37 narcotics traffickers. Of
 the 3,180 deaths, Sendero killed 1,314, the military 1,049, the
 police 346, MRTA 139, urban and rural rondas 109,
 narcotraffickers 31, antiterrorist paramilitary groups 9, and
 unknown perpetrators 177.
 Local human rights groups maintain that a significant but
 unknown number of captured terrorists and innocent civilians
 were.summarily executed by the military in 1991. Sendero's
 disregard for the rules of war and humanitarian law are also
 well known (seeSection l.a.) Sendero routinely tortures,
 mutilates and murders its captives.
 There were widespread abuses by both security and terrorist
 forces of the rights of prisoners, able-bodied, wounded, and
 sick alike. The military's violations of international norms
 ranged from the routine blindfolding-of prisoners, to the
 frequent refusal to admit that certain persons were being
 detained, to the less frequent summary execution of unarmed
 prisoners. For its part, Sendero does not acknowledge holding
 any government prisoners; it executes government prisoners as a
 matter of policy.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a   Freedom of Speech and Press
 The Constitution provides for freedom of speech and the press.
 With 8 television stations, r cable television system, 72 radio
 stations, and 18 daily newspapers in Lima alone, Peruvians have
 access to a very broad range of opinion and information. The
 Government owns one of the three national television networks,
 a radio network, and two newspapers. Most major opposition
 parties boast their own newspapers, and opposition figures also
 have frequent access to the government media.
 There were relatively few complaints during 1991 of government
 pressure on the media or of restrictions on journalists. There
 were, howevet, charges that a popular television newsmagazine
 program was canceled due to military pressure after the program
 revealed the draft of a military document authorizing summary
 executions under certain circumstances. The Minister of
 Defense publicly repudiated the draft proposal, and those
 involved in its preparation were administratively punished.
 The television station management stated that the program was
 canceled due to economic considerations and not as a response
 to military pressure.
 In separate actions MRTA and Sendero forces occupied the
 offices-of several radio stations and wire services, forcing
 the media outlets to transmit political propaganda messages.
 Sendero also bombed several rural radio stations. Sendero used
 threats to intimidate radio stations, journalists and
 publications.
 Journalists were sometimes the victims of violence and
 threats. The College of Peruvian Journalists reported that as
 many as 33 journalists have been killed in the 11 years of
 Sendero violence. Radio journalist Luis Antonio Morales
 Ortega, whom Sendero later acknowledged as one of their
 
 
 717
 PERU
 political cadre, was assassinated on July 13. Only days before
 his death, he had received'death threats from a group calling
 itself the Anti-Terrorist Liberation Command, and earlier had
 received similar threats from the Rodrigo Franco Command
 (CRF). Melissa Alfaro, the 23 year-old news editor of
 MRTA-linked Cambio newspaper, was killed on October 10 when she
 opened a letter bomb addressed to Cambio editor Carlos Arroyo
 Reyes. Ayacucho journalist Cirilo Ore Enriquez was
 assassinated by Sendero on October 27. Ore had received death
 threats and his name had appeared on Sendero black lists
 circulated in Ayacucho in the weeks prior to his death.
 Ayacucho journalist Magno Sosa Rojas received threats from the
 Anti-Terrorist Liberation Command. He was arrested on August
 23 and charged with terrorism, but a civil judge released him
 one week later for insufficient evidence.
 Academic freedom is generally respected, but professors and
 students are sometimes the victims of threats and abuses.
 Sendero and MRTA resort extensively to threats and abuse
 against faculty, staff, and students in a number of
 universities which they strive to control. Army units entered
 San Marcos and La Cantuta Universities in May to paint out
 Sendero propaganda and "restore university freedom" with a show
 of military presence.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 These rights are expressly provided for in the Constitution and
 are normally respected in practice except in areas under a
 state of emergency (where the right of assembly is suspended).
 Public meetings in plazas or streets require advance
 permission, which may be denied only for reasons of public
 safety or health. Municipal authorities usually approved
 permits for demonstrations in lima and nonemergency zones.
 Many unauthorized demonstrations also occurred, and, for the
 most part, the Government dealt with them in a
 nonconfrontationalmanner. On a number of occasions, however,
 police on the scene resorted to clubs, tear gas, buckshot, and
 truck-mounted water cannons to break up marches or to disperse
 large crowds. These tactics were frequently used against
 striking public service workers, including nurses, school
 teachers, and social security workers on various occasions
 during 1991.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Roman Catholicism predominates in Peru, and the Constitution
 formally recognizes the Church "as an important element in the
 historical, cultural, and moral development" of the nation.
 The Constitution also establishes the separation of church and
 state and ensures freedom of religion and conscience. These
 rights are respected in practice.
 Members of various religious organizations report having
 received death threats from Sendero during 1991. Sendero is
 becoming increasingly antagonistic to organized religion in
 general and to foreign clergy in particular; several religious
 workers were killed by Sendero (see Section l.a.). During
 February and March MRTA bombed, or tried to bomb, 15 Mormon
 churches.
 
 
 718
 PERU
 d-. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 *The Constitution provides for the right of free movement, and
 there are no political or legal constraints on foreign travel
 or emigration. Freedom of movement is legally suspended within
 the emergency zones, and travelers may be detained by
 authorities at any time. Other domestic and international
 travel is not restricted by the government for political
 reasons.
 Sendero called for numerous "armed strikes" in various parts of
 the country, during which civilians were obliged to stay at
 home-or risk violence if they traveled.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Peru is a democracy governed by a freely elected president and
 congress. The political process is open and subject to
 monitoring by an autonomous national elections board, and
 elections are vigorously contested by parties ranging from
 conservative to Marxist-Leninist. Elections are-held every 5
 years for a president and two vice presidents, as well as for
 the Senate and Chamber of Deputies. The President is barred
 from running for consecutive terms of office. Suffrage is both
 universal and mandatory for persons 18 to 70 years of age,
 except for active duty police or military, who are barred from
 voting or holding public office. Balloting is direct and
 secret.
 Sendero Luminoso persistently sought to deny citizens their
 political rights--particularly in the more remote areas--by
 killing candidates and elected officials and threatening voters
 (see Section l.a.). Sendero applied these tactics in the
 August 1991 supplemental elections.- Due to Sendero intimidation
 there were no candidates in 123 districts, which constituted 25
 percent of those districts holding elections in August 1991.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 A number of local private human rights organizations constitute
 the Independent National Coordinating Committee for Human
 Rights. These include the Commission for Human Rights
 (COMISEDH)-, the Institute for Legal Defense (IDL), the
 Association for Human Rights (APRODEH), the' Church's Episcopal
 Commission for Social Action (CEAS), and the Center for Studies
 and Action for Peace (CEAPAZ). A number of other, smaller
 groups work in the departmental capitals and other cities.
 These groups are generally credible observers, investigating
 and reporting on human rights abuses to the extent possible,
 regardless of the perpetrator.
 However, violence against human rights activists continued in
 1991, including the letter bomb attack on Dr. Augusto Zuniga
 Paz, legal counsel for the Commission for Human Rights
 (see Section l.a.). Local human rights organizations complain
 that they are limited by the military in their efforts to
 investigate human rights abuses in the emergency zones and that
 their requests to the Government for information are usually
 ignored. Legitimate fears of attacks by Sendero also greatly
 limit the ability of human rights monitors to investigate
 reported cases of abuse. Porfirio Suni Quispe, the President
 
 
 719
 PERU
 of a regional human rights commission, was assassinated by
 Sendero on February 14, in Puno.
 President Fujimori regularly spoke out demanding greater
 respect for human rights. At an Army Day celebration in
 September, the President told an audience of military officers
 that Peru would continue to fight the armed insurgents with
 discipline and respect for human rights. He added, however,
 that some human rights groups had not been evenhanded, failing
 to condemn equally the human rights offenses committed by the
 terrorists, and had thus served the ends of terrorism. Local
 human rights groups vigorously denied these allegations and
 expressed concern that this remark could endanger the lives of
 their members.
 Several foreign nongovernmental human rights organizations sent
 representatives to Peru during 1991 to investigate the human
 rights situation. Various of these visitors met with such
 officials as President Fujimori, the Minister of Defense, the
 Attorney General and military authorities. Some visited sites
 in the emergency zones. The Inter-American Human Rights
 Commission visited Peru in October 1991 to investigate the
 human rights situation. Representatives of the military joint
 command met with representatives of human rights monitoring
 groups. Several human rights groups were invited to
 participate in seminars and to offer human rights instruction
 at military and police academies. The ICRC has regular access
 to prison and detention facilities and to a military registry
 of detainees.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 The Constitution grants women equality with men, and laws on
 marriage, divorce, and property rights do not discriminate
 against women. Nevertheless, tradition impedes the access of
 women to leadership roles in major social and political
 institutions.
 Sexual violence, including spouse abuse, is a chronic problem.
 A special police center, staffed by policewomen, operates in
 Lima to provide legal, medical, and psychiatric assistance to
 abused spouses and children. Police in Lima receive
 approximately 100 formal complaints of rape daily. Police
 estimate, however, that less than 10 percent of all rape cases
 are reported. Of the 2,800 rape cases tried in Lima in 1991,
 only 340 resulted in convictions. A number of women's
 organizations and feminist groups are active in Peru.
 Peru's large indigenous population and its small black
 population are subject to pervasive social discrimination. The
 former group, mostly speakers of Quechua, Aymara, and other
 native languages, traditionally has lacked access to public
 services. Peru is a classic case of differential development,
 with public investment traditionally focused on the coast,
 drawing migrants to the cities, especially Lima. Recognizing
 'this fact, the Government has attempted to redirect the flow of
 resources and services to poor, largely Indian, rural areas.
 Development efforts, however, have been impeded by the
 difficulty and cost of providing services to remote areas and
 by the continued, targeted disruption of these efforts by
 Sendero. As a result of current problems, as well as historic
 and continued prejudice, the economic and social needs of
 Peruvians of European ancestry continued to be met to a far
 
 
 720
 PERU
 greater extent than those of Peruvians of black, mixed, or
 Indian heritage.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 The Constitution provides for freedom of association and,
 except for the judiciary, police, military, and military
 parastatals, the right to form-labor unions without previous
 authorization. However, there are some legal restrictions on
 the right to form a union. There is, for example, a
 requirement to register with the Ministry of Labor before the
 union can become a legal entity capable of performing its
 functions. Suspension or dissolution of labor unions is
 forbidden by the C6nstitution except through the civil court
 system at the request of the union itself or by Labor Ministry
 cancelation of the union's registration. Unions may form
 industrywide federations which may, in turn, form
 confederations, all of which may affiliate with international
 labor organizations and such affiliations are commonplace.
 Private and public sector unions of workers performing the same
 type of work may not join together as a confederation at any
 level. In late December 1990, the Government issued a new
 decree that allows the formation of new unions with a minimum
 of 20 members and allows multiple unions within the same
 workplace. The measure also attempts to limit the power of the
 politically affiliated leadership of the existing labor
 organizations by allowing any two unions to form a
 confederation.
 Only about 15 percent of the labor force is organized, although
 some labor organization is found in industries responsible for
 about 70 percent of Peru's gross national product. The
 majority of unorganized workers are in the countryside and
 involved in the vast underground "informal" sector which works
 outside government regulations. Although a significant
 percentage of organized labor belongs to independent unions and
 federations, those unions with a political party affiliation
 are routinely manipulated to serve partisan political interests
 The Constitution provides for the right to strike "according to
 law." There is no strike law, however, even though Congress
 has considered various implementing bills since the
 Constitution was promulgated in 1979. By Supreme Executive
 Decree (which defines some strike behavior in the absence of a
 formal law), workers in the private sector must give 72-hour
 notice to the employer and the Ministry of Labor before going
 on strike. When direct negotiations between workers and
 employers break down, the Government can intervene and
 constitute a tripartite (government, management, labor) board
 to review the situation. If no agreement is reached, the
 Government weighs the overall economic implications of the
 employer's and the workers' positions and makes a decision
 (which may be appealed administratively). A government
 determination that a strike is illegal can lead to the
 dismissal of workers or union leaders and permits employers to
 hire strikebreakers legally. There are no norms regulating
 strikes in the public sector and all such strikes, common
 though they are, are open to legal challenge.
 In spite of the constitutional right to strike, nearly all
 strikes in Peru are declared illegal. However, the workers who
 strike illegally are seldom penalized. Following a series of
 disruptive public sector strikes in late 1990, the Government
 
 
 721
 PERU
 issued a supreme decree restricting the right of government
 workers in essential services to strike. Although the right to
 strike remains, a minimum level of essential services must be
 maintained. Essential services were broadly defined by the
 decree, which generated a complaint to theInternational Labor
 Organization (ILO). Despite these restrictions, several major
 strikes in essential public services took place in 1991.
 In 1991 the ILO's Committee on Freedom of Association
 considered three cases involving government failure to
 prosecute military and other officials allegedly responsible
 for the illegal detention, torture, disappearance, and murder
 of workers, peasants, and union officials in 1989; and called
 for an independent judicial inquiry. Other ILO bodies
 acknowledged some improvement in the trade union law, for
 example in terms of permitting greater pluralism, but called
 for further lifting of restrictions dealing with public
 employee rights, free choice of representatives, freedom to
 participate in political activity and collective bargaining.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 The right to bargain collectively is provided for by the
 Constitution, but there are restrictions on what can be
 negotiated. In the public sector, however, only working
 conditions may be negotiated, and then only if the changes do
 not involve expenses greater than the funds already budgeted.
 In the private sector, collective bargaining can cover both
 working conditions and pay.
 By law, employers cannot discriminate against union members or
 organizers. In practice, however, union activists are
 sometimes harassed by employers who threaten to fire them.
 Others are paid off to leave the enterprise. Workers may
 appeal their cases through the Ministry of Labor or, if a
 decision is not acceptable to both parties, through the civil
 courts. In some cases, a worker is kept on the company's
 payroll until a final legal ruling is obtained. In other
 cases, a worker may be awarded back pay in a final settlement.
 There were several reported incidents during the year of
 serious harassment and intimidation of labor union activists.
 Sendero threatened leaders of the Teachers Union in order to
 protract a 5 month strike in the public education sector.
 Labor laws and regulations are applied uniformly throughout the
 country, including the free trade zone of Tacna, and an area of
 the Amazon Basin, granted in a Peru/Colombia border agreement,
 which is analogous to a free trade zone.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 The Constitution prohibits compulsory labor, and this
 prohibition is usually respected in practice. There have been
 a few, unverified reports of compulsory labor on plantations in
 remote areas of the country where law enforcement is all but
 nonexistent. Sendero has also been accused of forcibly
 recruiting peasants to either join its ranks or render support
 services. There were also credible complaints that the
 military used coercion to recruit peasants to join self-defense
 militias (see Section l.f.).
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 The law prohibits the employment of children under 14 years of
 age. In the formal sector of the economy, the law allows for
 
 
 722
 PERU
 the employment of older children in some jobs, for a limited
 period of time, and for a curtailed workweek at full pay.
 According to a 1987 Senate report, however, 1.1 Million
 children 6 to 14 years of age work, mostly in the informal
 sector. Unofficial sources estimate that about half a million
 children work in the Lima area alone. A June 1989 survey of
 133 working children by the Agrarian University in Lima showed
 that 78 percent of them were between 10 and 12 years old. Some
 40 percent sold assorted merchandise as street vendors, and 53
 percent went to school only occasionally or not at all.
 One-third worked 7 days a week, and 57 percent of the total
 worked between 2 and 5 days a week. There were confirmed
 reports of children working in conditions approaching slavery
 in the placer-mining gold fields of Madre de Dios department.
 In this remote area, where there is virtually no government
 presence, the children were overworked and ill-fed. Graves of
 children discovered in 1991 brought the issue to public notice.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 The administratively set minimum wage was last increased by the
 Government in January 1991. It continues to lag behind
 inflation and is not sufficient to provide a decent standard of
 living for a worker and family. The Government implicitly
 recognized the inadequacy of wages paid to government workers,
 often below the minimum wage when it reduced the required work
 week to 24 hours in order to allow government workers,
 including police and military, to seek secondary employment to
 supplement their incomes. However, many Peruvians are paid
 more than the minimum wage, and many others supplement their
 income through multiple jobs or subsistence farming, or both.
 Nonetheless, according to a September 1990 World Bank report,
 55 percent of all Peruvians live in extreme poverty.
 The Labor Code provides for an 8-hour workday and an official
 48-hour workweek for men, and a 45-hour workweek for women, but
 its provisions concerning conditions of work are routinely
 ignored by most employers. All workers are legally entitled to
 30 days' paid annual vacation. Those in the private sector
 have to work a minimum of 260 days (excluding 30 days' sick
 leave) or forfeit their vacation. In an economy where
 unemployment and underemployment total an estimated 80 percent,
 however, vacation benefits and other conditions of work are
 readily sacrificed in exchange for steady or even temporary
 employment.
 There are government standards for industrial health and
 safety, but these are rarely enforced, either by employers or
 by the Government (which has no inspectors). Accidents are
 common, and there is usually no emphasis on prevention; once
 accidents occur, employers normally make compensation
 voluntarily, however, minimal.
 
 
 723
