 PERU
 Peru has a freely elected democratic government, with an
 executive branch headed by a president, a bicameral
 legislature, a separate judiciary, and an autonomous attorney
 general. Peru's history has been punctuated by periods of
 military rule, most recently between 1968 and 1980. President
 Alan Garcia and his center-left American Popular Revolutionary
 Alliance (APRA) won the last general elections in 1985 by a
 large margin; representation in Congress ranges from
 conservative to Marxist. The next national elections are
 scheduled for 1990.
 Public security responsibilities are shared by both the police
 and the military. The Interior Ministry and its police
 services have the primary counterterrorist role in Lima and
 those departments not under a state of emergency. The
 military leads the effort to combat subversion outside Lima in
 the 43 provinces now under a state of emergency. These states
 of emergency place all executive branch authority in the local
 military command, suspend restrictions on arbitrary detention
 and the requirement for search warrants, and restrict rights
 to movement and assembly. A history of military coups has
 weakened civilian control over the military. There is little
 oversight of military activities in the emergency zones by
 civilian judges or prosecutors, and the constitutional rights
 of persons detained by the military are routinely ignored.
 Peru has a mixed economy, and private property is generally
 respected. Strict price controls, higher wages, and
 restrictions on foreign debt repayment brought temporary
 growth to the Peruvian economy in 1986 and 1987. It became
 apparent by early 1988, however, that these policies were
 unsustainable. Export earnings fell, unemployment rose,
 central bank reserves plummeted, and the fiscal deficit fueled
 an inflationary spiral. Austerity measures instituted during
 1988 will result in a further deepening of the recession and
 have already produced increased social unrest.
 Since 1980 the Sendero Luminoso (Shining Path) Maoist
 guerrillas have been active proponents of terror to undermine
 democracy and the economy. Sendero is a major human rights
 violator and bears heavy responsibility for the rise in
 violence in Peru. In the face of minimal popular support for
 its vague revolutionary goals, it regularly assassinates
 development workers, teachers, police, soldiers, and ordinary
 citizens, principally Indian residents of the Andean
 highlands. Sendero violence escalated in 1988. As measured
 by the number of reported deaths, 1988 was the most violent
 year since Sendero announced its popular war in 1980. The
 group engaged in widespread economic sabotage and an increased
 level of assassinations, especially in rural areas. Sendero
 also operated in the major coca-producing area of Peru, the
 Upper Huallaga Valley, where it both defended peasant coca
 producers against traffickers and cooperated with traffickers
 to thwart law enforcement efforts. In addition, two other
 smaller terrorist groups are active. It is believed that at
 least 1,100 persons were killed in terrorist incidents in
 1988.
 Documented cases of human rights abuses by government security
 forces continued in 1988, even though it has become more
 difficult to carry out independent investigations of alleged
 summary executions and detentions by the military. Regional
 military commands deny access to the emergency zones where the
 
 
 682
 PERU
 vast majority of alleged human rights violations by both the
 military and Sendero occur.
 Disappearances and summary executions appear to have increased
 in the past 2 years. Reliable human rights organizations
 reported 405 complaints alleging arbitrary detentions by
 security forces, of which 125 were resolved. These groups
 fear that most of the remainder are victims of summary
 executions. There are credible reports of the use of torture
 by the military. Trials of military personnel accused of
 human rights violations move slowly, and no military or
 security personnel were convicted of human rights abuses in
 1988. Congressional investigations of alleged abuses have
 been severely criticized as inadequate. Independent
 investigations of alleged military killings have been impeded
 by military commanders.
 The year also marked the emergence of an extralegal vigilante
 group calling itself the Rodrigo Franco Democratic Command.
 The group claimed responsibility for the murder of a prominent
 attorney and is also responsible for threats against an
 independent special prosecutor investigating alleged human
 rights violations by the military. There are reports that
 extremist members of APRA or the security forces may be using
 the group's name to conduct operations against suspected
 terrorists and sympathizers.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 Political killings remained a significant problem in 1988.
 Sendero Luminoso continued to assassinate policemen, soldiers,
 government and ruling party officials, teachers, engineers,
 and development workers, as well as Indian peasants. Official
 sources reported more than 1,100 deaths from terrorist
 violence in 1988. Due to the isolation of many rural areas
 where Sendero is most active, the number of victims almost
 surely is underreported. Sendero used violence in the
 countryside, particularly assassinations, to impose its
 administrative control over certain areas, punish so-called
 traitors, and eliminate opposition.  In the cities, Sendero
 used attacks more for propaganda purposes, although in 1988
 the assassinations of factory foremen and threats against
 union leaders appeared designed to increase Sendero influence
 in some labor unions. The pattern of Sendero killings of
 government and party (APRA) officials, which rose
 significantly in 1986 and 1987, continued in 1988.
 Sendero killings included at least 62 peasants in 5 villages
 in Ayacucho Department in December 1987 and January 1988.
 Also in January, Sendero combatants, disguised as soldiers,
 entered a village in La Mar province, rounded up the villagers
 in the town square, and beheaded 24. In February five state
 telecommunications workers were killed in San Martin
 Department. In March Sendero ambushed a government vehicle in
 the Huanuco Department, killing 8 police and 7 civilians. In
 April 6 civilian authorities were executed in the square of
 their village in the Lima Department. In June residents of a
 Huanta Department village were assembled to witness the
 execution of 14 persons. In July a judge and the governor of
 the Ica Department were assassinated. The lieutenant
 
 
 683
 PERU
 governor, an engineer, and another government worker were
 killed in Junin Department in August. In September a
 lieutenant governor and his wife were shot, and their two
 minor children were abducted and remain missing. An American
 citizen working in a rural development project in Huancayo
 Department and a Peruvian colleague were assassinated on June
 14 on a rural highway.
 The Minister of Defense reports that in 1988 at least 282
 police and military and 923 civilians were killed by Sendero.
 At least 70 of the more than 600 killed in 1988 were
 engineers, agronomists, school teachers, and other
 professionals.
 A second terrorist group, the Tupac Amaru Revolutionary
 Movement (MRTA), continues to operate primarily in Lima and
 its environs. Though the MRTA chiefly seeks the destruction
 of property through the selective bombing of banks, factories,
 foreign businesses, and diplomatic installations, these
 bombings killed 6 people in 1988. In a Lima hospital, MRTA
 also assassinated a woman whom it claimed was a police
 informer.
 The Government claims to have killed 4,500 terrorists since
 1980, including approximately 630 in 1988. Though the
 military may inflate this count, confirmed killings of
 terrorists may also be underreported since Sendero attempts to
 retrieve all its casualties, including fatalities, following
 clashes with the military. Local human rights groups claim
 that a significant but unknown number of captured terrorists
 and innocent civilians have been executed by the military.
 There are no official statistics on the number of summary
 executions in 1988. Since the number of confirmed
 disappearances sharply rose in 1988, it appears probable that
 the number of summary executions, represented by those who
 disappeared and who do not reappear within a reasonable period
 of time, also significantly increased in 1988. Amnesty
 International (AI), in an August 1988 report, charged that the
 decrease in the number of summary executions acknowledged to
 have been committed by government forces is the result of a
 government and military effort to hide abuses. Most press and
 human rights organizations are routinely barred from entering
 the emergency zones where alleged abuses occur. Two notable
 cases of probable military killings occurred in 1988. On May
 14, the day following a Sendero ambush which killed 4 soldiers
 and wounded 15, the military allegedly entered the Ayacucho
 Department village of Cayara and rounded up and killed at
 least 28 villagers. Cayara villagers reported being forced
 into their homes by the military while several village
 residents were murdered in the village church. Other
 witnesses reported that a military patrol tortured and killed
 a number of men returning from work in their fields. The
 military claimed a number of terrorists were killed in a
 shoot-out inside the village. An independent prosecutor began
 to investigate the incident, but the bodies of two presumed
 victims disappeared from a mass grave where they had been
 discovered. (It is believed that the military removed the
 bodies and buried them in an unknown second site.) On
 December 15 the mayor of Cayara and his secretary, both of
 whom were witnesses of the massacre, were shot to death, along
 with a bus driver, after a group of masked men stopped a
 public bus, examined the identity documents of all the
 passangers aboard, and singled out the mayor and his aide for
 death. These events, together with the disappearance of
 
 
 684
 PERU
 other witnesses to the killings, has convinced most impartial
 observers that the military did indeed kill noncombatant
 villagers.
 A second well-publicized case was the attempted summary
 execution in May of postal worker Sonia Munoz of Huancavelica
 Department. She stated that she was taken from her home to a
 military barracks, tortured, shot several times, and left for
 dead by soldiers who presumably believed her to be a Sendero
 collaborator. The perpetrators attempted to disguise their
 deed as a Sendero assassination by leaving a note affixed to
 her clothing stating that she had been killed for being an
 informant.
 In neither the Cayara nor the Munoz cases, nor in any other
 1988 incident of alleged military or police human rights
 violations, were the results of official investigations made
 public, nor were charges brought against security officials.
 Following the Cayara massacre, two witnesses led press and
 other observers to a common grave in which three bodies were
 found. President Garcia stated that Ayacucho's special
 prosecutor, Dr. Carlos Escobar, would receive full support for
 his investigation of the incident. Nevertheless, the
 prosecutor's requests for assistance from the Ayacucho
 military command were denied or ignored. Dr. Escobar stated
 publicly that the military command has hindered his
 investigation. Two congressional committees appointed to
 investigate the massacre have made inconclusive reports that
 have been severely criticized by responsible, informed
 observers. Dr. Escobar was subsequently transferred from his
 special assignment in Ayacucho. The Government initially
 announced his office was being closed for budgetary reasons,
 but then announced the office would be reopened with a
 different prosecutor. It appears Dr. Escobar's removal was
 the result of his public conclusion that military officers
 were guilty of murder and should be prosecuted.
 The trial of 77 army and police officials accused of using
 excessive force in the 1986 deaths of 124 inmates at the
 Lurigancho prison remains in process. The military justice
 code contains no specific language for dealing with cases of
 killing, kidnaping, or torture--only "negligence" and "abuse
 of authority." A reliable public polling organization found
 in January 1988 that 86 percent of Peruvians in a sample
 survey believed that the military kills innocent people in its
 anti-insurgency efforts.
 Allegations in 1987 that members of APRA or security forces
 were using paramilitary violence against suspected terrorists
 were lent credence by the emergence in 1988 of the "Rodrigo
 Franco Democratic Command." (Rodrigo Franco, an APRA party
 leader, was assassinated by Sendero in 1987.) The Franco
 Command claimed responsibility for the July assassination of
 attorney Manuel Febres, defense counsel for accused Sendero
 leader Osman Morote. Ayacucho special prosecutor Escobar
 received death threats in August from individuals claiming
 membership in the group. The press in August reported the
 arrest of 14 APRA youth allegedly armed with revolvers and
 explosives near the San Marcos University. In September
 hospital workers in Tingo Maria, who had criticized the lack
 of government support, claimed they were threatened by the
 Command. Also in September, the home in Huanuco Department of
 a reporter for the pro-Sendero paper El Diario was dynamited,
 allegedly by this vigilante group.
 
 
 685
 PERU
 b. Disappearance
 Since 1983 there have been between 2,500 and 3,200 cases of
 disappearances involving the security forces. The majority
 occurred prior to 1985. Local human rights groups estimate
 that there were approximately 280 unresolved disappearances in
 1988. Most involved the detention of persons suspected of
 terrorist links in the emergency zones, but there have been
 notable cases in Lima as well. Several prominent cases from
 1986 and 1987, all in Lima, remain unresolved. Though a
 larger percentage of those detained by security forces within
 the security zones have reappeared, human rights groups
 believe that most of the'remainder were or will be summarily
 executed. The bodies of disappearance victims are rarely
 found. 'Based on the testimony of survivors, such as Sonia
 Munoz, it appears that most victims are taken to military
 bases for interrogation. Some are turned over to the police
 after lengthy detentions and afterwards are freed for lack of
 incriminating evidence. Human rights groups argue
 persuasively that the rest are summarily executed-by the armed
 forces. In July 1988, the MRTA kidnaped an industrialist and
 retired military officer to demand ransom. The victim was
 released in October, but another businessman was kidnaped by
 alleged MRTA terrorists in December.
 A September 1988 report by the Peruvian multiparty Senate
 Commission on Violence and Pacification stated: "There are
 violations of human rights, consisting of crimes against
 innocent populations: extrajudicial executions, torture,
 arbitrary detentions, and disappearances; and apparently
 involved in these condemnable acts are members of the armed
 forces and the police."
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 Although the Constitution prohibits torture and inhuman or
 humiliating treatment, charges of brutality toward detainees
 are common. Human rights groups claim that suspected
 subversives held by the Government are routinely tortured at
 military detention centers. Lawyers and other persons
 familiar with the police and judicial system concur. In 1987
 the Public Ministry noted that the majority of detainees held
 by military authorities showed signs of mistreatment or
 torture. In 1988 there were several reliable accounts from
 released detainees of torture or mistreatment both by police
 and military, including eyewitness accounts by two American
 citizens briefly detained on terrorism charges and then
 released.
 The 1987 terrorism law requires that persons detained for
 terrorism be interrogated only in the presence of a public
 prosecutor and a defense attorney. In these cases, a court
 indictment must be sought within 15 days of arrest or the
 prisoner must be released. There are few reliable reports of
 violations of these standards in areas administered by the
 Interior Ministry's investigative police. In the emergency
 zones (except Lima and Callao), the military is not required
 to adhere to these requirements under the State of Exception.
 (A State of Exception is the constitutional mechanism whereby
 pertain rights normally guaranteed a citizen may be denied.)
 The International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) again in
 1988 was denied access to detainees in the military-controlled
 emergency zones and to police detention centers where
 interrogations occur prior to indictment. Many victims of
 
 
 686
 PERU
 Sendero also show signs of having been tortured before death.
 Torture of those victims often follows a brief "trial,"
 normally held in the presence of rural villagers. Sendero
 uses particularly brutal methods of execution, including
 slitting throats, strangulation, and burning. In addition
 there are credible reports that Sendero frequently beats or
 tortures peasants who withhold their support.
 Prison conditions are extremely poor, and prisoners are likely
 to experience unsanitary facilities, poor nutrition and health
 care, and ill treatment by prison staff. In 1988 there was a
 well-documented case of a foreign prisoner dying of pneumonia
 due to the negligence of prison officials. Because of the
 large numbers of convicted and accused terrorists, many
 prisons have reportedly fallen under Sendero or MRTA control.
 Prison visitors report open displays of Sendero propaganda,
 the free exercise of Sendero political indoctrination
 programs, and, in at least one case in 1988, the execution of
 a fellow prisoner who was accused of being an informant by
 Sendero inmates.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 The Constitution, the penal code, and antiterrorist
 legislation clearly delineate the arrest and detention
 process. However, these protections are suspended in those
 areas under a state of emergency. In areas not subject to a
 state of emergency, a warrant approved by a Public Ministry
 prosecutor is required for arrest. Persons arrested must be
 arraigned within 24 hours, except in cases of drug
 trafficking, terrorism, or espionage, for which the limit is
 15 days. Detainees have the right to choose their own
 counsel, or the Government provides counsel at no charge.
 Arrested persons are entitled to have an attorney present when
 they make statements to the police. Under the 1987 terrorism
 law, police must also notify the detainees' family and human
 rights groups of an arrest. There is no bail or provisional
 liberty for persons accused of terrorism.
 Arrest procedures are different in the rural emergency zones.
 The armed forces do not need an arrest warrant, and detainees
 are often denied access to an attorney during interrogation
 and to family members during their imprisonment. All
 detainees, including those in the emergency zones, have the
 right to seek judicial determination of the legality of their
 detention, but this right is routinely disregarded by military
 commanders in the emergency zones. Of the several thousand
 prisoners held by the military inside the emergency zones,
 human rights groups know of few who were turned over to
 civilian authorities for prosecution.
 Since 1986, human rights groups note that an increasing number
 of persons detained by the military in the emergency zones
 reappeared after a period of incommunicado detention. This
 may reflect the result of government efforts to reduce
 long-term detentions and summary executions. Arbitrary
 arrests and detentions in the emergency zones in 1988 are
 estimated in the hundreds.
 In 1988 the military began to detain persons entering the
 emergency zones to investigate human rights cases. In July, 4
 social workers from a Catholic social agency were detained for
 28 hours without charges. Also in July, five members of a
 parish organization were held for 48 hours without charges.
 The five were arrested while investigating the arrest of a
 
 
 687
 PERU
 Catholic priest and a lay worker. In Lima, a Catholic priest
 was detained on three occasions and questioned about his labor
 organizing activities. Following the Cayara killings, the
 military arrested a number of Cayara villagers, including some
 who claimed to have witnessed the massacre. Several have
 failed to reappear, and the military authorities do not
 acknowledge their arrest or detention.
 The Constitution prohibits, and there have been no known cases
 of, involuntary exile in the past 8 years. With regard to
 forced or compulsory labor, see Section 6.c.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The judiciary is a separate branch of government. Supreme
 Court judges are nominated by the President and ratified by
 the Senate. All judges may serve until age 70. In the
 Peruvian legal system, which is based on the Napoleonic Code,
 once criminal charges are filed, a judge determines whether
 probable cause exists. The judicial process prior to trial
 may last several months, followed by a public trial.
 Defendants have the right to be present at the trial. There
 is no jury trial; verdicts are rendered by the judge.
 Sentences may be appealed, and judges may send cases back to
 lower courts for additional investigation. There are too few
 public defenders for the large caseloads. Many judges on the
 Superior and Supreme Courts are active in political parties,
 and there are occasional claims that decisions have been
 politically motivated.
 Courts face severe backlogs, a product of inefficiency,
 influence peddling, and the sharp increase in terrorism
 cases. The Ministry of Justice reported in July 1988 that
 there was a backlog of nearly 45,000 criminal cases. The
 Government also acknowledged that a majority of prisoners have
 not been sentenced, but remain at some stage of the trial
 process. Human rights groups have documented numerous cases
 of persons who have been detained without bail, awaiting
 trial, for periods up to 4 years. There are also widespread
 charges of corruption and the suborning of judges, police, and
 witnesses at all stages of the judicial process.
 Threats and intimidation of judges handling terrorism cases
 represent a serious problem, accounting in part for the low
 conviction rate of accused terrorists. Fewer than 20 percent
 of those arrested for security violations are convicted, a
 notoriously low rate that leads to police frustration with the
 judicial process and public tolerance of police abuses. The
 July 1988 acquittal of suspected terrorist and St' nero leader
 Osman Morote on two of the eight initial charges against him
 is believed to have been partially the result of death threats
 against the judges hearing the case (including a break-in at
 the prosecutor's home). Morote's acquittal was subsequently
 reversed on appeal, but this has done little to restore faith
 in the judicial system. Similarly, the August 1988 release of
 convicted cocaine trafficker Perciles Sanchez was cited as
 evidence of judicial weakness.
 Well-informed lawyers were critical of the lack of cooperation
 between the special investigations police under the Interior
 Ministry who investigate leading to arrest, and the
 prosecutors under the Public Ministry who conduct their own
 investigations as a part of the trial process.
 
 
 688
 PERU
 Congress created special tribunals to hear terrorism cases in
 1987, and promised greater security measures to protect judges
 and witnesses. There were immediate problems with finding
 judges who were willing to serve on these courts, in providing
 the guarantees of safety required in the enabling legislation,
 and with the large backlog of cases. Overwhelmed by these
 problems, the special tribunals were abolished in April, but
 President Garcia proposed their reestablishment in July 1988.
 By year's end, no further action had been taken.
 The Constitution mandates that civilians be tried in civilian
 courts. The Supreme Court decides whether military or police
 offenders are tried in civilian courts or in a separate
 military court system. The military generally asserts its
 jurisdiction in these cases, and the Court generally rules in
 its favor. The last attempt to have a civilian court try a
 military officer occurred in 1986, and it was thwarted when
 the officer fled to avoid trial. The military court hearing
 other charges in this same case ruled in December that there
 was insufficient evidence to convict any of those charged in
 the case. The civilian courts are making slow progress on
 several cases involving alleged police violations of human
 rights. Ongoing cases include those against police charged in
 the 1982 killing of prisoners in an Ayacucho hospital, the
 1982 death of Francisco Nufflo, and the 1986 torture of
 detainees in a Cusco police station. Convictions were handed
 down against police accused in killings in 1983 and 1984.
 Military trials are not public, and little is known about
 specific cases. Although the military claims that human
 rights offenders are severely disciplined, no member of the
 armed forces has ever been convicted in either military or
 civilian courts for human rights violations. Cases reportedly
 pending in military courts include charges against: a
 lieutenant for the 1985 murder of 69 persons in Accomarca; an
 officer for three 1985 Huanuco deaths; officers accused of
 executions in 1986 in Parco and Pomatambo; and military
 personnel involved in the killings in 1986 at Lurigancho
 prison. In the Lurigancho case, the military prosecutor asked
 for sentences ranging between 6 and 25 years against the 77
 accused security force members (6 army officers, 20 police
 officers, and 51 police enlisted men). The prosecutor
 requested a 25-year sentence for police Colonel Roland Cabezas
 and 6 years for Army General Jorge Rabanal.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The Constitution stipulates that the police need a judicial
 warrant to enter a private dwelling, and this is generally
 respected in practice. The requirement is suspended in the
 emergency zones, however, and security forces in those areas
 routinely conduct searches of private homes without warrants.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 The Constitution provides for freedom of speech and the
 press. With 7 television stations, over 50 radio stations, 15
 daily newspapers, and many magazines in Lima alone, Peruvians
 have access to news and opinion of every political viewpoint,
 terrorist groups included. The media are highly partisan.
 The Government owns one of the two national television
 networks, a national radio network, and three newspapers; the
 
 
 689
 PERU
 government party controls two newspapers and a magazine. Most
 major opposition parties control their own newspapers, and
 opposition figures also have frequent access to the government
 media.
 Fears of government takeovers of the media in the wake of the
 1987 bank nationalization, and of government manipulation of
 newsprint supplies and foreign exchange, did not materialize.
 Nevertheless, there are still occasional and credible
 complaints of government pressure on the media and
 restrictions on journalists. There are occasional violations
 of the constitutional guarantee of a free press, but there is
 no discernible trend, nor do they constitute government policy.
 Journalists are effectively barred from traveling in the rural
 areas of the emergency zones, and those who attempt to do so
 are occasionally detained by the military, although they are
 generally released within hours. The government refusal to
 allow the media free access to the village of Cayara in the
 wake of an alleged massacre there provoked criticism and
 complaints. There are also frequent complaints of police
 confiscation of video and photographic material of events the
 Government does not want publicized.
 On August 20, police seized several thousand copies of the
 pro-Sendero daily El Diario. The edition contained a
 purported interview with Sendero leader Abimael Guzman. Three
 days later, police detained Luis Arce Borja, the newspaper's
 editor, on charges of terrorism. Local and international
 press organizations protested the detention, and he was
 released by a judge on October 1. In November the legislature
 passed new legislation which prohibits "apologies for and
 encouragement of" terrorism, and Arce was rearrested on
 December 10 under this act for materials included in a
 pamphlet that he wrote. He remained in detention at year's
 end. While the new terrorism law has been applauded by some
 journalists as necessary, others fear it will have a chilling
 effect on press freedom.
 Journalists are also sometimes the victims of violence and
 threats. One journalist was threatened, allegedly by APRA
 activists. A dead dog bearing a threatening message from the
 Rodrigo Franco Democratic Front was hung outside the home of
 an El Diario reporter in Ayacucho. A journalist received
 threats after reporting alleged links between Sendero Luminoso
 and narcotics traffickers in the Upper Huallaga Valley.
 Government security forces are widely believed to be
 responsible for the November killing of a magazine reporter
 working inside the Ayacucho emergency zone.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 These rights are expressly provided for in the Constitution
 and are normally respected in practice in areas not under a
 state of emergency. Municipal authorities usually approve
 permits for demonstrations. Unauthorized demonstrations also
 occur, and, for the most part, the Government deals with them
 in a nonconfrontational manner. However, as opposition groups
 adopted more provocative tactics, the Government often denied
 permits or broke up marches. Police resorted more often to
 tear gas, buckshot, and firetruck-mounted water cannons to
 disperse unruly or threatening crowds. There were cases where
 opposition cbngressmen were roughed up or hit with buckshot.
 One student was killed in a protest in May following the
 Cayara massacre. Hundreds of students were arrested in
 
 
 690
 PERU
 unauthorized demonstrations in Lima and Arequipa during 1988.
 Demonstrations by workers and labor groups were similarly
 restrained by police.
 For a discussion of freedom of association as it applies to
 labor unions, see Section 6.a.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Roman Catholicism predominates in Peru, and the Constitution
 formally recognizes the Church. The Constitution also
 establishes the separation of church and state and ensures
 freedom of religion and conscience. These rights are
 respected in practice. Members of minority religions
 encounter no government interference in practicing their faith
 or in exempting their children from religious instruction in
 public schools. Missionary organizations operate fre.ely in
 the country with the cooperation of government ministries.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 The Constitution provides for the right of free movement, and
 there are no political or legal constraints on foreign travel
 or emigration. Since 1985 nearly 120,000 Peruvians have
 emigrated to other nations. Freedom of movement is suspended
 in those areas under a state of emergency. Peru is a party to
 the 1967 United Nations Protocol on the Status of Refugees.
 Persons fleeing turmoil in other countries traditionally have
 been encouraged to return eventually to their country of
 origin or to emigrate to third countries, but have not been
 forced to do so. Involuntary repatriation occurs only in
 cases of persons accused of nonpolitical crimes.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Peru is a democracy governed by a freely elected president and
 congress. The political process is open and elections are
 vigorously contested by parties Tanging from conservative to
 Marxist. Sendero Luminoso persistently seeks to deny citizens
 their political rights--particularly in remote mountain
 areas--by killing candidates and elected officials and
 threatening voters. Sendero leaders have publicly stated
 their intention to disrupt the 1990 elections. Suffrage is
 universal for persons over 18 years of age, except for members
 of the military. Balloting is secret. The July 1985
 inauguration of President Garcia marked the first transfer of
 power between democratically elected governments in 40 years.
 There are 3 women in the 60-member Senate and 10 in the
 180-member Chamber of Deputies. There is one woman in the
 Cabinet.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 Americas Watch and the Washington Office on Latin America sent
 representatives to Peru during 1988. Outside of the emergency
 zones, the Government did not impede or restrict these groups'
 access. The Americas Watch representative was not permitted
 to visit the countryside outside Ayacucho, and a military
 commander required him to curtail a visit to Ayacucho and
 return to Lima   Access by the ICRC to the emergency zones and
 
 
 691
 PERU
 to security detainees in Lima has also been restricted. Local
 human rights organizations complain that they are limited by
 the military in their efforts to investigate human rights
 abuses in the emergency zones. Most local human rights groups
 state that they are not harassed or threatened by the
 Government, but that their requests to the Government for
 information are usually ignored.
 Several private human rights organizations constitute the
 independent National Coordinator for Human Rights. These
 include the Association for Human Rights, the Catholic
 Church's Episcopal Commission for Social Action, the National
 Human Rights Commission; and the Institute for Legal Defense.
 Smaller groups work in the departmental capitals and other
 cities  These groups are generally credible observers, but
 concentrate on government actions to the exclusion of
 terrorist abuses. Lima is also the headquarters of the Andean
 Commission of Jurists.
 The Government complains that both local and international
 human rights groups distort or exaggerate human rights
 problems. In its 1988 report, the Peruvian multiparty Senate
 Commission on Violence and Pacification claimed that the
 propaganda effort of pro-Sendero agents in the U.S. and Europe
 is partly to blame for what it termed a one-sided picture.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 The Constitution grants women equality with men, and laws on
 marriage and divorce do not discriminate against women.
 Nevertheless, tradition impedes the access of women to
 leadership roles in major social and political institutions.
 Women represent 26 percent of the labor force. In 1984, 61.9
 percent of the female work force was employed in commerce and
 services, 16.6 in the industrial sector, and the 19.5 in other
 occupations, mainly as domestics. The average wage of male
 workers is double that of females.
 The rural and indigenous population and Peru's small black
 community face situations similar to those of women. The
 former group traditionally has lacked access to public
 services. Peru is a classic case of differential development,
 with public investment traditionally focused on the coast,
 drawing migrants to the cities, especially Lima. Recognizing
 this fact, the Government has increased the flow of resources
 and services to poor, largely Indian, rural areas.
 Development efforts, however, have been impeded by the
 difficulty and cost of providing services to areas out of the
 mainstream of Hispanic culture, and by the continued
 disruption of these efforts by Sendero. As a result of
 current problems, as well as historic prejudice, the economic
 and social needs of Peruvians of European ancestry are more
 likely to be met than those of mixed or pure Indian heritage.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 The Constitution provides for the right of workers to freely
 associate and form labor unions without previous
 authorization. In practice, however, there are legal
 restrictions on the right to organize (see below), and a
 registration requirement with the Ministry of Labor in order
 for the union to become legal and capable of performing its
 
 
 692
 PERU
 functions. Suspension or dissolution of labor unions is
 forbidden by the Constitution, but it can be done legally
 through the civil court system at the request of the union
 itself, or by cancellation of the union's registration by the
 Ministry. Unions may form industry-wide federations which
 can, in turn, form confederations, all of which can be
 affiliated with international labor organizations. Peru is an
 active member of the International Labor Organization.
 Private and public sector unions of workers performing the
 same type of work cannot join together at any level.
 The Constitution provides for the right to strike "according
 to law." There is no strike law, however, even though
 Congress has considered various implementing bills since the
 Constitution was promulgated in 1979. By Supreme Executive
 Decree (which defines some strike behavior in the absence of a
 formal law), workers in the private sector must give 72-hour
 notice to the employer and the Ministry of Labor before going
 on strike. When direct negotiations between workers and
 employers break down, the Government intervenes and
 constitutes a tripartite (government, management, labor) board
 to review the situation. If no agreement is reached, the
 Government then weighs the overall economic implications of
 the employer's and the workers' positions and makes a
 decision. The decision can be appealed in the civil court
 system. The Government will then make a final offer which, if
 rejected, will open the way for declaring the strike illegal.
 A government determination that the strike is illegal can lead
 to the dismissal of workers or union leaders and permits
 employers to hire strikebreakers legally. Despite these
 restrictions, strikes, often wildcat in nature, do take
 place. The miners' strike of late 1988 gave rise to numerous
 complex legal battles over its legality, none of which
 prevented the miners from striking. There are no norms
 regulating strikes in the public sector and all such strikes
 are therefore open to legal challenge.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 Government rules stipulate that, in the private sector, unions
 can be formed only in enterprises with 20 or more workers, and
 only if more than 50 percent of the workers request it. Only
 one union is allowed for each enterprise or place of work and
 by category of worker, blue- or white-collar. In the public
 sector, 20 percent of the workers can request a union, thus
 allowing up to five unions to represent the same group of
 workers. Among the restrictions applying to public sector
 unions is a 1-year term, without reelection, to the
 leadership. Collective bargaining is provided for under the
 Constitution, but there are restrictions on what can be
 bargained. In the public sector, for example, only working
 conditions can be negotiated, and then only as long as the
 changes do not involve expenses greater than the funds already
 budgeted. In the private sector, collective bargaining can
 cover both working conditions and pay. Labor laws and
 regulations are applied uniformly throughout the country.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 The Constitution prohibits compulsory labor, and this is
 respected in practice. There have been a few reports of
 escapees from forced labor camps run by Sendero Luminoso in
 the jungle. Peasants are recruited forcibly to tend the
 fields and join the Sendero ranks. After a recent incident in
 Atalaya, Cusco Department, an official delegation from the
 
 
 693
 PERU
 Labor Ministry went to investigate and reported that the
 enslaved Indians had gone back into the jungle.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 The law prohibits the employment of children under 14 years of
 age. In the formal sector of the economy, it allows for the
 employment of older children in some jobs, for a limited
 period of time and working a curtailed workweek at full pay.
 According to a recent Peruvian Senate report, 1.1 million
 children 6 to 14 years of age work. Unofficial sources
 estimate that about half a million children-work in the Lima
 area alone. Of the relatively few accusations of labor
 exploitation of children, official authorities verified 38 in
 1988. A recent month-long campaign undertaken by a leading
 Lima newspaper has increased public awareness of abuses in the
 employment of children.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of work
 Workers have an 8-hour day and an official 48-hour week for
 men, and 45 for women. Retirement age is 60 for men and 55
 for women. There are government standards for health and
 safety by industry, but these are rarely enforced either by
 the employer or the Government (which has no inspectors). In
 negotiating new contracts, public and private sector workers
 can bargain for additional pay because of hazardous working
 conditions. Many employers wait for a demand from the workers
 to improve conditions. Accidents are common, and usually
 there is no emphasis on prevention, although once they happen,
 employers normally make compensation.
 All workers are entitled to 30 days' paid vacation. Those in
 the private sector' have to work a minimum of 260 days
 (excluding 30 days' sick leave) or forfeit their vacation.
 This regulation does not apply to the public sector. The
 minimum wage was increased recently by the Government, but it
 still lags behind inflation. At $50 per month (at the
 official exhcange rate), it is not sufficient to provide a
 decent standard of living for a worker and his family.
 However, many Peruvians are paid more than the minimum wage
 and many others supplement their income through multiple jobs
 and/or subsistance farming.
 
 
 694
