 PERU
 Peru is a multiparty republic with a dominant executive branch. President
 Alberto Fujimori was reelected to a second 5-year term in 1995 under provisions of
 a Constitution enacted in 1993. The President's party also controls Congress, which
 passed a law permitting the President to run for an unprecedented third term (oppo-
 sition parties were challenging the law at year's end). The Constitution also pro-
 vided or saeverl new judicial institutions to help create a more effective and inde-
 pendent system of justice and, with a view to reform, the entire legal system is un-
 dergoing a review directed and controlled by the executive branch.
 The police and military share security duties. Civilian authorities generally main-
 tain effective control of the security forces. Since 1980 much of the security forces'
 effort has been directed against the Sendero Luminoso and the Tupac Amaru Revo-
 lutionary Movement (MRTA) terrorist groups. They continue to pose a threat in
 some areas, but at a much reduced level than in previous years, despite the MRTA's
 hostage taking attack in December. Members of the security forces committed some
 human rights abuses.
 Over the past 5 years, the Government implemented major economic reforms,
 moving from heavy regulation to one of the most market-oriented economies in the
 hemisphere. Government controls on capital flows, prices, and trade have been
 eliminated. The Government has privatized most state enterprises, and those re-
 maining are scheduled to be sold by the end of 1997. As a result, inflation was
 brought under control, and growth and foreign investment soared. Gross domestic
 product was estimated at $51.5 billion. Major exports include minerals (principally
 copper), fishmeal, and textiles. Illegal exports of processed coca are thought to have
 earned about $600 to $800 million in past years. Unemployment is around 8 per-
 cent, but more than half of the economically active population works in the informal
 sector of the economy, which largely operates beyond government supervision and
 taxation. The poor account for 45 percent of the population, of which half live in
 extreme poverty.
 Although the human rights situation improved somewhat, serious problems re-
 main. Security forces were responsible for extrajudicial killings, disappearances, tor-
 ture, and beatings. Although individual prison directors made some efforts to im-
 prove conditions in their own prisons, overall prison conditions remain extremely
 harsh, particularly in the case of prisoners jailed for terrorism offenses. Arbitrary
 detention, accountability, lack of due process, lengthy trial delays, and prolonged
 pretrial detention remain problems. The authorities at times infringed upon citizens'
 privacy rights. Violence against women and children and discrimination against the
 disabled, indigenous people, and minorities are continuing problems. Child labor is
 also a problem.
 In April a Human Rights Ombudsman was sworn in, and in August Congress es-
 tablished an ad hoc commission to review and recommend for presidential pardon
 those unjustly detained for terrorism or treason. However, Congress extended yet
 again "faceless" tribunals, considered a major reason for the unjust imprisonment
 of an estimated 700 to 1,000 individuals on terrorism and treason charges, and it
 also extended the processing by military judges of civilians accused of the most seri-
 ous terrorism offenses.
 Sendero Luminoso and MRTA terrorists were responsible for the vast majority of
 the killings and other violence. Sendero Luminoso used torture and other forms of
 brutality, infringed upon citizens' privacy rights, intimidated religious workers, and
 violated the rights of indigenous people. In December the MRTA attacked the Japa-
 nese ambassador's residence, initially holding hundreds of people hostage, an event
 not resolved by year's end.
 
 
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political And Other Extrajudicial KillingsThere were no political killings attrib-
 uted to security forces. However, there continued to be reports of deaths caused by
 police beatings of detainees. On March 22, police picked up engineer Mario Palomino
 on a Lima street and beat him to death in a police station after he allegedly com-
 plained about the police publicly mistreating a detainee. The Government is currently
 prosecuting five officers for Palomino's death.
 Armed forces personnel also beat citizens to death. Accordin to human rights
 monitors, on August 23 soldiers detained Nicolas Carrion Escoedo, a resident of
 Uruspampa village in Sanchez Carrion,'La lAbertad, and took him to the military
 base at Sarin. Later that day, Escobedo was found dead. An autopsy revealed that
 he had received heavy blows to the head as well as other parts of his body. Relatives
 of Alberto Flores Montejo reported that soldiers based in the town of Aucayacu de-
 tained him on March 24; he was never seen again. The judicial investigation into
 the case determined that Montejo was killed in Madre Mia, San Martin department,
 and referred the case to the prosecutor's office in Tocache for further investigation.
 In August military personnel also reportedly beat and killed one soldier who lost
 a rifle at the Monzon base. On August 30, militarg personnel killed farmer Jorge
 Chavez, who was suspected of a role in the rifle's disappearance, and then-accord-
 ingto witnsses-drank Chavez's blood.
 In the case of Jhoel Huaman Garcia, who was killed while in police detention in
 1995, a court sentenced two police officers in July to 5 and 6 years in prison. A third
 police officer is charged but has fled.
 A 1995 law granted amnesty from prosecution to those who committed human
 rights abuses during the war on terrorism from May 1980 to June 1995. When lower
 court judge Antonia Sacquicuray declared the Amnesty Law unconstitutional, Con-
 gress immediately passed a second law blockingany judicial review of the law's con-
 stitutionality. Subsequently, a split decision by a superior court overturned the
 Sacquicuray decision. These events created considerable concern over military and
 poice impunity for past abuses. The Amnesty Law also cleared the records of secu-
 rity force personnel who had already been convicted of human rights abuses, includ-
 ing the eight military perpetrators of the 1992 La Cantuta massacre, who were sen-
 tenced in 1994 but released by military authorities a few days after the Amnesty
 Law's passage.
 In July the United Nations Human Rights Committee severely criticized the Am-
 nesty Law and called for its repeal. Committee members considered the Amnesty
 Law a violation of the Constitution, reflecting the earlier Sacquicuray decision. The
 Amnesty Law demonstrates a lack of serious commitment to accountability and the
 protection of human rights.
 Sendero Luminos, whose insurgency has led to the deaths of over 25,000 persons
 since 1980, continued to kill civilians. During the year, Sendero killed a total of 124
 persons, including security force personnel and civilians, according to statistics com-
 piled by Peruvian nongovernmental organizations (NGO's). Among the civilians
 killed by Sendero was Pasuala Rosado, a community leader in Huaycan known for
 her opposition to Sendero. On July 30, Sendero killed community leader Epifanio
 Santarria in Los Olivos, near Lima. In February Sendero killed a community leader
 and his two sons in Angashyacu, Huanuco. On August 22, Sendero murdered the
 brother of the mayor of Delicias, Huanuco.
 b. Di      ance.-Disappearances continued to be reported. A human rights
 group working in the Huallaga valley reported nine disappearances. The army is be-
 lieved responsible for two of them. On July 27, the army detained Maria Cardenas
 Espinoza in Chinchabito, Huanuco. While the army denied that it is holding her,
 other detainees reported seeing her at the Tingo Maria army base.
 On February 113, Belen Zavallos Masgo disappeared from his home in La
 Esperanza, Huanuco. According to members of his family, three masked and armed
 men took him away when they raided his house. They beat him badly and dragged
 him into a waiting car. Two days later, Belen Zavallos' wife reported her husband's
 disappearance to the human rights prosecutor's office in Huanuco. On March 15, the
 prosecutor's office reported that it had evidence that members of the armed forces
 carried out the kidnaping.
 A human rights group working in the Huallaga valley blamed Sendero for the dis-
 appearance of Rufmo Velasquez Pujay on July 28 from Moyuna near Aucayacu,
 iuanuco.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 Although the Constitution prohibits torture and inhuman or humiliating treatment,
 security force torture and brutal treatment of detainees remains common. This is
 
 
 542
 as true for common criminals as it is for alleged subversives. Torture most often
 took place in the period immediately after detention. The law permits police to hold
 terrorism suspects incommunicado for 10 days and for another 15-day period in
 cases of treason. Human rights groups report that the incidence of torture is high
 during this time, partly because detainees are normally not allowed access to family
 or an attorney except when giving sworn statements to the public prosecutor.
 Eyewitnesses and human rights monitors credibly reported that government secu-
 rity forces still routinely torture suspects at military and detention centers in some
 emergency zones, where certain constitutional guarantees are suspended due to
 high levels of terrorist activity. In Tocache 17-year-old Juan Gutierrez Silva was tor-
 tured repeatedly on July 6, when he refused to sign a confession for allegedly shoot-
 ing at the girlfriend of a military officer. When hospitalized after 10 hours of beat-
 ings, Gutierrez's skull was cracked, he had been stabbed with a thin rod 10 times
 in the chest area, and suffered cuts in the neck and left arm. Near death, Gutierrez
 was transported to Lima for medical treatment. At that pint, the police offered to
 pay for his medical treatment if Gutierrez's family woul si   a statement that his
 injuries were self-inflicted. The family refused. The police in Tocache nevertheless
 issued a statement asserting that Gutierrez's injuries were self-inflicted. Human
 rights workers claim that incidents similar to Gutierrez's are not rare in Tocache.
 However, most detainees who are tortured or beaten do not speak out for fear of
 reprisal.
 Army personnel at the Monzon army base in the Huallaga Valley have been impli-
 cated in the torture of a 5-year-old girl, who was beaten in an effort to obtain her
 mother's confession. Human rights groups received numerous reports of torture and
 beatings by soldiers in emergency zones. In Pucalpa on April i1, three police offi-
 cers detained and beat the 21-year-old son of a former police officer. One of the offi-
 cers allegedly tried to rape the detainee, who was never told why he was being held.
 The young man was released April 13 as a result of his father's intervention. Re-
 ports also continue of rape of female detainees by the security forces or prison per-
 sonnel. In one high-profile case in Lima, a woman reported that she was drugged
 by a male prison nurse and raped. As a result, the nurse was arrested and charged
 with a crime; however, the charges were dismissed, and he returned to his job.
 Leal action against those who commit prison rapes is rare.
 Besides beatings, common methods of torture included electric shock, water tor-
 ture, asphyxiation, and the hanging of detainees by a rope attached to their hands
 tied behind the back. Common forms of psychological torture included sleep depriva-
 tion and death threats against both detainees and their families. Interrogators fre-
 quently blindfolded their victims during torture to prevent them from later identify-
 ing their abusers. The authorities rarely if eyer bring the perpetrators of such acts
 to trial in court.
 Many victims of Sendero Luminoso terrorism also showed signs of torture. Credi-
 ble accounts indicate that Sendero tortured people to death by slitting throats,
 strangulation, atoning, and burning.
 Prison conditions are extremely harsh. Prisoners in many facilities experienced
 unsanitary conditions, poor nutrition and health care, and occasionally harsh treat-
 ment by both prison staff and fellow inmates. Human rights groups report that pris-
 oners jailed for terrorist acts are singled out for particularly inhuman treatment.
 This includes years of incarceration in cells 2 meters square, unusually short exer-
 cise periods (30 minutes per day), and infrequent, brief family visits (30 minutes per
 month by adults, but 30 minutes every 3 months by children), as well as refusal
 by prison authorities to allow prisoners to touch their visiting children. At least
 some of the prisons where those convicted of terrorist acts are jailed, such as
 Yanomayo in Puno, are located at very high altitudes where the cold temperature
 and inadequate supply of oxygen negatively affect the health of inmates. Illegal
 drugs are available in abundance, and tuberculosis and AIDS are reportedly at
 near-epidemic proportions in Lima's Lurigancho prison, the country's largest, con-
 taining just over 24 percent of the male prison population. The police chief at
 Lurigancho prison admitted that some of the prisoners there had contracted AIDS
 or tuberculosis while in prison. There were reports of prisoners suffering from se-
 vere depression, advanced neuroses, and schizophrenia, but there was no mental
 health assistance available.
 Corruption continued to be a problem among prison staff, who were implicated in
 offenses such as sexual blackmail, selling narcotics and weapons, and arranging es-
 capes. Prisoners often have to bribe guards to get a mattress and report that guards
 subject inmates to beatings, torture, and degrading treatment. In an effort to im-
 prove prison staff, the National Penitentiary Institute (INPE) began. to evaluate the
 work performance and ethics of its personnel and dismissed 222 INPE employees
 in August. As part of its anticorruption drive, INPE announced in September the
 
 
 arrest of an employee in Callao for taking a bribe from a relative of a detainee.
 INPE, as part of its efforts to improve prison management, moved all female pris-
 oners from facilities in Callao to the Chorrilos prison in Lima, leading to increased
 overcrowding. Public phones for use by inmates were installed in both Callao and
 Chorrillos.
 Detainees held temporarily in windowless cells in Lima's Palace of Justice are not
 allowed outside for exercise and fresh air and are taken to the bathroom only once
 a day. Adequate food, health care, and bedding are often not provided by the prison
 authorities, requiring families of prisoners to provide for these basic needs. In some
 prisns, female inmates are allowed to see their children only once every 3 months.
 While conditions for many prisoners remained inadequate, the Government contin-
 ued to make a costly and extensive effort to improve existing penal facilities, con-
 struct new penitentiaries, and ameliorate the physical conditions of detention.
 The authorities were able to quell peacefully a June 14 riot by 5,000 prisoners
 at Lurigancho prison protesting new restrictions on family visits, unlike in 1986,
 when security forces killed over 120 prisoners after a riot at that facility.The au-
 thorities suspended the prison director and security chief, but later reinstated the
 prison director. The Inter-American Court of Human Rights ruled in September that
 the Government should pay $154,000 in compensation to the families of three pris-
 oners who died in a similar 1986 El Fronton prison riot.
 Many rural communities lack appropriate detention facilities. For example, in
 Tocache, all male and female detainees are held separately in two large rooms with
 no privacy, sometimes for up to 2 years. Detainees who are minors are held with
 adults in the same room, even though this contravenes the law.
 The authorities continued to permit International Committee of the Red Cross
 (ICRC) representatives to visit detainees in any place of detention, including pris-
 ons, jails, police stations, and military bases. However in late December, m the
 wake of the MRTA's seizure of the Japanese ambassador's residence (see Section
 1.g.), the Government suspended an agreement that allowed the ICRC to visit over
 4,000 accused or convicted terrorists, among them MRTA members, in the prisons
 of the Ministry of Justice. During the year, the Government prohibited many human
 rights monitors from other groups from visiting some prisons.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The Constitution, Criminal Code, and
 antiterrorist legislation delineate the arrest and detention process. However, a num-
 ber of constitutional protections are suspended in emergency zones. For example, se-
 curity forces do not need an arrest warrant; they may legally hold incommunicado
 those detained for treason or terrorism and deny them access to an attorney during
 the 10-day interrogation period, except when giving formal statements.
 In areas not subject to a state of emergency, the law requires a judicial warrant
 for arrest, unless a perpetrator is caught in the act. However, the Organic Law of
 the National Police permits detention of an individual for any investigation, which
 is contrary to constitutional provisions. The authorities must arraign persons ar-
 rested within 24 hours (a law they frequently violate, according to informed observ-
 ers), except in cases of terrorism, drug trafficking, or espionage, for which the limit
 is 15 to 30 days. If the military is the detaining authority, it must turn over detain-
 ees to the civilian police within 24 hours (or as soon as practicable in remote areas).
 However, the military regularly disregard this law.
 A 1993 modification to antiterrorism legislation authorized lower court and supe-
 rior courtjudges to order the unconditional release of terrorism defendants if there
 was insufficient evidence to bring a case against them. However, in practice, judges
 have rarely applied this law; rather, persons accused of terrorism sometimes must
 wait until their cases have been reviewed and dismissed by the Supreme Court be-
 fore they are freed, a process that often lasts more than a year. Another 1993 modi-
 fication to the antiterrorist laws restored a detainee's right to a prompt judicial de-
 termination of the legality of the detention ("habeas corpus"). In practice, however,
 this provision has gone unheeded. According to human rights attorneys, judges have
 denied most requests for such hearings.
 According to INPE statistics, almost 76 percent of the country's prison popu-
 lation-about 16,700 of the almost 22,000 detainees--consisted of accused prisoners
 awaiting the conclusion of their trial. The average delay between arrest and trial
 in civil cases as well as in criminal or terrorism cases was between 26 and 36
 months. However, those tried on treason charges by military courts generally wait
 no longer than 40 days between the time of detention and the beginning of the trial.
 In November retired General Rodolfo Robles was violently abducted on a street
 and placed under arrest. For 2 hours, his family had no news of his whereabouts,
 until a government Congressman announced that Robles was being held in a mili-
 tary prison on charges of disobedience, insulting a superior officer, insulting the
 military, and giving false testimony. Robles's arrest took place after he had charged
 
 
 544
 
 in a televised interview that the military had reactivated a death squad and was
 responsible for the October bombing of a television transmitter. (In 1993, Roles had
 publicly confirmed the existence of a military death squad whose members were
 later convicted of killing nine students and a professor at La Cantuta University.)
 After widespread criticism of the arrest, on December 3 President F ujimori sent to
 Congress a bill for an amnesty of retired military officers under trial for criticizing
 the military. Congress passed the law on December 5, and Rabies was released from
 custody 2 days later. After his release, Robies publicly charged that his arrest was
 a bungled attempt by the military to kill him disguised as a terrorist assassination.
 Thelaw which amnestied Rbles also applied to the military judge and prosecutor
 who had refused to accept a civilian ourt jdge's habeas corpus ruling in favor of
 Robles. The authorities initially had transfeedthat judge--Greta Minaya-from
 her job after she issued the habeas corpus decree, but they transferred her back
 after Congress approved the Robles amnesty.
 The Constitution does not permit exile, and the Government does not practice in-
 voluntary exile of its citizens.
 e. Denial of Fair Public TWal.-The judicial branch is not fully independent of the
 executive. The 1993 Constitution provides for an improved system for naming
 judges, which was intended to produce a significantly more independent judiciary.
 It also provides for several new judicial institutions that would theoretically en-
 hance the professionalism and independence of the judiciary: An Office of the De-
 fender of the Peo ple (a human rig ts ombudsman); a Tribunal of Constitutional
 Guarantees (to rule on the constitutionality of legislation and government actions);
 the Natidnal Judiciary Council (a permanent, independent entity designed to test,
 name, confirm, and periodically evaluate and discipline the country's judges and
 prosecutors); and a Judicial Academy (to train judges and prosecutors).
 In June Congress finally agreed upon seven members to form the Tribunal of Con-
 stitutional Guarantees, and they were installed in August. However, many critics
 have already questioned the independence of this tribunal: While three of its mem-
 bers are in some way associated with the President and his party, it only takes two
 to prevent any law or government action from being declared unconstitutional. In
 addition, these critics point to recent legislation that limits the window of oppor-
 tunity for challenging the constitutionality of a particular law to a brief 6-month pe-
 riod immediately following promulgation.
 In order to improve the entire judicial branch's performance, the President cre-
 ated a Judicial Coordination Commission, which serves as an umbrella over a num-
 ber of important judicial institutions. However, in what government opponents say
 was an effort to ensure executive control of the justice system, the President ap-
 pointed as head of this commission a retired Navy commander who reports directly
 to him.
 The judicial structure consists of lower courts, superior courts, and appellate
 courts, with the Supreme Court at its apex.
 The justice system is generally based on the Napoleonic Code. Judicial proceed-
 ings have three stages. The first is before an examining judge in a lower court- the
 second is conducted by a superior court which tries and sentences the defendant;
 and the third is before an appeals court. A Public Ministry prosecutor investigates
 criminal cases and submits an opinion to a lower court judge, who decides whether
 to indict. Following study of the case, the judke renders a verdict, which must then
 be reviewed by a superior court prosecutor. The superior court prosecutor submits
 an advisory opinion to a superior court judge, who holds a trial. Virtually all civilian
 court convictions are appea ed to the Supreme Court. Defendants have the right to
 be present at their trial. A 1993 modification to antiterrorism laws eliminated con-
 victions in absentia. Defendants have the right to counsel, but the Government often
 does not prvide indigents with qualified attorneys.
 Jorge Santistevan de Noriega was sworn in as the first human rights ombudsman
 in April. The Ombudsman's office opened in mid-September in Lima, and there are
 plans for additional offices throughout the country. In August the Ombudsman was
 named along with the Justice Minister and a representative of the President, Father
 Hubert Lanssiers, as members of a congressionally mandated ad hoc commission to
 recommend presidential pardons for detainees believed to have been unjustly ac-
 cused of terrorism or treason. According to human rights groups, there are more
 than 1,000 such individuals. The commission's mandate lasts 6 months and can be
 renewed for an additional 6-month period. On September 30, President Fujimori
 granted the first 3 pardons; by the end of the year 110 persons had received such
 pardons. The Government suspended the granting of pardons after the MRTA tr-
 rorist takeover of the Japanese ambassador's residence on December 17, but the
 process was expected to resume after the hostage crisis is over.
 
 
 President Fujimori acknowledged the problem of those unjustly detained for ter-
 rorism in a speech on July 1, in which he spoke about the work of a team of attor-
 neys which, with government support and under the guidance of Father Lanssiers,
 had obtained the release of 150 such individuals during the previous 2 years. In his
 July 28 state of the union message, President Fujimori also referred to the problem
 of those unjustly imprisoned and asserted that the abuses resulted from the "repent-
 ant terrorist" law, which expired in November 1994. Although human rights groups
 have welcomed the review of the cases of those unjustly incarcerated for terrorist
 acts, they claim that those unjustly accused should be released and declared inno-
 cent rather than pardoned and should be compensated for the years that they have
 spent in jail.
 Proceedings in military courts that hear terrorism and treason cases do not meet
 internationally accepted standards for due process. Military trials are closed to the
 public and are carried out in secrecy by military judges whose identities are not re-
 vealed in court. Defense attorneys d not have access to evidence, nor can they
 interview police or military witnesses (to protect their identities) prior to or during
 the trial,     a   reports that many of the judges are active duty line officers with
 no legal background. Military tribunals in theory must pass judgment within 10
 days. ]efendants may appeal a verdict to the Superior Military Council, which has
 10 days to make a decision. The Supreme Council of Military Justice must act on
 a final appeal within 5 days, although this calendar is subject to delays. Human
 rights groups charge that military judges have sentenced some defendants before
 their lawyers were even notified that the trial phase had begun.
 According to Supreme Council of Military Justice statistics, between 1992 and Au-
 gust 1996, these faceless military tribunals tried 1,498 cases of treason. In those
 cases in which a verdict was reached, the tribunals sentenced 346 individuals to life
 sentences, 338 persons to 30 years or less, sent 256 cases to civilian court terrorism
 trials, and absolved 40 persons of all charges. From January to August, the Su-
 preme Council of Military Justice reached verdicts in 124 treason cases, leading to
 41 life sentences, 59 sentences of 30 years or less, 23 cases sent to civilian courts
 for trial, and 1 individual found not guilty.
 The sentencing in January to life imprisonment of US. citizen Lori Berenson on
 treason charges focused additional international attention on the lack of due process
 in the faceless military tribunals. The authorities ignored requests on Berenson's be-
 half for an open trial in a civilian court on charges stemming from her involvement
 with the MRTA.
 In October Congress extended for another year trials by faceless superior court
 tribunals of terrorism cases, thereby further undermining fairness, due process, and
 accountability. Human rights groups remain concerned about persons found not
 guilty by the faceless military courts but remanded to faceless civilian courts where
 a new trial is initiated. There were fewer reports of such problems in 1996 than in
 1995. In July the United Nations Human Rights Committee, which monitors compli-
 ance with the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, called for an end
 to the faceless tribunal system because of its lack of due process guarantees. In Sep-
 tember United Nations Special Rapporteur Dato'param Cumaraswamy visited Peru
 and repeated this call.
 The President did not sign criminal procedures code legislation passed by Con-
 gress in December 1995 and returned it to Congress for revision.      legislation
 was designed to institute new accusatorial, investigative, and trial procedures; to
 grant more investigative authority to civilian prosecutors; and to allow prosecution
 of military personnel in civilian courts for crimes that do not come under the Mili-
 tary Code of Justice. Informed observers noted that the police opposed increased au-
 thority for civilian prosecutors, and the armed forces opposed civilian prosecution
 of military personnel.
 There were no reports of political prisoners. Members of Sendero Luminoso and
 MRTA charged with terrorism-however arbitrarily in some instances-are not con-
 sidered political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Constitution requires security forces to have a judicial warrant to enter a private
 dwelling, but this requirement is suspended in the emergency zones. Security forces
 in those areas routinely conduct searches without a warrant. There were frequent
 credible reports of illegal telephone monitoring.
 A number of rural communities--with arms, training, and encouragement from
 the army-have organized self-defense forces (or "rondas) to protect local commu-
 nities against terrorism and banditry. These have had a noticeable impact on curb-
 ing Sendero's activity in certain areas of the country. In some parts of the country,
 rondas have existed for centuries as a form of social organization to protect commu-
 
 
 546
 nities from invaders and rustlers. However, military authorities organized many of
 the newer rondas and sometimes coerced peasants into participating.
 As a regular practice and to a far greater degree, Sendero and the MRTA forced
 peasants to join their military ranks, often for extended periods, and to participate
 in terrorist attacks and executions.
 g. Use of Excessive Force and Violations of Humanitarian Law in Internal
 ConfiictsWith the internal conflict winding down, reports of use of excessive force by
 th  military declined significantlyfrom previous years. However, there were reports
 of excesive use of force by the mita  n counterinsurgency operations against ter-
 rorists in San Martin and Huanuco departm ent. Durin, operations i these depart-
 ments, reports continued of arbitrary detention by the miary in communities where
 Sendero Luminoso had entered and terrorized residents.
 Although both the army and Sendero Luminoso committed serious human rights
 abuses in Peru's internal conflict, the latter was responsible for many more heinous
 acts. Sendero frequently used arbitrary violence against civilians and nonmilitary
 targets. It continued to detonate powerful bombs in public places, indiscriminately
 killing and injuring bystanders, and persisted in its practice of entering villages and
 killing residents. Victims included unarmed women and children. Sendero Luminoso
 terrorists were responsible for 124 killings, including 6 current or former members
 of that organization. A Sendero car bomb on July 26 killed one civilian and seriously
 injured a police officer in front of a police station in central Lima. A Sendero car
 bomb next to a Shell warehouse in Lima on May 16 injured 10 persons. In armed
 confrontations, Sendero never took prisoners or attended to the wounded. Sendero
 also practiced forced military conscription of children. In Delicias, Huanuco depart-
 ment, Sendero terrorists forcibly recruited eight adolescents in August. There were
 also reports that Sendero forced Ashaninka tribesmen in the Satipo area of Junin
 department to join its ranks.
 On December 17, MRTA terrorists took control of the Japanese Ambassador's resi-
 dence during a national day reception and initially took over 600 hostages. The hos-
 tag takers gradually released most of the hostages, however, and by the end of the
 year there were fewer than one hundred hostages, including the Foreign Minister
 and Ambassadors from Japan and Bolivia. The hostage takers' key demand was the
 release of over 400 imprisoned MRTA terrorists. Through November MRTA terror-
 ists were blamed for the deaths of three persons, including a soldier and a police
 officer.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speeh and Pres.-The Constitution provides for freedom of speech
 and of the press. The Government generally respects these provisions, although the
 Government uses its economic power in the form of newspaper advertising to influ-
 ence the press. The Government selectively disseminates information in order to
 exert some control over the views expressed. Government press offices have refused
 to send news releases and other information to some magazines and often limited
 opposition media access to official transportation when the President visited remote
 parts of the country or traveled abroad.
 The media represent a wide spectrum of information and opinion, with 22 daily
 newspapers, 10 television stations, 2 cable systems, and 120 radio stations in Lima
 alone. The media regularly criticize the Government and its policies. The Govern-
 ment owns a daily newspaper, a television network, and two radio stations, none
 of which are especially influential.
 Opposition political parties have access to the media. Television stations, although
 generally prgovernment, provide regular access to opposition figures on a variety
 of news and public affairs programs. The print press is .divied between popular,
 largely apolitical tabloids and more comprehensive editorial-baring papers, which
 at times articulate positions in opposition to the Government's policies.
 The authorities detained and prosecuted three military intelligence officers for
 their involvement in the October 17 bombing of the television transmitter of a sta-
 tion in Puno that broadcasts a Lima progra hosted by an outspoken critic of the
 Government. One of those arrested, Angel Sauni Pomaya, had been investigated for
 his involvement with the military death squad responsible for the 1991 Barrios
 Altos massacre.
 As part of the newly enacted legislation to review terrorism cases, theGovern-
 ment pardoned on September 30 and released from detention journalist Jesus Al-
 fonso Castiglion and two other detained journalists. Castiglione, the former direc-
 tr of Radio Amistad in Huacho, was serving a 20-year sentence for terrorism de-
 spite a lack of evidence. Another well-known case of a detained journalist, Javier
 puanama Valera, remains unresolved. The authorities have detained Tuanama, the
 former managing editor of the Tarapot daily newspaper Hechos, for 6 years on var-
 
 
 547
 ious terrorism charges, despite two acquittals, one on a charge that he took part
 in a terrorist act committed after his detention in 1990.
 The Government exercised substantial influence over the media through the
 placement of advertisements. Some media owners claimed that the Government also
 encourages private advertisers to boycott opposition publications and uses tax inves-
 tigationa to harass them. Many media owners are involved in other economic activi-
 ties that require government licensing or involve bidding on government contracts.
 Opposition media access to government information has been restricted.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Assodation.-The Constitution expressly
 provides for the right of peaceful assembly and association, and the authorities nor-
 mally respect these rights in practice, except in areas under a state of emergency
 (where the right of assembly is suspended).Public meetings in plazas or streets re-
 quire advance permission, which may be denied only for reasons of public safety or
 health. Municipal authorities usually approved permits for demonstrations in Lima
 and nonemergency zones.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for freedom of religion, and the
 Government respects this provision in practice. The Constitution recognizes Roman
 Catholicism "as an important element in the historical, cultural, and moral develop-
 ment of the nation' but also establishes the separation of church and State. Conver-
 sion to other religions is respected, and missionaries are allowed to enter and pros-
 elytize.
 Sendero Luminoso rejects religion and continues to threaten and intimidate reli-
 gious workers. Members of the Mormon Church, in particular, continued to receive
 threats and were victims of extortion by Sendero.
 d. Freedom of Movement within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Constitution provides for the right of free movement, and there are
 no political or legal constraints on foreign travel or emigration. However the au-
 thorities can restrict people with pending criminal and, in some cases, civil charges
 from leaving the country. The Constitution prohibits the revocation of citizenship;
 repatriates (both voluntary and involuntary) are not treated any differently from
 other citizens. Freedom of movement is suspended in the emergency zones but is
 generally permitted under the army's supervision. Nonetheless, the authorities may
 detain travelers in an emergency zone at any time. Passengers on public transpor-
 tation are contrled at check points throughout the country.
 Sendo still occasionally tries to interrupt free movement within the country.
 Sndero roadblocks were reported to be commonplace in sections of the Hluallaga
 valley.
 The Government cooperates with the office of the United Nations High Commis-
 sioner for Refugees and other humanitarian organizations in assisting refugees.
 There are provisions for granting asylum and refugee status, although the proce-
 dures have been used by only a few persons in recent years, principally Cubans. The
 issue of the provision of first asylum did not arise in 1996. There were no reports
 of forced return of persons to countries where they feared persecution.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 The Constitution provides for the right of citizens to change their government,
 and citizens exercise this right in practice. The law bars only groups that advocate
 violent overthrow of the Government from participating in the political process. Vot-
 ing by secret ballot is mandatory for all citizens between the ages of 18 and 70; how-
 ever, prisoners and members of the armed forces and the police are ineligible to
 vote. Legal opposition parties represent a wide variety of opinion and ideology, al-
 though the degree of grassroots support and organization of some parties is often
 not significant.
 Running for a second term under provisions of the 1993 Constitution, President
 Fujimori was reelected to a 5-year term in 1995 over 12 other candidates, with 65
 percent of the valid vote. Voters also elected 120 members of the unicameral Con-
 gress. Fujimori's Cambio 90/Nueva Mayoria party won 67 seats in Conss; 12 op-
 position parties won the remaining 53 seats. In August Conss passe  a law, over
 considerable opposition, permitting the President to run for a third term. This law
 states that the President could run again in 2000 because he would be running for
 his second term under the 1993 Constitultion. The opposition embarked on a petition
 drive for a referendum on this issue. However, on October 10, Congress approved
 a law declaring that, for a referendum to take plac, not only must the proponents
 gather 1.2 million signatures (as was the original requirement), but at least 48
 members of Congress must also vote to hold it. In a 4-to-1 decision on October 31,
 the National Elections Commission (JNE) ruled that the new law could not be ap-
 plied retroactively. The JNE's decision not only put the petition drive for a referen-
 
 
 548
 dum on the third term back on track, but also that for another referendum on the
 privatization of the state oil company, PetroPeru.
 Women and minorities participate fully in government and politics. There are 11
 female members of Congress. In addition, 3 of the 15 cabinet ministers and several
 vice ministers are women, as are the Attorney General and a Supreme Court justice.
 Peruvians of Asian descent hold leadership positions in government; President
 Fujimori is from an Asian ethnic minority. There are severa indigenous congress-
 men, and a recent vice president was a Quechua speaker. However, it is rare for
 indigenous peo ple, who represent 30 percent of the population, to reach the highest
 leadership levels in the public sector. Until recently, discrimination has often led to
 exclusion of members of these groups from leadership positions in government.
 Members of the black minority have no leadership role in government, and there
 are no black members of Congress.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 The Government allowed numerous nongovernmental organizations dedicated to
 monitoring and advancing human rights to operate freely, although government offi-
 cials continued to criticize them. The military often restricted the ability of local and
 international human rights workers to investigate human rights abuses; the Gov-
 ernment usually ignored human rights groups requests for information. It prohib-
 ited many human rights monitors--except those from the ICRC (until late Decem-
 ber)-from visiting some prisons. Public attacks by the Government against both do-
 mestic and international human rights monitors lessened in 1996. Legitimate fears
 of physical attack by Sendero severely limited the ability of human rights monitors
 to carry out their work in some p arts of the country.
 A human rights attorney fledPer for 3month early in 1996 due to threats that
 she received. On February 18, three masked men entered the home of human rights
 attorney Edith Luquillas Gonzalez, who was investigating the case of Jhoel Huaman
 Garcia (see Section l.a.). When they did not find Luquillas, the men threatened her
 family members that she could be killed at any moment.
 Most Peruvian human rights NGO's are independent and generally objective in
 their views. Several private human rights groups joined in 1985 to form an umbrella
 organization known as the National Coordinating Committee for Human Rights, or
 Coordinadora. The Coordinadora maintains a poli   of not mixing politics with
 human rights (its individual members may do so, but not in the Coordinadora's
 name). Its members, although widely recognized by the general public as thorough
 and impartial observers, are privately criticized by military, judicial, and police offi-
 cials as biased against the authorities. The Coordinadora has began to work closely
 with the newly established Human Rights Ombudsman in addressing key areas of
 mutual concern.
 Human rights groups repeatedly denounced Sendero Luminoso as the greatest vi-
 olator of human rights in Peru, while simultaneously documenting violations by the
 security forces. Documentary evidence indicates that Coordinadora members have
 been balanced in their denunciations of abuses by both sides. In its annual report,
 the Coordinadora regularly reported and denounced political violence by Sendero as
 well as by the MRTA and has issued press communiques denouncing violence by
 terrorist groups.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution provides for equal rights for all citizens and specifically prohibits
 discrimination based on ethnic origin, race, gender, language, religion, opinion, or
 economic condition. Nevertheless, discrimination against women, the disabled, and
 minorities continued.
 Women.-Violence against women, including rape and spousal abuse, is a chronic
 problem, according to local women's groups and law enforcement offices. According
 to official statistics, nationwide there were approximately 5,900 complaints of vio-
 lence against women in 1995. Of these, 50 percent were due to mantal problems,
 20 percent for other family causes, and 18 percent due to economic problems. In 40
 percent of the cases the aggressor was under the influence of alcohol, and in 10 per-
 cent he was under the influence of drugs. Despite this large number of complaints,
 many cases go unreported. Rape is also believed to occur frequently, and high-profile
 cases of minor girls who were raped and killed has led to calls for drastic sentences
 to punish those responsible. In July Cogess formed its first ommittee to look spe-
 cifically at women's issues, and among the new legislation it studied was a bill pro-
 viding for mandatory prison sentences of up to 12 years for those who attack
 women. Rape victims frequently are reluctant to come forward, and there are no ac-
 
 
 curate statistics of rape victims. Women's groups complain of police indifference and
 the pervasive assumption that if a women was raped she probably enticed her
 attacker.
 In order to address the special concerns of women, President Fujimori announced
 creation in October of a new Ministry of Women's Issues and Human Development
 and appointed Miriam Schenone to head it. In addition, Human Rights Ombudsman
 Santistevan named a deputy in November specifically to handle women's rits.
 Partially in reaction to a lack of response by regular policemen to domestic Muse
 cases, the authorities established special police stations in Lima and other m ajor
 cities where policewomen deal directly with abused women. They report a rising
 number of complaints of domestic violence. In addition, women's groups have estab-
 lished legal aid and health centers for women. Judicial authorities take legal action
 against perpetrators of domestic violence. Although the Government has passed
 strong legislation against domestic violence, it is not always implemented, especially
 outside the major cities.
 Sexual harassment in the workplace continues to be a common problem. One
 study by a women's rights organization showed that 62 percent of working women
 knew of cses of sexual harassment in the workplace.
 The Constitution grants women equality, and laws on marriage, divorce, and
 property rights do not discriminate against women. Nevertheless, tradition often im-
 pedes access by women to leadership roles in major social and business institutions.
 The 1995 emploent law treats bth men and women equally and supersedes ear-
 lier legislation that hadprovidd special working conditions for women. Among the
 benefits female workers lost were the guarantee of an hour each day for breast-Teed-
 iag of children up to 1 year of age and the requirement that employers with more
 than 25 female employees provide a nursery.
 Children.-The Government made efforts to address children's human rights and
 welfare; however, much work still needs to be done. The Government provdes free
 compulsory education through primary school. The President frequently emphasized
 the need to improve education at all levels, but the Government does not have suffi-
 cient funds for public schools, and school enrollment actually declined in 1996. A
 1993 government survey reported that only 59 percent of children between the ages
 of 6 and 11 attend school, and only 27 percent of those between the ages of 12 and
 17. Millions of children continue to suffer from malnutrition and live in extreme
 poverty. There were frequent press reports highlighting issues relating to child labor
 and children living in poverty.
 In Lima there are thousands of orphaned, homeless, and abandoned children, and
 many of them are forced to work in the informal economy to support themselves.
 Estimates vary, but most experts believe almost 1 million children-between the ages
 of 6 and 17 work; 55 percent of them live in rural areas.
 Violence against children is a serious problem. According to some estimates, ap-
 proximately half of all rapes are perpetrated against minors. Almost 70 percent of
 homeless children reported that they left their homes because of mistreatment,
 whereas only 16 percent said that they left their homes because of economic prob-
 lems.
 New legislation in 1995 discontinued the practice of adult terrorism trials for
 those under the age of 18 and ordered that underage prisoners be moved to juvenile
 detention facilities. In 1996, however, new cases continued to come to light of per-
 sons under 18 years of age being held in adult prisons.
 People With Disabilities.-Although the Constitution states that disabled persons
 "have the right to respect of their dignity and to a regime of protection, care, reha-
 bilitation, and security," the Government has few resources available for assisting
 the disabled or preventing discrimination against them. There is no law mandating
 access to buildings for people with disabilities, and few accommodations (such as
 wheelchair ramps on streets and in buildings) exist for them.
 The number of those disabled is believed to have increased as a result of the years
 of violence during the Sendero and MRTA insurgencies. Although according to the
 1993 census, 1.3 percent of the population (288,526 persons) are disabled n some
 form, nongovernmental experts believe that the figure is in reality much higher.
 Disabled persons face discrimination when seeking employment, and many are re-
 duced to begging in the streets. The publicity surrounding the performance of Peru's
 medal-winning team to the 1996 Special Olympics again focused public attention on
 the problems of the disabled.
 The Rehabilitation Center for the Blind, a private institute, has operated in Lima
 for 29 years providing job skill tr   and other useful guidance to thousands.
 There are several schools for blind children throughout the country.
 Indigenous People.-The 1993 Constitution prohibits discrimination based on race
 and provides for the right of all citizens to speak their native language. Neverthe-
 
 
 550
 less, the large indigenous population faces pervasive discrimination and social preju-
 dice. Because of geographic isolation, government centralization, lack of organiza-
 tion, and social marginal'zation, indigenous people in general are unable to partici-
 pate in, or are excluded from, decisions affecting their lands, cultures, traitions,
 and the allocation of natural resources. In jungle areas, colonists, coca growers,
 guerrillas, and business interests steadily encroach on native lands, many seking
 to exploit natural resources. Indigenous people lack access to public services in
 many inland areas while business investment is concentrated on the coast.
 The largest indigenous groups are those speaking Quechua and Aymara, which
 are recognized as official languages. These languages are not taught in schools, how-
 ever, and efforts to introduce Quechua and Aymara curriculums have so far failed.
 There are also dozens of smaller native language groups.
 The 45,000 Aguaruna-Huambisa people inhabit areas near the Upper Cenepa Val-
 ley where the 1995 Peru-Ecuador -border conflict took place. Aguaruna-Huambisa
 leaders have complained about poor living conditions and the lack of consultation
 by the Government on matters affecting their welfare, including land tenure.
 The Confederation of Amazonian Nationalities of Peru (CONAP) is one of eight
 NGO's representing the more than 50 ethnolinguistic grups-nearly 200,000 peo-
 ple-from the Peruvian Amazon, and does not necessarily speak for the entire indig-
 enous population. CONAP is critical of the 1995 land law which, according to its
 interpretation, allows Amazonian land to be bought and sold if no one is using it
 or living on it. Land as a marketable commodity is an alien concept to some indige-
 nous people, who have a religious way of relating to it. Moreover, some indigenous
 people are nomadic, moving from one part of their lands to another, and do not use
 all their land all the time. Recognizing that mining and other development activity
 is inevitable, CONAP says that indigenous people want to benefit from it, rather
 than die out because of it. Consultation and negotiation about the disposition of
 their lands is key, however, and CONAP claims that the Government's Indigenous
 Institute has failed to provide such an opportunity.
 Amazon tribes, particularly the over 10,000 Conip-Shipibo people of the Ucayali
 region, are also struggling to obtain government recognition of their economic prob-
 lem and to obtain development projects to improve their living standards. The
 Conipo-Shipibo people have started their own radio program, "the indigenous voice
 of the Ucayali," which is broadcast in their native language. Amazon tribes in areas
 of oil exploration and extraction have complained that environmental damage has
 negatively affected the health of their memers and sometimes led to deaths. These
 tribes assert that the Goyernment does not take their concerns seriously.
 Sendero Luminoso has been the most egregious violator of indigenous rights. At
 the end of the year, thousands of Ashaninkas in the central jungle area remained
 displaced, and many were in areas under Sendero control, although some displaced
 groups of Ashaninkas reincorporated into their original communities. Reports con-
 tinued, however, of forcible recruitment of Ashaninkas by Sendero.
 National/Racial/Ethnic Minorities.-Peru's population includes several small ra-
 cial minorities, the largest of which are blacks of African descent and Asians.
 Blacks, who tend to be concentrated along the coast, face particularly pervasive dis-
 crimination and social prejudice and are among the poorest groups in the country.
 They are excluded from leadership roles in government, military, and business insti-
 tutions. Both the navy and the air force reportedly have unwritten policies that ex-
 clude blacks from the officer corps. According to Peru's two black human rights
 groups, police routinely detain persons of African descent on suspicion of committing
 crimes for no other reason than the color of their skin, and police rarely act on com-
 plaints of crimes against blacks. The Government has taken no action to remedy
 these problems.
 Although Peruvians of Asian descent have traditionally been subjected to dis-
 crimination, this has changed during the past decade as Peru has looked toward
 Asia as a growth model and as the Asian community has achieved financial success.
 Apart from President Fujimori, who is of Japanese descent, many other Asians now
 hold prominent leadership positions in business and government.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-It is estimated that only 5 percent of the total work
 force of 8.5 million belong to organized labor unions. More than half of all workers
 are in the informal sector of the economy. Workers do not need prior authorization
 to form a trade union, nor, by law, can employment be conditioned on union mem-
 bership or nonmembership. Existing unions represent a cross section of political
 opinion. Although some unions have been traditionally associated with political
 groups, the law prohibits unions from engaging in explicitly political, religious, or
 
 
 551
 profitmaking activities. The several union leaders who ran unsuccessfully for Con-
 gress in 1995 all did so as individuals, without union sponsorshi
 In 1995 Congress approved a new employment law, which a1 of the main union
 confederations publicly criticized for violating the riits of unions, including free-
 dm to bargain collectively and the right to work. Unions also complained that the
 new law eliminated the compulsory reinstatement of dismissed workers when it is
 proven that they were unjustly dismissed. At present such workers onl have the
 right to a year's pay as indemnification. In practice the new Labor Cod has had
 a negative impact on the right of association by making it easier for companies to
 fire workers involved in union activities.
 The International Labor Organization (ILO) in June called on the Government to
 adopt new legislation to enhance freedom of association, including a guarantee that
 reduction of personnel not be used as an antiunion measure and permitting new
 probationary workers the right to join a union.
 There are no restrictions on membership in international bodies. Several major
 labor unions and confederations are affiliates of international labor groups, includ-
 ing the ILO and the International Confederation of Free Trade Unions.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The 1993 Constitution recog-
 nizes the right of public and private workers to organize and bargain collectively.
 However, it states that these rights must be exercised in harmony with broader so-
 cial objectives. Labor regulations promulgated prior to the 1993 Constitution provide
 that workers can form unions based on profession, employment, or geographic loca-
 tion. The regulations exclude temporary, probationary, apprentice, or management
 employees from union membership. They require a minimum of 100 members to
 form trade unions by branch of activity, occupation, or for various occupations; and
 a minimum of 20 workers to form a union within a company. They aso limit the
 number of union officials, the amount of time they may devote to union business
 on company time, and require them to be active members of the union. No legal pro-
 visions require employers who commit antiunion discrimination to reinstate workers
 fired for union activities.
 Labor regulations set the number of union representatives who can participate in
 collective bargaining negotiations (a minimum of 3, a maximum of 12) and establish
 the negotiating timetable. The management negotiating team cannot exceed the size
 of the workers team; both sides may have attorneys and professional experts in at-
 tendance as advisers. A majority of all workers in a company, whether union mem-
 bers or not, must approve a strike by a secret ballot. A second vote must be taken
 upon petition of 20 percent or more of the workers. The labor movement criticized
 provisions of the new Labor Code that facilitate an employer's ability to dismiss em-
 ployees as impeding workers' right to bargain collectively. However, there are a]-
 parently no restrictions that would prohibit unions from negotiating a higher stand-
 ard than the base line of protection provided for workers by the law. To become an
 official collective bargaining representative, a union must represent 20 workers.
 In response to a complaint regarding the right to organize and bargain collec-
 tively, an ILO committee noted that the 1995 Labor Code fails to ensure the protec-
 tion of workers against acts of antiunion discrimination and to protect workers' or-
 ganizations against acts of interference by employers. In addition, the ILO found ob-
 stacles to voluntary negotiation resulting from the requirement of a majority not
 only of a number of workers, but also of enterprises, in order to conclude a collective
 agreement for a branch of activity or occupation.
 Labor regulations also permit companies unilaterally to propose temporary
 changes of work schedules, conditions, and wages and to suspend for up to 90 days
 collective bargaining aMreements if obliged to do so by an unexpected event or eco-
 nomic conditions, provided that they give 15 days' notice to employees. If workers
 dispute the proposed changes, the Labor Ministry must resolve the dispute based
 upon criteria of "reasonableness" and "economic necessity." In such cases, employers
 must authorize vacation time and in general adopt measures that avoid aggravating
 the employment situation.
 A conciliation and arbitration system resolves disputes, but union officials com-
 plain that their proportionate share of the cost of arbitration can exceed their re-
 sources. (In the past, business and government entities had covered these costs.)
 Union officials also state that a growing number of companies utilize a policy of hir-
 ing workers on temporary, personal services contracts to prevent union afMiliation.
 The new law restricts such hiring to 20 percent of a companys work force. The
 Labor Ministry is still formulating regulations on this point. This is a subject of con-
 tinuing contention between organized labor and employers and is one of the con-
 cerns that labor continues to raise in international forums. Employers deny the ac-
 cusation of antiunion bias and assert that labor stability provisions of the law have
 made long-term commitments to workers too expensive.
 
 
 552
 Special regulations permitting greater flexibility in application of the Labor Code
 in export and duty free zones provide for the use of temporary labor as needed, flexi-
 bility in labor contracts, and a wage system based upon supply and demand. As a
 result, workers in duty free zones are unable to unionize. Duty free zone employers
 do not engage in illegal activities to prevent unionization.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The Constitution prohibits forced
 or compulsory labor. However, there are periodic reports of the practice of forced
 labor in remote Andean mountain and Amazonian jungle regions of the country. In
 response to a complaint filed with the ILO, the Government in 1994 acknowledged
 the existence of such practices and asserted that it had taken measures to end these
 abuses. However, reports of forced labor, including that of children in gold mines
 in the remote Madre de Dios department, continued to emerge. Forced labor is not
 a problem in urban areas.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-Education through primary school
 is compulsory and free. A high percentage of school-age children nevertheless work
 rather than attend daytime classes, with only a small number of such children at-
 tending classes at night. Given widespread poverty, children work in the informal
 economy without government supervision of wages or conditions from a very early
 age to help support their families. A recent government labor study found that 8
 percent of the work force was between the ages of 6 and 14. The Government's Na-
 tional Institute of Family Welfare cooperates with the United Nations Children's
 Fund and the Inter-American Development Bank to assist street children and other
 child laborers.
 The minimum legal age for employment is 16. The new Labor Code raised the age
 from 21 to 25 years for the special youth labor provisions, which allow employers
 to pay lower salaries as part of a program to provide new workers with specialized
 training. The new code also increased the period of apprenticeship from 18 to 36
 months. In addition, workers covered by these provisions now may make up 30 per-
 cent (increased from 15 percent) of a company's work force.
 Child labor is heavily used in the agricultural sector and in informal gold mining,
 but not in other major export industries, such as petroleum and fisheries. Recent
 studies by NGO's found that approximately 4,500 workers younger than 18 years
 of age work in harsh conditions in the informal Madre de Dios gold mines. Many
 of these workers are under the age of 15, and some are as young as 11. These child
 laborers were recruited from their families through a system known as "enganche"
 in Pano, Juliaca, Sicuani, Abancay, and Cuzco, through which they are provided
 free transportation to the mine and reportedly agree to work for at least 90 days
 before beingpaid. The Government has not exercised control over these employment
 agencies, and employers do not comply with labor code provisions relating to juve-'
 niles. Children who work in the informal gold mines lack proper medical care, must
 work long hours, and are often subjected to beatings, mistreatment, and rape. There
 are also reports of these mine workers not being paid.
 More than 20 children between the ages of 4 and 14 work in harsh conditions at
 Cerro de Belen caves near Arequipa collecting pumice stones, which are used in the
 manufacture of stonewashed jeans. These children work alongside their parents and
 other family members and suffer from various illnesses including tuberculosis and
 atrophy of the respiratory tract.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The Constitution provides that the State pro-
 mote social and economic progress and occupational education. It states that work-
 ers should receive a "just and sufficient" wage, to be determined by the Government
 in consultation with labor and business representatives and "adequate protection
 against arbitrary dismissal." The current minimum wage is about $87 (S1217) per
 month and is generally considered inadequate to support a worker and family. A
 considerable portion-one-half according to some estimates-of the country's work
 force makes only the minimum wage.
 The Constitution also provides for a 48-hour workweek, a weekly day of rest, and
 a yearly vacation. It prohibits discrimination in the workplace. In December Presi-
 dent Fujimori vetoed legislation passed by Congress in September that would have
 improved benefits and working hours for household maids. While occupational
 health and safety standards exist, the Government lacks the resources to monitor
 or enforce compliance. Employers and workers generally agree upon compensation
 for industrial accidents on an individual basis. The Government introduced reforms
 in 1993 eliminating the need to prove culpability in order to obtain worker's com-
 pensation for injuries. There are no provisions for workers to remove themselves
 from dangerous work situations without jeopardy to continued employment.
 
 
