 PERU
 Peru returned to democratic rule in July 1980, following free
 and open elections held in accordance with the 1979
 Constitution written by an elected constituent assembly. The
 Constitution provides for a republic with an executive branch,
 a bicameral legislature, and an autonomous judicial system.
 It also provides for an independent Public Ministry, headed by
 an autonomous Attorney General whose functions were envisioned
 as incorporating both prosecutorial and ombudsman-like roles.
 Peru's return to democracy came after more than a decade of
 military rule that began with a coup in 1968, and Peruvians
 have demonstrated their support for the electoral process and
 the right to choose among partisan alternatives. A large
 plurality of voters cast their ballots for Fernando Belaunde's
 Popular Action party in national and municipal elections in
 1980. But in municipal elections held in November 1983,
 candidates of two major opposition groups scored major
 successes. Throughout 1984, the focus of the political
 process remained on candidate selection among the four main
 and the many smaller parties expecting to compete in national
 elections scheduled for April 1985. A lively and often times
 highly partisan press kept Peruvians informed of political
 developments and opinions in their country. Restoration of a
 free press was one of the Belaunde Government's major.
 achievements.
 In mid-1984, the President signed into law a major revision of
 the country's civil code. The product of nearly nineteen
 years of study, the revised code modernizes Peruvian laws,
 legal institutions and practices in an attempt to achieve
 greater compatibility with contemporary Peruvian society. The
 code represents a major step forward for women in Peru, whose
 constitutionally guaranteed equality with men is now
 recognized in specific laws.
 Although Peru's restored democratic institutions continued to
 mature in 1984, the Goverment's efforts to revitalize a
 deteriorating economy and stem consequent social unrest met
 with only limited success. Persistently low world commodity
 prices and a very high debt service burden forced monetary
 authorities to follow a policy of strict austerity. Per
 capita GDP fell 14.4 percent in 1983; this negative trend was
 only partially mitigated in 1984.
 Labor unrest, particularly among state employees, led the
 Government on June 8 to declare a national state of emergency
 which was extended following the recrudescence of Sendero
 Luminoso ("Shining Path") terrorist attacks in Lima and
 elsewhere in the country at mid-year. Security conditions
 improved sufficiently to permit restoration of suspended
 guarantees in most of Peru by October 6, but liberties were
 curtailed throughout the year (as had been the case in most of
 the period 1981-83 before that) in a broad, three-departmental
 *emergency zone" in the south-central Sierra. This zone
 remained under the political-military control of Peru's armed
 forces. The Government also placed under a state of emergency
 a smaller, mostly jungle region in north-central Peru, where a
 combination of narcotics traffic lawlessness and expansion of
 Sendero Luminoso terrorism had placed government authority in
 question.
 
 
 653
 PERU
 The Sendero Luminoso terrorist phenomenon has had a seriously
 disruptive effect on the political life of the country. It
 has been responsible for a significant increase in the level
 of overall societal violence and for the random and
 particularly brutal killings in the emergency zone since early
 1983. Sendero Luminoso's disruptive effect was compounded
 during late 1984 by the emergence of the Tupac Amaru
 Revolutionary Movement (MRTA), an unrelated Castroite,
 urban-oriented group whose leaders reportedly have been tied
 to Cuba and Nicaragua. MRTA particularly targeted U.S.
 installations and private facilities in 1984; its actions took
 place largely in Lima and achieved a high public profile for
 the group.
 Although the nationwide state of emergency had little impact
 on daily life for most Peruvians, those living in the
 emergency zone were affected by the special regime there.
 Operating under a unified *political-military command," units
 of Peru's three national police services worked with soldiers
 and marines to reestablish government authority. Successes
 were spotty, and the Government expended the zone in late
 1983-early 1984. An upsurge of terrorist violence in mid-1984
 appeared to provoke a corresponding campaign of security force
 counterviolence. By late 1984, government forces had
 succeeded in breaking Sendero Luminoso's dominance in
 Ayacucho, the zone's main city, and a number of rural areas.
 But elsewhere in the region terrorist cadres retained an
 ability to operate openly.
 The emergency zone's isolation from Lima made information
 gathering about, or independent verification of responsibility
 for, events difficult. Nevertheless, the fact of a rising
 death toll and widespread brutality was indisputable.
 According to recently published statistics, 70 local
 government officials have been assassinated by Sendero
 Luminoso there since the beginning of the Belaunde
 administration -- 31 in the period January-October 1984
 alone. The overall death toll in the zone resulting from
 Sendero Luminoso actions has not been tabulated but is
 believed to be heavy. In August 1983, Peruvian authorities
 reported total losses (since the onset of terrorist violence
 in May 1980) of approximately 1,600. As of late 1984, the
 government had not issued any updated statistics on the death
 toll, except to announce that some 1,355 terrorist incidents
 occurred in 1984. But compilations of individual reports of
 deaths in terrorist-related incidents indicated that the 1983
 figure had perhaps tripled. Foreign and local human rights
 activists expressed concern that much of this loss of life was
 the consequence of indiscriminate killing by the security
 forces, a charge that both military and top civilian
 government leaders denied. Amnesty International reports
 issued in early 1984 referred to incidents in which persons
 reportedly detained by security forces subsequently
 "disappeared," eventually turning up dead and, in some cases,
 with their corpses displaying signs of torture.
 
 
 654
 PERU
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 The phenomenon of widespread political killing in Peru is
 relatively new. Although Sendero Luminoso violence began in
 mid-1980, extensive brutal killing did not begin until early
 1982. The terrorists' initial targets seemingly were
 selected: police, government authorities, and "exploitative"
 landlords and merchants. But in early 1983 Sendero changed
 tactics, fomenting indiscriminate communal massacres in which
 large numbers of persons--mostly rural villagers--died. In
 1984, internecine clashes between pro- and anti-Sendero
 Luminoso communities became more frequent.
 Security forces responded to escalated Sendero Luminoso
 violence with increased violence of their own. Although
 military authorities discontinued in 1984 the previous
 practice of issuing frequent communiques describing Sendero
 Luminoso losses suffered in "armed confrontations" in the
 emergency zone, thus making it difficult to track the toll of
 violence, indirect evidence suggested that the pace of ki-lling
 increased. Newspaper and magazine accounts in the final weeks
 of 1983 reported the discovery of bodies, singly and in
 groups, in desolate spots near the emergency zone's two main
 centers, the cities of Ayacucho and Huanta. Most of these
 were the corpses of young men, among whom some were identified
 as individuals previously reported as "missing." A second
 series of such discoveries followed in the wake of a renewed
 Sendero Luminoso offensive that began in late June.
 Anti-government critics charged that these events disclosed a
 security force practice of killing suspects without trial or,
 for that matter, without regard to evidence of their
 involvement in subversive acts. Some pro-government spokesmen
 acknowledged the probability of cases of security force
 "excesses." Controversy was wide ranging regarding who was
 responsible for the deaths and what should be done.
 In addition to deaths arising directly from the conflict
 between terrorist and counter-terrorist forces, government
 authorities acknowledged the involvement of a local police
 garrison in the massacre of over 30 villagers in Socos in
 mid-November 1983. Civil Guard head Juan Balaguer revealed on
 September 7, 1984 that 26 policemen (later indicted) were
 implicated in that event. Although he provided no details,
 news media alleged that the police in question had acted under
 the influence of alcohol -- with a minor dispute between
 villagers and policemen setting off a tragic massacre which
 the police later sought to cover up. Press reporting on other
 occasions also charged drunkenness among security forces as a
 causal factor in producing emergency zone tragedies. The
 zone's political-military head, General Adrian Huaman,
 attempted to restrict access to alcohol by personnel under his
 command.
 b. Disappearance
 The question of disappeared persons ('desaparecidos") became a
 major political issue in August-September 1983, with the
 publication of Amnesty International's reports. Amnesty
 International issued follow-up reports in early 1984 but, with
 
 
 655
 PERU
 a change of military leadership in the emergency zone and
 apparent corresponding change in security force tactics, the
 issue began to recede from the foreground. The private
 National Commission on Human Rights presented to the Public
 Ministry on May 9 a documented list of 661 cases of
 Idesaparecidos.1 Almost without exception, however, this list
 dealt with complaints that had been registered in 1983 (i.e.,
 before the January 1 change in zone command). Statistics
 released in late April by Ayacucho's District Attorney,
 Benjamin Madueno, offered a similar picture: of some 690
 instances filed with his office, the largest portion (all but
 100) dated from 1983. The anti-government Lima daily 'La
 Republica' reported on June 26 that the total number of
 complaints presented to public ministry authorities from
 December 1982 until May 1984 numbered 1,200, a large majority
 having occurred in the single Department of Ayacucho.
 However, beginning in late July and continuing through August
 and September, the controversy surrounding disappearances
 intensified dramatically. On July 27, campesino leader Jesus
 Oropeza was detained in a police station in the southern
 Ayacucho Department town of Puquio. Between that date and the
 discovery of his mutilated corpse on August 10, Oropeza was
 officially "missing," as police authorities asserted they had
 turned Oropeza over to an unidentified military unit on the
 night of the 27th. Interior Minister Luis Percovich on August
 13 sent the Senate a police investigative report that changed
 fundamental details from the original police version but
 maintained that the police had not been responsible for
 Oropeza's death. But, after testifying before a closed Senate
 session August 16, Percovich acknowledged that the Puquio
 police appeared to have been responsible. The Senate itself
 issued a communique noting that grounds existed Oto presume
 that the citizen Oropeza could have been victimized by (those)
 forces responsible for his custody and transport.*
 In a contemporaneous case in northern Ayacucho Department, "La
 Republica' Huanta correspondent Jaime Ayala Sulca went to the
 local security force headquarters on August 2 to protest a
 forced entry by police earlier that day at his mother's home.
 Although Peru's Attorney General himself investigated, Ayala
 was never seen thereafter.
 On August 24, the press reported the discovery near Huanta of
 numerous corpses in several "clandestine' graves.
 Approximately fifty bodies were uncovered. Both President
 Belaunde and the Military High Command disclaimed security
 force responsibility for the deaths, asserting that the
 victims were likely Sendero militants who had fallen in combat
 and been buried by their comrades. Many press commentators in
 Lima disagreed, citing the fact that the victims' corpses had
 been disfigured and left nude to prevent identification; the
 manner of death too, they pointed out, was inconsistent with
 battle-inflicted wounds. Many normally pro-government
 publications editorialized on the dangers to Peruvian
 political society of allowing security force excesses to
 occur, but complaints of disappearances (such as that of
 Huancavelica labor union leader Hilario Ayuque on September
 20) continued, and Lima's press reported the discovery of more
 clandestine graves near Huanta.
 
 
 656
 PERU
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 The Constitution prohibits capital punishment (except for
 treason in time of foreign war), torture and inhumane or
 humiliating treatment. Nevertheless, charges of security
 force brutality toward detained prisoners have been
 commonplace since the military entered the emergency zone in
 December 1982. Amnesty International's report "Torture in the
 Eighties" asserts that torture victims in Peru "have included
 people from all walks of life," although those of "the largely
 Indian peasantry, or from sections of the urban poor" are more
 likely to experience serious mistreatment. The Amnesty
 International report also charged that torture is more likely
 to occur before prisoners appear in court and (referring to
 the emergency zone) often precedes extra-judicial executions.
 In general, prison conditions in Peru are primitive, and
 persons under detention are likely to encounter limited
 hygienic facilities, poor nutrition, and occasional
 ill-treatment by poorly paid prison staff. Charges of
 outright torture in such facilities, however, were notably
 absent in 1984. Torture charges that did appear in the press
 associated such activity with Sendero Luminoso terrorists and
 security forces engaged in combatting subversion. Chamber of
 Deputies President Elias Mendoza acknowledged on August 13
 that some of those engaged in the anti-terrorist effort indeed
 had committed abuses. Although pro- and anti-government
 political leaders often disagreed as to the identity of those
 responsible for particular events, the mutilated bodies of
 victims found in the emergency zone frequently testified to
 their having been tortured prior to execution. A number of
 female detainees complained that they had been raped or
 otherwise sexually abused. In one such example, Juana Lidia
 Argumedo, a key witness in the trial of suspects accused of
 the January 1983 murder of eight Peruvian newsmen at
 Uchuraccay was, according to charges filed by the public
 prosecutor, raped by security force members after she was
 taken into custody in mid-September 1984.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 The Constitution requires that persons arrested be arraigned
 within 24 hours for all crimes except drug trafficking,
 terrorism, or espionage, for which the limit is 15 days.
 Administrative difficulties sometimes preclude the 24-hour
 deadline from being met, but arraignment usually occurs in a
 timely manner. The Constitution also guarantees habeas corpus
 which is respected in practice. These guarantees are
 suspended, however, by the declaration of a state of
 emergency, under which police authorities are empowered to
 detain individuals indefinitely.
 Aside from the particular experience of the south-central
 Sierra emergency zone, however, the 120 days that Peru spent
 under a national state of emergency in 1984 passed virtually
 unnoticed. Notwithstanding the suspension of constitutional
 guarantees, with only isolated exceptions police authorities
 did not detain persons longer than permitted by the
 Constitution. The exceptions in general appeared to be the
 product of local initiative, were of short-term duration and
 resulted in no known disappearances. Within'the zone, little
 changed in regard to security force practices established in
 1983. Allegations continued to be published in the Lima press
 
 
 657
 PERU
 concerning the detention of persons in the zone by members of
 the security forces, some of whom allegedly were not in
 uniform or were masked, and of the difficulty experienced by
 relatives in establishing the whereabouts of persons so
 detained. These complaints on occasion were echoed by Public
 Ministry officials posted in the zone. District Attorney
 Madueno, for example, protested publicly in April about a lack
 of cooperation by security force authorities who, he said,
 were impeding his office's operations. Of several hundred
 inquiries regarding complaints of Idesaparecidos' that his
 office had sent to the zone's political-military command, only
 a handful elicited responses. On May 1, Madueno resigned in
 protest, an example that some other Public Ministry
 representatives in Ayacucho later followed.
 The Constitution expressly forbids exile, and no such acts
 occurred in 1984.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The Peruvian judiciary is independent of the executive in both
 law and practice. The National Council of the Magistracy,
 under the Attorney General, selects nominees for judicial
 vacancies; appointments are for life, and only Supreme Court
 justices require legislative confirmation. Charges of lower
 court'malfeasance are investigated by the Supreme Court, while
 the National Council of the Magistracy investigates any
 complaints against the top tribunal and turns them over to the
 Attorney General if there are grounds for indictment. The
 Supreme Court itself has responsibility for final action.
 All civil crimes are tried in civilian courts. Those arrested
 are entitled to have an attorney present when they make
 statements to the police. Public prosecutors (from the Public
 Ministry) customarily also are present, to assure that such
 statements have not been made under threat or coercion. A
 system of public defenders exists, but resources available to
 support it are limited and, in the final analysis, most
 defendants must themselves bear the costs of arranging for
 their own defense. In accordance with the Constitution, the
 burden of proof formally lies with the prosecution and
 arrested persons are presumed innocent. Nevertheless, Peru's
 jails are clogged with large numbers of untried prisoners
 whose cases have not been adjudicated due to administrative
 backlogs. A trial review system provides for a closed
 judicial hearing, followed by a public trial in Superior Court
 for those held for probable cause at lower levels. Where its
 jurisdiction so permits, the Supreme Court hears final appeals.
 In common with other prisoners, persons arrested and formally
 charged with terrorist crimes face long periods of detention
 while their cases remain under investigation. Some 900 such
 persons were in various prisons throughout Peru in November
 1983; by June 1984, that number had risen to approximately
 1,100, and in December the Prime Minister declared that 1,966
 subversives were detained. For security reasons, all trials
 of terrorism cases are concentrated in Lima, a factor which
 itself adds to delay, and the overwhelming majority of
 terrorism suspects have yet to see their cases processed to a
 final verdict through the several stages of the judicial
 process.
 
 
 658
 PERU
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 A judicial warrant is required to enter a private dwellingi
 the inviolability of which is guaranteed by the Constitution
 except under a state of emergency. State authorities do not
 interfere with or regulate the right of individuals to join
 political or religious organizations. There is no indication
 that the Government monitors correspondence or telephone
 communications except as authorized by judicial warrant.
 Foreign publications circulate freely, and radio broadcasts
 from abroad are not jammed. The Government-permits,
 encourages, and assists the promotion of indigenous languages.
 Security forces in the emergency zone routinely availed
 themselves of their authority under the state of emergency
 decree to make warrantless searches of private homes.
 Elsewhere in the country, however, police exercised this
 liberalized authority in only isolated instances.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Peru's Constitution guarantees, and the Goverment in practice
 allows, freedom of speech and of the press. Acknowledged to
 be one of the Belaunde administration's key achievements, the
 reestablishment of a fully independent media was accomplished
 on its first day in office. Peruvian publications reflect
 political viewpoints across the spectrum, and the Government
 makes no attempt to censor criticism, including criticism of
 its human rights record. Under Peru's constitution and in
 practice, press freedom is not one of the civil liberties
 suspended when a state of emergency is declared, whether
 nationwide or in the emergency zone.
 The Government came in for occasional press criticism in 1984
 resulting from allegations concerning inappropriate police
 behavior toward individual journalists covering news events on
 Lima's streets. As in 1983, more serious allegations of
 security force interference with press freedom arose in the
 emergency zone. Two "El Diario" correspondents (Abilio Arroyo
 in Huanta and Luis Morales in Ayacucho) complained that the
 police continued to threaten and detain them arbitrarily. The
 latter newsman's 16-year old son "disappeared' briefly in
 April, but prompt intervention by District Attorney Madueno
 resulted in his release. The disappearance of Jaime Ayala led
 the Peruvian Press Association to issue a communique on August
 14 demanding his immediate liberation and an end to
 infringements on press freedom in the zone. The Foreign Press
 Correspondents Association also issued a public protest
 (August 21), when security forces briefly detained three
 newsmen (two of them from UPI) when they arrived in Ayacucho
 to cover the Ayla disappearance. Conversely, many Peruvians
 were critical of what they considered the Government's
 excessive tolerance of deliberately false reporting by some
 media regarding the terrorist/anti-terrorist situation which,
 in their view, was destabilizing and damaging to Peru's image
 abroad.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 These rights are guaranteed in the Constitution and are
 normally respected by the Government, which is forthcoming in
 
 
 659
 PERU
 issuing permits for demonstrations. For the most part, the
 Government deals with even unauthorized demonstrations in a
 non-confrontational manner. The right to assembly is among
 those specifically suspended by the proclamation of a state of
 emergency, and on occasion the Government availed itself of
 this suspension during the 120-day period of national
 emergency.
 The Constitution guarantees private sector workers the right
 to organize, bargain collectively, and strike. Public sector
 workers (except for armed forces, judges, and high officials)
 have similar rights, although with some restrictions. In
 practice, employees organize and strike freely. A legislative
 proposal to regulate the right to strike has been under
 consideration in Congress for over two years.
 About ten percent of the work force is organized, and total
 membership in communist and other far left unions is somewhat
 larger than that of democratically-oriented unions. No
 significant part of the labor movement is tied to the
 Government or the government party. Unions generally are not
 formally linked with political parties, but important national
 confederations are identified with particular political
 tendencies. Union leaders are consulted regularly by the
 President, Prime Minister, and Minister of Labor, as well as
 congressional committees. Peruvian labor organizations
 affiliate freely with regional and international trade union
 organizations of all ideological tendencies. Peru is an
 active member of the International Labor Organization.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 The Roman Catholic faith is overwhelmingly predominant in
 Peru, and the Constitution formally recognizes the Church's
 importance. It also establishes the independence of church
 and state, which is respected in practice, and guarantees
 freedom of religion and conscience. Members of minority
 religions encounter no difficulty in practicing their faith or
 in exempting their children from religious instruction in
 public schools. Missionary organizations operate freely in
 the country with the cooperation of government ministries.
 The few complaints that arose in 1984 with respect to freedom
 of religion had to do with the consequences of Peru's ongoing
 efforts to combat terrorism. Charges occasionally surfaced in
 sectors of the media, and were repeated by some government
 party members of Congress, of subversive activities being
 carried out in Peru by certain foreign nuns and clerics. The
 occasional detention of a nun or cleric by local police
 officials on suspicion of involvement with terrorists (such as
 that of Salesian Priest Rolando Ramos in Cuzco in early
 October) indicated that these expressions of concern, whether
 or not intended to be more than rhetorical by government
 spokesmen, could create an atmosphere of suspicion. In none
 of the cases did the initial detention lead to the pressing of
 charges, and all such individuals were set free, usually after
 only a short delay.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 The Constitution guarantees the right of free movement. There
 are no political or legal constraints on foreign travel or
 emigration. The declaration of a state of emergency suspends
 
 
 660
 PERU
 the guarantee of free movement within the country but, in
 practice, even during the period of national emergency in 1984
 travelers were seldom hindered because of the suspension of
 this guarantee. Travel in the emergency zone continued to be
 affected more by the difficulty of moving about in mountainous
 and dangerous terrain than by prohibitions set by the security
 forces.
 In June 1984, Peru acceded to the 1967 UN Protocol on the
 Status of Refugees. Even before accession, the Government had
 accepted the protocol in principle and did not force refugees
 to return to countries where they had reason to fear
 persecution; rather, Peru has assisted refugees to integrate
 into Peruvian life. Most of the Cuban refugees who came to
 Peru in 1980 have now been resettled. Historically, refugees
 fleeing turmoil in neighboring countries have been encouraged
 eventually to return but have not been pressured. Refugees
 from more distant places (such as Iran) have been either
 resettled or assisted in finding third countries that would
 accept them. The only cases in which Peru has approved
 involuntary repatriation have involved non-political criminals.
 Section 3   Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Peru is a democratic country governed by a freely elected
 President and Congress. The Constitution mandates universal
 suffrage for all Peruvians (except armed forces members) 18
 years of age and older. The political process is completely
 open and vigorously contested by a broad variety of political
 groups, any of which citizens can join without government
 interference. Constitutional provisions guarantee
 participation in the political process to all, regardless of
 race or sex. Leadership of the various parties tends to
 remain largely in the hands of urban elites, whose access to
 educational, financial, and communications opportunities
 affords them de facto advantages over rural-based elements.
 Indians and Peru's small black community remain
 underrepresented at top levels of all governmental
 institutions and professional associations.
 The Belaunde Government has enjoyed working majorities in both
 houses of Congress for almost all of its incumbency. (The
 Government's Senate majority depended on cooperation by a
 coalition partner, the Popular Christian Party, which opted to
 end their alliance in mid-1984.) Although members of Congress
 tended to accept party discipline, enough instances of broken
 ranks occurred to make votes at times unpredictable.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Non-governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 Peruvian Government authorities continued to dispute charges
 in 1984 of alleged abuses made by both international and
 domestic human rights spokesmen and associations. Prime
 Minister Luis Percovich and Second Vice President Javier Alva,
 among others, described Amnesty International's 1984 report on
 Peru (which expressed serious concern about extrajudicial
 executions, disappearances, torture and prolonged detention of
 peasant leaders, as well as the use of torture and
 execution-style killings by guerrillas) as one replete with
 errors and inadequately investigated charges. The
 government-owned Lima daily *Cronica" editorialized in October
 
 
 661
 PERU
 that Amnesty appeared 'to have no other source of information
 than communist newspapers' 'circulating in Peru (referring to
 considerable Amnesty International reliance on 'El Diario
 Marka'). Pro-government press sectors periodically condemned
 foreign publications, especially in Western Europe, for
 printing allegedly distorted accounts of rights violations.
 Notwithstanding such criticism, however, government officials
 treated visiting foreign human rights advocates courteously
 and afforded them opportunities to travel about the country
 and interview both government spokesmen and critics. This was
 the case with a December 1983 visit by an 'Americas Watch'
 delegation, which conferred Mith then-Prime Minister Fernando
 Schwalb and then-Interior Minister Percovich, among others.
 The Government also treated visiting Nobel Peace Laureate
 Adolfo Perez Esquivel with deference, facilitating his mid-May
 visit to Peru with a trip to Ayacucho and a private interview
 with President Belaunde. Domestic Peruvian human rights
 advocates denounced alleged violations and attacked the
 Government's lethargy in dealing with them; none appeared to
 suffer any retaliation or other adverse consequences as a
 result.
 The Government's attitude toward the International Committee
 of the Red Cross (ICRC) appeared to undergo change as 1984
 advanced. While welcoming and publicizing an ICRC delegation
 visit to Ayacucho in January, government officials later in
 the year tended to ignore the organization and were
 unresponsive when the political/military command denied ICRC
 representatives access to detention facilities in the
 emergency zone.
 Peru supports human rights causes in international forums, but
 maintains a low official profile. Most Peruvian declarations
 on international human rights issues take the form of
 editorial comment in the press and public comment by elected
 party and political figures. Peru is a member of the UN Human
 Rights Commission.
 ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND CULTURAL SITUATION
 Peru's population, growing 2.4 percent yearly, exceeded 19
 million in 1984. GDP per capita was about $1,254 in 1982 and
 declined in real terms by about 10 percent in 1983. Median
 per capita income was estimated in mid-1982 at $640 in Lima
 and $600 in other major cities; in the rural areas it is
 lower. Many other indices illustrate Peru's relative
 poverty. In 1984, life expectancy at birth was slightly over
 59.2 years, while the infant mortality rate was 98.9 per 1,000
 births. Data from 1978 show that only 25 percent of the rural
 population had access to potable water sources, while 60
 percent of urban dwellers did.
 A 1977 study showed that Peruvians obtained 96.8 percent of
 their caloric needs. In 1980, the adjusted primary school
 enrollment ratio stood at 118. About 73 percent of the adult
 population was literate in 1972 (the last year for which data
 is available). This figure probably improved in the
 succeeding decade.
 Composed of completely distinct geographic regions, Peru is a
 classic case of differential development. Public investment
 traditionally has been focused on the coast, drawing migrants
 to the cities, especially Lima. The one-third of the
 population in the capital area accounts for two-thirds of
 
 
 662
 PERU
 Gross Domestic Product (GDP). Many Indians live in Peru's
 poorest regions in the mountains, and the difficulty and cost
 of providing services to areas remote from the mainstream of
 the dominant Hispanicized culture and the centers of economic
 activity impedes development efforts. As a result of this
 dichotomy and of historical prejudices, the economic and
 social needs of Peruvians of European ancestry are more likely
 to be met than those of Peruvians of mixed or pure Indian
 heritage.
 The previous military Government made significant efforts to
 rectify this situation. The Belaunde administration attempted
 to continue these efforts and provide for sustainable and
 equitable economic development. The developmental
 achievements of President Belaunde's administration have been
 limited by a variety of factors. Adverse economic conditions
 that intensified in 1983-84 overwhelmed the Government and
 forced it to adopt austerity measures. Austerity programs,
 essential for economic recovery, create temporary hardship for
 the unemployed or underemployed (about 60 percent of the work
 force) as well as for the employed, whose wages have declined
 in real terms.
 Tradition has impeded the access of both women and members of
 minority groups to leadership roles in major social and
 political institutions. This slowly is changing. A revised
 Civil Code, which took effect in November 1984, eliminated the
 inequality with respect to the ownership of property to which
 women had previously been subjected. Moreover, for the first
 time, a woman was chosen (December 1983) to head Lima's
 Superior Court. All major political parties indicated
 interest in selecting more women as candidates for
 congressional races in 1985. Proposals to open the officer
 ranks of the three national police services and armed forces
 to women, however, did not prosper in 1984.
 
 
 663
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: PERU
 1982     1983    1984
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL...       54.6    93.4    164.6
 LOANS ..............      44.2     48.5    119.0
 GRANTS .................. 10.4     44.9    45.6
 A.AID ....................... 35.8     35.5   118.9
 LOANS ..............      28.0     19.5   100.0
 GRANTS .............       7.8     16.0     18.9
 (SEC.SUPP.ASSST.)...        0.0     0.0      0.0
 B.FOOD FOR PEACE .......      16.2     55.9    42.9
 LOANS ..............      16.2     29.0    19.0
 GRANTS .............       0.0     26.9    23.9
 TITLE I-TOTAL ..........      16.2     29.0    19.0
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS .....      16.2     29.0    19.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR .....       0.0      0.0     0.0
 TITLE I-TOTAL .........       0.0     26.9    23.9
 E.RELIEF.EC.DEV & WFP.        0.0    10.6      2.7
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY .....       0.0     16.3    21.2
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST...        2.6      2.0     2.8
 LOANS ..............       0.0      0.0     0.0
 GRANTS .............       2.6      2.0     2.8
 PEACE CORPS ......       0.0      0.0     0.0
 NARCOTICS ........       2.3      1.8     2.8
 OTHER ............       0.3      0.2     0.0
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL...        5.0     4.6     10.7
 LOANS ..............       4.5      4.0     10.0
 GRANTS .............       0.5      0.6     0.7
 A.MAP GRANTS ..........       0.0      0.0     0.0
 8.CREDIT FINANCING ....       4.5      4.0    10.0
 C.INTL MIL.ED.TRN   G ....    0.5      0.6     0.7
 D.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK...        0.0      0.0     0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS ........       0.0     0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. & NIL...       59.6    98.0    175.3
 LOANS ..............      48.7     52.5   129.0
 GRANTS ...... ......      10.9     45.5    46.3
 OTHER US LOANS ..........       0.0     26.3     0.0
 EX-IM BANK LOANS .......       0.0     26.3     0.0
 ALL OTHER ..............       0.0      0.0     0.0
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1982     1983    1984     1946-84
 TOTAL .......... 443.3   454.1    316.5  3077.6
 IBRD             286.7   302.2    122.5  1646.4
 IFC               18.2     8.0      9.2    73.3
 IDA               0.0      0.0      0.0     0.0
 IDB              130.0   142.3    184.8  1291.1
 ADB                0.0     0.0      0.0     0.0
 AFO8               0.0     0.0      0.0     0.0
 UNOP               5.4      1.6     0.0    52.2
 OTHER-UN           3.0     0.0      0.0    14.6
 EEC                0.0     0.0      0.0     0.0
 
 40-387 0 - 85 - 43
 
 
 664
