 PERU
 Peru is a multiparty republic with a dominant executive branch headed by Presi-
 dent Alberto   Fujimori. Following  the President's April 1992    seizure  of
 extraconstitutional powers, he called elections for a new Congress, which drafted a
 new Constitution approved in a 1993 referendum. The President's party controls the
 80-member unicameral Constituent Congress. The next Congress will have 120
 members elected at large in April 1995. An independent tribunal has reviewed the
 
 
 most senior judicial appointments, but two-thirds of the judges and prosecutors re-
 main provisional, chosen by the President.
 The military and police share public security duties. Since 1980 much of their ef-
 forts have   been  directed  toward  defeating  Sendero  Luminoso   and  other
 antigovernment guerrillas. As government counterinsurgency policies became in-
 creasingly effective, the threat from Sendero greatly declined, and the human rights
 situation improved. Nonetheless, the military and the police continued to be respon-
 sible for serious human rights abuses and, except in rare cases, continued to act
 with impunity.
 Peru's mixed economy combines free market capitalism with state ownership of
 some major industries. Minerals extraction and processing account for nearly half
 the foreign exchange earnings. The Government pursued a market-oriented eco-
 nomic stabilization and structural adjustment program, including privatization of
 state-owned firms. The economy continued to recover from an economic crisis, with
 gross domestic product rising 12 percent and inflation falling to 15.3 percent. How-
 ever, the 1993 census showed that over half of Peruvians live in poverty, and nearly
 half of those in extreme poverty.
 Most of the human rights problems in 1994 continued to be related to the guer-
 rilla war, in which over 27,000 Peruvians have died due to actions and abuses by
 beth sides. The Government lifted emergency zone status, which provides for the
 suspension of certain constitutional guarantees, in six provinces in November, but
 this status continued in Lima and other provinces, affecting 48 percent of Peru's 22
 million people. While the number of human rights abuses such as extrajudicial
 killngs and disappearances are down considerably from previous years, the military
 and the police continued to be responsible for numerous extrajudicial killings, arbi-
 trary detentions, torture, rape, and disappearances. The Sendero Luminoso and
 other terrorist groups were responsible for much greater numbers of serious abuses,
 including assassinations, massacres of indigenous people, torture, and the use of
 random and specific acts of terror to intimidate the populace.
 Perpetrators of human rights violations in general continued to act with impunity.
 There was no effort to investigate the 1991 Barrios Altos or 1992 Huancayo killings.
 Congress passed a special law to prevent the trial in the La Cantuta case (in which
 army personnel abducted and killed nine students and a professor from "La
 Cantuta" University in 1992) from going to a civilian court. While a military tribu-
 nal convicted a general and eight other officers and sentenced them to jail terms,
 there was no rigorous investigation of accusations of involvement by higher officials.
 The administration of justice continued to be slow, inefficient, and frequently sub-
 ject to charges of corruption, although significant reforms are in progress. The Gov-
 ernment established two groups to review cases of individuals who had suffered pro-
 longed detention without trial or who had been wrongly arrested or convicted. It
 also repealed the Terrorist Repentance Law, the abuse of which led to large number
 of arbitrary detentions based on false accusations, but it did not address the fun-
 damental problem of lack of due process. Prison conditions remained poor, although
 the Government did improve some facilities.
 By the end of 1994, Congress had not yet created the office of the "Defender of
 the People" (which would serve as an ombudsman on human rights issues) as called
 for in the new Constitution. However, it passed legislation in October to reopen the
 offices of human rights prosecutors, which the Attorney General had closed in June
 when an executive decree restructured the Public Ministry. The Congress also cre-
 ated the National Judiciary Council to provide an independent review of current
 provisional judges and prosecutors, but it was not staffed or functioning by year's
 end. It postponed implementation of a new Criminal Procedures Code subject to a
 congressionally mandated review commission. The Government continued to criti-
 cize harshly local human rights groups, and the President publicly rejected what he
 termed "foreign interference" in human rights and democracy issues. The dialogue
 between the Government and the Coordinadora, an umbrella organization for
 human rights groups, stalled over a number of issues. Despite a generally free
 press, some journalists were occasionally threatened and harassed. Peru's large in-
 digenous population was subject to widespread discrimination. Violence against
 women remained pervasive.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extra *udicial Killing.-Since 1980 Peru has suffered a
 bloody guerrilla war waged by te terrorist groups Sendero Luminoso and the Tupac
 Amaru Revolutionary Movement (MRTA). This war has caused over 27,000 deaths
 
 
 482
 and numerous human rights abuses by both guerrillas and security forces; Sendero
 Luminoso committed more killings than the security forces.
 The Coordinadora estimated hat military forces were responsible for at least 32
 extrAjudicial killings, the rural self-defense forces known as rondas were responsible
 for 2, and the National Police for 4. Killings by the military could be even greater,
 since accordi~g to credible reports, the army killed an unknown number of civilians
 in Huanuco department in April (the Coordinadora counted 25). The reported level
 of killings by government forces was sih  higher than in 1993, but still substan-
 tially lower Than previous years. At the height of the insurgency in 1992, the
 Coordinadora estimated that security forces were responsible for 114 extrajudicial
 killings. Most of the 1994 killings took place in the Upper Huallaga valley, where
 the level of conflict was highest, and occurred in the course of a military sweep oper-
 ation in Huanuco department in April (see Section 1.g.).
 On January 20, military police detained university student Victor Raul Espinoza
 after he reportedly instigated an altercation with military personnel near the presi-
 dential palace in Lima. They turned Espinoza over to the National Police, who took
 him to a nearby police station where police reportedly tortured and killed him. Sev-
 eral hours later, the police took Espinoza's bruised body to a local hospital. Follow-
 ing an investigation, a judge found sufficient evidence to indict 14 officers. According
 to the attorney for Espinoza's family, all 14 police indicted in the case remained on
 active duty at the end of the year, the case remained open but had not yet pro-
 gressed beyond the investigative stage by the Attorney General's office.
 However, civil authorities neither investigated fully most of the remaining killings
 by security forces, nor subjected the perpetrators to judicial sanctions. In those cases
 that were token up, the armed forces relied on provisions of the Military Justice
 Code and the Constitution, the effect of which was to preempt independent civilian
 investigation and prosecution of cases involving military abuses. Although adminis-
 trative sanctions and dismissals may have been decided in some cases, this process
 often accorded impunity to the perpetrators of human rights abuses. It was unclear
 how long even those who were convicted would stay in jail, in light of credible re-
 ports that Captain Telno Hurtado, who had confessed to and was convicted for the
 1985 Accomarca massacre, had reappeared on active duty.
 In January when a civilian judge indicted several army personnel for the 1992
 abduction and execution of nine students and a professor from La Cantuta Univer-
 sity, the army refused to turn the soldiers over to civilian authorities, asserting that
 the military court system had jurisdiction. While the army kept the indictees under
 militah r detention, the authorities a ppealed the jurisdiction issue to the Supreme
 Court in early February. Before the Court could muster the required two-vote mar-
 gin in favor of either civilian or military trial the government majority in Congress
 passed a bill, subsequently signed into law y President Fujimori, that permitted
 the one-vote majority in favor of prosecution in closed military court to be sufficient.
 The military court convicted nine in the case (a general and eight other commis-
 sioned and noncommissioned officers) and imposed sentences ranging from 4 to 20
 years in prison (one was later acquitted on appeal). However, there was no rigorous
 investigation of allegations that higher-level officials had either ordered the killings
 or had covered them up. Nonetheless, this was only the third time since the onset
 of Sendero terrorism in which any court convicted military officers for extrajudicial
 killings, and included the highest ranking officer thus far convicted for such of-
 fenses.
 Sendero Luminos continued to assassinate civilians, including peasants, farmers,
 villagers, indigenous people, civil authorities and public servants, as well as 40
 mebers of the security forces. However, the number of people murdered by
 Sendero declined significantly from 516 in 1993 to 215 in 1994, as the security
 forces continued to capture terrorist leaders. In addition, the Coordinadora reported
 the MRTA responsible for 22 political assassinations and unidentified subversives
 responsible for 8. Terrorist bomb attacks killed another 14 people. In 17 other
 deaths, the Coordinadora was unable to deduce from available evidence whether the
 security forces or subversives were responsible. The number of killings committed
 by each side doubtless is undepoed because of the remoteness of many of the
 incidents and widespread distrust of the authorities and the judicial system.
 b. Disappearance.-The number of reported disappearances in 1994 was the low-
 est since 1982. The Coordinadora registered only 25 unresolved disappearances at-
 tributable to the security forces. This apparent reduction resulted from the Gvern-
 ment's decision to end in late 1992 the tacit reliance on security forces' use of dis-
 appearances that characterized the previous two governments counterinsurgency
 practices. Most of the disappearances occurred in areas where the insurgency was
 most active: Eight in Ucayai department, six in San Martin department, four in
 Lima department and the rest in four other departments. However, with disappear-
 
 
 483
 ances occurring in areas where the Coordinadora does not have a permanent pres-
 ence, these numbers are subject to change. For example, human rights observers as-
 sociated with the Coordinadora discovered that the provincial human rights prosecu-
 tors based in the cities of Huanuco and Huancayo had reported to the Attorney Gen-
 eral a higher number of 1993 disappearances in their jurisdictions than had been
 previously believed. The Coordinadora deduced that there may have been as many
 as 168 unresolved disappearances in 1993 (previous estimates had ranged from 44
 to 59). During the latter part of 1994, the Coordinadora was investigating and at-
 tempting to confirm these reports. The closure for most of the year of Public Min-
 istry human rights offices made it more difficult to track disappearances in 1994
 than in previous years.
 As in the past, the majority of complaints about disappearances in 1994 impli-
 cated members of the security forces in the emergency zones. Testimony from wit-
 nesses and survivors indicated that the most common scenario was for groups of
 men in civilian attire to abduct individuals and take them to military bases for in-
 terrogation. They later turned some over to the police for eventual terrorism trials,
 released others, but some never reappeared.
 On January 16, Orlando Lopez Villalobos was changing money at a hotel in
 Pucallpa, Ucayali department, when navy personnel forced him to give them his
 money and identity documents. He reported this act to the local Catholic vicar's of-
 fice, then went to the navy base to try to recover his money and papers. Lopez was
 never seen or heard from again. In another case in Pucallpa, navy personnel de-
 tained Segundo Fernandez Ferrari on March 20 at his home in front of relatives.
 He never returned home, and his whereabouts remain unknown.
 Acting on previsions of a decree law issued by President Fujimori, Attorney Gen-
 eral Blanca Nelida Colan shut down the Public Ministry's office of the Special Pros-
 ecutor for Human Rights, which, among other responsibilities, tracked disappear-
 ances on a full-time basis. Government officials justified this decision by citing the
 Constitution's creation of a "Defender of the People" office that would also monitor
 human rights. Byyear end, the government-controlled Congress had not passed en-
 acting legislation for the new office, but it did reopen the office of the human rights
 Srosecutor on an interim basis in November until the office of the Defender of the
 eople is established.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 Although the Constitution prohibits torture and inhuman or humiliating treatment,
 torture and brutal treatment of detainees are common. Eyewitnesses and human
 rights monitors reported that government security forces routinely tortured sus-
 pcted subversives at military and police detention centers. Justice Minister Vega
 acknowledged in November at a United Nations Human Rights Commission meeting
 in Geneva that torture had not yet been eradicated in Per but asserted that re-
 ports of torture had declined.
 Torture most often takes place in the period immediately following detention. The
 law prmits police to hold a terrorism suspect incommunicado for 15 days, and for
 another 15-day period in cases of treason (aggravated terrorism). The incidence of
 torture is high during this time, partly because the detainee is not allowed access
 to family or an attorney except when giving sworn statementto o the public prosecu-
 tr. The Government asserts that the more liberal access it previously granted re-
 sulted in alleged miscarriages of justice in favor of detained terrorists. The law re-
 quires that the authorities interrogate persons detained for terrorism in the pres-
 ence of a Public Ministry prosecutor, but they frequently violate these standards,
 especially in the emergency zones. A 1992 decree law eliminated the requirement
 that an attorney be present during the initial stages of detention and interrogation
 in terrorism or treason cases. A modification to that law, passed in 1993, permits
 a lawyer to be present when a detainee signs any written document, including his
 or her formal statement.
 On September 13, the police arrested Maria Elena Foronda, an environmentalist
 working in Chimbote, on suspicion of terrorism after a so-called repentant terrorist
 taking advantage of the amnesty law made an accusation against her. After visiting
 her in jail, Foronda's mother publicly claimed that police had beaten Foronda and
 subjected her to psychological torture in an attempt to force her to confess that she
 was a terrorist.
 In early 1994, a Coordinadora delegation visited Picsi prison near Chiclayo and
 interviewed dozens of detainees. Virtually all those interviewed complained that the
 police had tortured them during the interrogation phase of their detentions; several
 women claimed police had raped them. The Coordinadora noted that the incidence
 of torture was very high at police stations but had declined at the prison itself.
 Besides beatings, common methods of torture included electric shock, water tor-
 ture, asphyxiation, and hanging detainees on a hook from a rope attached to hands
 
 
 484
 tied behind the back. Common forms of psychological torture included sleep depriva-
 tion and death threats against both the detainee and his or her family members.
 Interrogators almost always blindfolded their victims during torture so they could
 not later identify their abusers.
 There continued to be credible reports that members of the security forces raped
 women especially in the emergency zones. Following the alleged army indiscrimi-
 nate kilngs of civilians in Molluna and Moena in April (see Section 1.g.), survivors
 claimed to have witnessed army personnel committing numerous rapes of local
 women and girls. In one scene shown on television news, a man entered Molluna
 without the knowledge or authorization of the military authorities accompanied by
 journalists, to search for his 16-year-old daughter after troops had left the area. The
 state of his daughter's remains corroborated the testimony of a witness who told
 him several soldiers had raped her. Several members of a commission sponsored by
 Congress's h uman rights committee, including representatives of the Consejo por la
 Paz (Peace Council) and the Coordinadora, visited the area and concluded that sol-
 diers had carried out at least two rapes. The authorities took no action to inves-
 tigate or punish military rapists. According to eyewitnesses, on September 22, secu-
 rity forces raided the village of Paraiso in San Martin department and raped a
 woman and a 14-year-old girl. Several days later, the lieutenant who conducted the
 raid reportedly admitted in front of Paraiso villagers and his commander in Tocache
 that he ordered the rapes, but he has not been charged in this crime.
 Many victims of Sendero terrorism also show signs of having been tortured.
 Sendero groups normally held a brief "people's trial in the presence of onlookers
 as a means of intimidation before torturing their victims. There were credible ac-
 counts that Sendero tortured people to death by means such as slitting throats,
 strangulation, stoning, and burning Mutilation of the body was common; in the
 Monterrico massacre, Sendero mem rs cut up the bodies of their victims with ma-
 chetes and axes (see Section 1.g.). In August Sendero sympathizers tortured four
 people they accused of cooperating with the police in the town of Llihuari, Huanuco
 department, for 3 days before killing them.
 Conditions for many prisoners continued to be poor, although the Government
 made a costly and extensive effort to improve existing penal facilities, construct new
 penitentiaries, and ameliorate the physical conditions of detention. Nonetheless,
 prisoners in many facilities continued to experience unsanitary facilities, poor nutri-
 tion and health care, and occasionally harsh treatment by both prison staff and fel-
 low inmates. Picsi prison near Chiclayo, for example, holds twice the number of in-
 mates for which it was designed and has no running water. Illegal drugs, tuber-
 culosis, and AIDS are at near-epidemic proportions in Lima's Lurigancho prison, the
 country's largest, containing nearly 25 percent of the male prison population. The
 prison in Huancayo is prone to flooding, and electrical wires are exposed in various
 parts of the building. Detainees, held temporarily in windowless cells in Lima's pal-
 ace of justice, are not allowed outside for exercise and fresh air and are taken to
 the bathroom only once a day.
 Since prison authorities reestablished control in 1992 in prisons formerly man-
 aged in all but name by Sendero, prisoner-on-prisoner violence and abuse of inmates
 by prison officials appears to have declined. However, corruption continued to be a
 problem among prison staff, who were implicated in offenses such as sexual black-
 mail, selling narcotics and weapons, and arranging escapes. Prisoners often have to
 bribe guards to get a mattress and report that guards subject inmates to beatings,
 torture, and degrading treatment.
 � The Government showed a greater willingness to clamp down on corruption than
 in past years. Prison authorities fired some officials at Lima's San Jorge facility for
 charrg money to permit relatives to give food and medicine to some inmates. In
 late eptember, the authorities removed from duty the warden and a number of cor-
 rupt police guards at Lurigancho prison. The Government built a number of prisons
 around the country and completed renovation of two of the largest facilities for ter-
 rorism convicts and detainees, Castro Castro in Lima and Yanamayo in Puno de-
 partment. These projects helped alleviate the severe overcrowding in the prison sys-
 tem and improved thephysical conditions in which many inmates must live.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The Constitution, the Criminal Code, and
 antiterrrist 1eislation delineate the arrest and detention process. However, a num-
 ber of constitutional protections are suspended in emergency zones. For example, se-
 curity forces do not need an arrest warrant; they may legally hold incommunicado
 those detained for treason or terrorism and deny them access to an attorney during
 the interrogtion period, except when giving formal statements.
 In areas not subject to a state of emergency, the law requires a judicial warrant
 for .arrest, unless a perpetrator is caught in the act. In adition, the Organic Law
 of the National Police-rn contradiction of the Constitution and other laws-permits
 
 
 485
 detention of an individual for any investigation. The authorities must arraign per-
 sons arrested within 24 hours (but they frequently violate this legal provision, ac-
 cording to informed observers), except in cases of terrorism, drug trafficking, or espi-
 onage, for which the limit is 15 to 30 days. If the military is the detaining authority,
 it must turn over detainees to the police within 24 hours (or as soon as practicable
 in remote areas). The military disregarded this law in many cases.
 Detainees have the right to choose their own attorney, or the Government must
 provide counsel at no cost. Often this does not occur in practice, and human rights
 monitors report instances in which court clerks (or in one case, an army cook) were
 deputized to stand in as public defenders. There is no functioning bail system, al-
 though a form of previsional liberty is theoretically available for persons not accused
 of terrorism, espionage, or narcotics offenses. A 1993 modification to antiterrorism
 legislation authorized first-instance and superior court judges to order the uncondi-
 tional release of terrorism defendants if there is insufficient evidence to bring a case
 against them. However, judges have not applied this law in practice; rather, persons
 accused of terrorism sometimes must wait until their cases have been reviewed and
 dismissed by the Supreme Court before they are freed, a process that often lasts
 more than a year after the defendant's arrest.
 Juan Mallea, an evangelical pastor who drove a taxi to help support his family,
 was arrested in July 1993 when he drove a customer to a house that was being raid-
 ed by antiterrorism police. The passenger turned out to be a member of Sendero
 Luminoso; the police accused Mallea of drawing a map found inside the house. They
 presented him publicly in striped jail clothes; Mallea later claimed that the
 antiterrorism police tortured him. Although independent handwriting experts testi-
 fied that Mallea could not have been the author of the map, and despite being ac-
 quitted by a circuit court judge, the authorities did not free him until April, when
 the Lima superior court finally ruled in his favor.
 Another 1993 modification to the antiterrorism laws restored a detainee's right to
 a prompt judicial determination of the legality of the detention ("habeas corpus").
 In practice, however, this has proven to be ineffective; according to human rights
 attorneys, judges have denied the vast majority of such requests.
 The Public Ministry inaugurated a National Registry of Detainees to track cases
 of persons arrested for terrorism offenses. Both the police and the military must re-
 port the names of anyone they detain within 24 hours. The Government also formal-
 ized the registry statutorily (it had been established provisionally in 1992) and cre-
 ated an interagency committee to oversee its operation and correct any problems.
 The Registry opened to the public in Lima in February, branch offices were inaugu-
 rated in Tarapoto, San Martin department, in September and in Ayacucho in No-
 vember. Some registry users have commented that it is incomplete and that the
 military and police frequently do not provide informations on detainees in a timely
 fashion.
 Apart from an interruption of its access in northern Huanuco department in April
 (see Section 1.g.) the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) operations
 proceeded normaly. The authorities permitted ICRC representatives to visit detain-
 ees in any place of detention, including prisons, jails, police stations, and military
 bases.
 According to Justice Minister Vega, 80 percent of the country's prison population,
 or 16,000 of the 20,000 prisoners, consisted of accused persons awaiting trial. The
 special terrorism prosecutor's office reported that 4,888 persons awaited trial for ter-
 rorism or treason as of August 31. The average delay between arrest and civilian
 trial on criminal or terrorism charges was between 26 and 36 months. However,
 those tried on treason charges by military courts generally wait no longer than 40
 days between the time of detention and the beginning of the trial.
 Persons accused of terrorism must remain in custody while awaiting trial, no mat-
 ter how little evidence there is against them. During this time, only immediate fam-
 ily members may visit them for a total of 15 minutes per month. Since the
 antiterrorism decrees took effect in 1992, there were numerous instances when the
 authorities arrested and detained people with very weak or no evidence against
 them. The police arrested Jesus Alfonso Castiglione, the owner and operator of a
 radio station in Huacho, in April 1993 when some of his possessions were found in
 an apartment in another city where a known terrorist was captured. Castiglione had
 been a tenant in the apartment a year before; he had left some of his belongings
 there as a security deposit and was unaware that the owner had decided to rent
 the apartment to someone else after he moved out. Despite the lack of evidence link-
 ing him to terrorism, a court convicted Castiglione in August, and he began serving
 a 20-year sentence while awaiting action on an appeal to the Supreme Court.
 Although government regulations to end public displays of detainees were issued
 in January 1995, there were numerous cases in 1994 in which police or the military
 
 
 486
 presented detainees in striped jail clothes to the media as terrorists. Occasionally
 such detainees were acquited because they were innocent or for lack of evidence;
 many of those acquitted charged that they had been stigmatized by these public dis-
 plays.
 There were a number of arbitrary detentions as a result of abuse and
 misapplication of the Terrorist Amnesty Law, which Congress repealed effective No-
 vember 1. Under its provisions, terrorists could have their sentences reduced or sus-
 pended if they gave authorities the names of terrorist leaders. This plea-bargaining
 option led many terrorists to accuse innocent people of being subversives, and the
 authorities detained hundreds of people around the country solely on the basis of
 such accusations.
 The plice first arrested journalist Javier Tuanama in October 1990 and accused
 him of belonging to MRTA. After a long judicial process, the courts finally acquitted
 Tuanama in March and released him from prison. However, just after he walked
 out of jail, the police rearrested him on another outstanding warrant: a "repentant"
 terrorist had accused Tuanama of recruiting young people for MRTA in Amazonas
 department in December 1990 (when he was in jail). A court acquitted Tuanama
 of two charges, but then sentenced him to 10 years in prison based on a third charge
 that he had given refuge to repentant MRTA members, despite retractions by the
 two terrorists who accused him. Tuanama has spent 4 years in prison.
 The Government created two separate commissions to review cases of peojple un-
 fairly detained for Iong periods. An executive branch commission, formed m Feb-
 ruary and consisting of several lawyers, reviews cases of individuals detained on ter-
 rorism charges. A second commission, established by the Congress in June and in-
 stalled in December, will review both terrorism and criminal cases and recommend
 presidential "grace" for detainees who have waited long periods without a trial and
 who appear to be innocent.
 Inconsistencies in the application of the terrorist amnesty law were also apparent.
 In October, in contravention of the anonymity clause in the law, President Fujimori
 publicly named a university rector and a superior court judge as repentant terror-
 ists. The authorities detained the rector, Abner Chavez, and the judge, Luis
 Galindo, for 1 month after Fujimori's statement. After their release Chavez and
 Galindo denied having been Sendero supporters and announced plans to seek res-
 titution for having been falsely accused.
 Although the Constitution does not explicitly prohibit it, the Government did not
 practice involuntary exile of its citizens. Several public figures, however, remained
 in voluntary exile to escape what they perceived to be political persecution. Al-
 though others claimed they were in exile, they apparently fled from what appeared
 to be legitimate criminal charges.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The Peruvian system of criminal justice is gen-
 erally based on the Napoleonic Code. A Public Ministry prosecutor investigates ar-
 rests and criminal complaints and then submits an opinion to a first-instance judge,
 who decides whether to indict. Following study of the case, the judge renders a ver-
 dict, which is then reviewed by a superior court prosecutor. The superior court pros-
 ecutor then submits an opinion on the case to a superior court judge, who holds a
 trial. Terrorism cases, on the other hand, are tried by anonymous superior court tri-
 bunals made up of three judges. Virtually all civilian court convictions are appealed
 to the Supreme Court.
 Defendants have the right to be present at their trial, although there were in-
 stances of trials in absentia of fugitives (however, a 1993 modification to
 antiterrorism laws eliminated convictions in absentia). Although there were trials
 in absentia, they did not lead to convictions, but to acquittals or judgments in re-
 serve until the defendant was in custody. Defendants have the right to counsel, but
 the Government often does not provide the indigent with qualified attorneys. Fol-
 lowing an investigation and filing of charges, a judge renders a verdict. Sentences
 may be appealed to a panel of judges.
 The judicial branch rarely has been fully independent of the executive. However,
 the 1993 Constitution contains a number of provisions, including an improved sys-
 tem for naming judges, that provides for a significantly more independent judiciary.
 President Fujimori provisionally appointed some two-thirds of the incumbent judges
 and prosecutors after he seized extraconstitutional powers in 1992. In 1993 the new
 Congress appinted an independent tribunal to review the 1992 dismissals of hun-
 dreds of judicial officials, to examine the qualifications of President Fujimori's ap
 pointees, and to replace those found to be unqualified. By December this tribunal
 completed its review of all the judges and prosecutors in Lima The tribunal found
 a large number of prvisional judges and prosecutors unqualified and replaced
 them. Human rights groups and independent observers applauded many of the
 
 
 changes, and reports of corruption decreased with respect to the reformed jurisdic-
 tions. At year's end, Judicial officials outside Lima had not been reviewed.
 The legislative and executive branches openly interfered with an ongoing judicial
 branch action when, in February, they approved a law that imposed a new voting
 formula on Supreme Court decisions concerning civil versus military jurisdiction.
 This law in effect gave jurisdiction over a sensitive human rights case (the La
 Cantuta case-see Section L.a.) to the military court system.
 There continued to be widespread charges of corruption and of suborning of
 judges, prosecutors, police, and witnesses at all stages of the judicial process, al-
 though the number of complaints in Lima decreased significantly after permanent
 judges were named to the Supreme and superior courts. Government efforts to re-
 duce corruption included a sa.ry raise for judges and a more active judicial branch
 control mechanism to investigate allegations of bribes. This office of control dis-
 missed 19 career judges and 33 provisional judges for misconduct during the year;,
 it fined another 215; and it admonished 439 for various irregularities. The Govern-
 ment's 1995 budget allocations include a 70 percent real increase in funds for the
 judiciary and a 149 percent real increase for the Public Ministry, whose responsibil-
 ities will dramatically increase once the long-delayed new Criminal Procedures Code
 is brought into force. The high cost of litigation limited access to the judicial system,
 as did the lack of public judicial services m many isolated areas of the country.
 Civilian courts made limited progress in tackling the judicial backlog, a product
 of inefficiency, lack of infrastructure and personnel, archaic case law and criminal
 procedure law, and the high number of terrorism cases. According to the National
 Prisons Institute, there were 13,791 detainees awaiting trial throughout the country
 on June 30. Meanwhile, a backlog of 800 to 1,000 cases challenging the constitu-
 tionality of laws or official actions remained pending in the absence of actions to
 establish the Tribunal of Constitutional Guarantees provided for in the new Con-
 stitution.
 Sendero and MRTA threats and intimidation of judges were one of the justifica-
 tions for President Fujimori's overhaul of the antiterrorism trial system in 1992. Ci-
 vilian courts now try terrorism cases in anonymous tribunals made up of three
 "faceless" judges. An August 1992 decree law classified many terrorism cases as
 treason and therefore triable by military courts; the lesser cases are heard by civil-
 ian tribunals. In November Justice Minister Vega announced that he had proposed
 an end to the use of faceless judges to try civilians accused of terrorism, an end to
 military tribunal jurisdiction over civilians, and an end to the trial by faceless
 judges of minors charged with terrorism. These proposals were before the Council
 of Ministers at year's end.
 Between September 1992 and August 1994, according to the official government
 newspaper, the military courts remanded 122 cases to civilian jurisdiction after find-
 ing that there was not enough evidence to try some individuals for treason. In-
 formed observers believe that antiterrorism police in effect decide which cases are
 tried in military courts and which are tredm civilian courts. According to various
 human rights observers, approximately 80 percent of treason trials in military
 courts resulted in convictions; civilian terrorism tribunals, in contrast, convict only
 around 60 percent. Treason convictions carry sentences from 30 years to life in pris-
 on; there were 217 persons serving life sentences for treason at the end of 1994.
 Proceedings in military courts do not meet internationally accepted standards for
 due process. Military trials are closed to the public and carried out in secrecy. De-
 fense attorneys d not have access to the evidence, nor can they interview police
 or military witnesses (to protect their identities) prior to or during the trial. Military
 judes, rarely have any legal background; they are active duty line officers. However,
 military justice system officials say they are making efforts to increase the number
 of judges with legal backgrounds. Military tribunals in theory must pass judgment
 within 10 days. A case may be appealed to the War Council, which has 1iP days to
 make a decision. A final appal to the Supreme Council of Military Justice must
 be acted on within 5 days. However, this calendar is subject to delays in a number
 of cases. Human rights groups charge that military trials have railroaded some de-
 fendants and sentenced them before their lawyers were even notified that the trial
 had begun.
 Statistics for military prosecutions of civilians suggested greater care and selectiv-
 ity in the application of treason laws to the most serious cases. In 1994 military
 courts prosecuted civilians in 356 treason cases compared to 315 in 1993, but im-
 posed life sentences on 72 persons, compared to 117 in 1993. Although the proceed-
 ings in military courts for all practical purposes are summary, not all those pros-
 ecuted are convicted. The military courts acquitted defendants in 7 cases and re-
 manded 53 cases to civil athorities. The Government has publicly recognized that
 military trials of civilians are a temporary, extraordinary measure out of step with
 
 
 international norms, to be reformed as soon as the situation in its judgment per-
 mits. The authorities also began a review process of military trials. In late 1993
 this review process absolved Miguel Ruiz-Conejo, who had been wrongly convicted
 of treason in a military court, and ordered his release. In 1994 a special military
 tribunal annulled five life sentences after discovering procedural and other errors
 in reviewing those trials.
 In late April, the Government postponed indefinitely implementation of a new
 Criminal Procedures Code that was to have taken effect on May 1. The new Code
 would have instituted accusatorial investigative and trial procedures. Instead, the
 Government established an interagency commission to "reconcile" the Code with the
 1993 Constitution and present the Congress with a plan for the gradual application
 of the revised Code. Informed observers claimed that the Government postponed the
 Code's implementation because the National Police were unhappy with provisions
 that would grant more investigative authority to prosecutors; because the armed
 forces opposed a provision that would mean prosecution of military personnel in ci-
 vilian court for crimes such as murder that do not come under the Military Code
 of Justice; and because the Public Ministry was not prepared in terms of budget or
 personnel to put the new Code into practice.
 In 1993 an international panel of distinguished jurists visited Peru and studied
 the legal and judicial system to determine whether or not there was adequate due
 process, particularly in terrorism trials. The panel recommended eliminating mili-
 tary trials of civilians and reintroducing precepts of due process suspended by the
 1992 antiterrorism decrees. When the jurists made their report public in April,
 President Fujimori and his Justice Minister rejected it as interference in Peru's in-
 ternal affairs. The Government maintained that further changes in the law and pro-
 cedures used in treason and terrorism cases must be linked to progress in pacifica-
 tion, as well as to reform of the judicial branch. The jurists' report stimulate a seri-
 ous public debate.
 The new Constitution provides for several new judicial institutions to help create
 a more effective and independent system of justice: an Office of the Defender of the
 People (a human rights ombudsman); a Tribunal of Constitutional Guarantees
 (which would rule on the constitutionality of legislation and government actions);
 the National Judiciary Council (a permanent, independent entity in charge of test-
 ,naming, confirming, and periodically evaluating and disciplining the country's
 and prosecutors; and a Judicial Academy (to train judges and prosecutors).
 The Congress passed legislation to define the structure and functions of only the
 last two institutions; it had not established the other entities by the end of the year,
 but did create the Tribunal of Constitutional Guarantees in January 1995.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Constitution requires security forces to have a judicial warrant to enter a private
 dwelling, but this requirement is suspended in the emergency zones, and security
 forces in those areas routinely conduct searches of private homes without warrants.
 The law requires that a Public Ministry prosecutor be present during searches.
 There were plausible reports that, on occasion, police planted subversive pamphlets
 in the homes of persons they suspected of terrorism but could not otherwise arrest
 for lack of evidence. There were frequent credible reports of illegal telephone wire-
 taps. In August and September, several prominent journalists, opposition politi-
 cians, and retired military officers made credible claims that the Government's in-
 telligence services followed them, videotaped them, and recorded their private con-
 versations.
 In Lima and other urban areas, the army conducted "sweep" operations in which
 soldiers surrounded and sealed off targeted neighborhoods to conduct house-to-house
 searches. They detained persons wanted for a crime and held for questioning those
 found with unregistered weapons, subversive material, or without identity docu-
 ments. Public prosecutors routinely accompany these operations, and citizens made
 few complaints of serious abuses stemming from them.
 A number of rural ommunities--with arms, training, and encouragement from
 the army--have organized self-defense forces, or rndas, to protect themselves
 against terrorist and bandit incursions. These have had a noticeable impact on curb-
 ing Sendero's presence in certain areas of the country. In some parts ofPeru, rondas
 have existed for centuries as a form of social organization and to protect commu-
 nities from invaders and rustlers. However, military authorities organized many of
 the newer rondas and sometimes coerced peasants into participating. As a regular
 practice and to a far greater degree, Sendero also forced peasants to join its military
 ranks, often for extended periods, coercing their participation in terrorist attacks
 and executions.
 g. Use of Excessive Force and Violations of Humanitarian Law in Internal Con-
 flicts.-Although the Government stated that its security forces did not have a pol-
 
 
 489
 icy of indiscriminate violence against civilians army troops nevertheless killed an
 undetermined number of noncombatants in te Upper Huallaga valley. Between
 March 29 and March 31, according to witnesses who testified before the local pros-
 ecutor, an army patrol detained and then killed between 8 and 12 villagers in
 Cayumba Chic, south of the city of Tingo Maria in Huanuco department. The army
 also began to deny access to the zone nort h of Tingo Maria and west of the Huallaga
 river to delegates of the ICRC. In the course of a claimed major sweep between
 April 5 and April 8, members of the army, using bth heliopters and ground troops,
 entered the settlements of Moiluna and oena an, according to similar, credible
 accounts by numerous eyewitnesses, indiscriminately killed most of the population.
 In some cases rape and torture preceded the killing. The army reportedly fired rock-
 eta from helicopters at the settlements.
 The exact number of dead was difficult to determine because the army closed the
 zone to nonmilitary personnel for 7 weeks during which time remains could have
 been moved or buried, and because many o the residents were transient farm work-
 ers whose only relatives were unlikely to report them as missing. The Coordinadora
 decided to list only 25 persons as victims of the army operation-the only ones who
 could be identified by name, based on eyewitness reports and identified remains.
 The armed forces, the Congress and the Attorney General's office undertook inves-
 tigations into these killings. In November a special prosecutor responsible for inves-
 tigating this incident brought charges in a civilian court against an army captain
 for ordering the deaths of at least eight persons. The army subsequently undertook
 other large-scale operations in other regions of the country without new claims of
 abuses, possibly indicating that commanders made a conscious effort to avoid what
 happened in April.
 Although both the army and Sendero Luminoso violated humanitarian law in
 Peru's internal conflict, the latter was responsible for many more heinous violations
 than the former. Sendero frequently used arbitrary violence against civilians and
 nonmilitary targets. It continued to detonate powerful bombs in public places, indis-
 criminately killing and injuring dozens of bystanders, and persisted in its practice
 of entering villages and killing residents. Many of the victims were unarmed women
 and children. Terrorist bomb attacks perpetrated by Sendero and MRTA killed 14
 people and injured 86.
 In April, in one of its more gruesome massacres, a Sendero Luminoso column en-
 tered the village of Monterrico in the Mazamari district of Junin department,
 burned down houses, and tortured and beheaded 18 residents. In the same area in
 August residents discovered graves of several Ashaninka Indians believed to have
 been killed by Sendero (see also Section 5).
 In armed confrontations, Sendero never took prisoners or attended to the wound-
 ed; its normal aim was to kill as many people as possible. Sendero also practiced
 forced military conscription of both adults and children. The law prohibits military
 conscription of children, and government forces respected this prohibition.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of speech
 and freedom of the press. While the Government generally respected this provision,
 there were many instances when government officials or members of the security
 forces harassed media representatives. The Government also used its economic
 power and the legal system to exert influence over the media.
 The media represent a wide spectrum of information and opinion, with 8 tele-
 vision stations, 3 cable systems, 72 radio stations, and 16 daily newspapers in Lima
 alone. The media regularly criticize the Government and its policies. The Govern-
 ment owns a television network, a daily newspaper, and a radio station, none of
 which is particularly influential.
 Opposition political parties and factions have access to the media. Television sta-
 tions, although generally progovernment, provide regular access to opposition fig-
 ures on a variety of news and public affairs programs. The written press is defined
 by extremes, with many leading newspapers and magazines either strongly for or
 against the Government.
 The Government took steps to eliminate the applicability to the media of the Con-
 stitution's "habeas data" provision. This legal mechanism gives citizens the right to
 demand rectification for articles or reports they consider slanderous. Many journal-
 ists viewed this provision as a potential tool to censor and harass the press. As a
 result of these concerns, the government majority in Congress voted 56 to 1 on Au-
 gust 18 to remove from the Constitution the portion of the "habeas data" clause re-
 lated to the press. Iocal journalists praised this action, as did the Inter-American
 Press Society which called the vote an important step towards full observance of
 press freedom." However, the measure will not become law until the Congress ap-
 
 
 490
 
 proves it a second time in a subsequent legislative session and the President signs
 On several isolated occasions, government officials took measures that interfered
 with press freedom. On April 16, President Fu'imoi personally ordered a Reuter
 television crew to erase video footage it had taken during his visit to a maximum
 security prison in Puno, which showed Sender Luminoso prisoners reading a state-
 ment about their support for a then secret peace letter. The foreign correspondents'
 association protested the action but received no response from the Government.
 Also in April, the military justice system indicted six retired generals on charges
 of "insulting the armed forces." The retired officers had, in various press interviews,
 criticized decisions by the army leadership. Despite their retired status, they were
 subjected to court-martial. In addition, a military court summoned a journalist for
 the opposition daily La Republica in April to explain his February 13 interview with
 one of the indicted generals who had criticized the army's handling of the La
 Cantuta case.
 On April 30, army personnel arrested and beat radio journalist Cesar Flores in
 Huanta, Ayacucho department. The day before, Flores had denounced the army's
 mistreatment of another journalist. The army held Flores at the local army base for
 6 days on trumped-up charges that he had not done his obligatory military duty.
 In March a Lima radio journalist began receiving anony     us telephone cis
 threatening him with death if he did not stop criticizing the Government. When the
 journalist complained to police, they sent him official notices to appear for interroga-
 tion regarding alleged terrorist actions that had occurred in far-off provinces. The
 harassment stopped after international human rights monitors expressed interest in
 the case.
 On September 2, the commander of the first military region, army Lieutenant
 General Howard Rodriguez, ordered his staff to expose the Film of a La Republica
 photographer who had shot footage showing the General handing out calendars and
 posters of President Fujimori. General Rodriguez also allegedly threatened the re-
 porter. Although observers agreed that the Generals original activities constituted
 a probable violation of the constitutionally mandated political neutrality of the
 armed forces, the authorities took no action against him.
 The authorities continued to detain 15 journalists for trial on terrorism charges
 at the end of 1994; the courts acquitted 13 others of terrorism charges during the
 year. However, their detentions di not appear to be the result of a government pol-
 icy to persecute journalists.
 The Government also exercises substantial influence over the media through the
 placement of advertisements. Some media owners claim that the Government also
 encourages private advertisers to boycott oppsition publications and uses tax inves-
 tigations to harass the opposition media. l.any media owners are involved in other
 economic activities that require government licensing or involve bidding on govern-
 ment contracts. All these factors result in a degree of self-censorship, particularly
 in the broadcast media.
 The Government often restricted opposition media access by refusing to send news
 releases and other information to some magazines and limiting access to official
 transportation when the President visited remote parts of the country or traveled
 to other nations. However, after widespread criticism of the secrecy that character-
 ized the army's April sweep operation in Huanuco department, the military authori-
 ties began to report publicly on a more regular basis the results of their operations.
 The Government also used the legal system to keep opposition journalists off bal-
 ance. Enrique Zileri, publisher of the opposition weekly magazine Caretas, was sub-
 ject to a judicial order to seize his possessions in July. The judge who signed the
 order immediately took a vacation, leaving a substitute judge to carry out the ac-
 tion. The attempted seizure resulted from accusations by a convicted felon who ob-
 jected to his name being used in a Caretas story on drug trafficking. The case had
 supposedly ended some time earlier, when the superior court had ruled in Zileri's
 favor, yet somehow a second case for the same alleged offense was initiated. Last-
 minute action by Zileri and his attorney prevented the police contingent that a&-
 peared on his doorstep from enforcing the seizure. An editorial in the July 27 e
 tion of the conservative daily newspaper El Comercio said the case had "awakened
 suspicions" about the "series of intimidating actions taken against" members of the
 political opposition.
 As with other sectors of society, the media were not immune to Senders Luminoso
 attacks. The most notorious example of Senders violence against the media occurred
 on March 14, when the house of Patricio Ricketts, a columnist with the daily news-
 paper Expreso was bombed. The attack, which killed a passerby and wounded
 Ricketts' daughter, appeared to be in retaliation for a Ricketts column titled
 "Senders is annihilatea, which had appeared in Expreso the previous day. Officials
 
 
 at Channel 2, the most progovernment television station (and the site of a 1992
 Sendero car-bombing), also reported receiving regular Sendero threats. Even opposi-
 tion-leaning Channel 9 arranged for a group of soldiers to occupy a floor of its
 central office building as a form of insurance against Sendere attacks.
 The Government generally respected academic freedom as long as it did not in-
 volve direct confrontation with security practices. The Government usually does not
 interfere in the teaching, discussion, or publication of a variety of opinions; however,
 all forms of indoctrination by subversive groups are prohibited, and teachers who
 express support of terrorist ideology are subject to prosecution.
 Sender and, to a lesser extent, META, have or a long time used threats and
 abuse against faculty, staff, and students in an effort to gain control of a number
 of universities. However, since the military took control of campus security at sev-
 eral universities in 1991 and 1992, the terrorist groups have maintained a lower
 profile.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution expressly
 provides for these rights, and the authorities normally respect them in practice, ex-
 cept in areas under a state of emergency (where the right of assembly is suspended).
 Public meetings in plazas or streets require advance permission, which may be de-
 nied only for reasons of public safety or health. Municipal authorities usually ap-
 proved permits for demonstrations in Lima and nonemergency zones. Unauthorized
 public meetings occurred, and the police occasionally used clubs, tear gas, and water
 cannons to break up marches or disperse large crowds, sometimes using excessive
 force. The police interrupted both unruly and peaceful gatherings this way in Lima,
 using these tactics against striking public service workers, small political rallies,
 and a march by students protesting human rights violations. In October police fired
 on a union march by dock workers in the port city of Callao, wounding two protest-
 ers.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for freedom of religion, and the
 Government respects this provision in practice. The Constitution recognizes Roman
 Catholicism "as an important element in the historical, cultural, and moral develop-
 ment of the nation,* but also establishes the separation of church and State. Conver-
 sion to other religions is respected, and missionaries are allowed to enter the coun-
 try and proselytize.
 Sender Luminoso rejects religion and continued to threaten and intimidate reli-
 gious workers. In addition to threats, Sendero terrorists threw a stick of dynamite
 at a Mormon chapel in Chilca in June.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Constitution provides for the right of free movement, and there are
 no political or legal constraints on foreign travel or emigration. However, the au-
 thorities can restrict people with pending criminal and, in some cases, civil charges
 from leaving the country. Freedom of movement is suspended in the emergency
 zones but is generally permitted under control of the army. Nonetheless, the au-
 thorities may detain travelers in the emergency zones at any time. During the
 army's operation in northern Huanuco department in April, the army closed a zone
 north of Tingo Maria and west of the Huallaga river for several weeks (see Section
 'he Constitution prohibits the revocation of citizenship. Repatriates (both vol-
 untary and involuntary) are not treated any differently than other citizens. Peru
 has provisions for granting asylum and refugee status; the procedures have been
 used by small groups of persons in recent years, principally Cubans. Refugees are
 not forced to return to countries in which they fear persecution.
 On occasion, Sendr tried to interrupt free movement within the country, con-
 ducting "armed strikes" during which civilians were told to stay home or risk repris-
 als. Public and private vehicles operating during such strikes were subject to attack.
 Sendr's armed strikes were significantly less successful in 1994 than in previous
 years.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 The Constitution provides for the right of citizens to choose and change the laws
 and officials that govern them, and citizens exercise this right in practice. Voting
 is mandatory by secret ballot for all citizens between the ages of 18 and 70; how-
 ever, prisoners and members of the armed forces and police are ineligible to vote.
 The law bars only groups that advocate violent overthrow of the Government from
 participating in the political process. The Fujimori administration tolerated opposi-
 tion groups representing a wide variety of opinion and ideology and did not hinder
 them from criticizing the Government.
 
 
 492
 
 The campaign for the 1995 presidential and congressional elections began in late
 1994. Under a provision of the new Constitution, President Fujimori will seek re-
 election. In October an unprecedented 26 political groups representing a wide politi-
 cal spectrum launched presidential bids, though the ndependent National Elections
 Board "..diualified nearly half for failure to meet registration requirements.
 Opposition politicians, human rights groups, and the media all complained of the
 incumbent's unfettered access to government resources to promote his candidacy.
 There were already a limited number of reports of instances of irregularities in the
 campaign, such as government harassment of, and spying on, opposition members.
 Nevertheless, o pposition candidates were able to campaign across the country and
 hold rallies (including in the government-declared emergency zones), buy advertise-
 ments, and speak freely to the press.
 There are no laws that restrict women and minorities from participating in gov-
 ernment and politics; both women and minorities (including indigenous people), for
 example, are represented in the Congress and some senior government leadership
 positions. There are 7 congresswomen out of 80 members. Two of the 14 cabinet
 ministers and several vice ministers are women, as is the Attorney General and a
 supreme court justice. Four of the 26 people declaring candidacies in the 1995 presi-
 dential campaign were women, though 2 failed to meet election board requirements,
 and 1 later withdrew.
 President Fujimori is from a racial minority. There are two or three indigenous
 congressmen, and one recent vice president was a Quechua speaker. There are some
 indigenous prosecutors and one of the declared presidential candidates is a
 Quechua speaker from Ancash. However, it is difficult for indigenous people to reach
 the highest leadership levels in both the public and private sectors. Discrimination
 has often led to exclusion of these groups from leadership positions in government
 and business (see Section 5).
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 The Government allowed numerous nongovernmental organizations (NGO's) dedi-
 cated to monitoring and advancing human rights to operate independently, although
 government officials often criticized them. The military often restricted the ability
 of local and international human rights workers to investigate human rights abuses-
 the Government usually ignored human rights groups' requests for information; and
 it prohibited many human rights monitors-but not the ICRC-from visiting key
 prisons. Verbal attacks by the Government against both domestic and international
 human rights monitors suggested a hardening of the Fujimori administration's atti-
 tude toward the role of NGO's (especially those associated with foreigners) in bring-
 ig human rights abuses to public attention. Legitimate fears of physical attack by
 Sendero severely limited the ability of human rights monitors to carry out their
 work.
 The vast majority of Peruvian human rights NGO's are independent and generally
 objective in their views. Several private human rights gups joined in 1985 to form
 an umbrella organization known as the National Coordinating Committee for
 Human Rights, or Coordinadora. Over 40 groups from around the country are either
 voting or o server members of the Coordinadora. The Coordinadora maintains a pol-
 icy of not mixing politics with human rights (although its individual members may
 occasionally do so but not under the Coordinadora's name), and its members func-
 tion as credible, thorough, and impartial observers. The previously established dia-
 log between the Government and the Coordinadora stalled over dissatisfaction with
 progress on key agenda items and Congress' action in the La Cantuta case.
 Local groups repeatedly denounced Sendero Luminoso as the largest violator of
 human rights in Peru, while simultaneously documenting the many violations by
 government forces. In fact, strong documentary evidence proves that Coordinadora
 members have been balanced in their denunciations of abuses by both sides. Never-
 theless, President Fujimori, other government officials, members of the business
 community, and the progoverment press often unfairly accused human rights
 groups of being defenders of terrorism and of criticizing only government abuses, not
 those of Sendero. For example, in January government-party Congresswoman Mar-
 tha Chavez called for greater congressional oversight of NGO's on the grounds that
 some of them were allegedly "financing terrorism." However, she produced no evi-
 dence to prove her accusation. The Coordinadora and other organizations responded
 by noting that by law their accounting was transparent and proved that they were
 not channeling funds to terrorist groups.
 In April the Government's public attacks on human rights groups stepped up as
 those groups denounced the reported army killings in sweep operations in Huanuco
 department. President Fujimon criticized human rights organizations, claiming they
 
 
 493
 had not denounced human rights violations by terrorists. Health Minister Jaime
 Freundt publicly accused human rights NGO's of defending Sendero Luminoso. In
 addition to reversing for 7 weeks the policy of allowing the ICRC access to the zone
 where the operation took place, the politlcal-military commander of the Huallaga
 front, where the Huanuco killings took place, alleged to the media in April that the
 ICRC was collaborating with terrorists. Finally, on April 27, the government-con-
 trolled Congress passed a resolution condemning the Coordinadra for supposedly
 lying and exaggerating its denunciations of the Huanuco killings and thereby "dam-
 aging the image and prestige of Peru."
 In early May, a Ministry of the Presidency official, Dora Solari, and a govern-
 ment-party congressman, Hugo Zamatta, without offering proof, accused unnamed
 NGO's of having links to terrorism. Also in May executive branch officials, including
 President Fujimori and Justice Minister Vega, boycotted a visit by Pierre Sane, the
 Secretary General of Amnesty International; Vega wrote to Sane before the visit
 telling him he was not welcome in Peru. Executive branch officials also refused to
 meet With a human rights delegation from the New York Bar Association and would
 not permit the delegates to visit any of the country's prisons. In late September,
 President Fujimori again criticized international human rights organizations, alleg-
 ing that they were "defending the human rights of terrorists and not the public.'
 A few days later the Congress passed a motion authorizingits oversight committee
 to investigate NGO's use of funds. In December President Fujimori publicly labeled
 the Coordinadra as terrorist accomplices for its alleged "complicitous silence: In
 a spirited public rebuttal the next day  the Coordinadra Executive Secretary point-
 ed out that since its foundation the (oordinadora had condemned acts committed
 by Sendero and MRTA.
 Some human rights workers were the subject of threats and harassment from un-
 known sources. One, who worked for a Lima-based human rights group and a local
 radio station, received repeated anonymous telephone calls advising him to stop
 criticizing the Government or he would be killel In October a judge issued an ar-
 rest warrant for another human rights monitor working for a church _group in
 Chimbote because he was reportedly associated with two environmentalists detained
 on terrorism chares. Human rights groups affirmed the innocence of both the envi-
 ronmentalists and-the monitor.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Languae, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution provides for equal rights for all citizens and spcifically prohibits
 discrimination based on ethnic origin, race, gender, language, r~eligion, opmion, or
 economic condition. Nevertheless, discrimination against women and minorities is
 extensive. Discrimination based on .sexual preference is also frequent. According to
 Peru's only gay rights group, rthe Homosexual Mavement of Lima, gays and lesbi "ans
 are often the target.of harassment by poice, who rarely investigate hate crimes
 against them. On August 1l,.police raided a gay bar in Lima, allegedly beat some
 o the  ratons, and arrested 76 people without n king.any charges. Tiney held some
 of the customers in custody for 7 hours before releasing them.
 Women-The Constitution grants women equality ith men, and laws on mar-
 riage, divorce. and property rights d not discriminate against women. Nevertheless,
 tradition often impedes access by women to leadership roles in major social, busi-
 ness, and poltitia i tutions. However, there is a tmall but growing number of
 women in leadership positions in the Gvernmenr (see Section 3).
 Violence against women, including rap and spousal abuse, is a chronic problem,
 according to local women's groups and law enforcement offices. On average there
 were 326 complaints of violencH against women .per month, according to these
 sources. In the last 10 years, there were over 59,600 reported cases of violence
 against women; many additional cases, howeyer, go unrep rted. There are special
 women's police stations in Lima and other major iti"es to eal with the rising num-
 ber of complaints of domestic violence. In addition, women's groups have established
 legal aid and health centers for women. Judicial authorities d take legal action
 against perpetrators of domestic violence. However, one of the reasons that special
 womens POlice stations were established was that regular policemen often do not
 take seriously accusations by women against their husblands. Although the Govern-
 ment has passed strong legislation against domestic violence, this is not always
 translated into action at lower levels, especially outside the major cities.
 Although prhiited by law, sexual harassment in the workplace is a common
 problem. According to a study by the Flora Tristan Women's Center, 62 percent of
 working women knew of cases of sexual harassment in the workplace. Women's
 groups assert that this problem is on the rise and is exacerbated by the country's
 high rate of unemployment.
 
 
 Sendero Luminoso also targeted women's organizations, claiming that communal
 kitchens and the "glass of milk" program-managed principally by women-have
 links with the Government.
 Children.-The Government does not adequately address children's human rights
 and welfare. President Fujimori has on numerous occasions emphasized the need to
 improve education at all levels but the Government does not provide sufficient
 funding for the public schools. Millions of children suffer from malnutrition and live
 in extreme poverty. In addition, minors can be tried as adults for terrorism offenses
 (see below).
 A large percentage of children are born out of wedlock; many fathers fail to sup-
 port their children. In addition, orphans have become common, due in large part to
 the guerrilla war;, one newspaper estimated the number of war orphans at 55,000.
 It is not unusual for indigent parents to give up their children, either through adop-
 tion or by sending them away as house servants. In Lima alone, there are thou-
 sands ofhomeless, orphaned, or abandoned children. Many children are forced to
 work in the informal economy to support themselves; according to the Movement of
 Children of Christian Workers, the number of children under the age of 16 obliged
 to work exceeds 200 000.
 Violence against children is a serious problem. Approximately half of all rapes are
 perpetrated against minors. According to the director of Lima's children's hospital,
 600,000 children have been the victims of abandonment and physical violence.
 Decree Law 25564, issued by President Fujimori in June 1992, provides for mi-
 nors aged 15 to 18 to be tried as adults for terrorism offenses. The law was issued
 in response to Sendero's frequent use of minors in acts of terrorism. Several dozen
 minors are awaiting trial or serving time in various prisons. In October 1993, the
 Children's Rights Committee of the United Nations reported that Peruvian minors
 accused of terrorism "do not benefit from the safegua  or guarantees normally of-
 fered by the juvenile administration of justice system."
 Although hampered by a lack of resources, the Government has taken some meas-
 ures to safeguard children's rights. For example, in February the Government stiff-
 ened the penalties for rape and violence against children; conviction of rape of a
 minor can now mean life imprisonment depending on the circumstances. The Jus-
 tioe Ministry administers several children a defense centers around the country
 which work to protect the rights of children and deal with cases of violence against
 minors. In 1994 training for police officers included a course on children's rights.
 In addition the Government announced it would build 30 to 40 homes for orphaned
 and abandoned children; it inaugurated one of these shelters in Lima in September.
 Indigenous People.-The 1993 Constitution prohibits discrimination base don race
 and guarantees the right of all citizens to speak their native language. However,
 Peru sarn indigenous population faces pervasive discrimination and social preju-
 dice, in addition to suffering many of the severe human rights abuses cited in this
 report. Because of geogra phic isolation, government centralization, lack of organiza-
 tion, and social marginalization, indigenous people are in general unable to partici-
 pate in decisions affecting their lands, cultures, traditions, and the allocation of nat-
 ural resources. These decisions are made by the central Government in Lima. Par-
 ticularly in the jungle regions, colonists, coca cultivators, guerrillas, and business
 interests steadily encroach on native lands, many seeking to exploit natural re-
 sources. Indigenous groups fear that Articles 88 and 89 of the Constitution, which
 assign to the State any native lands "in abandonment," will mean the loss and sale
 to commercial interests of traditional land. Seine Amazon groups have expressed
 concern over the possible effects on their communities and the environment of oil
 and gas exploration in the Camisea area. Malnutrition and disease are rampant
 among many of these trbes.
 The law generally protects the civil and political rights of indigenous people to the
 same extent as the rights of other citizens. However, many indigenous groups live
 in isolated areas, which affect the Government's ability to offer them services, secu-
 rity, and enforcement and protection of civil and ritical rights.
 ups are speakers o Quechuna and Aymara (recognized
 as officiaang   e         re are dozens of smaller native language groups. Indig-
 enous people lac access to public services and support in their native lands, and
 investment is focused largely on the coast. The Government's lack of investment in
 traditional indigenous areas has been aggravated in recent years by the presence
 of Sendero Lfminoso in many such places.
 Sendero Lminoso remains by far the most egregious violator of the rights of in-
 digenous people. It continued to target violence against the AChaninka tribe in
 Peru's central jungle. The Cordinadra estimated that between 20 and 40
 Ashaninka commumties have disappeared as a result of Sendero violence, and that
 more than 10,000 Ashaninkas have been displaced. As many as 3,000 Ashaninkas
 
 
 may be trapped in zones under Sendero oppression. In late August, unconfirmed re-
 ports indicated that common graves with the bodies of Ashaninka natives were dis-
 covered; the authorities said they believed the graves may contain the remains of
 victims of Sendero violence.
 National/Racial/Ethnic Minorities.-Peru's population includes several small ra-
 cial minorities, the largest of which are blacks of African descent and Asians.
 Blacks, who tend to be concentrated along the coast, face particularly pervasive dis-
 crimination and social prejudice and are among the poorest groups in Peru. This
 discrimination excludes blacks from leadership roles in government, military, and
 business institutions. Both the navy and the air force reprtedly have unwritten
 policies that exclude blacks from the officer corps. According to Peru's two black
 human rights groups, police routinely detain persons of African descent on suspicion
 of committing crimes for no other reason than the color of their skin, and police
 rarely act on complaints of crime against blacks. The human rights groups also note
 that blacks tend to be relegated to servants' jobs; the few blacks who have been rel-
 atively successful financially have done so in the sports and entertainment fields.
 People With Disabilities.-Although the Constitution states that disabled persons
 "have the rights to respect of their dignity and to a regime of protection, attention,
 readaptation and security," the Government spends relatively little on assisting the
 handicapped or preventing discrimination against them. There is little public infra-
 structure with facilities for people with disabilities, such as wheelchair ramps on
 streets or in buildings, and no law mandating access for them. Disabled persons face
 discrimination when seeking employment; many are reduced to begging in the
 streets.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The new Constitution recognizes the right to orga-
 nize a trade union, to engage in collective negotiations, and to strike. These rights
 are to be exercised democratically, and the State is to promote the peaceful resolu-
 tion of labor disputes. The Constitution states, however, that the right to strike
 must take into account broader social interests. It also states that employers may
 not require membership or nonmembership in a union as a condition of employment.
 About 7 percent of the estimated 8.5 million persons in the work force belong to
 organized labor unions. Up to three-quarters of Peruvian workers work in the infor-
 mal sector of the economy, which operates largely beyond government supervision
 and taxation. Existing unions represent a cross-section of political opinion. Though
 some unions have been traditionally associated with political groups, unions are pro-
 hibited by law from engaging in explicitly political, religious, or profit-making activi-
 ties. There are no restrictions on membership in international bodies.
 Workers from organized trades, teachers, and government unions struck more fre-
 quently than in 1993, seeking benefits in accordance with the improved economic
 situation they perceive. Reprisals against striking workers are reportedly infre-
 quent.
 Union members and officials have been targts of terrorist assassination and in-
 timidation attempts. The labor movement and its leaders have been generally hos-
 tile to terrorist groups and have fought to prevent or reduce terrorist infiltration
 into the labor movement; however, the Government detained some union officials
 suspected of terrorist links.
 In March the International Labor Organization (ILO) Committee of Experts' an-
 nual review of compliance with ILO conventions criticized a number of restrictive
 practices and asked the Government to take initiatives to amend its labor legisla-
 tion so as to bring it into conformity with the conventions to which Peru is a party.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-Although the Constitution
 recognizes the right of public and private workers to organize, bargain collectively,
 and strike, it states that these rights must be exercised in harmony with broader
 social interests. It excludes public employees exercising management or decision-
 making authority, as well as members of the police and military, from the right to
 organize or strike. However, both judiciary branch and Lima municipal workers con-
 ducted strikes in late 1994 to protest salary and working conditions.
 Labor regulations promulgated prior to the 1993 approval of the new Constitution
 provide that workers can form unions based on profession, employment, or geo-
 graphic location. The regulations exclude temporary, probationary, apprentice, or
 management employees from union membership. They require a minimum of 100
 members to form trade unions by branch of activity, occupation, or for various occu-
 = ations; and a minimum of 20 workers to form a union within a company. They also
 im  the number of union officials, the amount of time they may devote to union
 business on company time, and require them to be active members of the union.
 
 
 Labor regulations set the number of union representatives who can participate in
 collective bargaining negotiations (a minimum of 3, maximum of 12), and establish
 the negotiating timetable. The management negotiating team cannot exceed the size
 of the workers' team; both sides may have attorneys and professional experts in at-
 tendance as advisers. A majority of all workers in a company, whether union mem-
 bers or not, must approve a strike by a secret ballot. A second vote must be taken
 upon petition of 20 percent or more of the workers.
 The law permits companies unilaterally to propose temporary changes of work
 schedules, conditions, and wages and to suspend for up to 90 days collective bar-
 gaining agreements if required by force majeure or economic conditions, provided
 they give 15 days' notice to employees. If workers dispute the proposed changes, the
 Labor Ministry is to resolve the dispute based upon criteria of"reasonableness" and
 "economic necessity." I such cases employers are to authorize vacation time and
 in general adopt measures that avoid aggravating the employment situation.
 Aconcilation and arbitration system resolves disputes in collective bargaining
 impasses, but union officials complain that their proportionate share of the cost of
 arbitration exceeds their resources. They also state that increasing numbers of com-
 panies utilize a policy of hiring workers on temporary, personal services contracts
 to prevent union affiliation. This has become an issue of contention between orga-
 nized labor and employers and is one of several concerns that labor has raised in
 international forums. Employers deny the accusation of antiunion bias and assert
 that labor stability provisions of the law have made long-term commitments to
 workers too expensive.
 The law does not prohibit antinion discrimination, and there are no effective
 measures to resolve such complaints. No legal provisions require employers who
 commit antiunion discrimination to reinstate workers fired for union activities.
 Special regulations permitting greater flexibility in application for the Labor Code
 in export and duty free zones provide for the use oftmporary labor as needed, flexi-
 bility in labor contracts, and a wage system based upon supply and demand. As a
 result, workers in duty free zones are unable to unionize.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The Constitution prohibits forced
 or compulsory labor, as well as imprisonment for debt. However, there are periodic
 reports of the practice of forced labor in remote mountainous Andean and Amazo-
 nian jungle regions of the country. In response to one complaint filed with the ILO,
 the Government acknowledged the existence of such practices and asserted it had
 taken measures to end abuses, such as closing down and fining clandestine recruit-
 ment agencies and opening a labor and social welfare office in Huaypetue, where
 forced labor abuses had occurred .
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Chidren-Education through primary school
 is compulsory and free. However, a high percentage of school-age children work
 rather than attend daytime classes, with only a small number of such children at-
 tending classes at night. The minimum legal age for employment is 16. Labor law
 contains special provisions for workers between the ages of 16 and 21. Their appren-
 ticeship cannot exceed 18 months, they must be paid at least the minimum wage,
 should be accorded specialized training, and can comprise no more than 15 percent
 of a company's work force. Given Peru's widespread poverty, children work in the
 informal economy without government supervision of wages or conditions from a
 very early age to help support their families. Child labor is heavily used in the agri-
 cultural sector and to mine gold, but not in other major export industries, such as
 petroleum or fisheries.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Worh.-The Constitution provides that the State
 should promote social and economic progress and occupational education. It states
 that workers should receive a hjust and sufficient" wage, to be determined by the
 Government in consultation with labor and business representatives, and "adequate
 protection against arbitrary dismissal." The current minimum wage is about $57
 (130 soles) per month and is generally considered inadequate to support a worker
 and family.
 The Constitution als provides for a 48-hour workweek, a weekly day of rest, and
 yearly vacation. It prohibits discrimination in the workplace. While occupational
 ealth and safety standards exist, the Government lacks the resources to monitor
 or enforce compliance. Employers and workers generally agree upon compensation
 for industrial accidents on an individual basis. The Government introduced reforms
 in 1993 eliminating the need to prove culpability to obtain workman's compensation
 for injuries. There ae no provisions for workers to remove themselves from dan-
 gerous work place situations without jeopardy to continued employment.
 
 
 497