Peru
^he 1995 report provides a largely accurate overview of Peru's principal human rights problems and supports its presentation, for the most part, with specific facts. Its central weakness is one of tone and emphasis. The report correctly indicates that there has been a "marked decrease in the number of extrajudicial killings and disappearances attributable to the security forces," although it does not emphasize that arbitrary executions and forced disappearances continued to occur in certain emergency zones. The report generally stresses "improvements," in Peru's human rights situation, while downplaying gross human rights violations perpetrated by the government, principally the routine torture of suspects by the military and police. Significantly, the report discusses, but fails to condemn directly, two crucial retrenchments by the government on human rights issues: its decision to protect human rights violators by passing Latin America's broadest general amnesty law for state agents in June 1995, and its refusal to eliminate "faceless" military and civilian courts in October despite prior commitments to do so. Although the report is factually accurate in most respects, it does not squarely identify or sufficiently analyze the question that lies at the heart of Peru's human rights problems — whether the government is truly committed to restoring civil and political rights in the wake of President Fujimori's "self-coup" (autogolpe) in 1992.
The report correctly notes that government security forces still routinely torture persons during interrogation, but inappropriately refers to the victims as "suspected subversives." The use of torture by Peru's security forces is more widespread, reaching to persons held on suspicion of a variety of criminal activities. Moreover, the victim's suspected affiliation is appropriate only if it sheds light on the motive for torture; as used here, it may be interpreted as implicitly condoning the practice. The systematic use of torture during interrogation has led many detainees to confess to crimes they did not commit, and has perpetuated false arrests of other persons who themselves become the victims of torture. The report does capture the horrors of torture by describing not only the forms of torture employed by the government (including beatings, electric shock, near-drownings, prolonged suspension by the arms bound behind
171
Critique 1995
the back, mock executions and death threats), but also the facts of specific cases. Consistent with State Department guidelines, the report focuses appropriately on the use of rape as a form of torture of female detainees. The report should have mentioned that rape with rifles is committed against male and female detainees in many instances. While dting claims by the Justice Minister that officers and non-commissioned officers have been punished for committing human rights abuses, induding torture, the report fails to mention that the secrecy of military proceedings precludes corroboration of such claims. Human Rights Watch/Americas reported in July that it was not aware of a single case in which an agent of the state had been brought before a civilian court and punished for having carried out torture.
The report indicates that constitutional protections were suspended in state of emergency zones affecting 44% of Peru's population. It should have attempted to analyze the close connection between ongoing human rights abuses and the continuation of states of emergency. For example, according to the World Organization Against Torture, 41 residents of a village in an emergency zone were detained, interrogated and tortured by the military in August. Such abuses occur more readily where civilian control of government has been ceded to the military in these emergency zones. Nor does the report address whether states of emergency continued to be necessary in such zones, particularly in light of the government's repeated claim that guerrilla violence had been brought under control. While Sendero Luminoso (Shining Path) and other guerrilla groups continued to commit gross violations, and, according to most respected human rights organizations, killed more civilians than government security forces, these activities sharply dedined in 1995, as compared to prior years. The government's broad adherence to states of emergency in the face of these changes has been questioned by most respected human rights advocates. The report should have directly confronted the government's policy, which forms part of the institutionalized core of Peru's human rights problem.
The report contains an extensive discussion of the Amnesty Law proposed by President Fujimori in June — two months after he was reelected to a second term — and passage of that law the very next day by
172
Peru
a Congress dominated by the president's party. It notes that the "summary manner" in which this and other laws were passed "revived concerns about an authoritarian approach to governance." However, the report stops short of directly condemning the Amnesty Law. That reticence is particularly troubling because, in June, the State Department forthrightly denounced the law, stating that it demonstrated a "lack of serious commitment to the protection of human rights." Among other things, the Amnesty Law resulted in the release of low-level military officers convicted of the 1992 La Cantuta massacre, whom the United States had insisted be prosecuted as a condition for renewed foreign assistance. The report's failure to criticize the Amnesty Law more directly is, in effect, a subtle retreat by the United States from its prior denunciation.
A subsequent law passed by Peru's Congress has equally disturbing implications for the rule of law. After a judge ruled that the amnesty was unconstitutional and could not be applied to the 1991 Barrios Altos massacre case before her, the legislature rushed passage of a law which prohibits judicial review of the amnesty law and mandates a mechanical application of its benefits. The report offers no evaluation of this action, which truncates the role of an independent judiciary. Few actions are as threatening to the protection of rights than a prohibition on the ability of courts to review governmental action against constitutional imperatives. This disturbing measure leaves little doubt about the government's attitude towards judicial independence.
Similarly, the report mentions, but fails to condemn, the government's one-year extension of its use of "faceless" courts, despite prior indications that it would eliminate such courts by October. Instead, the report spends considerable time discussing judicial reforms which, while important, do not counteract the fundamental due process violations committed under Peru's military and civilian faceless court system. The basic elenjents of that system are: military jurisdiction over civilians accused of treason; incommunicado and punitive detention; routine torture; denial of bail pending trial; severe restrictions on access to counsel; presentation of persons dressed in prison garb to the press before they have been convicted; secret trials by prosecutors and judges
173
Critique 1995
who remain behind one-way glass mirrors and whose identities are never revealed; denial of the opportunity to cross-examine security force witnesses; and sentencing that violates basic proportionality requirements. (Terrorism cases are tried by civilian tribunals and not, as the report suggests, military courts. The civilian tribunals follow procedures which are very similar to those described in the report and herein regarding treason cases.) As a July 1995 Human Rights Watch/Americas report aptly concluded:
Since 1992, faceless courts have amassed a breathtaking record of human rights violations. To enumerate the particulars is to descend into a citizen's nightmare, where no rule is inviolable, no right guaranteed, no precedent honored. In Peru, the arbitrary permeates every stage of the judicial process: from arrest to charge, investigation, trial, sentencing, and appeal.
The State Department report describes the failings of that system but does not direcdy condemn it. Indeed, at one point it appears to attribute the decline in disappearances and extrajudicial killings approvingly to the "high conviction rate" obtained in military courts. The report does not mention the arrest on terrorism charges in December of Lori Berenson, a U.S. citizen, and her descent into Peru's faceless court system.
The report correctly indicates that most Peruvian NGOs are "independent and generally objective," and appropriately criticizes the government's "verbal attacks" against these organizations, as well as its attacks against journalists who criticize government policies. The State Department itself has been the subject of "verbal attacks" when it has pubhcly criticized Peru's human rights record. In the absence of sustained public pressure, however, it seems unlikely that the Peruvian government will take those steps that are minimally necessary to account for the disappeared, eliminate torture, and bring the administration of justice out into the open.
The actions of the Fujimori government — its continued use of the faceless court system; pushing through an amnesty law and then barring judicial review; and continued hostility to human rights advocacy — lead
174
Peru
to an inescapable conclusion: the Peruvian government has no demonstrable commitment to institutionalized improvement or to the rule of law. While the State Department's catalogue of facts is admirable, this obvious conclusion nonetheless remains muted.
175

1


t!
