PERU
The Peru report is a model of objective and carefully researched reporting. The United States Embassy personnel in charge of monitoring human rights are obviously in touch with a variety of sources, possess an excellent grasp of international human rights law, and understand that dispassionate reporting on violations is an important contribution to the promotion of fundamental freedoms. As a result, the Peru report accurately illustrates a very difficult human rights situation, without any apparent bias in favor of or against the government or any particular faction in Peruvian politics.
We have, consequently, only minor quibbles with the content of the report. For example, in discussing the lack of progress in the criminal investigation into the 1986 prison massacres, the report says that 15 policemen, including three officers, are still in custody. This is a fact that is strongly questioned by many human rights groups. All of these defendants have been removed from the Canto Grande penitentiary (where they had been taken by express order of President Alan Garcia) in late 1986, and if they sire in custody at all, they are being held in police facilities in undisclosed places.
We also think that the report should have highlighted the significance of the attempt to expand the jurisdiction of military tribunals to include serious offenses such as murder, torture and kidnapping. The report accurately points out that the Code of Military Justice does not now include such crimes, so that alleged perpetrators are tried for far-less-serious violations, such as disobedience, negligence or abuse of authority. Even then, trials are conducted outside public scrutiny, and proceedings drag on while accused military offenders continue on active duty. Despite these failings, the PeruNÍan judiciary has systematically assigned jurisdiction to the military courts when such crimes are committed by members of the military, thereby shamefully tolerating effective immunity for these crimes. While the current legislative effort to add these serious crimes to the Code of Military Justice might be perceived as a partial
116
Peru
remedy, the State Department should have noted the widely endorsed view that the omission of these crimes in the ñrst place is evidence that they were never intended to be treated as delitos de junción (military-specific offenses) for which military jurisdiction is appropriate, and thus should not be entrusted to military tribunals.
On the issue of disappearances, the State Department should have noted that the reported figure of 200 a year, though significantly lower than in former President Fernando Belaúnde's term, has remained flat in the two-and-a-half years of the Garcia presiden<^. It is still an intolerably high number, and it appears that the Garcia administration is content to keep the practice in check rather than eliminate it. Although it is true, as the report notes, that the bodies of those who have disappeared usually are not found, the report should have placed this in context. While the number of so-called "temporary disappearances" (where a detention is not immediately acknowledged but the victim is eventually found alive, usually in custody, after several weeks) is on the rise, permanent disappearances continue, at the 200-per-year rate noted. The report thus should have tempered its observation about bodies not being found by adding that several mass graves were discovered in 1983 and 1984, and that most observers believe that the victims of currently unresolved disappearances have met a similar fate.
Finally, the report is in error in stating that Americas Watch did not conduct a visit to Peru m 1987. Americas Watch did visit Peru in May of that year, including a trip to nu"al areas in Puno, as well as high-level meetings with government officials and a visit to the Canto Grande penitentiary.
117
Critique
