PERU
As in previous analyses, the 1989 State Department's report on Peru accurately describes the country's grave human rights situation. The report sheds light on both violations committed by government forces and those committed by insurgent forces.
One of the gravest situations concerns the high number of "disappearances" in the country, particularly in the emergency zones, such as Lima and certain areas in the Andes. The report mentions that the majority of these "disappearances" are citizens abducted by the military forces for interrogation or intelligence operations. Human rights organizations have reported more than 300 victims during the course of 1989, while the report notes that the Public Ministry quotes a figure of 500. It is important to point out that the victims are for the most part poor members of peasant communities. Moreover, union leaders, teachers and health workers are also victims of "disappearances."
Also of concern is the killing of journalists, which constitutes not only a grave violation of the right to life, but chills freedom of expression and of the press. The Committee to Protect Journalists sent a communiqué to President Alan Garcia, expressing its concern for the murders of at least seven journalists during a 15 month period. These journalists were Hugo Bustios, Luis Piccone, Juvenal Farfán, Guillermo López, Barbara d'Achille, Todd Smith and Joseph Piescher. In the case of Guillermo López, a reporter for Radio Tingo Maria, death threats from the military and police preceded his murder on April 19. Eight men, believed to be soldiers, shot him in front of his family. Delfín Ortiz, a key witness to the murder of Hugo Bustios, was also killed by presumed members of the armed forces, whom he had identified as Bustios' assassins. The State Department appropriately mentions most of these in its discussion of political killings, as well as noting their chilling effect in the section on freedom of speech and the press.
Evidence of the armed forces' conduct in the emergency zones described in the report is the murder of Martha Crisòstomo Garcia. As the report mentions, she was one of the last surviving witnesses in the Cayara case, which involved the murder of 28 peasants by an army patrol in May 1988. On September 8, 1989, eight armed men in military uniform broke into her house and shot her and a friend Olga Fargán. Her father and neighbors witnessed the murders. All other witnesses in the Cayara case had previously been murdered. During
169
Peru
1989, Carlos Escobar, the specially appointed District Attorney for Disappearances in the emergency zones, was forced to leave the country due to constant death threats. While the report of his investigation has never been publicly released. Dr. Escobar had reportedly found evidence implicating General José Valdivia in the Cayara murders. In Lima, a congressional commission headed by a government party senator, Carlos Enrique Melgar, suppressed evidence of military responsibility in the Cayara case and paradoxically accused Dr. Escobar. The State Department report errs in saying that this commission "has yet to produce its official report." The report (Senado de la República, Informe de la Comisión Investigadora de los Sucesos Ocurridos en el Pueblo de Cayara, Ayacucho) was in fact published on May 8, 1989.
Another sector targeted by violence has been the legal community. Dr. Vicente Véliz, a lawyer working with the Ayacucho office of the Bishops' Commission for Social Action (CEAS), was constantly harassed by military officers who accused him of being a "protector of terrorists" and, after repeated death threats, was forced to leave the city in March 1989. On June 15, Attorney Fernando Mejia Egocheaga was abducted by the army in Oxapampa. Two days later, he was found dead. In the same state, Pasco, Coqui Samuel Huamani, attorney and director of Cerro de Pasco Human Rights Commission, was abducted on August 23 by presumed members of the army and was found dead several hours later. In yet another incident, Héctor Flores Leiva, an attorney for peasant unions, was threatened with death in September by the Comando Chavin, another paramilitary group. These killings and threats against human rights lawyers undermine the rule of law and should have been mentioned in the State Department report.
The report correctly describes the impunity enjoyed by members of the armed forces responsible for prison massacres in June 1986. The Tribunal Supremo de Justicia Militar (the highest court of military justice) ruled in favor of 75 defendants and condemned only two police officials for the deaths of more than 100 inmates. Given the circumstances, it is not credible that two officers alone could have killed all these prisoners. The State Department fails, however, to offer its assessment of these proceedings. In addition, the report fails to mention that Navy officers responsible for the deaths of 118 inmates in El Frontón prison, also during June 1986, were never tried. A congressional commission report attributed criminal responsibility to officials and troops involved in the incidents. This same commission also placed responsibility on high government officials
170
Peru
such as former Deputy Minister of the Interior Agustín Mantilla. Nonetheless, the commission report was not taken into account by the military courts. The results of the trials illustrated the lack of independence of the Peruvian military courts.
The report mentions attacks by military helicopters in the Upper Huallaga Valley on June 19 in which an unknown number of civilians were killed. It is important to note that the U.S. Drug Enforcement Agency's fortified station is located in this same area of the Upper Huallaga Valley. The reports of human rights violations perpetrated by military personnel contrast with the fact that the Bush Administration has recently approved a $35 million military aid package for counterinsurgency operations and training. Thus, it appears that the very troops responsible for human rights violations will receive U.S. military aid.
In October 1989, members of an investigative congressional commission uncovered evidence of involvement of high government officials in the operations of a paramilitary group known as Comando Rodrigo Franco (CRF). Commission representatives belonged to both the United Left (lU) and the Democratic Front (FREDEMO). The commission's report accuses the current Minister of Interior Agustín Mantilla and police generals Fernando Reyes Roca, Raúl Jarez Gago and Edgar Luque Freyre of links with CRF. It is important to note that CRF has claimed responsibility for several assassination attempts, terrorist attacks and death threats. While the State Department mentions the commission's findings, CRF's links with important government officials of the ruling party and ranking police officers is understated.
The report also commendably states its own conclusion that the government and Shining Path have committed serious violations of international humanitarian law. The group Tupac Amaru Revolutionary Movement (MRTA), but especially Shining Path, have carried out selective murders of innocent civilians and government officials, as well as other well-known attacks against civilians. According to the human rights organization Coordinadora Nacional de Derechos Humanos, Shining Path killed 720 people during the period June-July 1989, as compared with to 185 deaths in combat, further evidence of a targeted assassination campaign. In addition to the assassination of mayors and of peasants who opposed their actions. Shining Path killed five mining union leaders during the period April-June 1989. On October 31, Shining Path killed Enrique Castilla, leader of a textile workers' union. These and other attacks
171
Peru
on union leaders demonstrate Shining Path's efforts to defeat organizing attempts, striking out even at organizations which are highly critical of present government policies. In 1989, Shining Path continued attacks against members of the leftist and rightist political parties, as well as against union leaders and elected authorities.
There is an important improvement in this year's report concerning the State Department's appraisal of the activities of nongovernmental (NGO) human rights organizations in Peru. In contrast to prior reports which mistakenly said that Peruvian NGOs concentrated their attention only on violations attributable to the government, this year's report recognizes the credibility of these organizations in their investigation and reporting of "human rights abuses to the extent possible, regardless of the perpetrator." The correction is commendable and recognizes the important role of human rights monitors such as the National Coordinator for Human Rights and its members: the Institute for Legal Defense, the Association for Human Rights, the Human Rights Commission, the Andean Commission of Jurists and the Catholic Church Commission for Social Action, among others. This is important, given that the work of these and other humanitarian organizations in the emergency zones has been seriously limited by the actions of the government as well as insurgent groups.
172
