Peru
Peru made history in 2009 by convicting a former elected president for grave
human rights violations. Yet efforts to prosecute others responsible for abuses
committed during Peru’s internal armed conflict (1980–2000) have had mixed
results and most perpetrators continue to evade justice. Investigations of massacres
and enforced disappearances by government forces have been obstructed
by lack of cooperation from the military.
Torture and ill-treatment of criminal suspects are chronic problems. Police sometimes
overstep international norms on the use of lethal force in controlling
protests and demonstrations.
Confronting Past Abuses
According to Peru’s Truth and Reconciliation Commission, almost 70,000 people
died or “disappeared” during the country’s internal armed conflict. Many were
victims of atrocities committed by the Shining Path and the Túpac Amaru
Revolutionary Movement (MRTA), and others of human rights violations by state
agents.
On April 7, 2009, in a unanimous verdict, a three-judge panel of the Peruvian
Supreme Court convicted and sentenced former president Alberto Fujimori to 25
years’ imprisonment for crimes against humanity. He was the first democratically
elected Latin American leader to be convicted for grave human rights violations in
his own country. The court found him responsible for the extrajudicial execution
of 15 people in the Barrios Altos district of Lima in November 1991, the enforced
disappearance and murder of nine students and a teacher from La Cantuta
University in July 1992, and two abductions. Fujimori’s lawyers appealed the sentence
and a final verdict is still pending at this writing. The trial was respectful of
due process guarantees and consistent with international standards of fair trial.
By October 2009 Fujimori had been convicted and sentenced in each of the other
cases for which he was extradited from Chile in 2007, involving charges of corruption,
bribery, and phone-tapping.
In a separate trial, in April 2008 Gen. Julio Salazar Monroe, former head of the
National Intelligence Service during the Fujimori government, was sentenced to
35 years in prison for ordering the Cantuta killings. By the end of September
2009, 13 members of the Colina group, the government death squad directly
responsible for the La Cantuta and Barrios Altos killings, had been convicted.
Efforts to investigate and prosecute former officials and military officers implicated
in scores of other killings and “disappearances” dating from the beginning of
the armed conflict have had meager results. Lack of cooperation by the military
has consistently hampered the investigation of human rights cases. Moreover,
President Alan García’s government has repeatedly questioned the legitimacy of
human rights trials. In 2009 top government and military officials suggested that
efforts by Peru’s human rights organizations to combat impunity undermined military
morale. The defense minister, Rafael Rey, claimed at a War Marines ceremony
in October that the military and police did not commit crimes against humanity
because they did not kill for religious, racial, political, or ideological reasons.
According to information published by the human rights Ombudsman in
December 2008, of 218 cases monitored by the institution—which include abuses
committed by insurgent groups—only eight had led to convictions, while 122 were
still under investigation by prosecutors several years since the investigations
were opened. In October 2009 the National Human Rights Coordinator, an NGO
that monitors accountability, reported that the National Criminal Court, created in
2004 to deal with human rights violations and terrorism, had acquitted 52 military
and police agents and convicted 12. The ratio of acquittals to convictions
increased significantly in 2008-09: the court acquitted 29 agents and convicted
only two. In September 2009 the Supreme Court overturned one of the two convictions.
In this case, the court annulled the 20-year prison sentence of a naval officer for
the murder of Indalecio Pomatanta, a 17-year-old who was captured in 1995 by a
military patrol, tortured, and burned alive. The court based its decision on inconsistencies
between the accused officer’s testimony and his earlier statements to a
military tribunal, which in 2004 the Supreme Court had ruled not competent to
hear the case. In October the National Criminal Court acquitted five former topranking
army officers responsible for counterinsurgency operations in the Huallaga region of enforced disappearances in 1990, discounting evidence that
“disappearance” was a systematic practice at the time.
Political Violence
During the current decade there have been several violent clashes between protesters
and police, with deaths on both sides. The circumstances of these incidents
are usually disputed. Prosecutorial investigations rarely clarify the circumstances
of incidents in which police were accused of unlawfully using lethal force.
In June 2009, 33 people were killed (23 police and 10 civilians) in violent clashes
between police and indigenous protesters in the provinces of Utcubamba and
Bagua in the Peruvian Amazon. Eighty-two were treated in hospital for gunshot
wounds, according to a report by the Ombudsman’s Office. The police were clearing
a stretch of road blocked by indigenous groups who were demanding that the
government abandon a series of legislative decrees intended to facilitate economic
activities in the Amazon region. Three indigenous witnesses who participated
in the protest and were interviewed by a journalist in hospital where they
were recovering from gunshot wounds said that the police fired live ammunition
directly at them. Other witnesses claimed that several police were shot by demonstrators
who had seized police weapons. Indigenous demonstrators also killed 10
policemen taken captive while guarding an oil pipeline.
According to the Ombudsman’s Office, 84 civilians were later facing court proceedings
for the violence, 18 of whom were in detention. The Attorney General’s
Office also opened an investigation into possible police responsibility for unlawful
killings. In August a prosecutor started proceedings against 16 police officers
alleged responsible for deaths and injuries. However, the attorney general
accused the prosecutor of acting without a mandate by opening the case after
being notified that she had been replaced. The case was dropped, and another
prosecutor is still collecting evidence at this writing.
Torture and Ill-Treatment
Torture and ill-treatment of criminal suspects continue to be problems in Peru. A
poor record of prosecuting state agents for abuses hinders eradication of these practices. The Ombudsman received 503 complaints of torture and ill-treatment
between January 2003 and October 2008.
The crime of torture was incorporated into the criminal code in 1998, but some
judicial authorities have failed to grasp the seriousness of the crime. In 2008 a
Supreme Court panel annulled a conviction for torture on the erroneous grounds
that torture—which comes under the heading of crimes against humanity in the
criminal code—exists only at times of political conflict. The court ordered a new
trial, and in August 2009 a new panel found the perpetrator guilty only of causing
injury and reduced the penalty to a suspended prison sentence of four years. In
another case, a prosecutor used the same argument to drop charges of torture
against a military officer accused of beating a recruit in 2001. He declared the
lesser charge of causing injury to be subject to a statute of limitations, depriving
the victim of any redress.
Media Freedom
Journalists in Peru’s provinces are vulnerable to intimidation and threats.
Individuals acting in support of, or working for, municipal authorities have
assaulted, and even murdered, journalists who publicize abuses by local government
officials.
In June 2009 the government revoked the broadcasting license of a local radio
station in the Peruvian Amazon, La Voz de Bagua, after the minister of the interior
and members of the president’s American Revolutionary People’s Alliance (APRA)
party accused it of “inciting violence” during its coverage of the civil unrest in
Bagua. Although the broadcasting authorities claimed the station was operating
illegally, the timing and circumstances of the revocation suggested that it was an
act of censorship or punishment in response to coverage of the anti-government
protests.
Human Rights Defenders
Former president Fujimori’s supporters in Congress, as well as some top government
officials, have aggressively sought to discredit NGOs that advocate for human rights accountability. Such NGOs have been falsely accused of sympathy
with terrorist groups or of undermining the armed forces.
Rights advocates face anonymous threats. In September 2009 Salomón Lerner,
former president of the National Truth and Reconciliation Commission, reported
that the dogs at his property had died from poisoning. Two weeks later he
received anonymous phone calls both at his house and at the Institute for
Democracy and Human Rights at the Catholic University of Peru, of which he is
president. The caller left a message warning, “What we did to your dogs we will
do to you.”
Reproductive Rights
Peru’s restrictive abortion laws and policies, which criminalize abortion generally
and provide only vague guidance on when an abortion may be procured lawfully,
contribute to maternal death and disability. Approximately 16 percent of maternal
deaths in Peru are attributable to unsafe abortions. In October 2009 a special
congressional committee set up to review the country’s penal code proposed
decriminalizing abortion in cases of rape, incest, and fetal abnormalities.
Key International Actors
In June 2009 the United Nations special rapporteur on indigenous people, James
Anaya, visited Peru on a mission to investigate the events in the Peruvian
Amazon. In August, in its final observations on Peru’s report to the UN Committee
on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, the committee urged Peru to implement
Anaya’s recommendation that an independent commission with indigenous
representation be formed to impartially investigate the events.