 PERU
 Twelve years of democratic government in Peru were interrupted on April 5, 1992,
 when President Fujimori dissolved Congress, reorganized the judiciary, and sus-
 pended portions of the 1979 Constitution. Supported by the military and the major-
 ity of public opinion, the President said the old political system was incapable of
 fighting terrorism, corruption, and economic decay. Following international con-
 demnation of his actions at a s pecial Meeting of the Foreign Ministers of the Orga-
 nization of American States (OAS) on May 18, President Fujimori agreed to hold
 elections for a Constituent Congress, which took place on November 22. The Con-
 stituent Congress will legislate until July 1995 and draft a new constitution. Al-
 though the two largest political parties boycotted the elections, observers, including
 
 
 472
 those from the OAS, found them to have been conducted fairly. A return to demo-
 cratic institutions, however, will depend upon the degree of autonomy of the new
 Congress and the judiciary, as well as the conduct of the 1993 municipal elections
 and the entry into force of a new constitution. An attempted coup in November fur-
 ther underscored the need for a return to full democracy.
 The judicial system, which had suffered from corruption and political influence,
 was placed under executive branch control after April 5. Ruling by decree law
 President Fujimori made major changes in judicial and prosecutorial procedures and
 personnel. Numerous judges and prosecutors were fired for corruption in an effort
 to address deficiencies in the civilian courts. New decree laws defined most terror-
 ism cases as "treason" to be tried in military courts. This led to concern that the
 military courts, which so far have an almost 100 percent conviction rate under the
 new rules, will not try defendants fairly. Other laws restrict the actions of defense
 attorneys in terrorism trials and increase penalties for terrorism. Prosecutions of al-
 leged government abuses made little significant progress during 1992.
 Public security responsibilities are shared by the police and the military. Accord-
 ing to the U.S. Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, total military expenditures
 for 1989 were approximately $500 million. There are no plans to reduce current
 military expenditures in the near future. The military and the police continued to
 share counterterrorism duties in Lima; in the countryside, the military takes the
 lead in areas under a state of emergency. Emergency zone status continued to pro-
 vide for the suspension of certain constitutional guarantees; currently 48 percent of
 Peru's 22 million people live in such areas, including the 8 million residents of
 Lima. A vast majority of Peruvians consider the terrorist activities of the Sendero
 Luminoso (Shining Path) Maoist guerrillas to be the country's major threat. Both
 the police and military continued to be responsible for human rights abuses in 1992.
 Peru has a mixed economy which combines free market capitalism with state
 ownership of some major industries. Minerals extraction and processing account for
 half of the foreign exchange earnings. President Fujimori's administration pursued
 a rigorous economic stabilization and structural adjustment program in an attempt
 to reverse decades of economic decline. An important step in this program was the
 privatization of state-owned firms. Recession continues, however, and it is estimated
 that at least one third of Peruvians live in critical poverty.
 The chief sources of human rights violations in Peru remained the terrorist activi-
 ties of the Sendero Luminoso and, to a lesser degree, the excesses of the security
 services. Sendero abuses included assassinations of perceived opponents or the
 merely uncooperative, from government leaders and other officials to religious work-
 ers and peasants. Sendero, lacking popular suiport makes terror against civilians
 an integral part of its strategy. In the countryside, endero killed members of rural
 self-defense forces (rondas), community leaders, and political party members. On Oc-
 tober 10, Sendero killed 48 peasants in the Ayacucho village of Huayllao; it was the
 largest single massacre by guerrillas in the last 8 years. To create a power vacuum
 in which it could grow in Lima, Sendero murdered scores of grassroots leaders dur-
 ing 1992, including Maria Elena Moyano, who advocated peaceful opposition to
 Sendero. She was shot dead and her body blown to pieces by dynamite in front of
 her children on February 15. Sendero's other weapon in Lima was the use of power-
 ful car bombs in populated areas.
 Peru's respected, independent National Coordinating Committee for Human
 Rights (Coordinadra) reported that Sendero was responsible for 654 assassinations
 as of November 1992. On September 12 ounterterrorism police captured Sendero
 chief Abimael Guzman and other top Sendero leaders. They were found guilty in
 military trials and sentenced to life imprisonment. This was a considerable blow to
 Sendero, although the organization remained a serious threat to Peruvian institu-
 tions, and Sendero bombings and abuses continued. Other police and military ac-
 tions in 1992 severely hurt the Tupac Amaru Revolutionary Movement (MRTA).
 Both Sendero and MRTA continued to vie for control of parts of Peru's major coca-
 growing region, the Upper Huallaga valley.
 h 1992 there continued to be credible reports of summary executions, disappear-
 ances, arbitrary detentions, torture, and rape by the military and police. Most of
 these abuses occurred in rural emergency zones. Particularly in the Huancayo area,
 the military and police appear to have selectively kidnaped and killed dozens of per-
 sons alleged to be members of Sendero Luminoso. Few abuses are fully investigated,
 and prosecution of security force members is rare. Statistics from the Coordinadora
 and the Public Ministry (an autonomous office of the Attorney General) confirmed
 that the number of disappearances and extrajudicial killings by the security forces
 remained roughly the same as in 1991. Members of the security forces, rondas, and
 paramilitary groups possibly connected to elements within the Government were be-
 lieved responsible for 95 extrajudicial killings. President Fujimori continued in 1992
 
 
 473
 to stress publicly the need to improve respect for human rights, including by the
 security forces. However, he continued to criticize strongly local and international
 human rights groups as apologists for terrorists. There were credible reports that
 the Government used the courts on several occasions to intimidate political oppo-
 nents and human rights activists.
 Military and police investigations into human rights violations committed by their
 own members were sporadic and rarely resulted in effective criminal prosecutions.
 While security forces claimed that there were significant numbers of dismissals for
 various types of abuses, these were difficult to verify since military practice is to
 seal the relevant records.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-The Coordinadora estimated that
 Sendero Luminoso committed 654 political assassinations through November 1992;
 the MRTA 15; and unidentified subversives 54. The security forces were responsible
 for 81 extrajudicial killings through November 1992; paramilitary groups or 10; and
 peasant rondas, often associated with the military, for 4. The deaths of 170 persons
 were classified as "not clarified." Due to the isolation of many rural areas where
 Sendero is moat active, the number of victims is probably underreported.
 According to the dissolved Congress' Commission on Pacification, 2,830 people, in-
 cluding combatants and civilians, were killed in overall terrrist-related violence be-
 tween January and November 1992. This figure includes 1,040 terrorists and 427
 soldiers and police. Armed clashes with government forces accounted for the bulk
 of casualties among terrorists. It is often difficult to distinguish combat-related
 deaths from extrajudicial killings, which makes charges of human rights abuse dif-
 ficult to verify.
 Of the reported 81 extrajudicial killings attributed by the Coordinadora to police
 and military forces as of November 1992, the majority occurred in emergency zones.
 For example, between August and October, armed and masked persons abducted 30
 students from the Peruvian Central University in Huancayo. Eleven were found
 dead bearing burns and signs of electric shocks. Human rights monitors blame the
 military for these deaths. In San Martin Eric Rojas Llanca, 16, and Rafael Navarro
 Pisango, 20, were detained by the armed forces on June 21. On June 22, their bod-
 ies, bearing signs of torture, were found in a nearby river. The number of
 extrjudicial killings was likely underreported, given widespread distrust of the
 State by the community at large and the dysfunctional Peruvian justice system.
 The security forces have generally been unable or unwilling to investigate and
 prosecute cases in which their own members are implicated. The Peruvian CMde of
 Military Justice contains no provision for dealing with cases of killing, kidnaping,
 or torture only "negligence" and 'abuse of authority." Although the current Code
 allows military courts to use relevant portions of the Civilian Penal Code to try
 crimes not covered under the Military Code, this is rarely done. The military has
 repeatedly used its court system to preempt civilian investigation and prosecution
 of cases involving military abuses; under the law, persons tried under a military
 court cannot subsequently be tried in civilian courts for the same offense.
 In September 1991, the Government authorized access by the International Com-
 mittee of the Red Cross (ICRC) to all military detention facilities to verify the pres-
 ence and welfare of detainees. This access continued until September 1992, when
 the Government informed the ICRC that new laws restricted previously agreed-upon
 ICRC access to civilian prisons. The ICRC halted its prison visits in September but
 continued to visit police and military installations. At year's end, the ICRC and the
 Government were working to resolve the problem.
 In 1992 the ICRC registered over 2,200 new security detainees at various places
 of detention throughout the country. The ICRC visited some 130 police stations, in-
 cluding the counter-terrorism police offices in Lima, and registered over 1,100 new
 detainees, of whom over 300 were later released by the authorities after investiga-
 tion. Over 135 military facilities were visited and about 120 new detainees were reg-
 istered, of whom approximately 40 were released after investigation.
 During May 4-9, the national police stormed Lima's Canto Grande maximum se-
 curity prison, which housed the majority of the country's convicted terrorists.
 Sendero and MRTA inmates had gained control of their respective cell blocks, and
 Sendero propaganda proclaimed the prisons to be "shining trenches of combat" that
 Sendero used as training centers for its cadre. Police initially showed restraint, de-
 spite the deaths of two policemen, one of whom was reportedly killed with acid.
 After a final police assault, official and unofficial casualty reports indicated that at
 least 36 inmates had been killed. There are credible reports that the police delib-
 
 
 erately killed four Sendero leaders, and perhaps others, after effective control of the
 prison was reestablished. After the assault, human rights organizations and the
 ICRC were denied access to the prison.
 Human rights groups maintain that an unknown number of captured terrorists
 and innocent civilians were summarily executed by the military in 1992. These
 claims are difficult or impossible to verify due to difficulties in obtaining information
 or traveling to many of these areas.
 In 1992 resident Fujimori pointed to the rondas as a fundamental part of his
 antisubversive strategy against Sender Luminoso. Some rondas are organized and
 equipped by the Government and the military. Many, however, emerge and operate
 with little government encouragement; they are often the only defense a community
 has against terrorists. The rondas have demonstrated some effectiveness in deter-
 ring bandits and terrorists, as well as serving other functions such as basic commu-
 nity self-help work. Reports indicated, however, that some rondas were involved in
 numerous human rights abuses, including the torture and extrajudicial killing of
 suppected terrrst.
 No progress was reported in the investigation into the November 3, 1991, mas-
 sacre of 17 persons in the Barrios Altos neighborhood of Lima. Despite strong indi-
 cations that the authors of this massacre may have been linked to the security
 forces, the Government publicly insisted the assailants could have been common
 criminals, and the investigation stalled. An article based on supposed army sources
 that claimed a special intelligence service unit carried out the killings, with appar-
 ent government approval, was not investigated. Instead, the Government sued the
 journalist for libel.
 There was little progress in the Santa Barbara (Huancavelica department) case
 where an army officer and five noncommissioned officers were charged in the July
 4, 1991, deaths of 14 peasants whose bodies were found in an abandoned mine. The
 trial of 14 cashiered police personnel implicated in the June 23, 1991, deaths of a
 medical student and two teenaged brothers in Callao entered its last legal stages
 and is expected to be concluded in early 1993. The investigating prosecutor in the
 March 15 letter bomb attack on human rights lawyer Dr. Augusta Zuniga Paz sus-
 pended action on the case April 27 pending further evidence. Dr. Zuniga's represent-
 atives were reportedly unaware of this until September and filed another suit in
 this case. As in 1991, military officials asserted that a number of enlisted men and
 officers were prosecuted in the military justice system on charges relating to human
 rights violations. However, such assertions were difficult to confirm because, as a
 matter of practice, the military courts sealed relevant records. Neither the identities
 of these individuals, the nature of their offenses, nor the exact sentences imposed
 were made public.
 Sendero Luminoso continued to assassinate teachers, clergy, engineers, develop-
 ment and human rights workers, political activists, and public servants, as well as
 members of the security forces. In 1992 Sendero steped up violent political activity
 in urban centers, with particular emphasis on Lima s surrounding slum areas, kill-
 ing over 145 grassroots leaders. A number of these killings were carried out in a
 gruesome fashion intended to intimidate other potential opponents. On February 15
 a Sendero assassination team shot and killed Maria Eens Moyano, a leader in
 Lima's Villa El Salvador shantytown, in the presence of her children, then blew up
 her body by exploding dynamite placed on her chest. Sendero continued to target
 foreign religious and development workers. On October 2, a Sender unit kidnaped
 Italian Salesian Brother Giuliani Rocca from his order's house near Huaraz, Ancash
 department and later killed him with a shot to the head. On October 10, a Sendero
 column attacked the hamlet of Huayllao, in Ayacucho department, murdering at
 least 48 villagers, including the elderly, women, and children, and sacking or burn-
 inga large portion of the community.
 A second terrorist grup, the MRTA, carried out sporadic high visibility/low risk
 actions, such as the July 6 4-hour raid on Jaen, Cajamarca department; the August
 ambush of an army truck in Lima, in which five soldiers and one civilian died; and
 a series of ineffective mortarattacks in mid-October against the Presidential Palace
 the U.S. Ambassador's residence and the Ministry of the Army. This group suffered
 serious setbacks, however, including capture and incarceration of senior MRTA lead-
 ers.
 b. Disappearance.-The number of disappearance cases in 1992 remained roughly
 the same as in 1991. The Public Ministry reported 145 new unresolved disappear-
 ance cases as of November 1992. The Coordinadora, using different case tracking
 methods, reported 171 at that time. These numbers are likely to increase as reports
 of disappearances that occurred late in 1992 continue to be recorded. Senator
 Enrique Bernales, former chairman of the respected Senate Commission on Vio-
 lence, reported that in 1992 there were 280 disappearances, as compared to 300 in
 
 
 1991. According to the Public Ministry, the majority of its formal disappearance
 complaints implicated members of the security forces in the emergency zones. Most
 new cases were reported in San Martin, Junin, and Ayacucho departments. How-
 ever, the number of cases reported in metropolitan Lima increased dramatically,
 from some 3 percent of all cases in 1991 to about 15 percent in 1992.
 Testimony from survivors indicates that most victims are taken to military bases
 for interrogation. Some of those held are eventually turned over to the civilian court
 system to ge released due to lack of evidence or to be imprisoned on terrorism
 charges; others never reappear. The rondas fiu red increasingly in the number of
 reported disappearances. ondas were allegedrto have been involved in approxi-
 mately 3 percent of disappearance cases in 1991 and 13 percent in 1992. Combined
 military/ronda patrols were implicated in another 10 percent of disappearance cases
 in 1992.
 On July 18, professor Hugo Munoz Sanchez and nine students were reportedly de-
 tained by the armed forces during a sweep of dormitories at La Cantuta Teachers'
 College. The military denied the detentions, but to date the students have not been
 seen; writs of habeas corpus were ignored. (The armed forces occupied La Cantuta
 in 1991 to counter pervasive Sendero Luminoso influence on the campus.)
 At 2 a.m. June 24, unidentified armed and uniformed army personnel reportedly
 broke into the home of journalist Pedro Yauri Bustamante in Huacho, Lima depart-
 ment. The men bound and gagged Yauri and his father, beat them, and drove away
 with Yauri in a pickup truck.He was not seen subsequently. The Huacho police re-
 fused to let Yauri's father rile a complaint, and the court in Huacho denied a writ
 of habeas corpus. In May charges of illegal detention and abuse of authority were
 filed against five policemen in the disappearance case of Manuel Pacotaype, mayor
 of Chuschi in Ayacucho department, and three other men. The victims disappeared
 on March 14, 1991, and were never seen again.
 An unknown number of "disappeared" persons may be unaccounted for because
 they joined the ranks of the MRTA or Sendero, either voluntarily or under duress.
 It is believed that the number of persons forcibly recruited by Sendero is
 underreported.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 Although the Constitution prohibits torture and inhuman or humiliating treatment,
 charges of brutal treatment of detainees are common. Knowledgeable observers re-
 ported that suspected subversives held by government security forces were routinely
 tortured at military detention centers. Four army officers detained for coup plotting
 made credible claims that they had been tortured by beatings, electric shocs, an
 being hung upby their wrists with their arms tied behind their backs. In 1992 there
 were also reliable accounts from released detainees of torture or mistreatment by
 the police. There continued to be credible reports of rape perpetrated by elements
 of the security forces in the emergency zones. In one ease, an army lieutenant and
 six soldiers raped 14-year-old Froyli Mori Vela after searching the house in which
 she and her parents were staying.
 When torture occurs it often takes place in the period immediately following de-
 tention. The law requires that persons detained for terrorism be interrogated in the
 presence of a Pubhic Ministry .prosecutor. Reliable reports of violations of these
 standards are frequent, especially in the emergency zones. The requirement that an
 attorney be present at the initial stages of detention and interrogation in treason
 cases was eliminated by decree law in 1992.
 Many victims of Sendero terrorism also show signs of having been tortured. Tor-
 ture of those victims often follows a brief "people's trial," normally held in the pres-
 ence of villagers as a method of intimidation. There are credible accounts that
 Sender tortures victims to death by means such as slitting throats, strangulation,
 stoning, and burning. Mutilation of the body is common.
 Peruvian prison conditions are appalling. Prisoners are exposed to unsanitary fa-
 cilitiest poor nutrition and health care, as well as to harsh treatment by both prison
 staff and fllow prisoners. Corption is rampant among prison staff, who have been
 implicated in a multitude of offenses, from sexual blackmail and the selling of nar-
 cotics and weapons to arranging prison escapes. There wer  redible reports of rou
 tine beatings and torture of inmates by prison guards. Besides beatings, common
 methods of torture reportediy include electric shocks to sensitive areas of the body,
 water torture, asphyxiation, and being hung on a hook from a rope attached to
 hands tied behind the back. Human rights groups reported that in June two
 Senderista inmates died of exposure at the maximum security prison in Puno follow-
 ing their transfer to that facility after police regained control of Lima's Canto
 Grande prison in May.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest. Detention, or Exile.-The Constitution, the Penal Code, and
 antiterrorist legislation delineate the arrest and detention process. However, most
 
 
 476
 if not all of these protections are suspended in practice in those areas under a state
 of emergency.
 In areas not subject to a state of emergency a judicial warrant is required for
 arrest, unless a perpetrator is caught in the act. Persons arrested must be arraigned
 within 24 hours, except in cases of terrorism, drug trafficking, or espionage, for
 which the limit is 15 days. Suspected terrorists charged under new 1992 treason de-
 crees may be held for up to 30 days before arraignment. Detainees (in non-
 emergency zone areas) have the right to choose their own attorney, or the Govern-
 ment must provide counsel at no cost. This does not always occur in practice, and
 human rights sources report instances where court clerks have been deputized to
 stand in as counsel. There is no functioning bail system; a form of provisional lib-
 erty is available for persons not accused of terrorism, espionage, or narcotics of-
 fenses.
 A provisional registry of detainees held by both the military and police for terror-
 ism and other security crimes began operating in 1992. Police detention centers do
 not make publicly available information detailing detentions, charges transfers, or
 releases of detainees. The ICRC, however, has access to local police detention
 records and to the national military registry of detainees. Local human rights orga-
 nizations are expected to have access to the national registry of detainees in mili-
 tary and police facilities through the Office of the National Fiscal for Human Rights.
 Arrest procedures are different in the emergency zones. Security forces do not
 need an arrest warrant, and detainees are often denied access to an attorney during
 interrogation and to family members during their imprisonment. All detainees, in-
 cluding those in the emergency zones, have the legal right to seek judicial deter-
 mination of the legality of their detention, but this right is often disregarded by
 military commanders in the emergency zones. Of the detainees held by the military
 inside the emergency zones, human rights groups know of very few who were turned
 over to civilian authorities for prosecution. Incommunicado detention of suspects
 was a common practice by government forces operating in the emergency zones.
 Dozens of persons, whose detention the Government's security forces had initially
 denied, nonetheless were later found to have been held in military detention cen-
 ters.
 In mid-1991 the Government issued a legislative decree granting civilian public
 prosecutors access to all military barracks and detention centers, including those in
 the emergency zones. The decree aecifies that the prosecutor may privately inter-
 view a detainee immediately upon hs detent ion and examine him or her for signs
 of physical abuse. Where applicable, the prosecutor may order the prisoner re-
 manded into the civilian court system. If remanded to the courts, the prosecutor is
 to accompany the prisoner and require a formal medical examination upon deliver-
 ing him into civilian judicial custody. A public prosecutor must be present at the
 re ease of any prisoner from military detention.
 Throughout 1992 public prosecutors generally continued to have access to military
 installations in the emeency zones with sporadic problems. The provision for ac-
 css to military installations by the P'ublic Ministry's human rights officials is rel-
 atively new and could reverse the status quo whereby detainees are held incommu-
 nicad and possibly disappear. Neverteless, the number of detainees actually
 turned over to civilian authorities is believed to be small in comparison to the num-
 ber of persons thought to have actually been detained.
 At leant 48 persons were detained or placed under house arrest without charges
 following the events of April 5, including former government ministers, par-
 liamentarians, labor leaders and an estimated 24 journalists. The Government per-
 mitted ICRC visits to most of the detainees, and most were released within 10 days.
 Only Agstin Mantilla, former Interior Minister in the Alan Garia administration,
 remains in detention. Government and security officials, as well as independent ob-
 servers, believe that Mantilla wa connected to the now defunct Commando Rodrigo
 Franc paramilitary group that operated during the Garcia administration in the
 late 1980's. However, Mantilla's detention wa generally viewed as politically moti-
 vated.
 The Constitution prhibit forced involuntary exile, and there have been no such
 cases in the past 10 years.
 e. Denial  Fair Public Trial.-The Peruvian legal system is based generally on
 the Napoleonic Code. Defendants have the right tobe present at the tral, at which
 time verdicts are rendered by a judge or a panel of judges following an investigation
 and the filing of charges. Sentences may be appealed, and judges may send cases
 back to lower courts or additional investigation. Prior to April 5, the 28 Supreme
 Court dges were nominated by the President (from slates supplied by an Advisory
 Committee) and approved by the Senate. After the April a takeover, 14 Supreme
 Court judges were ibmissed, and 3 others resigned in protest. President Fujimori
 
 
 then appointed new judges to a new Supreme Court consisting of 18 members. The
 Court of Constitutional Guarantees and the Advisory Committee mandated to nomi-
 nate judges were both disbanded. The President may replace and appoint judges
 and prosecutors; in practice, the court system is not independent of the executive
 branch.
 In September a new decree created a judicial career system, in which future
 entry-level judges will be chosen from the graduates of the planned Academy of
 Higher Studies in the Ministry of Justice. Post-graduate academy training will be
 a requirement for promotion throughout the judicial system, including the Supreme
 Court.
 There continued to be widespread charges of corruption and of the suborning of
 uds, police, and witnesses at all stages of the judicial process. Courts faced severe
 acog, a product of inefficiency, archaic case law and criminal procedural law,
 and the sharp increase in terrorism cases. The case backlog in the Supreme Court
 alone was 28,000. No one knows the size of the backlog for the entire judicial sys-
 tem, but estimates range between 250,000 and 500,000 for all types of cases.
 Human rights groups have documented hundreds of cases of persons who have been
 detained without bail while awaiting trial for periods of up to 4 years or longer.
 President Fujimori continued his program of p hsed rel ease of unconvicted prison
 inmates awaiting trial, especially those who had already been in custody for a time
 longer than the sentence or the crime with which the have been charged.
 Thie vast majority of human rights complaints made to the public prosecutor's of-
 ice during the past 10 years were not investigated adequately due to lack of police
 and military cooperation, resources, and official support. Provincial prosecutors at-
 tempting to investigate complaints in the emergency zones were threatened, ob-
 structed, and refused information by members of the armed forces. Following a pres-
 idential decree in late 1991, access and support for human rights prosecutors im-
 proved, but cooperation by the security forces with civilian prosecutor investigations
 is still limited, and the prosecutors themselves often failed to conduct investigations
 aggressively.
 Sendero and MRTA threats and intimidation of judges handling terrorism cases
 also account in part for the low conviction rate of accused terrorists. Since 1981 only
 571 people have been tried and convicted for terrorism. According to the Public Min-
 istry, this represents a conviction rate of approximately 10 percent. The extremely
 low rate of conviction in terrorism cases contributes to police/military frustration
 with the judicial process and to public tolerance of abuses committed by security
 forces operating against presumed terrorists. Following the events of April 5, special
 courts were created to try terrorism cases in which the identity of the audges would
 remain secret. An August decree classified nearly any terrorist act as treason, sub-
 jeet to trial by military tribunal with a maximum sentence of life imprisnment at
 hard labor. The civilian courts with secret judges began operating in September, at
 the same time the military courts began to handle terrorism cases. Human rights
 groups criticized these decrees and procedureas  a denial of due process. These
 groups reported that of over 70 cases expeditiously tried by military tribunals, all
 resulted in guilty verdicts. Civilian 'faceless judge" court rortedly are affected by
 the same inefficiency and inability to process cases that plague the normal civilian
 judicial system..
 With most terrorism trials now falling under military court jurisdiction, the pro-
 ceedings became hidden from public scrutiny. Decree laws were issued in 1992 de-
 signed to speed case processing and eliminate backlogs and waiting periods in ter-
 rorism cases. After a 30-day initial detention and investigation period (twice the 15-
 day maximum previously allowed), most cases appear to now fall under the jurisdic-
 tion of military tribunals, which must pass judgment on the cases within 10 days.
 An appeal may be made to the War Council, which has 10 days to decide on the
 appeal. A ninal appeal to the Supreme Court of Military Justice would be acted upon
 within 5 days. New decrees restricted defense attorneys to one active terrorism case
 each.
 On September 22, a special military tribunal sentenced Juan Carlos Quispe and
 Edilberto Macalupu to life imprisonment for treason in the Sendero assassination
 of police captain Carlos Verau. These legal proceedings took a record 20 days, re-
 fleting still other decree laws designed to speed up dramatically the legal process-
 ing of terrorism cases.
 On October 7, Sendero Luminoso founder Abimnel Guzman was sentenced by se-
 cret military tribunal to life imprisonment and assessed $25 billion plus interest in
 civil damages for treason against the State." Other senior Sendero leaders captured
 along with Guzman on September 12 were also senled to life in prison under the
 new decrees. Defense lawyers complained that the trial procedures were too abbre-
 
 
 478
 
 viated, that they were unable to cross-examine witnesses, and that President
 Fujimori had in effect announced the verdict before the trial.
 Guzman's lawyer argued that Guzman was a political prisoner not subject to
 criminal prosecution. However, Guzman publicly admitted that he was the "presi-
 dent" of Sendero Luminoso and was responsible for what he termed Sendero's "war
 against the Peruvian State. Guzman showed no signs of physical mistreatment and
 was allowed to address the press at length on one occasion. The nature of these
 trials--secret, brief, with little apparent time for the defense to act and limited abil-
 ity to cross examine or impeach witnesses--combined with a system in which the
 military makes arrests, prosecutes, and passes judgment raises serious questions
 about Peru's ability to ensure due process for persons who, unlike Guzman, plead
 innocence.
 The new Supreme Court apparently will continue to decide whether military and
 police offenders are tried in civilian courts or in the separate military court system.
 The military generally asserts .its jurisdiction in cases involving its personnel, and
 the Supreme Court has generally ruled in its favor. Under Peruvian law, those tried
 in military courts may not be retried for the same offense in civilian courts.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Constitution requires police to have a judicial warrant to enter a private dwelling,
 and this requirement is generally respected. The requirement is suspended in the
 emergency zones, however, and security forces in those areas routinely conduct
 searches of private homes without warrants.
 With training and encouragement by the army, a number of rural communities
 organized rondas to protect themselves against terrorist and bandit incursions. They
 have had a noticeable impact on curbing Sendero's presence in certain areas of the
 country. In some parts of the nation, rondas have existed for centuries as a form
 of social organization and to protect residents from invaders and rustlers. In most
 cases, peasants joined rondas voluntarily to defend against Sendero. However, many
 of the newer rondas were actively organized, and sometimes imposed, under the di-
 rection of the military authorities, with peasants sometimes coerced into participat-
 ing in ronda activities. Credible reports indicate some rondas engage in or support
 illegal activities, from cattle rustling to protection of the coca industry. Sendero is
 also credibly accused of regularly forcing peasants to join its military ranks, often
 for extended periods, and coercing their participation in terrorist attacks and execu-
 tions.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of speech
 and the press. With 8 television stations, 1 cable television system, 72 radio sta-
 tions, and 18 daily newspapers in Lima alone, Peruvians have access to a broad
 range of opinion and information. The Government owns one of the three national
 television networks, a radio network, and one newspaper. Most major opposition
 parties boast their own newspaper, and opposition figures also have frequent access
 to the government media.
 Following the April 5 takeover, the Government occupied print and broadcast
 media offices, closed a radio station and a weekly leftist newspaper and briefly
 jailed some 24 journalists. Though the measures were withdrawn wiihin 48 houri9
 with an apology from the President, many media sources expressed concern that
 such actions could be repeated.
 A number of journalists reported receiving phone calls from unidentified sources
 warning them off stories that might reflect advances by Sendero or lack of progress
 b the Government in the fight against terrorism. On the night of Apnil 5, Gustavo
 Gorriti, a well-known journalist and the author of a book on Sendero Luminoso, was
 arrested and taken into custody, reportedly by agents from the National Intelligence
 Service (SIN). Gorriti's computer was confiscated and authorities sought other
 records and information Gorriti had gathered for the sequel to his first book. Gorriti
 was released after 2 days, following intense U.S. Government and international pro-
 test. Human rights observers believe Gorriti's detention was connected to a long-
 standing public feud with Presidential security advisor Vladimiro Montesinos.
 Enrique Zileri, publisher of the influential weekly news magazine Caretas, lost a
 fimal appeal against a court suit for libel filed by Montsinos. Zileri had published
 an article about Montesinos and his work as a lawyer for a Colombian drug dealer.
 A restraining order prohibited Zileri and Caretas from mentioning Montesinos'
 name or publishing his photo. Many journalists and legal professionas felt this ac-
 tion had no real legal basis, since the basic allegation was backed up by official
 records and there was no argument that the material published met any of the basic
 standards for libel
 
 
 479
 Some journalists were jailed on suspicion of subversive activities. In September
 the Government arrestedMagno Sosa, a journalist based in Ayacudho, on terrorism
 charges. The Government has not provd     sny evidence against Sosa who had
 written articles critical of the Government, but he remained under detention. In De-
 cember the Defense Minister asked the Attorney General to sue Si magazine editor
 Ricardo Uceda for publishing a story that alleged that national intellignce and
 army persnnel had carried out the 1991 Barrios Altos massacre.
 Media sources expressd concern over Legislative Decree Number 25475, a vague-
 ly worded ordinance which holds journalists who allegedly assist seditious forces"
 n any way liable to crminal prosecution. First promulgated by the executive branch
 before the events of April 5 but derogated by Congress, President Fujimori rein-
 stated the decree aft   ste        ence, say meda representatives, "hang like
 a sword of Daniocles" over journaists.
 In separate actions MRTA and Sender forces occupied the offices of several radio
 stations and wire services, forcing the media outlets to transmit political propa-
 ganda messages. Snder also bombed several rural radio stations. Sender used
 threats to intimidate radio stations, journalists, and publications. The College of Pe-
 rvian Journalists reported that as many as 40 journalists have been killed in the
 past 12 years, many by Sendero violence. On June 5, a Sendero car bomb ex-oded
 outside Limna' Channel 2 television statsn, killing at least 5 persons and ifjuring
 over 20. On August 3, Santiago Jan Gomez was killed by a Sender  e assassination
 team for having refused to obey an "armed strike" in Barrenca, northern Lima de-
 partment.
 Academic freedom is generally more respected by the Government than by the
 subversives, who strive to control many un vers ities. Sendero and MRTA resort ex-
 tensively to threats and abuse against faculty, staff, and students in a number of
 universities which they seek to control. Sendro influence was most notable at the
 University of San Marcos, La Cantuta Teachers' University, the National Engineer-
 ing University (all in Lima), and the Universidad del Centro in Huancayo. Army
 units entered San Marcos and La Cantuta in May 1991 to paint out Sender propa-
 ganda and 'restore university freedom" with a show of military presence.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-These rights are expressly pro-
 vided for in the Constitution and are normally respected in practice except in areas
 under a state of emergency (where the right of assembly is suspended). Public meet-
 ings in plazas or streets ruire advance permission, which may be denied only for
 reasons of pubhic safety or health. Municipal authorities usually approved permits
 for demonstrations in Lima and nonemergency zones. Many unauthorized public
 meetin and demonstrations also occurred, and, for the most part, the Government
 dealt with them in a nonconfrontational manner. The police have occasionally used
 clubs, tear gas, and water cannons to break up marches or disperse large crowds
 but this has been the exception and not the role. These tactics were mostly used
 against striking public service workers, including nurses, school teachers, and social
 security workers.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-Roman Catholicism predominates in Peru, and the Con-
 stitution formally recognizes the Church 'as an mortant element in the historical,
 cultural, and moral development" of the nation. e Constitution also establishes
 the separation of church and state and ensures freedom of religion and conscience.
 These rights are respected in practice.
 Sender Luminoso issued death threats against members of various religious or-
 ganizations during  1992, including the Roman Catholic Church. Sender dem-
 onstrated increasing antagonism to organized rei  in gneral and to foreign cler-
 cyinptargar. Several religious workers were  by   ndero in 1991 and 1992,
 in cluding an Italian priest in October 1992 and Peruvian Presbyterians in June.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Rte-
 patriation.-The Constitution provides for the right of free movement, and there are
 political or legal constraints on foreign travel or emigration. Freedom of move-
 ment is legally suspended within the emergency zones, and travelers may be de-
 tained by authorities at any time. Lax contrls at checkpoints allow internal travel
 in security zones with little official interference. On June 10, following a spate of
 serious Sendero terrorist attacks in Lima, the Government ordered a nighttime ve-
 hicular curfew for the metrpoitan area which remained in effect until December
 2. At least three persons were shot to death by soldiers when they failed to obey
 commands to stp during curfew hours. Pedestrian traffic and limited vehicular traf-
 fic with official passes was permitted. Other domestic and international travel is not
 restricted by the Government for political reasons.
 Sendero conducted numerous "armed strikes" in various parts of the country, dur-
 which civilians were obliged to stay home or risk reprisals. Public and private
 veiicles operating during the strikes were subject to attack. In July Sender burned
 
 
 480
 a taxi driver to death in his vehicle in Lima. In September Sendero ambushed sev-
 eral vehicles traveling in a remote part of Ayacucho on a main route, burning the
 vehicles and killing at least five persons. Bandit ambushes of vehicles, especially
 inter-provincial buses, continued in 1992. Some bandits were found to have been off-
 duty police officers.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 President Fujimori, elected to office in 1990, interrupted the democratic process
 on April 5, 1992 by dissolving Congress and suspending the independent judiciary,
 with military and police support. He claimed that rampant corruption and institu-
 tional inefficiency inside the Government and congressional obstructionism forced
 him to establish a "Government of Emergency and National Reconstruction* under
 his direct control. The President charged that the Congress, the political parties,
 and the judiciary hamstrung his ability to address effectively what he termed the
 nation's most important problem, the growing threat posed by Sendero Luminoso.
 Opposition political parties claimed that the Government rebuffed repeated efforts
 to engage in a dialog. The April 5 events occurred as Congress was initiating an
 independent investigation of corruption charges made by the wife of President
 Fujimori against other members of the President's family. Those charges were sub-
 sequently dismissed by the Fujimori-controlled judiciary.
 While   there   was    strenuous   condemnation    of  President   Fujimori's
 extraconstitutional action by the international community and most of Peru's politi-
 cal elite, what he did was popular among the majority of Peruvians, especially those
 from the more disadvantaged classes. With unfettered control of the Government,
 Fujimori quickly issued a series of decree laws and other measures intended to re-
 form the Government and the economy, many of which had previously been rejected
 or modified by the deposed Congress.
 On May 18, at a special Meeting of Foreign Ministers of the Organization of
 American States (OAS), President Fujimori made a commitment to them that elec-
 tions would be held for a constituent congress. After several changes in the time-
 table and other details, elections were held on November 22, 1992, for an 80-mem-
 ber Democratic Constituent Congress (CCD) to rewrite the Constitution, promulgate
 new laws, and review previous legislation. The new Congress is to serve out the pre-
 vious Congress' term until July 28, 1995.
 After anil   with some of the smaller parties, the President dictated decrees reg-
 ulating the CCD elections. Major opposition parties briefly joined talks with the
 Government, but then refused to engage further, charging the Government with not
 accepting genuine dialog. Several traditional opposition political parties and new
 independent political groupings eventually participated in the CCD elections, albeit
 many with reservations. The two largest traditional parties, the American Popular
 Revolutionary Alliance (APRA) and Popular Action (AP), refused to participate. The
 fairness of the election rules was widely criticized, and the extent to which the CCD
 would exercise power independent of the executive branch was questioned. The elec-
 tions were monitored, at the Government's request, by over 200 OAS observers.
 These observers, as well as domestic ones, concluded that the elections were con-
 ducted freely and fairly, with significant popular participation. Most deficiencies
 were due to the lack of training and experience of electoral workers.
 A coup attempt in November underscored the fragility of the Government and the
 need for a prompt return to democracy. The President claimed that coup plotters,
 plus severalprominent opposition politicians, had sought to kill him. No proof, how-
 ever, was made public. Several military officers were jailed pending trial. By the
 end of the year, two politicians and two businessmen allegedly involved in the coup
 attempt claimed political asylum outside Peru, asserting the Government was perse-
 cuting them.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitute Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 A number of local private human rights organizations joined to form the Inde-
 pendent National Coordinating Committee for Human Rights, known as the
 oordinadra. These include the Commission for Human Rigts, the Institute for
 Legal Defense, the Association for Human Rights the Catholic Church's Episcopal
 Commission for Social Action, and the Center or tudies and Action for Peace. Sev-
 eral smaller groups work in the departmental capitals and other cities. These
 groups are widely considered to be credible, thorough, and impartial observers.
 Local groups produced documentary evidence of their longstanding and strenuous
 denunciations of Sender Lminoso as the single largest violator of human rights
 
 
 481
 in Peru, while simultaneously denouncing the many violations committed by mem-
 bers of the Peruvian Government.
 President Fujimori nonetheless repeatedly accused some international and na-
 tional human rights groups of failing to condemn equally the human rights offenses
 committed by the terrorists, thus serving the ends of terrorism. His repeated attacks
 on human rights organizations were symptomatic of the difficult working environ-
 ment these groups face in Peru. Local human rights organizations complain that
 they are limited by the military in their efforts to investigate human rights abuses
 in the emergency zones and that their requests to the Government for information
 are usually ignored. Legitimate fears of attacks by Sendero also greatly limit the
 ability of human rights monitors to investigate reported cases of abuse. In a case
 that occurred prior to the capture of Guzman, Jose Ramirez Garcia, a human rights
 monitor and writer on political violence from Cuzco, was detained in August accord-
 ing to reliable reports, for photocopying a book about the Shining Path and for alleg-
 edy having Sender literature in his home. He was tried and released.
 Followi       September 12 arrest of Guzman, the Government and the media
 p ublished the identities of presumed Sendero leaders living abroad and inside Peru.
 Several of those identified were respected members of local self-help or human
 rights organizations. Human rights groups expressed concern that the Government
 was trying to limit their effectiveness by tarring legitimate human rights activists
 as Sendero supporters. For example, Carlos Chipoco, a respected human rights ac-
 tivist, was included on a list compiled by security services of persons allegedly sym-
 pathetic to Sendero. The Government provided no evidence against Chipoco, nor was
 he charged with any crime.
 Several foreign nongovernmental human rights organizations sent representatives
 to Peru during 1992 to investigate the human rights situation. The president of the
 Inter-American Commission on Human Rights (IAHRC) visited Peru in May and
 Americas Watch sent a delegation in July. The IAHRC president was denied access
 to Lima's maximum security Canto Grande Prison, but met with Prime Minister
 Oscar de la Puent. Several human rights groups and the ICRC were invited to par-
 ticipat in seminars and to offer human rights instruction at military and police
 academies.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sez, Religion, Language, or SociaJ Status
 The Constitution grants women equality with men, and laws on marriage, divorce,
 and property rights do not discriminate against women. Nevertheless, tradition im-
 pedes access by women to leadership roles in major social and political institutions.
 tsident Fujimori appointed Blanca Neida Colan as Attorney General and Maria
 Herminia Drag Correa as National Comptroller, but has no women in his Cabinet.
 Sexual violence, including spouse abuse, is a chronic problem. A special police cen-
 ter, staffed by policewomen operates in Lima to provide legal, medical, and psy-
 chiatric assistance to abused spouses and children. Police in Lima receive numerous
 formal complaints of rape daily, but estimate that less than 10 percent are reported.
 Of the 2,800 rape cases tried in Lima in 1991, only 340 resulted in convictio'ns. A
 number of women s organizations and feminist groups are active in Peru.
 Peru's large indigenous population and its small black population face pervasive
 discrimination and social prejudice. Indigenous people, mostly speakers of Quechu,
 Aymara, and other native languages, traditionally ack access to public services and
 support. Peruvian public investment is focused largely on the coast, drawing impov-
 erished migrants to the cities, especially Lima. Recognizing this fact, the Govern-
 ment announced plans to redirect the flow of resources and services topoor, largely
 Indian, rural areas. Development efforts, however, have been impeded by the dif-
 ficulty and cost of providing services to chidre reas and by the cntinued delib-
 erate disruption of these efforts by Sendere.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The Constituent Assembly elected on November 22
 is to rewrite the 1979 Constitution. That Constitution provided for freedom of asso-
 ciation  and, with the exception of judiciafy, police, military, and military
 parastatals, the right to foriu trade unions without prior authorization. A labor
 union may be suspended or dissolved under the 1979 Constitution only upon request
 of the umon or upon cancellation of its registration. Unions, industry-wide federa-
 tions, and confederations all freely affiliate with international labor organizations.
 A comprehensive labor law was promulgated in 1992, which for the first time de-
 fines, and inherently limits, the nature of a trade union. President Fujimori has de-
 clared that the new law is necessary to establish a free and competitive labor mar-
 ket which will increase investment and employment. The new law, as clarified by
 implementing regulations, does not require prior government authorization to form
 
 
 482
 a union, but provides for a legal recognition process. It allows for multiple forms
 of unions across company and professional lines, thus permitting multiple unions in
 the same company. The 1992 law enumerates tie types of activity in which unions
 may engage, but prohibits political activity, coercion, or illegal use of union funds,
 and imposes new record keeping and reporting obligations on unions. Candidates for
 union office must be employed at least 1 year in the company. Private and public
 sector unions in the same field may not join toiether. Workers in probationary sta-
 tus or on 1-year ontracts are not eigible for union membership. It is estimated that
 60 percent of the country's labor force works in the informal sector. In the formal
 Peruvian economy, probably less than 15 percent of the labor force is organized.
 The 1979 Constitution provides the right to strike 'according to law." The new
 law establishes that stries may be called only after approval by all workers, not
 just union members, voting with secret ballots. Strikes in essential public services
 must provide sufficient workers, as determined by the employer, to maintain oper-
 ations. The 1992 law specilies the conditions under which a strike may be declared
 illegal, which include striking in defiance of an order not to strike, any violence,
 strikes in the public sector except as noted above, or failure to terminate a strike
 following an agreement to terminate. Most strikes in Peru in recent years have been
 determined to be illegal.
 Several complaints against Peru involving freedom of association or collective bar-
 ganingrtrictions were examined by supervisory bodies of the International Labor
 Organization (ILO) in 1992. The ILO Governing Body at several of its meetings for
 example, expressed deep onern at allegations of murders, disappearances, and at-
 tacks on teacher trade unionists during a strike in 1991 and urged the Government
 to determine the whereabouts of four missin trade unionists. At year's end the
 Governing Body had under examination anothier complaint dealing with military
 and police intervention at trade union headquarters and the detention of trade
 union officials during the emergency measures of April Union activists have also
 been threatened by terrorist groups. In December Pedro Huillca became the third
 labor leader to be murdered in 1992 in a terrorist-type attack.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collecti ely.-While the right to bargain
 collectively is constitutionally guaranteed, there are restrictions. Under the f992
 law bargaiing agreements are now considered contractual agreements valid only
 for the life of the contract. Productivity provisions must be included in any collective
 bargainin agreement. The amount of time union officials may devote to union work
 with pay is limited to 30 days per year. If there is no existing labor contract at the
 professional or industry level, unions must negotiate with each company individ-
 ually, unless the affected employers agree to industry-wide negotiations.
 Unions must present their contract demands 30 to 60 days before expiration of
 existing contracts. Employers are now required to disclose essential financial data
 to unions, which unions are required to keep confidential. The union may request
 binding arbitration, and the Labor Ministry can choose an arbitrator if parties can-
 not agree. Workers, however, may opt for a strike in lieu of arbitration, but this
 has not yet been tested. The Ministry may impose compulsory binding arbitration
 in the case of essential services if agreement is not reached through negotiations
 or conciliation.
 "Certain workers,* not further defined, are protected against arbitrary dismissal
 under the 1992 labor law. Although discrimination against union members or orga-
 nizers is illegal, employers make -ull use of various legal mechanisms to minimize
 a union presence. In practice outright harassment of union members by employers
 is uncommon. Union activists have been threatened by terrorist grups.
 Labor laws and regulations are applied uniformly throughoutthe  contry.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The constitutional prohibition
 against compulsory labor is generally respected. In 1991 a Penal Code provision was
 repealed under which a judge culd commit a savage" to a penal agricultural colony
 involving compulsory labor for an unspecified period up to 20 years, irrespective of
 the maximum sentence that would be applicable if his crime had been committed
 by a "civilized man." The Government's presence outside of metropolitan areas is,
 however, limited. In the past there have been unverified reports of compulsory labor
 on plantations in remote areas. Sendero Luminoso also engages in forcible recruit-
 ment of cadres and workers.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-Children under 14 may not be le-
 gally employed. Children ages 16 to 21 may constitute up to 15 percent of a compa-
 ny's work force and may be employed for periods not to exceed 18 months. Workers
 between 14 and 24 must have completed their primary schooling before being hired
 in apprentice programs and are entitled to receive the minimum wage. Minimum
 age laws for    d employment are not widely enforced. Children of all ages work
 in the informal sector.
 
 
 483
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-Most wages lag behind the cost of living, and
 many Peruvians must seek secondary employment to supplement their incomes. The
 legal minimum wage is insufficient to provide basic requirements for a worker and
 family. A September 1990 World Bank report indicated that 55 percent of all Peru-
 vians live in extreme poverty, and economic conditions have not improved since
 then.
 The Labor Code provides for an 8-hour day and an official 48-hour workweek for
 men and a 45-hour workweek for women, including 24 hours' rest per week and 30
 days' paid annual vacation. Given job competition however, these and other benefits
 are readily sacrificed in exchange for regular employment.             _
 There are government standards for industrial health and safetv, but they are
 rarely enforced either by the employers or by the Government, which has no i nspe-
 tors. Accidents are common, and there is usually no emphasis on prevention. Wen
 accidents occur, however, employers normally provide at least minimal compensa-
 tion voluntarily.
