Peru
In recent years, public protests against large-scale mining projects, as well as
other government policies and private sector initiatives, have led to numerous
confrontations between police and protesters, and resulted in the shooting
deaths of civilians by state security forces. While the number of deaths
declined significantly during the first nine months of 2013, there has been little
progress in investigating these cases or taking steps to ensure that police comply
with international norms on the use of lethal force.
Despite the landmark convictions in 2009 and 2010 of former President Alberto
Fujimori, his advisor Vladimiro Montesinos, several army generals, and members
of a government death squad, progress on cases involving abuses committed
under earlier administrations has been very limited.
Deaths in Protests
As of September 2013, 27 civilians had been killed during protests since
President Ollanta Humala took office in July 2011. The number of these fatal
shootings declined from 18 in the first eight months of 2012 to three in the
same period of 2013. The National Office for Dialogue and Sustainability, a government
body created in August 2012, has promoted dialogue to seek peaceful
resolution of social conflicts that drive protests. However, there has been little
progress determining the circumstances in which the deaths occurred and holding
to account police or military personnel who used force unlawfully.
Confronting Past Abuses
Peru’s Truth and Reconciliation Commission estimated that almost 70,000 people
died or were subject to enforced disappearance during the country’s armed
conflict between 1980 and 2000. Many were victims of atrocities by the Shining
Path and other insurgent groups; others were victims of human rights violations
by state agents.
Former President Fujimori was sentenced in 2009 to 25 years in prison for
killings and “disappearances” in 1991 and 1992. His intelligence advisor,
Vladimiro Montesinos, three former army generals, and members of the Colina Court ruling that public personalities must assume a greater burden of proof in
libel cases where a public interest is involved.
A bill that would replace such prison sentences for criminal defamation with
community service and fines is still awaiting a vote in the legislature. Although
Congress approved the bill in July 2011, former President García lodged objections,
and an amended version was never approved.
Reproductive Rights
Women and girls in Peru have the right to seek abortions only in cases of risk to
the health or life of the woman. However, the country lacks clear protocols that
enable health providers to determine in which specific circumstances an abortion
may be lawful. Multiple United Nations human rights monitoring bodies
have all called on Peru to establish such protocols, as well as to legalize abortion
in cases in which the pregnancy results from rape. At time of writing, the
government had failed to comply with these recommendations.
Disability Rights
Under Peru’s system of judicial interdiction, judges can determine that individuals
with certain intellectual or mental disabilities are legally “incompetent”
and assign them legal guardians, effectively suspending their basic civil rights,
including the right to vote. International and regional human rights bodies have
called on Peru to abolish judicial interdiction—or guardianship—because it is
incompatible with Peru’s obligations under the Convention on the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities.
In December 2012, the General Law on People with Disabilities entered force,
but as of October 2013 the executive had yet to adopt its implementing
regulations. The law aims to bring existing national legislation into line with the
convention, protecting the right of people with disabilities to act in their own
interests, with appropriate support when necessary. However, a commission to
revise the civil code, created by the General Law on People with Disabilities,
had not been established as of October 2013. Peruvian law still permits
involuntary detention for treatment of people with disabilities who are under
guardianship.
Key International Actors
In March 2013, in its concluding observations on Peru’s fifth periodic report, the
UN Human Rights Committee recommended that Peru “effectively prevent and
eradicate the excessive use of force by law enforcement officials and members
of the security forces” and “intensify its efforts to eradicate torture.” It also
called on Peru to adopt legislation to prohibit discrimination on the basis of
sexual orientation and gender identity, to allow abortion in cases of rape, and
to “swiftly adopt a national protocol regulating the practice of therapeutic abortion.”
In September 2013, the UN Subcommittee on Prevention of Torture and Other
Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment visited 26 prisons and
police stations in different parts of Peru. Peru ratified the Optional Protocol to
the Convention against Torture in 2006. The subcommittee’s chairperson
expressed hope that by the end of 2013, Peru would have instituted a national
prevention mechanism against torture and ill-treatment, and given it sufficient
funds to function effectively.
As a relatively new member of the UN Human Rights Council, Peru has played a
positive role in voting for a number of resolutions that address human rights
violations in countries like Sri Lanka, Belarus, and Iran. However, Peru took a
step back backwards by deciding to no longer sponsor country-specific resolutions
at the UN.