Peru
Justice for past abuses continues to be a leading human rights concern in Peru.
While authorities have made some progress in holding accountable those responsible
for abuses committed during its 20 year armed conflict (1980-2000), most
perpetrators continue to evade justice. Investigations of massacres and “disappearances”
by government forces have been held up by lack of military cooperation
and insufficient funding.
Cases of torture and police brutality continue to occur. Victims and witnesses in
torture cases are vulnerable to intimidation and reprisals. Journalists reporting on
corruption in Peru’s provincial cities face harassment and physical attacks, apparently
instigated by local authorities.
Confronting the Past
In 2003 the Truth and Reconciliation Commission reported that left-wing insurgents
and government forces committed grave abuses during the 1980s and
1990s. Peru has made significant progress in prosecuting former members of
insurgent groups for their past crimes. After annulling in 2003 the sentences of
more than 700 prisoners convicted without due process for crimes under Peru’s
antiterrorism law, the state has conducted new trials that have resulted in the
conviction of more than 450 people for killings, attacks with explosives, and other
violent crimes. In October 2006, the National Criminal Court sentenced Abimael
Guzmán, leader of the Shining Path, an armed group notorious for atrocities, and
his partner Elena Iparraguirre, to life in prison. The court held them responsible
for a 1983 massacre of 69 peasants at Lucanamarca and numerous killings and
car-bombings. Nine other Shining Path leaders received lesser prison sentences.
Peru has also made some progress in bringing to justice those responsible for
abuses committed by state agents during the rule of Alberto Fujimori (1990-
2000). More than 50 alleged members of the Colina Group, a specialized squad
of military and intelligence officers which was created in 1991 to “eliminate” suspected
terrorists, are on trial in Lima. An ad-hoc solicitor’s office, created by
Fujimori himself before he abandoned the country and backed at the outset by
former President Toledo, has played a vital role in these investigations.
Altogether, more than 1,780 individuals implicated in abuses and corruption during
this period are facing charges.
Based on evidence collected by the ad-hoc solicitor, numerous charges have
been brought against Fujimori himself since he left office and took up residence
in Japan in 2000. In November 2005 Fujimori left Japan and arrived unexpectedly
in Santiago, Chile, evidently intending to return to politics in Peru. As of October
2006 a Chilean Supreme Court justice was still considering the Peruvian government’s
request for him to be extradited to Peru. More than sufficient grounds
exist to justify Fujimori’s extradition for the killing of 25 people in two separate
incidents in 1991 and 1992 attributed to the Colina Group (the Barrios Altos and
La Cantuta cases). Additionally, abundant evidence has been presented to support
other charges of corruption and abuse of authority. In May 2006 a Supreme
Court panel granted Fujimori pre-trial release, but barred him from leaving the
country. The Criminal Chamber of the Chilean Supreme Court is expected to make
a final decision on the extradition request in 2007.
Compared with the record of the ad-hoc solicitor’s office, advances in the prosecution
of former military and police personnel for human rights violations committed
during the first decade of the conflict have been far more modest. As of July
2006 judges had filed charges in at least 37 cases and at least 188 others were
still under preliminary examination by prosecutors, but there were only a handful
of convictions, only one of them involving a commanding officer. In March 2006 a
Lima court sentenced a police colonel to 16 years of imprisonment and three junior
officers to 15 years for the “disappearance” in October 1990 of student Ernesto
Castillo Paez—the first ever sentence in Peru for a forced disappearance.
Peru’s new president, Alan García Pérez, who took office in July 2006, served an
earlier term during the second half of the 1980s, at the height of the country’s
political violence. During his first presidency killings and “disappearances” were
widespread and went almost completely unpunished. President García’s responsibility
for a 1986 massacre at El Fronton, a maximum security jail—for which the
Truth Commission considered him politically responsible—has been scrutinized
by prosecutors, although no criminal charges have been brought against him.
Investigations currently pending in the courts include this case and two army
massacres that occurred during García’s first term in office, in which scores of soldiers face charges. In September 2006 the government passed a decree committing
the state to cover the legal fees of police and military defendants in human
rights cases.
Up until now, lack of cooperation by the armed forces has hampered faster
progress of these investigations. The Ministry of Defense has consistently failed
to provide information needed by prosecutors and judges to identify men who
served in rural counterinsurgency bases during the conflict and who are potentially
key witnesses. It has also failed to identify servicemen known only by their
aliases, while denying that official records of this information exist.
The probe currently underway into the alleged responsibility of former presidential
candidate Ollanta Humala for the torture and “disappearance” of civilians
while he was stationed in the Madre Mia counterinsurgency base in 1992 exemplifies
this lack of military cooperation. In August 2006 a Lima court charged
Humala with the “disappearance” and killing of two people and the wounding of
a third and banned him from leaving the country. The prosecutor was unable to
obtain from the former minister of defense a list of the men stationed at the base
at the time, and the investigating judge had to repeat the request. Its outcome
was not known at this writing.
The failure of successive governments to provide enough resources for these
investigations has made it difficult for prosecutors to process cases swiftly. The
special prosecutor in Ayacucho, who is responsible for investigating around 200
cases, has insufficient staff and equipment. In other districts prosecutors have to
deal with complex human rights cases along with their regular workload, all without
additional assistance.
Torture and Police Brutality
Torture and police brutality continue to be a problem. The Human Rights
Commission (Comision de Derechos Humanos, COMISEDH), a human rights NGO
that has monitored the issue over many years, documented 11 such complaints in
the first six months of 2006.
Witness Protection
Victims pursuing complaints of torture in the courts, as well as their relatives, are
sometimes attacked and intimidated. In April 2006 for example, Juan Fidel
Zamudio Bocángel, a victim of a police beating whose case was being tried, was
reportedly confronted in the street by men who tried to force him into a station
wagon. He fought them off, but one pulled a gun and shot him in the back as he
was running away. Although he survived, the bullet perforated his lung.
Attacks on Journalists
Journalists who publicize abuses by local government officials are vulnerable to
intimidation, assault, and even murder by individuals acting in support of, or
hired by, municipal authorities.
During 2005 and 2006 courts made some progress in solving past killings of journalists.
In December 2005 a court in Ancash sentenced the mayor of Yungay,
Amaro León León, and two accomplices to 17 years in prison for the 2004 murder
of radio journalist Antonio de la Torre Echeandía after he had broadcast accusations
against local government officials. However, the defendants appealed and
in July 2006 the First Transitory Criminal Bench of the Supreme Court absolved
and released León and the other two defendants. According to local human rights
groups, the Supreme Court panel disregarded a large body of evidence incriminating
the three.
Human Rights Defenders
Peru’s human rights organizations are frequently criticized and accused of bias in
their legal work on behalf of victims. In September 2006 Vice-President Luis
Giampetri, whose alleged role in the El Fronton prison massacre has also been
investigated by prosecutors, convened a meeting of the congressional intelligence
committee (which he chairs) to scrutinize the work of the Legal Defense
Institute (Instituto de Defensa Legal, IDL). Lawyers from IDL, a well-respected
human rights organization which specializes in justice issues, represent relatives
of one of the El Fronton victims. Giampetri claimed that IDL was interfering in trials
affecting the military and affecting the morale of the armed forces.
In November 2006, Peru’s congress approved the first draft of a bill that would
allow the government to “supervise” the activities of Peruvian NGOs that receive
foreign funding. The bill, which posed a major threat to the independence of the
country’s human rights NGOs, was on the brink of final approval but was returned
for further debate after strong protests from civil society groups.
Key International Actors
In April 2006, the Inter-American Court of Human Rights ordered Peru to “identify,
judge and punish” those responsible for the torture and death of Bernabé
Baldeón García, a peasant who died after torture by an army patrol in 1990.
In July 2006 the United Nations Committee against Torture issued its concluding
observations on Peru’s periodic report on the implementation of the UN
Convention against Torture. The Committee noted that complaints of torture continue
to be received. It expressed concern that victims or witnesses seeking
redress in court are sometimes threatened and intimidated and urged Peru to set
up an appropriate mechanism to protect them.