 PERU
 
 The 1933 Peruvian Constitution, in force except where
 in conflict with the Revolutionary Statute of 1968,
 guarantees rights of life, liberty and security.
 Following public disturbances in July 1976, certain
 individual guarantees--habeas corpus, inviolability.
 of the home, right to strike and freedom from
 deportation--were suspended. These constitutional
 guarantees were restored on August 28, 1977, with
 the lifting of the state of emergency. Peru has
 embarked on a transition to constitutional democratic
 rule. The Government of Peru supports human rights
 in international fora.
 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Torture
 There have been a few reports of torture; some may
 be true but there is no evidence that such practices
 are condoned by the Peruvian Government. The Minister
 of Interior has publicly pledged to investigate thorough-
 ly every case of alleged torture or mistreatment and
 to see that the guilty are punished.
 b. Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 Peruvian penal facilities are often rudimentary and
 overcrowded. In a small number of reported cases
 suspects have died while in police custody. Occasionally
 in the past the Government has appeared to condone
 arrest, detention, or deportation for what it perceived
 to be security reasons. Otherwise it does not generally
 approve violations. However, local Peruvian authorities
 on occasion violate the rights of suspected criminals
 or potential troublemakers.
 c. Arbitrary Arrest or Imprisonment
 During the 13-month state of emergency in 1976-77,
 the Government of Peru detained and sometimes deported
 
 (207)
 
 
 those whose activities were perceived to be a threat
 to internal security. These emergency measures were
 used primarily against labor leaders, as well as
 against some leftists.
 Prior to and immediately after a July 19, 1977 general
 strike, 400-500 labor leaders/activists were temporarily
 detained. Cuajone mine labor leader Victor Cuadros was
 deported and has not been allowed to return. All of the
 labor leaders were released but six, who are now being
 tried on state of emergency charges.
 Of the workers fired as a result of participation in the
 July 19 strike, perhaps as many as 3,000 have not been
 rehired. Union headquarters were allowed to reopen.
 With growing economic problems and inflation, particular-
 ly since the implementation of a free exchange market on
 October 10, 1977, local strikes have been more frequent.
 Thus far the Peruvian Government has been generally
 conciliatory in dealing with them. However, there
 have been several arbitrary arrests since the suspension
 of the state of emergency.
 One case which has attracted considerable attention
 is that of Callao slum leader Jesus Alberto Paez Vargas,
 who disappeared in August 1977. Paez' neighbors and
 supporters staged several occupations of Lima churches
 after his disappearance, but Peruvian authorities
 have consistently denied any knowledge of his where-
 abouts.
 Amnesty International has reported that members of a
 federation of teachers unions have been held on unspeci-
 fied charges in an isolated penal colony since June 1976.
 No denial of this has been issued by the Peruvian
 Government.
 d. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 With restoration of suspended constitutional provisions in
 August 1977, habeas corpus guarantees are in force. There
 remain instances of detention without speedy public trial,
 
 
 209
 but such delays are due mainly to Peru's overburdened
 and anachronistic legal system. Quechua-speaking peas-
 ants often find access to swift and impartial justice
 blocked by centuries-old barriers of prejudice and
 ignorance.
 e. Invasion of the Home
 The Constitutional guarantee of inviolability of the
 home was restored in August 1977. There are no indi-
 cations of subsequent violations by Peruvian authorities.
 2. Governmental Policies Relating to the Fulfillment of
 Such Vital Needs as Food, Shelter, Health Care and
 Education
 A major goal of the Peruvian Revolution has been to trans-
 form the economic and social system through agrarian and
 industrial reforms so as to improve the status of the poor
 majority and to enable them to participate in a vaguely
 defined "social democracy". Policies on health care and
 education have also been geared to extending services to
 the masses. Government policies have not always had the
 intended effect but their intent was clear. Corruption at
 lower levels of Government has long been a problem and
 marginally diverts resources from the poor.
 Peru is now in a severe economic crisis which has forced
 the Government to resort to austerity measures. A reduc-
 tion in subsidies on basic commodities, prompted by the
 economic crisis, has adversely affected the poor. Govern-
 ment resources which could have been directed to economic
 development have been diminished to some extent by large-
 scale arms purchases and military expenditures in the past
 few years. The Government has stated publicly that new
 arms purchases will cease at least until 1980.
 3. Respect for Civil and Political Liberties Including:
 a. Freedom of Thought, Speech, Press, Religion, and
 Assembly
 The Constitution of 1933 guarantees liberty of conscience
 
 
 and religion. These rights are respected in practice,
 and individuals are not persecuted for their religious
 beliefs. The Government's broad interpretation of what
 constitutes individual libel or an offense against
 the state and the armed forces has resulted in instances
 of restriction of freedom of expression.
 National circulation daily newspapers have been under
 direct Government editorial control since 1974.
 Peru's "Tupac Amaru" Plan for the period 1977-1980
 states in very general terms the Government's commitment
 to turn over the national newspapers to their respective
 "organized sectors of society". In late 1977 President
 Morales Bermudez declared that during the 1978 Constitu-
 ent Assembly election campaign the political parties will
 have "access" to Government-controlled media. Until very
 recently, independent magazines and weekly newspapers were
 subject to prior Ministry of Interior "evaluation", but
 instances of forced deletion of material were rare. This
 pre-censorship was suspended on November 17, 1977.
 Since termination of the state of emergency, freedom
 of assembly has been generally observed.
 b. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel and Emigration
 The constitutional guarantee of free domestic and foreign
 travel was restored in August 1977 and is being respected
 in practice. Some political figures deported in the
 past few years remain abroad. It is unclear whether
 they are allowed to return to Peru or have decided
 not to return, for the time being at least.
 c. Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 During the 1968-76 period of the Peruvian Military Revo-
 lution, this freedom was severely restricted. However,
 in 1977, the Government has publicly committed itself
 to Constituent Assembly elections in 1978 and a return
 to civilian constitutional rule by 1980. On November
 16, 1977, the Government announced a detailed election
 law, and interest in elections is growing among
 
 
 211
 civilian political parties and groups. The Government
 has held numerous meetings with recognized political
 leaders.
 4. Government Attitude and .Reco.rd Regarding Internation-
 al and Non-Governmental Investigation of Alleged Vio-
 lations of Human Rights
 The Government of Peru supports both the UN and the Inter-
 American Human Rights Commissions. Peru has signed (but
 not yet ratified) the American Convention on Human Rights.
 The Government has also made observance of internationally
 recognized human rights standards a part of its political
 plan- for 1977-80. -.
 The Amnesty -nternational Report 1977 stated that, after
 the September 1976"arrest0 -ofLima--universi-ty--students  ...
 serious allegations of torture were made by some detain-
 ees. Amnesty wrote to the Peruvian Minister of Interior
 to welcome official announcements that there would be an
 inquiry into the allegations. The Ministry subsequently
 denied the charge of torture.
 
 
