 PERU
 
 President*Fernando Belaunde took office in July 1980, following
 free and open elections held in accordance with the 1979
 Constitution written by an elected constituent assembly. The
 Constitution established a republic with an executive branch, a
 bicameral legislature, and an autonomous judicial system. It also
 provided for an independent Public Ministry, headed by an
 autonomous attorney general who functions both as a prosecutor and
 an ombudsman.
 Peru's return to democracy came after more than a decade of
 military rule that began with a coup in 1968. The authoritarian
 military governments attempted to impose social change from
 above. The Belaunde Government has sought to eliminate vestiges
 of authoritarianism, strengthening democratic institutions and
 guaranteeing Peruvians long-denied basic political rights.
 The Belaunde administration also attempts to achieve equitable
 economic growth through generally market oriented economic
 policies. However, as the result of adverse factors including a
 legacy of statism and debt inherited from the military regime,
 worldwide recession and consequent low prices for Peruvian raw
 material exports, and natural disasters, some economic targets
 were not met in 1983, which increased social and political
 pressures throughout the country.
 Concurrently, in late 1982 and 1983 Peru was beset by a sharp
 increase in attacks by the Sendero Luminoso ("Shining Path")
 terrorists centering on three poverty-stricken central mountain
 departments. The Sendero Luminoso assassinated an increasing
 number of villagers and local officials in an effort to bring
 about a generalized revolution, creating strong pressures on the
 Government for effective counterterrorist action. During 1983,
 the terrorists spread their violence to other areas of the
 country, notably Lima itself, creating a climate of fear and
 indignation. Sendero Luminoso has been denounced by all
 participants in the Peruvian democratic process, including
 representatives of the Marxist left.
 In late 1982, President Belaunde acceded to public clamor that he
 deal with the growing terrorist threat by sending military forces
 into an "emergency zone" composed of portions of the three
 affected departments. In accordance with "state of emergency"
 provisions of the Constitution, certain specific guarantees were
 suspended and remained suspended in the "emergency zone"
 throughout 1983, with military officers exercising political
 authority in the zone. The spread of terrorist violence to Lima
 in late May provoked the declaration in May of a nationwide state
 of emergency (separate from the decree covering the emergency
 zone), which the Government allowed to lapse in mid-September to
 facilitate a nationwide campaign for municipal elections in
 November.
 Although the nationwide state of emergency had little impact on
 daily life for most Peruvians, those living in the emergency zone
 were affected by the special regime there. operating under a
 unified "political military command," units of Peru's three
 national police services worked with soldiers and marines to
 reestablish government control in the zone. The security force
 achieved some apparent successes in February and March, but a
 series of communal massacres by the terrorists in April
 demonstrated that government control in the region was spotty and
 
 (673)
 
 
 674
 that terrorist cadres retained an ability to operate at will. The
 region's natural isolation, compounded by its cultural distance
 from Westernized news media along the coast, made information
 gathering or independent verification of responsibility for events
 difficult. But the pattern of developments demonstrated that most
 residents of the region were less secure in their homes and
 persons in 1983 than in 1982.
 Government statistics make clear how the situation in the
 emergency zone deteriorated. From the onset of significant
 terrorist violence in May 1980 until the end of 1982, some 166
 persons (including 27 police, 71 civilians, and 48 terrorists)
 lost their lives. Speaking to foreign newsmen on August 19, 1983,
 Interior Minister Luis Percovich provided an updated casualty
 figure of 1,580 (police losses given as 59, civilians 465, and
 terrorists 1,033). Almost all these deaths occurred in the
 emergency zone.
 The increasing death toll was accompanied by reports in Lima's
 opposition press, echoed by some political leaders and
 commentators, concerning "disappearances" and other abuses
 allegedly committed by the security forces. Amnesty International
 expanded on these charges in August and September. High military
 and government officials uniformly and categorically rejected the
 accusations, pointing out specific factual errors, although some
 officials acknowledged the possibility that abuses were committed
 by individual security force personnel acting without Official
 sanction.
 Although the Belaunde government has tried to promote human
 rights, it appears that some violations did occur in 1983 in the
 course of the Government's struggle against the terrorists. The
 Belaunde administration has said, however, that it will not
 condone such violations.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1  Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Unlawful or Arbitrary Deprivation of Life
 The terrorist violence that began in Peru in May 1980 accelerated
 in 1983. Losses among the terrorists themselves increased as
 security forces took countermeasures.
 Although Sendero Luminoso initially aimed its violence at selected
 targets such as police, government authorities, and "exploitative"
 merchants and landlords, in 1983 it expanded its violence which
 led to a higher civilian death toll. The worst incident occurred
 in early April in the emergency zone, when a Sendero-led band
 numbering some 200 persons attacked and massacred villagers in the
 Andean community of Lucanamarca. The 67 people who died there
 nearly doubled the civilian death figure over the preceding three
 years. On July 11, the Sendero attacked the ruling Accion Popular
 party headquarters in Lima, killing three and injuring others.
 Subsequent terrorist attacks added substantially to the Lima death
 toll. The Sendero Luminoso has not issued any statements
 concerning these actions.
 The authorities' response to Sendero's escalated activity both
 produced higher losses in terrorist ranks and generated
 controversy. The bulk of those termed "terrorists" were killed in
 what the security forces called "armed confrontations" in the
 emergency zone. But an August report by Amnesty International
 
 
 675
 asserted that many of the dead were "extrajudicially killed"
 subsequent to their capture and interrogation. Amnesty
 International said its report was based on "a broad range" of
 sources, including communications from opposition politicians and
 media reports. Amnesty International also based its report in
 part on official statistics, including communiques issued in April
 and May by the emergency zone political military command which
 referred repeatedly to deaths suffered by Sendero in "armed
 encounters" but made no mention of terrorists either injured or
 captured or, for that matter, of security force losses. Amnesty
 International held that these statistics indicated that those
 taken prisoner were subsequently killed. (The news weekly Caretas
 uncovered one person, alive and well in Lima, who had been
 reported by Amnesty International to have been shot in cold blood
 by security forces.) The Amnesty International report also cited
 other "extrajudicial killings" carried out "by or with the
 acquiescence of government authorities." This referred to the
 death, in late January, of eight Peruvian journalists in the
 isolated Andean community of Uchuraccay. A special nonpartisan
 investigative commission, appointed by the Peruvian Government and
 headed by author Mario Vargas Llosa, determined that the eight
 died at the hands of local villagers who, acting under the
 conviction that the police encouraged their doing so, resolved
 beforehand to kill (presumed) terrorists entering their
 communities and had so misidentified the journalists. The Vargas
 Llosa commission stated its absolute conviction that the political
 military command did not encourage such vigilante-type actions on
 a systematic basis but that in isolated cases security forces
 supported such actions.
 b. Disappearance
 The question of disappeared persons ("desaparecidos") became a
 major political issue in August-September 1983. Until then,
 charges that security forces were responsible for the
 disappearance and death in the emergency zone of persons presumed
 to be terrorists came solely from political and press figures on
 the left. Amnesty International's August report focused public
 attention on the issue, however, and listed several cases of
 prisoners described as "disappeared and subsequently found dead."
 Alan Garcia, Secretary General of Peru's leading opposition party,
 the American People's Revolutionary Alliance, paid a campaign
 visit to the zone on August 27 and subsequently announced that he
 had been presented there with a list of several hundred
 "desaparecidos." Two weeks later, Lima's leading
 television-documentary program, "Vision," broadcast a report on
 the subject citing 160 cases. The president of Lima's bar
 association, following a visit to the zone, also expressed concern
 about reports of disappeared persons. Government officials
 vehemently denied that security forces were responsible for
 disappearances and asserted that Sendero terrorists customarily
 killed persons they carried off. Some Government spokespersons
 held that persons who disappeared were Sendero recruits who, if
 they were found dead, died in confrontations with the police or
 military.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 As a matter of law and policy, Peru prohibits torture and the use
 of violence against detainees and makes even the threat of
 violence or coercion a punishable criminal offense. Nevertheless,
 there were increasing allegations in 1983, some of which appeared
 in the opposition media, that prisoners accused of terrorist
 crimes had been mistreated. The bulk of reported complaints
 
 
 676
 originated in the emergency zone. Although most were charges of
 "third-degree"-type physical mistreatment, some allegations
 appearing in opposition media spoke of electrical shock and
 immersion in cold water. Many of the charges referred to persons
 held at the Los Cabitos barracks in Ayacucho, the command post for
 the political military authorities in the zone. The Vargas Llosa
 commission felt obliged to point out that security forces had
 committed "excesses," and Caretas' rebuttal of certain Amnesty
 International allegations also included corroboration of charges
 of occasional prisoner mistreatment. Despite the official policy
 of respect for human rights, questions about the propriety of
 security force behavior in countering the Sendero Luminoso are
 likely to persist as long as conditions lead to the application of
 the state of emergency provisions and leave constitutional
 guarantees suspended and the role of autonomous public ministry
 representatives curtailed.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Peru's 1979 Constitution requires that an arrestee be arraigned
 within 24 hours for all crimes except drug trafficking, terrorism,
 or espionage, for which the limit is 15 days. Administrative
 difficulties sometimes preclude the 24-hour deadline from being
 met, but arraignment occurs in a timely manner. The Constitution
 also guarantees habeas corpus which is respected in practice.
 These procedures, however, did not apply to persons in the
 emergency zone suspected of terrorism. Amnesty International's
 report referred to several cases of persons who had "disappeared"
 but subsequently were acknowledged to be in military custody. Of
 these, the most prominent was Dr. Jaime Urrutia, an anthropology
 professor in Ayacucho and Vice President of the Ayacucho branch of
 the National Commission for Human Rights, who was taken from his
 home in the night of May 5. His family said that masked men
 abducted him. "'he police denied responsibility for his
 disappearance and suggested he was the victim of a kidnapping, but
 the local office of the independent public ministry verified on
 May 11 that he was being held incommunicado at the Los Cabitos
 political military command headquarters in Ayacucho. The ministry
 succeeded in having him transferred to police custody on May 14,
 and he was released on May 21 when the public prosecutor announced
 that no charges would be brought against him.
 Official statistics on detentions reported there were 2,400
 "detainees" in early May, 2,630 in mid-July, and 2,120 in
 mid-August. The number of persons formally charged with specific
 terrorist offenses, according to judicial statistics, was
 substantially lower (658 in mid-June, some 900 in July).
 Presumably, many releases of detainees have gone publicly
 unreported, but it is also possible that some persons reported as
 "disappeared" in the emergency zone were and possibly still are
 detained by the security forces.
 It appears that persons detained and charged with terrorism either
 are tried and convicted of specific violent acts or else are
 eventually freed when they are found innocent, either in pretrial
 investigations or in the judicial process.
 Peru does not practice exile under the present Government; there
 were no allegations of exile in 1983.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The Peruvian judiciary is independent of the executive in both law
 and practice. -he National Council of the Magistracy, under the
 
 
 677
 Attorney General, selects nominees for judicial vacancies.
 Appointments are for life. Only Supreme Court justices require
 legislative confirmation. Charges of lower court malfeasance are
 investigated by the Supreme Court, while the National Council of
 the Magistracy investigates any complaints against the Supreme
 Court itself, and turns them over to the Attorney General if there
 are grounds for charges. The Supreme Court itself has
 responsibility for final action.
 All civil crimes are tried in civilian courts. Arrestees are
 entitled to have an attorney present when they make statements to
 the police. Public prosecutors are charged with assuring that
 defendants have legal representation. There are no public
 defenders below the superior court level, however, and indigent
 arrestees must rely on volunteers from the bar association, if
 available. The Constitution presumes innocence and guarantees a
 trial review system. A closed judicial investigation by a
 magistrate is conducted first, followed by a public trial in
 superior court for those held for probable cause at the lower
 levels. The Supreme Court hears final appeals.
 Persons arrested for terrorist crimes face long periods of
 detention in primitive conditions while their cases remain under
 investigation; for instance, of some 700 persons accused of
 terrorism between mid-1980 and mid-1983, only 13 were found guilty
 and sentenced, and 18 were absolved and set free; the remainder
 were still being held at the end of that period. It should be
 noted that most of these arrests occurred from early 1982 through
 mid-1983.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The Government generally does not interfere in the private lives
 of Peruvians, other than the relatively small proportion of the
 population in the emergency zone who are suspected of being
 terrorists. A judicial warrant is required to enter a private
 residence, the inviolability of which is constitutionally
 guaranteed. Authorities do not monitor correspondence or
 telephones, except under court supervision, or attempt to jam
 radio broadcasts or interfere with the receipt of foreign
 publications. The Government permits, encourages, and assists the
 promotion of indigenous languages.
 But the "state of emergency" provision of the Constitution
 suspends the guaranteed inviolability of the home, and security
 authorities in the emergency zone routinely availed themselves of
 this suspension to conduct search operations. There were only a
 few allegations, however, mostly from Lima, that police exercised
 this authority during the limited period in which the national
 state of emergency prevailed throughout the country.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 The Peruvian Constitution guarantees, and the Government in
 practice allows, freedom of speech and of the press. President
 Belaunde's Administration considers its reestablishment of a fully
 independent media, accomplished its first day in office, to be one
 of its key achievements. Peruvian publications reflect political
 viewpoints across the spectrum. The Government normally makes no
 attempt to censor criticism.
 However, there were complaints in 1983 that the political military
 
 
 678
 command authorities in the emergency zone interfered with news
 dissemination and gathering. The opposition newspaper Republica
 and the Marxist El Diario de Marka accused authorities of delaying
 distribution of newspaper editions air delivered from Lima to
 Ayacucho. Command authorities ordered the detention of the latter
 publication's correspondents in Ayacucho and Huanta (largest
 cities in the zone) on several occasions. Each correspondent
 complained he was the object of insults, threats, and physical
 harassment by military officials. The Ayacucho correspondent of
 the leftist weekly Equis X alleged that he had been arrested by
 masked men and beaten. These charges led Peru's National Press
 Association to request an investigation by the Attorney General
 about restrictions on freedom of the press in the emergency zone.
 Political military command authorities denied mistreating
 journalists but expressed their belief that certain journalists
 were aiding the terrorist cause by reporting on events in an
 intentionally biased and inaccurate fashion. The College of
 Journalists, the professional association with tribunal powers,
 brought such charges against El Diario de Marka. While it is
 probable that occasional official harassment of certain
 journalists has taken place in the emergency zone, the omnipresent
 danger of violence constituted a far more serious impediment to
 unrestricted news gathering in the region.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 These rights are guaranteed in the Constitution and are normally
 respected. The Government is forthcoming in granting permits for
 demonstrations, and, despite occasional incidents, for the most
 part deals with unauthorized demonstrations in a
 nonconfrontational manner.
 The right to assembly is among those specifically suspended by the
 proclamation of a state of emergency but government authorities,
 including those in the emergency zone, rarely used their power to
 restrict public gatherings. The approach of the November
 municipal elections, and the corresponding need to assure
 candidates full opportunity to campaign, led the Government to
 terminate the national state of emergency on September 9. For its
 part, the political military command announced it would take
 special measures to protect candidates running for office in the
 emergency zone and assure their freedom to hold public rallies.
 The Constitution guarantees private sector workers the right to
 organize, bargain collectively, and strike. Public sector workers
 (except for the armed forces, judges, and high officials) have
 similar rights, although there are some restrictions. In
 practice, employees organize and strike freely. Legislation to
 regulate the right to strike is still under consideration in
 Congress.
 About 10 percent of the work force is organized, and total
 membership in Communist and other far left unions is somewhat
 larger than that of democratically oriented unions. No
 significant part of the labor movement is tied to the Government
 or the Government party. Unions generally are not formally linked
 with political parties, but important national confederations are
 identified with particular political tendencies. There is no
 Government persecution of unions or professional groups. Peruvian
 labor organizations affiliate freely with regional and
 international trade union organizations of all ideological
 tendencies.
 Union leaders are frequently consulted by the President, the Prime
 Minister, and the Minister of Labor, as well as by Congressional
 
 
 679
 committees. A National Labor Council was established in 1982 to
 provide a means to enhance and formalize labor and employer
 participation in social and economic policy.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 The Roman Catholic faith is overwhelmingly predominant in Peru,
 and the Constitution formally recognizes the church's importance.
 It also establishes the independence of church and state, which is
 respected in practice, and guarantees freedom of religion and
 conscience. Members of minority religions encounter no difficulty
 in practicing their faith nor in exempting their children from
 religious instruction in public schools. Missionary organizations
 operate freely in the country with the cooperation of government
 ministries.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel,
 Emigration, and Repatriation
 The Constitution guarantees the right of free movement. There are
 no political or legal constraints on foreign travel or
 emigration. Freedom of movement is effectively limited in the
 emergency zone by the danger of traveling outside of populated
 centers.
 Traditionally, Peru has been willing to receive limited numbers of
 refugees for both transit and resettlement, and Peruvian embassies
 have been generous in granting asylum. Peruvian policy continues
 to be not to return refugees to the countries from which they
 fled, in spite of widespread resentment at problems encountered in
 assimilating several hundred Cuban refugees in Lima.
 Section 3   Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to
 Change Their Government
 Peru is a democratic country governed by a freely elected
 President and Congress. The Constitution mandates universal
 suffrage for all Peruvians (except armed forces members) 18 years
 of age and older. The political process is completely open and
 vigorously contested by a broad variety of political groups, any
 of which citizens can join without government interference.
 Leadership of the various parties tends to remain largely in the
 hands of urban elites because of their educational and financial
 advantages. Indians and Peru's small black community are
 underrepresented at top levels.
 The governing party with its coalition partner has a working
 majority in both houses of Congress. Municipal elections took
 place freely in November. Congressional and Presidential
 elections are next scheduled for 1985. The Constitution prohibits
 the incumbent President from a succeeding term.
 Constitutional provisions guarantee participation in the political
 process to all, regardless of race or sex. Tradition,
 nevertheless, impedes the access of both women and members of
 minority groups to leadership roles in major social and political
 institutions. Two women currently hold seats in the Senate, while
 12 are serving as deputies. There are no women officers in any of
 the three national police services or in the several branches of
 the Armed Forces. -he Army is the most integrated of the military
 services and the most representative of Peru's racially varied
 populace. There are few members of minorities in the uppermost
 ranks of the Navy or Air Force, although in the case of the Air
 Force, promotion of more junior minority officers is likely to
 increase their representation over time.
 
 30-231 0 - 84 - 44
 
 
 680
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Non-governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 Amnesty International's August report on alleged human rights
 violations in Peru touched a sensitive nerve. Government leaders,
 who have permitted private organizations to investigate such
 allegations, responded with charges that Amnesty International's
 report contained errors and that the organization itself was
 partial to Communist causes.
 Spokespersons for the human rights committees of the two houses of
 Congress supported government refutations of Amnesty
 International's charges, but individual opposition members of
 these bodies supported the Amnesty International charges of
 security force abuses. Private human rights groups similarly were
 free to air their views and allegations in the media. There is no
 evidence that any of these groups or persons put themselves at
 risk of reprisal from the Government by acting in this manner.
 Amnesty International in its 1983 general report, covering events
 in 1982, expressed concern about the arbitrary detention of
 prisoners of conscience, consistent reports of torture, poor
 prison conditions, and several deliberate killings of prisoners by
 security personnel. Freedom House in 1983 rated Peru "free..
 he independent public ministry, in addition to its direct role in
 insuring proper treatment of those arrested, receives citizen
 complaints directed against other branches of the Government,
 investigating and acting as necessary. Although military
 authorities in the emergency zone assumed powers normally reserved
 to civil officials, public ministry representatives in the zone
 continued to function autonomously and receive complaints on all
 issues including human rights.
 Peru supports human rights causes in international forums but
 maintains a low official profile. Most Peruvian declarations on
 international human rights issues take the form of editorial
 comment in the press and public comment by elected party and
 political figures.
 ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND CULTURAL SITUATION
 Property rights are protected in Peru, although the civil code
 continues to deny women the equality in this area which the
 Constitution prescribes.
 Peru, composed of completely distinct geographic regions, is a
 classic case of differential development. Public investment
 traditionally has been focused on the coast, drawing migrants to
 the cities, more especially Lima: the one-third of the population
 in the capital area accounts for two-thirds of Gross Domestic
 Product (GDP). Many Indians live in Peru's poorest regions in the
 mountains, and the cost of providing services to areas remote from
 the mainstream of culture and the centers of economic activity
 impedes development efforts. As a result of this dichotomy and of
 historical prejudices, the economic and social needs of Peruvians
 of European ancestry are more likely to be met than those of
 Peruvians of mixed or pure Indian heritage.
 The previous military government made significant efforts to
 rectify this situation. The initial goal of the Belaunde
 administration to provide for sustainable and, continuing the
 military Government's thrust, equitable economic development has
 been overwhelmed by austerity measures taken because of Peru's
 
 
 681
 difficult economic situation. Reforms of the military
 government-s statist economic policies were slowed in 1983 by the
 need to closely control expenditures. Depressed world economic
 conditions, production reduced by climatic catastrophe, and high
 real interest rates on the foreign debt all limited the
 Government's ability to respond effectively to the need for
 improved living conditions and job opportunities.
 Peru's population, growing 2.8 percent yearly, reached over 19
 million in 1983. GDP per capita was about $1,121 in 1981,
 although it has since dropped as GDP grew minimally in 1982 and
 declined in real terms by about 10 percent in 1983. Median per
 capita income was estimated in mid-1982 at $640 in Lima and $600
 in other major cities; in the rural areas, it is lower. Many
 other indexes illustrate Peru's relative poverty. In 1980, life
 expectancy at birth was slightly over 58 years, while the infant
 mortality rate was 80.9 per 1,000 births in 1983. Data from 1978
 show that only 25 percent of the rural population had access to
 potable water sources, while 60 percent of urban dwellers did.
 A 1977 study showed that Peruvians obtained 97.55 percent of their
 caloric needs. In 1978, the adjusted primary school enrollment
 ratio stood at 112, with the ratio for males slightly above that
 for females. About 73 percent of the adult population was
 literate in 1972 (the last year for which data is available); this
 figure probably improved in the succeeding decade.
 The developmental achievements of President Belaunde's
 administration have been limited by a variety of factors.
 Austerity programs, essential for economic recovery, create
 temporary hardship for the unemployed or underemployed (about 60
 percent of the work force), who depend on expanding activity for
 new opportunities, as well as for the employed, whose wages have
 declined in real terms.
 
 
 682
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: PERU
 1981     1982     1983
 ..........................................................
 1.ECON. ASS.IST.-TOTAL...       80.2     54.6     93.4
 LOANS .............. .....  47.0   44.2     48.5
 GRANTS ..............   ..  33.2    10.4     44.9
 A.AID ..... ...............   34.5     35.8     35.5
 LOANS ..............  ....  28.0    28.0     19.5
 GRANTS .............. 6.5            7.8     16.0
 (SEC.SUPP.ASSIST.)...         0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.FOOD FOR PEACE .......       42.5     16.2     55.9
 LOANS .............. .....  19.0   16.2     29.0
 GRANTS .............       23.5      0.0     26.9
 TITLE  I-TOTAL ........ ,,     19.0     15.2     29.0
 htPAY. IN S-LOANS....'        19.0     16.2     29.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR .....        0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE  II-TOTAL .........      23.5      0.0     26.9
 E.RELIEF.EC.DEV & WFP.         6.8      0.0     10.6
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY .....       16.7      0.0     16.3
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST...         3.2      2.6      2.0
 LOANS .................    0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ..............       3.2      2.6      2.0
 PEACE CORPS ......        0.0      0.0      0.0
 NARCOTICS ........        3.0      2.3      1.8
 OTHER ..............     0.2      0.3      0.2
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL...         4.3      5.0      4.6
 LOANS .................    4.0      4.5      4.0
 GRANTS .............        0.3      0.5      0.6
 A.MAP  GRANTS ..........       0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.CREDIT FINANCING ....        4.0      4.5      4.0
 C.INTL MIL.ED.TRNG ....        0.3      0.5      0.6
 D.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK...         0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS ........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. & MIL...        84.5     59.6     98.0
 LOANS ..............  ....  51.0    48.7     52.5
 GRANTS ................   33.5     10.9     45.5
 ..--------------------------------------------------------
 OTHER US LOANS ..........       16.0      0.0     26.3
 EX-IM BANK LOANS .......       13.1      0.0     26.3
 ALL OTHER..............         2.9      0.0      0.0
 --.---- .-----------        -----------------------------------
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1981     1982     1983     194 -83
 --------------------------------------------------------
 TOTAL.........   461.6    443.3    452.5   277317
 IBRD             148.0    286.7    302.2   1523 9
 IFC                8.5     18.2      8.0     64.0
 IDA                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 IOB              305.0    130.0    142.3   1120.6
 ADB                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 AFDB               0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 UNDP               0.1      5.4      0.0     5016
 OTHER-UN           0.0      3.0      0.0     14.6
 EEC                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 
 
