 PERU
 Peru is a multiparty republic with a dominant executive branch that often uses
 its control of the legislature and the judiciary to the detriment of the democratic
 process. Under provisions of a Constitution enacted in 1993, President Alberto
 Fujimori was reelected to a second 5-year term in 1995, at which time his party also
 won a controlling majority in Congress. In 1996 the congressional majority, faced
 with the constitutional provision limiting presidents to no more than two consecu-
 tive terms in office, passed a law that would permit President Fujimori to run for
 a third consecutive term. Congress removed three members of the Constitutional
 Tribunal who had declared themselves against the interpretation allowing a third
 term, and the Tribunal ceased to function effectively, unable to rule on any constitu-
 tional issues for lack of a quorum. Although the Constitution provides for an inde-
 pendent judiciary, in practice the judicial system is inefficient, often corrupt, and
 as appeared to be easily manipulated by the executive branch.
 
 
 The police and military share the responsibility for internal security. However, in
 May President Fujimori issued a decree granting the National Intelligence SerVice
 an as-yet-unspecified role in anticrime efforts. Since 1980 the security forces have
 directed most of their efforts against the Sendero Luminoso (Shining Path) and
 Tupac Amaru Revolutionary Movement (MRTA) terrorist groups. Due in large part
 to the Government's strong actions, the threat posed by these groups continued to
 decline in overall terms. Within specified emergency zones, which cover 16 percent
 of the country and where the military is in charge, certain constitutional protections
 are suspended. In the rest of the country, the civilian authorities generally maintain
 effective control of the security forces. Nevertheless, the military and the police were
 responsible for serious human rights abuses.
 The Government has implemented major economic reforms, transforming the
 economy from one based on heavy regulation to a market-oriented one. The Govern-
 ment has eliminated controls on capital flows, prices, and trade. It has privatized
 most state enterprises and plans to sell those that remain by the end of 1999. The
 inflation rate has dropped into single digits, and growth and foreign investment
 have soared. Per capita gross domestic product is estimated at $2,000. Major exports
 include copper as well as other minerals, fishmeal, and textiles. Illegal exports of
 processed coca are thought to have earned about $300 to $500 million annually in
 past years. The unemployment rate in Lima is estimated at 8 percent, but the na-
 tional rate of underemployment is about 40 percent. More than half of the economi-
 cally active population work in the informal sector of the economy, which largely
 functions beyond government supervision and taxation. The poor constitute 50 per-
 cent of the population, and slightly less than 15 percent of the population live in
 extreme poverty.
 Although egregious abuses of human rights continued to decline, there were seri-
 ous problems in several areas. Security forces were responsible for torture and beat-
 ings, and impunity remained a problem. In February two of the four officers who
 had been sentenced to prison for torturing Army Intelligence Service (SIE) officer
 Leonor La Rosa in 1997 were pardoned and released. Overall prison conditions re-
 mained extremely harsh, particularly in maximum security facilities. Arbitrary ar-
 rest and detention, prolonged pretrial detention, absence of accountability, lack of
 due process, and lengthy trial delays remained problems. The general inefficiency
 of the judicial system persisted, and it remained subject to executive influence. It
 is widely believed that the Government infringed on citizens' privacy rights. A con-
 gressional investigation of a reported secret government intelligence program to
 monitor the telephones of a broad spectrum of government officials, opposition poli-
 ticians, journalists, business executives, and other public figures found no evidence
 of government wrongdoing and sought to blame the journalists who had uncovered
 the monitoring program for having themselves instigated it. The Government in-
 fringed on press freedom. Journalists faced increased harassment and intimidation
 and practiced even greater self-censorship. The Government allegedly instigated and
 financed a media campaign by the tabloid press defaming the investigative staff of
 an opposition newspaper. The authorities at times hindered the operations of
 human rights monitors. Violence and discrimination against women were wide-
 spread. Violence against children and discrimination against the disabled, indige-
 nous people, and racial and ethnic minorities remained problems. Child labor, in-
 cluding forced child labor, remained a serious problem.
 The office of the Defender of the People, or Human Rights Ombudsman, continued
 to enjoy the public's respect and confidence. The ad hoc Pardons Commission so far
 has received pardon applications from 80 percent of those individuals unjustly jailed
 for terrorism or treason. During the year, the Commission continued to recommend
 presidential pardons for applicants, and won the release of an additional 102 detain-
 ees, bringing the total of those pardoned and released to 462. The President signed
 into law legislation classifying torture as a crime to be tried in civilian courts. Fol-
 lowing the 1997 abolition of the "faceless" (anonymous) tribunals, the civilian juris-
 diction created a new system of specialized terrorism courts with identifiable judges
 and a greater degree of due process.
 Sendero Luminoso and MRTA terrorists continued to commit the great majority
 of killings and other egregious abuses. Members of Sendero Luminoso used torture
 and other forms of brutality, disrupted the home and family life of many citizens,
 and violated the rights of indigenous people. Due to the overall decline in the threat
 posed by these groups, there was a corresponding reduction in the abuses that they
 committed.
 
 
 739
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were press reports of five
 extrajudicial killings carried out by the security forces, one of which may have been
 politically motivated. In all cases, the alleged perpetrators were detained and
 charged.
 On the night of April 14, a 12-man army unit on an antiterrorist patrol killed
 Emetrio Santos Calvay, a teacher, and one of his friends, near Chiclayo, allegedly
 because they suspected that the victims were terrorists, although the unit had no
 evidence that this was the case. The patrol members attempted to conceal the true
 nature of the incident by claiming that they had clashed with a band of 30 terrorists
 and, in order to substantiate their story, even lightly injured 2 of their own patrol
 members. However, their credibility became suspect when they were unable to
 produce any of the alleged terrorists weapons and failed to file an official report
 of the incident. The local prosecutor filed charges against some of the men. OnNo-
 vember 30, a court sentenced the planner of the crime to 18 years in prison, the
 three men who actually carried out the killings to 12-year sentences, and five ac-
 complices to 5 years in prison.
 On February 7, two police officers accosted Willy Llerena Macedo and Paolo Her-
 rera Lesama in the city of Pucallpa. The officers beat the men in the face and drove
 them to a police station where the assault and beating continued, before Paolo Her-
 rera was eventually released. After learning of his whereabouts, Llerena's relatives
 arrived at the police station where they were denied any information. On February
 9, the relatives again went to. the station where they were told that Llerena had
 been hospitalized. Hospital officials told them that Ulerena had died and that his
 body was at the morgue. According to the death certificate, death was caused by
 severe blows to the head. The two police officers were charged with causing serious
 injury resulting in death and with abuse of authority.
 In March two soldiers killed farm hands Genaro Julca Bula and Alberto Aponte
 in the village of Lumbra, Huaral province. The authorities brought charges against
 the soldiers, Cas Quito Lopez and Raul Qulto Herrera, as well as against two
 other soldiers at the base who had supplied them with weapons. The authorities or-
 dered the accused soldiers to appear before court in March 1999.
 No progress was made in the case of Mariela Barreto, an SIE agent whose dis-
 membere an decapitated body was found in March 1997. Although President
 Fujimori had promised an exhaustive investigation, neither the Public Ministry nor
 the poice so far have succeeded in determining a motive for the ng or a likely
 suspect. However, in a March 16 television interview from abroad, Lulsa Margarita
 Zanatta Muedas, a former SIE agent, provided what appeared to be credible infor-
 mation about wiretapping and other operations conducted by her former agency. In
 response to the interview and to a congressional request, Human Rights Ombuds-
 man Jorge Santistevan dispatched two members of his staffto interview Zanatta for
 additional leads regarding the Barreto case.
 In June a specialized criminal court in Iqitos sentenced six soldiers to 20 years'
 imprisonment and their commanding officer Milton Trigoso to life in prison, in a
 case of kidnaping, aggravated robbery, and homicide. The 7 were among 16 soldiers
 who were arrested and discharged from the service for having beaten, robbed, and
 murdered 2 Japanese students who had been exploring the Amazon River by raf
 in 1997. The incident led to strong public criticism, both because of the country's
 generally close ties with Japan and, more specifically, because of the MRTA hostage
 crisis at the Japanese Ambassador's residence, which ended in April 1997. In a
 move atypical of cases involving members of the armed forces, President Fujimori
 had announced that those responsible would be tried in a civilian rather than a
 military court. In addition, the Public Ministry appointed a special prosecutor from
 Lima to go to Iqults and carry out the investigation phase of the case. Trigoso's
 lawyer said that he would appeal his client's sentence.
 The December 1992 killing of union leader Pedro Hullca  Tecse was initially
 thought to have been carried out by Sendero Luminoso terrorists. However, in Sep-
 tember 1995, jailed former SIE agent Mesmer Caries Talledo charged in letters
 written from his prison cell that Huillca Tecse's murder, as well as a number of
 other high- p ro ie bombings and massacres, actually had been perpetrated by the
 Colina death squad, whose operations are believed by critics of the Government to
 have been authorized and controlled by the National Intelligence Service. In Novem-
 ber 1997, President Fujimori pardoned Mesmer Carles Talledo for having been con-
 victed wrongly of terrorism. Wen the Congressional Human Rights Subcommittee
 inquiring into Caries Talledo's charges summoned him to testify before it, he denied
 ever having made any allegations against the Colina death squad, admitted no
 
 
 knowledge of the Colina group, could not remember ever having written the accusa-
 tory letters from his cell, and even disputed the fact that one of the members of
 the subcommittee had questioned him earlier in a videotaped interview. Coinciden-
 tally, Jose Luis Bazan, another former SIE agent, who had corroborated Carles
 Talledo's allegations to investigative reporter Jose Arrieta, also retracted his origi-
 nal story. Although Carles Talledo attempted to explain his behavior by claiming
 that he was undergoing treatment for psychosis and schizophrenia, critics of the
 Government believe that both Carles Talledo's and Bazan's change of heart was due
 to fear, blackmail, or the promise of some reward from the intelligence services.
 After refusing to subject Carles Talledo to a lie-detectr test or to submit his letters
 to graphologica analysis, the Human Rights, Subcommittee decided in June to
 shelve its inquiry for lack of proof and let the Public Ministry pursue the investiga-
 tion further. Arrieta fled the country due to fear that the ino ation he had re-
 ceived from Bazan made him particularly vulnerable to possible attack by the Gov-
 ernment's intelligence agents.
 According to statistics gathered by the Legal Defense Institute, the Sendero
 Luminoso and MRTA terrorist groups carried out 454 violent attacks during the
 first 10 months of the year. During this period, the total number of deaths attrib-
 utable to the internal conflict was 117. Of these, the security forces, including both
 military and police, suffered 27 fatalities while the members of the terrorist groups
 incurred 21 deaths. The civilian population, with 69 deaths, suffered the highest
 toll.
 In March Sendero Luminoso terrorists killed Waudulco Munante in suburban
 Lima, dynamited his body, attached a note to his remains describing him as an "ex-
 ploiter" of the people, and left Sendero Luminoso literature at the scene. In August
 a band of some 30 Sendero Luminoso terrorists dressed in military uniforms killed
 Celso Rodriguez Vargas, the mayor of Saposoa, in Huallaga province, San Martin
 department, after summarily sentencing him to death in a "people's trial." They also
 attacked the local National Police post, where they killed two other civilians.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of disappearances alleged to have been
 politically motivated or carried out by security forces. At the end of its November
 fact-finding visit, the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights (IACHR) said
 in press statement that the IACHR had not received any recent complaints of dis-
 appearances.
 In February President Fujimori signed into law legislation that specified a sen-
 tence of up to 15 years for perpetrators of forced disappearances. In a meeting with
 the Peruvian Association of Relatives of Kidnaped, Detained, and Disappeared Per-
 sons, Human Rights Ombudsman Santistevan highlighted the need to resolve the
 problems left over from the internal conflict, among them the 2,371 cases of persons
 who had disappeared and had never been found. He said his office would work to
 help the relatives in locating and identifying the bodies of those who had dis-
 appeared and seeking appropriate compensation from the State.
 At year's end, compensation in the Neira Alegria case, dating from 1986, still had
 not been paid by the Government, despite several rulings by the Inter-American
 Court of Human Rights. At its last session of the year, the Court ordered the Gov-
 ernment to pay $245,000 in compensation to the family of Ernesto Rafael Castillo
 Paez, who was last seen in October 1990 being forcibly detained and driven away
 by police. In November 1997, the Inter-American Court of Human Rights ruled that
 the Government had violated Castillo Paez's right to life, liberty, and personal integ-
 rity. The Court also had ordered the Government to punish those responsible and
 to return the victim's remains to his family.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution prohibits torture and inhuman or humiliating treatment; however,
 in practice torture and brutal treatment of detainees by the security forces occur fre-
 quently. Torture most often takes place during the period immediately following ar-
 rest. Human rights groups report that the incidence of torture is high during police
 detention, in part because families are prohibited from visiting suspects while they
 are held incommunicado, and attorneys have only limited access to them (see Sec-
 tion 1.d.).
 In February the President signed legislation that classifies torture as a crime
 whose perpetrators would be tried in the civilian jurisdiction and be subject to
 lengthy prison sentences. The new law brings before civilian courts torture suspects
 who belong to the security forces, a provision long resisted by the military. The stat-
 ute specifies a sentence of 5 to 10 years for anyone convicted of torture. If the tor-
 ture results in grave injury to the victim, the perpetrator would receive a 6- to 12-
 year sentence and, if the torture results in the death of the victim, the perpetrator
 would be sentenced for 8 to 20 years. Human rights groups had criticized the lack
 of a criminal classification of torture, particularly in cases involving members of the
 
 
 741
 security forces, who were typically tried on charges of abuse of authority or physical
 assault in military courts, which tended to opt for lenient sentences. In June the
 United Nations Committee Against Torture called on the Government to reestablish
 the rule of law by restoring to the judiciary its independent character and to adopt
 measures guaranteeing compensation to the victims of torture.
 Physical torture and brutal treatment of detainees by security force personnel are
 common occurrences, particularly in police cells operated by the National
 Counterterrorism Directorate (DINCOTE) and in detention facilities on military
 bases where terrorism and treason suspects normally are held. Psychological torture
 and abuse, which result from the harsh conditions in which detainees are held, are
 more characteristic of the prisons. The Legal Defense Institute reported that the
 United Nations Committee Against Torture had received 617 complaints of torture
 allegedly committed between 1993 and 1997.
 Human rights monitors and other credible eyewitnesses continued to report that
 security forces routinely torture suspects at military bases and detention centers in
 some of the emergency zones, although the presence of International Committee of
 the Red Cross (ICRC) delegates in these zones is an important factor in minimizing
 human rights abuses against the civilian population there. In these zones, which
 cover 16 percent of the country's territory and 23 percent of its population, certain
 constitutional protections are suspended due to high levels of terrorist activity, even
 though at least some areas designated as emergency zones have not reported serious
 terrorist incidents for some time. There were frequent reports of beatings and other
 mistreatment of adolescents in army bases, in connection with the forcible conscrip-
 tion of youths for military service (see Section 1.f.).
 In October a pretrial investigation began into charges of torture against a police
 officer who, if convicted, would be the first person to be sent to prison under the
 new torture statute promulgated in February. On September 1, officer Augusto
 Raymundo Gutierrez Rivero, of San Francisco district, Ayacucho department, alleg-
 edly brutally beat two illiterate farm hands in the district police station while inter-
 rogating them about charges by their boss that they had stolen about $600 (2,000
 soles). As a result, one of the men, Lucas Huaman Cruz, age 62, died 24 hours later.
 An autopsy revealed that Huaman's iver, kidneys, and spleen were completely
 crushed, his testicles were inflamed, one of his ribs was broken, his whole body was
 bruised, and there was internal bleeding in his abdomen. Prior to going to the police
 station, the two farm hands reportedly were forced to admit their guilt before a jus-
 tice of the peace, and intimidated into putting their thumbprint on a statement in
 which they agreed to pay back the stolen money.
 In September Pablo Waldir Cerron Gonzalez of Huamachuca sought help from a
 Trujillo human rights group following an alleged incident of police brutality. Cerron
 claimed that on September 4, policeman Elmer Perez Arnao entered his house with-
 out a judicial warrant, and after beating, kicking, and punching him, drove him
 with a colleague to a police station. At the station, police continued to beat Cerron,
 particularly on the back and stomach, and forcibly dipped his head in a barrel of
 water until he almost drowned. According to Cerron, the motive for the policeman's
 assault was that Cerron owed about $6 (18 soles) to a local bar. Although the Tru-
 jillo human rights group had not reported any legal action in the case by year's end,
 it obtained a doctor's statement confirming the severe contusions and internal inju-
 ries to Cerron's stomach and back.
 In addition to beatings, common methods of torture and other inhuman or degrad-
 ing treatment included electric shock, water torture, asphyxiation, the hanging of
 victims by a rope attached to hands tied behind the back, and, in' the case of female
 detainees, rape. Common forms of psychological torture included sleep deprivation
 and death threats against both the detainees and their families. Interrogators fre-
 quently blindfolded their victims during torture to prevent them from later identify-
 ing their abusers. The authorities rarely brought the perpetrators of torture to jus-
 tice.
 In February police officers reportedly beat Willy Llerena Macedo and Paolo Her-
 rera Lesama. Llerena died as a result of this abuse (see Section L.a.). The police
 also beat and injured student protesters in June (see Section 2.a.).
 In April ousted Constitutional Tribunal judge and Dean of the Lima Bar Associa-
 tion Delia Revoredo claimed that she was being threatened by the National Intel-
 ligence Service for her outspoken criticism of unconstitutional and authoritarian ac-
 tions taken by the Fujimori regime. She also maintained that the custom fraud
 charges brought against her businessman husband Jaime Mur for importing a used
 car on which he paid the taxes and duties were nothing more than a pretext for
 bringing added pressure to bear on her. As a result, they both sought and received
 political asylum in Costa Rica. Revoredo then presented a comprehensive complaint
 against the Government to the IACHR. In September Revoredo returned to the
 
 
 country, thereby risking revocation of her asylum. Soon after, the authorities with-
 drew the customs fraud charges against Mur.
 There were significant developments during the year in the case of Leonor La
 Rosa, the SIE agent who was tortured by four of her fellow officers and superiors
 in 1997 after she allegedly revealed to the media a number of SIE undercover oper-
 ations and refused to participate in one of them herself. Afltr spending several
 months in jail for abuse of authority, two of the four officers who had tortured her
 were released quietly in February. In June the then-Prime Minister managed to
 have the military's disloyalty charges against La Rosa quashed. At year's end, the
 IACHR agreed to consider her case and gave the Government and La Rosa 60 days
 to reach a settlement on her claim for compensation and her request to be declared
 eligible for military disability pension benefits.
 There continued to be credible reports that Sendero Luminoso was also respon-
 sible for acts of torture, including cases that led to death.
 Prison conditions continued to be extremely harsh due to low budgets, the incon-
 sistent quality of prison administration, severe overcrowding, lack of sanitation, and
 poor nutrition and health care. Prisoners often were victimized by both prison
 guards and fellow inmates. Corruption continued to be a serious problem among the
 poorly paid prison guards, many of whom were implicated in such offenses as sexual
 blackmail, extortion, the sale of narcotics and weapons, and the acceptance of bribes
 in exchange for favors that ranged from providing a mattress to arranging an es-
 cape. Since prison authorities do not supply adequate bedding and only budget
 about $0.75 (2.5 soles) per prisoner per day for food, the families of prisoners must
 provide for these basic needs. In high-security prisons, female inmates are allowed
 to see their children only once a week. However, in prisons that house only common
 criminals, such as Lima's Chorrillos women's prison, children 3 years of age and
 younger live with their jailed mothers.
 Overcrowding and inadequate infrastructure continued to hamper efforts to im-
 prove the living conditions of prison inmates. At Lima's Lurigancho men's prison,
 the country's largest, more than 5,000 prisoners live in a facility built for 1,500. In-
 mates have only intermittent access to running water; bathing facilities are inad-
 equate; kitchen facilities are unhygienic; and prisoners sleep in hallways and com-
 mon areas due to a lack of cell space. Illegal drugs are abundant in many prisons,
 and tuberculosis and AIDS are reportedly at near'epidemic levels. Detainees held
 temporarily while awaiting arraignment at Lima's Palace of Justice are not allowed
 outside for fresh air and have restricted access to bathrooms. According to the
 Catholic Bishop's Social Action Commission (CEAS), only 10 percent of the country's
 89 prisons have adequate facilities.
 In July the Human Rights Ombudsman published a report on prison conditions
 and administration which highlighted many serious shortcomings, including a short-
 age of trained medical personnel, spotty legal representation for prisoners, and in-
 sufficient numbers of social workers. Although the Ombudsman's staff visited only
 37 prisons, those facilities accounted for 21,700 prisoners, or 89 percent of the coun-
 try's total prison population of 24,821. The Ombudsman reported that 8 out of the
 37 prisons visited have no doctor on staff, that 5 prisons have neither doctors nor
 nurses on staff, that 4 prisons have no lawyer on staff, that 5 prisons have no social
 workers on staff, and gat 6 prisons have no psychologists on staff. The Ombudsman
 indicated that the operating philosophy in the prison system is one of punishment
 rather than rehabilitation: only 33 percent of prisoners do some form of work, and
 only 28 percent participate in some kind of educational activity. In June 800 pris-
 oners classified as nondangerous were transferred from Lurigancho to the new pris-
 on in Canete, where work facilities are available.
 According to human rights monitors, the recently opened Challapalca prison in
 Tarata province, Tacna department, seriously violates international norms and
 standards, particularly with respect to its isolation and high altitude. Located at an
 altitude of about 14,000 feet,- Challapalca's freezing temperatures and oxygen-thin
 air are believed to have an unavoidably negative effect on the health of prisoners.
 Moreover, since the prison only can be reached after an all-night bus ride from the
 nearest population center, most families only rarely would be able to visit their
 jailed relatives; hospital care is 8 hours away by overland transportation; and face-
 to-face consultations by inmates with their attorneys are extremely rare. In order
 to relieve some of the isolation, the ICRC funds a monthly visit to Challapalca by
 the families of its inmates. Three visiting human rights monitors representing the
 International Federation of Human Rights; as well as the visiting members of the
 IACHR, called for Challapalca prison to be closed down.
 During the year, there were a number of riots, mutinies, and hunger strikes in
 various prisons, including Huancayo's El Tambo juvenile detention center, the
 
 
 743
 
 Yanamayo high-security prison for terrorism and treason convicts, Tarapoto's
 Juanjui prison, and San Cristbal de Moyobamba prison in San Martin department.
 The Government permits prison visits by independent human rights monitors.
 However, during a 12-month period encompassing the 1996-97 MRTA hostage crisis
 and the subsequent 8 months, the Government suspended ICRC visits to prisoners
 incarcerated on terrorism and treason charges, thereby violating its 1992 agreement
 authorizing ICRC delegates to meet and interview such prisoners away from public
 view and with no witnesses present. Nonetheless, for the first 10 months of that
 period, identical ICRO visits to detainees in police holding cells proceeded as before.
 By January, in line with President Fujhnori s December 1997 announcement, ICRC
 delegates fully resumed their regular visits to terrorism and treason convicts in
 maximum security prisons, which had been suspended at the time of the hostage
 crisis. However, beginning in September 1997, DINCOTE officials had denied ICRC
 delegates visiting its Lima detention cells the opportunity to interview detainees
 alone, insisting that a DINCOTE witness be present. After repeated ICRC protests
 against such a critical change of policy, the original no-witness-present policy was
 reinstated on September 10.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-Arbitrary arrest and detention remain
 problems. The Constitution, Criminal Code, and antiterrorist statutes delineate the
 arrest and detention process. However, a number of constitutional protections are
 suspended in the emergency zones where, for example, security forces do not need
 an arrest warrant in order to detain a suspect. The law permits the police to detain
 terrorism and treason suspects for a maximum of 15 days and to hold them incom-
 municado for the first 10 days. Treason suspects, who are automatically handed
 over to military jurisdiction, may be held incommunicado for an additional 30 days.
 The authorities prohibit families from visiting suspects being held incommunicado,
 and attorneys have access to them only during the preparation and giving of sworn
 statements to the prosecutor.
 Outside the emergency zones, the Constitution requires a written judicial warrant
 for an arrest to be made unless the perpetrator of a crime is caught in the act. With
 respect to detention without arrest, the Organic Law of the National Police con-
 tradicts the constitutional provision, permitting the police to detain a person for any
 investigative purpose. Although the authorities must arraign most arrested persons
 within 24 hours, they often violate this requirement. However, in cases of terrorism
 or espionage, arraignments must take place within 15 days. The military authorities
 must turn over persons they detain to the civilian police within 24 hours; in remote
 areas of the country, this must be done as soon as practicable. However, the mili-
 tary often disregard this requirement.
 At year's end, the Human Rights Ombudsman issued recommendations designed
 to resolve the cases of an estimated 5,228 individuals still subject to detention or-
 ders, many of whom were forced against their will to participate in terrorist activi-
 ties during the internal conflict, or were accused falsely of links with terrorist
 groups. The Ombudsman called on the Government to rescind all outstanding deten-
 tion orders that were more than 5 years old, to cancel all orders that did not comply
 with legal specifications, and to authorize the ad hoc Pardons Commission to evalu-
 ate the remaining cases and recommend that the President revoke those detention
 orders where insufficient evidence existed that the individuals in question either
 committed terrorist acts or were associated with terrorist groups.
 Detainees have the right to a prompt judicial determination of the legality of their
 detention and adjudication of their habeas corpus petitions. However, according to
 human rights attorneys, judges have denied most requests for such hearings. In
 May one of the decrees issued by the executive branch as part of the war on crime
 (see Section I.e.) further restricted the ability of detainees in the provinces of Lima
 and Callao to petition for habeas corpus by limiting the number of judges able to
 hear such petitions to no more than 2, instead of 40 to 50 as before, thereby signifi-
 cantly delaying justice. In 1993 the antiterrorism laws were amended to authorize
 lower court and superior court judges to order the unconditional release of suspected
 terrorists, if there was insufficient evidence to bring a case against them. However,
 judges rarely act on this provision. As a result, accused terrorists sometimes must
 wait until their cases have been reviewed and dismissed by the Supreme Court be-
 fore they are freed, a process that often lasts more than a year.
 At year's end, only one-third of a total prison population of 26,330 had been sen-
 tenced, while the remainder still either were awaiting trial or had not yet been sen-
 tenced finally. In Lurigancho, 96 percent of the inmate population remained
 unsentenced. The reported ratio of sentenced to unsentenced prisoners is made
 somewhat wider than the actual ratio by the fact that many judges are slow to no-
 tify the National Penitentiary Institute (INPE) of the final disposition of their trials
 once they have pronounced their sentences. The CEAS has called for the implemen-
 
 
 tation of a system that would allow detainees to post bail, so that.first-time offend-
 ers would not have to wait in jail for their trials. According to the INPE, the elapsed
 time between arrest and trial in civil, criminal, and terrorism cases averages be-
 tween 26 and 36 months. Those tried by military courts on treason charges gen-
 erally do not have to wait more than 40 days for their trial, following arrest. How-
 ever, since trial procedures in military courts are largely devoid of due process pro-
 tections, the speed with which trials are concluded offers little benefit to the defend-
 ants involved. Once trials have concluded, prisoners often have to wait long periods
 before receiving written copies of their sentences.
 According to two human rights organizations, police routinely detain persons of
 -African descent on suspicion of having committed crimes, for no other reason than
 the color of their skin, and rarely act on complaints of crimes against blacks (see
 Section 5).
 In November 1997, nine human rights lawyers who had defended Sendero
 Luminoso terrorists in the military courts, including Luis Ramon Landaure, who
 had defended Sendero Luminoso founder Abimael Guzman, were themselves ar-
 rested as terrorists and charged with treason. The authorities held the lawyers
 without charge for more than 30 days, denied their habeas corpus petitions, did not
 give some of them an opportnity to present sworn statements, and provided one
 with a military lawyer chosen by the military court instead of a lawyer of his own
 choosing. The military jurisdiction absolved all nine defendants of treason and sent
 them to be tried for terrorism in the civilian courts. At year's end, the first-instance
 court ordered two of the lawyers released, pending confirmation of the ruling by the
 Lima superior court, which was not scheduled to issue its decision before March
 1999. The Lima Bar Association has filed a complaint with the IACHR, charging
 that the lawyer's habeas corpus petition had been denied unconstitutionally (see
 Section i.e.).
 The Constitution does not permit exile, and the Government respects this prohibi-
 tion.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The Constitution provides for an independent judi-
 ciary; however, in practice the judicial system is inefficient, often corrupt, and easily
 manipulated by the executive branch. As a result, public confidence in the judiciary
 is low. In 1993 the Government appointed the executive commission of the judicial
 branch and the executive commission of the Public Ministry for a 5-year period. The
 ostensible mission of both was to carry out judicial reform. However, in reality,
 these commissions serve as the executive's instrument of control over the judicial
 system. While the Government points to some administrative and technical progress
 in caseload reduction and computerization as examples of reform, little has been
 done to restore the judiciary's independence from the executive.
 There is a three-tier court structure: lower courts, superior courts, and the Su-
 preme Court. A Constitutional Tribunal rules on the constitutionality of congres-
 sional legislation and government actions; a National Judiciary Council tests, nomi-
 nates, confirms, evaluates, and disciplines judges and prosecutors; and a Judicial
 Academy trains judges and prosecutors. The Government moved to limit the inde-
 pendence of the Constitutional Tribunal almost from its inception in 1995 and con-
 tinued such efforts in subsequent years. By year's end, Congress still had not taken
 any steps to replace the three judges ousted from the Constitutional Tribunal after
 they voted against the interpretation allowing President Fujimori a third term. This
 effectively paralyzed the court's ability to rule on any constitutional issues for lack
 of a quorum (see Section 3).
 The justice system generally is based on the Napoleonic Code. In the civilian
 courts, criminal cases must move through a total of three distinct prosecutorial and
 judicial phases. The first phase takes place in a lower court where a Public Ministry
 prosecutor investigates cases and submits an opinion to an examining judge who ini-
 tially determines whether there is sufficient evidence to issue an indictment. If
 there is, the judge studies the case, conducts all necessary investigations, and pre-
 pares a case report for delivery -to the superior court prosecutor. In the second
 phase, the superior court prosecutor reviews the lower court decision and, if the re-
 view results in formal charges, renders an advisory opinion to a superior court
 where a three-judge panel holds an oral trial. All criminal case convictions in the
 civilian courts must proceed to the final phase, where the Supreme Court hears ap-
 peals and confirms or rejects the superior court sentences.
 Under the military justice system, judges in the lower military courts have the
 power to sentence and are required to pass judgment within 10 days of a trial's
 opening. Defendants then may appeal their sentences to the Superior Military
 Council which, in turn, has 10 days to make its decision. A final appeal may be
 made to the Supreme Council of Military Justice, which must issue its ruling within
 5 days.
 
 
 745
 Of the country's 1,531 judges, only 574 have permanent appointments, having
 been independently selected. The remaining 957, including 19 of the 33 judges of
 the Supreme Court, have provisional or temporary status only. Critics charge that,
 since these judges lack tenure, they are much more susceptible to outside pressures.
 This reliance by the Government on untenured, provisional, and temporary judges
 was demonstrated when the executive commission of the judicial branch created two
 specialized chambers of the Supreme Court, staffed by provisional and temporary
 judges, which proceeded to assume control over tax, customs, and narcotics crimes
 previously under the jurisdiction of the tenured judges of the Lima superior court.
 This enabled the Government to supervise more closely such cases as the fraud case
 of Baruch Ivcher (see Section 2.d.) and the customs case against Jaime Mur (see
 Section 1.c.).
 Further tightening the executive's grip on the judicial system, Congress passed a
 law in March transferring the power to dismiss Supreme Court judges and prosecu-
 tors from the formerly independent National Judiciary Council to the judicial
 branch, in the case of judges, and to the Public Ministry, in the case of prosecutors.
 The new law requires investigations of judges and prosecutors accused of infrac-
 tions, as well as decisions on dismissal, to be carried out by the Executive Commis-
 sions of the judicial branch and the Public Ministry, both of which are controlled
 by strong allies of President Fujimori. All seven members of the National Judiciary
 Council resigned simultaneously to protest the curtailment of their powers. In addi-
 tion, the World Bank, which earlier had announced a $22.5 million loan for judicial
 ,reform, suspended disbursement of the loan pending the restoration of the Council's
 powers. In April and May, the judicial bodies represented on the National Judiciary
 Council named replacement candidates for all but one of their respective seats. In
 September Congress amended the law to restore only partially the Council's powers
 and left the Public Ministry in charge of determining whom the Council could inves-
 tigate.
 In April the four members of the Executive Council of the Judicial Academy also
 had resigned, partly because no steps had been taken to restore the academy's au-
 tonomous status as envisioned in the basic law governing its policies and proce-
 dures, and partly in solidarity with the members of the National Judiciary Council
 who had resigned. In one of their first acts, the new members appointed to the Exec-
 utive Council of the Judicial Academy decided to lengthen the training program for
 judicial and prosecutorial candidates from 6 months to 2 years, a move that critics
 of the Government claim was designed to delay even further the appointment of
 tenured judges and prosecutors and to prolong the reliance on provisional and tem-
 porary officials more susceptible to manipulation by the executive branch.
 In November the visiting IACHR fact-finding mission called on the Government
 to terminate the Executive Commissions of the judicial branch and the Public Min-
 istry when their 5-year terms expired at the end of 1998. However, in December,
 despite much political, press, and public opposition, the congressional majority ex-
 tended the life of the two executive commissions for an additional 2 years, until the
 end of 2000.
 All defendants have the right to be present at their trial. Defendants also have
 the right to counsel. However, a public defender system exists in name only; the
 Government often fails to provide indigent defendants with qualified attorneys.
 Human rights groups have criticized strongly the power of the military courts to
 try civilians in cases of treason or aggravated terrorism and the powerlessness of
 the civilian judicial system to review military court decisions. In 1997 Gustavo
 Adolfo Cesti Hurtado, an insurance broker who had retired from military service 13
 years earlier, was arrested, prosecuted, convicted, and sentenced to prison by the
 military justice system in a complicated case involving, in part, alleged insurance
 fraud in a military purchase of helicopters. When a civilian court approved a habeas
 corpus petition and ordered the military court to release Cesti, the military jurisdic-
 tion not only refused to do so but also charged the civilian judges with usurpation
 of power and sought to have them reassigned. At year's end, the case was before
 the Inter-American Court of Human Rights, which rejected a government motion to
 dismiss it. The Human Rights Ombudsman asked the police to ensure the safety
 and protection of Cesti's wife, who had complained that she had been the target of
 kidnap attempts.
 While terrorism cases are tried in civilian courts, cases of treason or aggravated
 terrorism may be tried only before military courts. Human rights groups charged
 that the vaguely worded definitions of certain crimes in the antiterrorism statutes
 often lead military judges to issue sentences disproportionate to the crimes commit-
 ted. At the military superior court and Supreme Court levels, a significant number
 of judges are active-duty line officers with little or no professional legal training.
 
 
 746
 In May Congress acceded to President Fujimori's request to delegate to the execu-
 tive branch exclusive powers for a 15-day period to promulgate measures specifically
 designed to combat the growing wave of violent street crime. In a series of 11 de-
 crees, the Government classified acts of "extreme violence," such as criminal gang
 activity and the use of explosives, as "aggravated terrorism," to be tried automati-
 cally by the military courts, with a maximum penalty of life imprisonment. In the
 case of aggravated crimes" such as homicide and kidnaping, the judicial proceed-
 ings would be so accelerated as to increase the likelihood of innocent persons being
 convicted, as was-the case in many terrorism and treason cases in the past. Accused
 criminals would be able to have their sentences reduced if they informed on other
 individuals, thereby increasing the likelihood of serious abuses, as was the case with
 the repentance law for terrorists. Finally, the Government created the National In-
 telligence Directorate for Social Peace and Safety, thereby intensifying still further
 the role of the National Intelligence Service in public life.
 Proceedings in terrorism cases in the civilian courts, and particularly in treason
 cases in the military courts, do not meet internationally accepted standards of open-
 ness, fairness, and due process. In practice, military courts hold treason trials in se-
 cret, although such secrecy is not required by law. Defense attorneys in treason
 trials are not permitted adequate access to the files containing the State's evidence
 against their clients, nor are they allowed to question police or military witnesses
 either before or during the trial. Human rights groups charge that some military
 judges have sentenced defendants without having first notified their lawyers that
 their clients' trials had even begun. During the year, the military courts tried 146
 persons charged with treason or aggravated terrorism. These courts handed down
 84 prison sentences, remitted the cases of 58 persons to civilian jurisdiction to be
 tried for terrorism, and acquitted 4 persons. Of the 84 persons who were sentenced,
 36 received a life sentence. In June then-Prime Minister Javier Valle Riestra drew
 attention to the subject of due process in the military courts when he recommended
 in a television interview that U.S. citizen Lori Berenson, who was convicted in a
 military court in 1996 of aggravated terrorism for her association with the MRTA
 and is serving a life sentence, simply be pardoned and expelled. President Fujimori
 immediately rejected the suggestion.
 Defendants in treason cases who are found not guilty by a military court may be
 remanded to a civilian court for a second trial on terrorism charges based on the
 same facts, a practice criticized by human rights monitors as double jeopardy. This
 was the main issue that led the Inter-American Court of Human Rights in 1997 to
 order the Government to release Maria Elena Loayza Tamayo from jail and pay her
 compensation. After the military justice system had absolved her of treason charges,
 Loayza was retried for terrorism y a civilian court, which sentenced her to 20 years
 in prison. Although the Government released Loayza, it failed to comply with the
 compensation order. Accordingly, in November the Court issued a ruling specifying
 the precise amount of compensation to be paid by the Government within 6 months:
 $99,000 to Loayza herself and $78,000 to Loayza's children, parents, and attorney
 sister, who had served as her legal representative. In addition, the Court ordered
 the Government to reemploy Loayza as a teacher in a public school, to pay her at
 a level equal to that to which she would have been entitled had she not been impris-
 oned, and to count the time that she spent in jail as time worked for purposes of
 calculating her retirement pension.
 In April U.N. Human Rights Commission Special Rapporteur on the Independence
 of Judges and Lawyers, Param Cumaraswamy, presented the oral introduction of
 his report on Peru to'the Commission, following a September 1996 visit to the coun-
 try. Even though the "faceless" military and civilian courts were abolished in 1997,
 and the identities of judges in treason and terrorism cases no longer are concealed,
 the Special Rapporteur's criticisms still are relevant in regard to the basic unfair-
 ness, lack of openness, and shortcomings in due process that are characteristic of
 the military justice system, in particular. Cumaraswamy also criticized the climate
 of impunity that has characterized the military justice system ever since Congress
 passed the amnesty laws of 1995. He said that such laws cannot relieve the Govern-
 ment-of its obligation under the International Covenant of Civil and Political Rights
 to investigate human rights violations, and that they deprive the victims of abuses
 of their right to the truth and to an effective remedy.
 Nevertheless, the military judicial system and its supporters in Congress contin-
 ued to reject any outside suggestion of reform. When, in March, the Human Rights
 Ombudsman invited the military courts to participate in a conference on his rec-
 ommendations for reform of the military justice system, the invitation was ignored,
 and not a single military judge or prosecutor attended.
 In the civilian jurisdiction, terrorism cases are tried by a new specialized terror-
 ism division of the Superior Court, which began to function in the spring. The divi-
 
 
 sion is based in Lima, but its judges travel to the provinces as needed. Prior to this
 change, the old provincial terrorism court in Puno tried five military personnel and
 one civilian who reportedly had bombed the local affiliate of a television station that
 carried a national news program known for its investigative reports of alleged gov-
 ernment wrongdoing. When the Puno court absolved the defendants in the case, the
 new specialized terrorism division of the superior court in Lima ordered all the old
 provincial terrorism courts to cease hearing terrorism trials unless one or two Lima-
 based judges were included on the bench. The Puno court decision in the television
 station bombing case was appealed to the Supreme Court, which overturned it in
 September and ordered the case to be retried.
 Besides no longer shielding their identities, the judges trying suspected terrorists
 in the reformed civilian terrorism courts hold their trials inside maximum-security
 prisons. Although the trials theoretically are open to the public, few persons attend
 them. According to experienced human rights lawyers, many of the once anonymous
 judges have begun to embrace a more balanced judicial conception of guilt and inno-
 cence and base their decisions on more reasoned arguments than before.
 The ad hoc Pardons Commission, established by Congress in 1996, has received
 pardon applications from 80 percent of those individuals unjustly jailed for terror-
 ism and treason, and continued its mission to recommend presidential pardons for
 such prisoners. The Commission consists of the Human Rights Ombudsman as
 Chairman, the Minister of Justice, and, representing the President, long-time prison
 reformer Father Hubert Lanssiers. In December 1997, Congress extended the life
 of the Commission until August 31. However, in April Congress charged the Com-
 mission with the added task of studying the files of the "arrepentidos," or repentant
 terrorism and treason convicts, and with recommending to the President, in each
 case, the extent to which the original sentence might be commuted. For this pur-
 pose, Congress extended the life of the Pardons Commission to December 31. The
 Repentance Law of 1992 had provided these convicts, of whom over 400 remain in
 prison out of an original total of 8,471, with the opportunity to have their original
 sentences reduced if they admitted their terrorist past, repudiated any previous
 links with terrorist groups, and turned in the names of other alleged terrorists. This
 led to the arrest and conviction of many innocent individuals, who were named by
 arrepentidos and then convicted for terrorism and treason. By year's end, the ad hoc
 Commission had received applications from 361 arrepentidos requesting that their
 original sentences be reviewed for possible commutation. In late December, the
 Commission recommended, and the President agreed, that the sentences of an ini-
 tial five arrepentidos be commuted. Because of the heavy caseload of requests still
 outstanding, as well as the yet unfinished work on pardon applications, the Con-
 gress decided in December to extend the term of the Pardons Commission until De-
 cember 31, 1999.
 During the year, 102 detainees were pardoned, bringing the total of "innocent!'
 terrorism or treason convicts pardoned and released throughout the life of the Par-
 dons Commission to 462. Of this total, 22 had been convicted of treason by military
 courts and the remaining 440 had been convicted of terrorism in civilian courts.
 Working along a second track and beginning in 1994, lawyers belonging to four
 major human rights organizations represented prisoners wrongly charged with ter-
 rorism or treason, brought their cases to the courts, and won the release of many.
 From January 1995 through September 1998, the courts declared innocent and freed
 1,110 such prisoners, bringing the total of all prisoners unjustly incarcerated and
 either pardoned or exonerated to 1,572.
 In November President Fujimori signed a law restoring certain basic legal rights
 and benefits to those "innocents" unjustly convicted of treason who have been, or
 will be, pardoned and released through the ad hoc Commission process. The meas-
 ure automatically terminates all legal proceedings against the individuals pardoned,
 expunges their past criminal records, returns their identity documents to them, can-
 cels the fines that were judged against them at the time of their sentencing, and
 restores to them items removed from their possession during police investigations.
 However, the new law is silent on the controversial issue of whether and how the
 State might financially compensate these innocent individuals for the years they
 were forced to spend in prison. Although human rights groups have called for such
 compensation to be paid, a presidential pardon does not automatically render a par-
 doned individual eligible for compensation. The Human Rights Ombudsman has
 called on the Government and the Congress to formulate a solution to cover all
 those deserving compensation. The Congress' Justice Commission appointed a sub-
 committee to study the issue of compensation.
 In April Luis Ramon Landaure, who had defended Sendero Luminoso leader
 Abimael Guzman, and eight other human rights lawyers who had defended Sendero
 
 
 Luminoso terrorists in the military courts were turned over to civilian jurisdiction
 for trial on terrorism charges (see Section l.d.).
 There were no reports of political prisoners. Sendero Luminoso and MRTA mem-
 bers charged with terrorism are not considered to be political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy;- Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Constitution requires security forces to have a written judicial warrant to enter a
 private dwelling. However, this requirement is suspended in the emergency zones,
 where the security forces routinely conduct searches without such warrants.
 The Human Rights Ombudsman continued to receive complaints about incidents
 of forced conscription of young men, even minors, by units of the security forces car-
 ried out as part of the constitutionally mandated system of compulsory 2-year mili-
 tary service. Some of the reports told not only of beatings and other mistreatment
 but also of severe injury leading, in some cases, to murder or suicide. In a country
 where well-placed contacts and even bribes are used by middle-class families in
 order to avoid military service, forced conscription tends to target uneducated youth
 in remote areas. Although the Ombudsman repeatedly has raised the issue with the
 military authorities, they continue to deny that forced conscription is an official pol-
 icy, while conceding that some local commanders may have acted illegally. Accord-
 ing to the Center for the Study and Promotion of Peace, there was no known case
 of an allegation of forcible conscription and mistreatment in which the investigation
 has upheld the victim's complaint. In November legislation was enacted reiterating
 the prohibition against forced recruitment of youths. In addition, in order to monitor
 compliance more effectively and investigate violations, the Human Rights Ombuds-
 man established a nationwide, toll-free telephone line for use by any citizen who
 may have been recruited forcibly or wished to report rumors of such a practice.
 However, despite the new legislation, in late November the military forcibly re-
 cruited a group of 16 youths in Piura.
 The Constitution also provides citizens with the right to private communication,
 but the media continued to report that the Government violated this right. In May
 the daily newspaper El Comercio accused the Government of tapping its telephones
 (see Section 2.a.). In March former SIE agent Luisa Margarita Zanatta Muedas, who
 had fled the country reportedly in search of political asylum, granted a number of
 television and newspaper interviews in which she gave credible accounts of the SIE
 wiretapping operation in which she had participated in 1997.
 Opposition Congresswoman Anel Townsend and 13 journalists who had been tar-
 geted by the wiretaps filed suit, charging that the Government had violated their
 constitutional right to privacy and seeking civil damages. In May the Constitutional
 Tribunal dismissed the suit, and in July, having exhausted all domestic remedies,
 Townsend and the journalists presented their case to the Inter-American Commis-
 sion on Human Rights. In addition, the congressional Committee on Defense, Intel-
 ligence, and Internal Order, chaired by one of President Fujimori's loyalists, con-
 ducted a less than comprehensive investigation of the charges, which not only exon-
 erated the intelligence services and security forces, but recommended that the ag-
 grieved journalists be charged with having disseminated false information that had
 tainted the honor of the military.
 Prompted by the terrorism and banditry which characterized the internal conflict,
 a number of rural communities have organized their own self-defense units, or
 "rondas," which are often trained, armed, and encouraged by the regular security
 forces. However, some military commanders go beyond encouragement and, at
 times, coerce peasants into joining the rondas, thereby disrupting their home and
 family life.
 To a far greater degree, Sendero Luminoso and MRTA are known to have forced
 peasants to join their ranks and participate in terrorist attacks and executions,
 similarly disrupting their home and family life.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of speech
 and of the press; however, in practice, the Government limits these freedoms. The
 press practices a degree of self-censorship in order to avoid provoking government
 retribution.
 While the press represents a wide spectrum of opinion, ranging from left-leaning
 opposition views to those favoring the Government, the 1997 loss by television
 owner Baruch Ivcher of his station, and other cases in which the Government ac-
 cused investigative journalists of treason demonstrate the limits of press freedom.
 In the greater Lima area alone, there are 16 daily newspapers, 7 television sta-
 tions, 68 radio stations, and 2 commercial cable systems. The Government owns one
 daily newspaper, one television network, and two radio stations, none of which is
 particularly influential.
 
 
 749
 
 Tensions continued during the year between the Government and the segment of
 the media that was very critical of certain government policies and actions, and
 whose investigative reporting has generated wide public criticism of alleged govern-
 ment wrongdoing. Government intelligence agents allegedly orchestrated a cam-
 paign of spurious attacks by the tabloid press against a handful of publishers and
 investigative journalists in the strongly pro-opposition daily La Republica and other
 print outlets and electronic media. During the year, these journalists, who write in-
 vestigative pieces and columns and anchor television news programs, published
 news stories and editorials about allegedly corrupt militaryprcurement practices
 and arms transactions, as well as about the military standoffon the Peru-Ecuador
 border. In front page banner headlines and in long inside page stories, four different
 newspapers rep~eatedly attacked the investigative reporters, labeling them traitors,
 Ecuadorian spies, and terrorist sympathizers. The similar language and writing
 style employed by all four tabloids made it appear as though a single entity were
 orchestrating the entire campaign of intimidation and defamation. In addition, the
 investigative reporters and their families were targets of telephoned death threats
 and other harassment. The investigative reporters admit that they or their editors
 held back some stories to avoid angering the regime and risking its retaliation.
 Some of these tabloid newspapers were established only recently and allegedly were
 financed and controlled by government security forces, which instigated the cam-
 paig in an attempt to prevent further negative stories about the military, whose
 sensitivity has been unusually high due to the tension along the Peru-Ecuador bor-
 der.
 During the year, threats and harassment continued against Baruch Ivcher and
 some of his former journalists and administrative staff. Ivcher pursued and ex-
 hausted legal channels to regain control of his station and appealed to international
 organizations to help restore his rights (see Section 2.d.). In September Ivcher and
 several of his staff involved in his other nonmedia businesses were charged with
 customs fraud. The courts sentenced Ivcher in absentia to 12 years' imprisonment
 and his secretary to 3 years in prison. Other persons from his former television sta-
 tion, who resigned in protest in 1997 when the station was taken away, also have
 had various charges leveled against them and complain of telephone threats and
 surveillance by persons in unmarked cars. One such case of government pressure
 and intimidation involved Jose Arrieta, who headed the investigative unit at
 Ivcher's Channel 2, where he had reported on a variety of alleged human rights
 abuses by the intelligence services. The tax authorities conducted an audit of
 Arrieta's tax return; he and his family began receiving death threats; and he him-
 self was charged with pressuring an intelligence agent to provide false information
 to government investigators and with violating the public trust. As a result, Arrieta
 fled the country in January.
 In May the daily newspaper El Comercio charged the Government with tapping
 the telephones of its Sunday magazine section, after it received threats concerning
 an interview with former police captain Julio Salas, which it had not yet published.
 Salas had participated in the 1997 investigation of Channel 2 and accused other po-
 lice officers of covering up their role in the investigation. The newspaper criticized
 the wiretapping as a government scare tactic designed to limit press freedom.
 In July the congressional Committee on Defense, Intelligence, and Internal Order
 completed its investigation of alleged wiretapping by government security forces,
 claiming that it had found no evidence to support the allegations (see Section l.f.).
 In November in Yurimaguas, Loreto department, the MRTA terrorist group forced
 radio journalist Johnny Eduardo Pezo Tello to broadcast a letter from them, under
 threat of death to himself and his family. Even though Pezo clearly read the letter
 against his will, a provincial judge ordered his imprisonment on charges of sym-
 pathizing with terrorists. When 18 other local journalists wrote to the judge protest-
 ing such treatment, the judge charged them with obstruction of justice. Following
 complaints by national and international professional associations of journalists and
 legal representations by the Human Rights Ombudsman, the Superior Court or-
 dered Pezo released aftersome 5 weeks in jail.
 Also in November, newly appointed Organization of American States Special
 Rapporteur on Press. Freedom, Santiago Canton, accompanied the IACHR fact-find-
 ing mission to Peru. During his visit, Canton-inaugurated a nationwide hot line for
 journalists who are -hreatened and seek immediate legal counsel and -other assist-
 ance. In his own press statement at the conclusion of the mission, Canton called
 ,on the Government to cease all official harassment of journalists and to investigate
 and prosecute all abuses of freedom of speech and of the press.
 The Government respects academic freedom.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution provides for
 the right of peaceful assembly, and the authorities generally respect this right in
 
 
 p ractice, except in the emergency zones where the right of assembly is suspended.
 blic gatherings in plazas or streets require advance permission which may be de-
 nied only for reasons of public safety or health. Municipal authorities usually grant-
 ed permits for demonstrations in all nonemergency zones.
 From June through September, five protest rallies took place in central Lima, the
 -first two largely consisting of university students who demonstrated against Presi-
 dent Fujimori's measures inhibiting the democratic process and the Government's
 inability to provide enough jobs for young persons entering the labor market. During
 the first rally, the police beat and injured a number of the participating students,
 some shop windows were broken, and allegations were made that government intel-
 ligence agents took-photographs of protesters. As a result, during the following ral-
 lies, observers representing the Human Rights Ombudsman were on hand to ensure
 an orderly and peaceful demonstration. The third and fourth rallies consisted of a
 more heterogeneous agglomeration of students, labor union members, retirees, and
 community activists. These later rallies coincided, respectively, with the delivery of
 petitions containing as many as 1.4 million signatures for a referendum on Presi-
 dent Fujimori's reelection, and with the vote in Congress rejecting the referendum
 (see Section 3).
 On September 30, as many as 5,000 to 7,000 construction workers, teachers, stu-
 dents, retired persons, and other organized contingents demonstrated in Lima's cen-
 tral square to publicize their Citizens' Agreement for a Democratic Transition. This
 was a 80-point manifesto headed by demands for a complete prohibition of all at-
 tempts to reelect President Fujimori, for a total reform of the judiciary to ensure
 its independence, and for an end to the Government's neoliberal economic model and
 its replacement with poicies more friendly to the poor. Some 200 demonstrators
 broke into the Presid.ential Palae, smashed windows, vandalized property, and
 looted weapons belonging to the presidential gard. The security forces responded
 with tear gas and fired some shots before the demonstrators were driven off the pal-
 ace premises. The Government blamed the violence on the opposition, while the op-
 position charged the Government with deliberately provoking the violence in: order
 to discredit legitimate dissent later.
 In October violent demonstrations took place in Iquits in opposition to the Peru-
 Ecuador peace agreement. Prompted by nationalism and a regional resentment of
 the central Government, the Patriotic Front of Loret started a riot on October 24,
 in which 6persons died and over 20 persons were injured, and a mob of 1,000per-
 sons burneddown several government buildings. When the Patriotic Front called for
 further demonstrations and strikes to take place on November 25 and 26, the armed
 forces took over full control of Loreto department from November 24 to 30, in order
 to prevent any further loss of life or property.
 The Constitution provides for freedom of association, and the authorities generally
 respect this right.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for freedom of religion, and the
 Government generally respects this provision in practice. The Constitution recog-
 nizes the Catholic Church "as an important element in the historical, cultural, and
 moral development" of the nation, but also establishes the separation of church and
 state. Conversion to other religions is respected, and missionaries are allowed to
 enter the country and proselytize.
 Although teaching about Roman Catholicism has not been required in the public
 school system since the education reforms of the 1970's, most schools devote 1 hour
 a week to such study. Parents who do not wish their children to participate in these
 classes are expected to submit a written request for an exemption to the school prin-
 cipal. Non-Catholics who wish their children to receive a religious education in their
 own particular faith are free to organize such classes during the weekly hour allot-
 ted by the school for religious education, but must supply their own teacher.
 Sendero Luminoso rejects religion and has been known to threaten and intimidate
 religious workers.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Constitution provides for the right to free movement; however, this
 right is suspended in the emergency zones, which cover 16 percent of the country's
 territory and where the security forces may detain travelers at will. Nevertheless,
 the army generally does not hinder travel in these zones. Passengers on public
 transportation and drivers in private vehicles may be checked at control points
 throughout the country.
 Sendero Luminoso occasionally still interrupts the free movement of persons, and
 reports of its roadblocks in sections of the upper Huallaga Valley and in Ayacucho
 department were common.
 Although there are no political or legal constraints on foreign travel or emigration,
 the authorities can restrict persons with pending criminal and, in some cases, civil
 
 
 751
 charges against them from leaving the country. Repatriates, both voluntary and in-
 voluntary, are not treated differently from other citizens.
 The Constitution prohibits the revocation of citizenship. However, according to the
 Nationality Law of 1996, naturalized Peruvians can lose their citizenship for, among
 other reasons, committing crimes against the State, national defense, and public se-
 curity, as well as for reasons that 'affect the public interest and the national inter-
 est." In 1997 the Government invalidated the naturalization of Israeli-born Baruch
 Ivcher, the majority owner of television station Channel 2, which persistently had
 carried stories of government abuse. Although the Government claimed that its deci-
 sion was based on irregularities in Ivcher's original naturalization petition 13 years
 earlier, observers believe that it was the Nationality Law that provided the Govern-
 ment with the legal basis for the revocation. After challenging the withdrawal of his
 nationality and losing his case in the lower courts, Ivcher, who was out of the coun-
 try throughout the legal process, took his case directly to the IACHR. In March the
 Commission declared Ivcher's case admissible; the Government challenged the find-
 ing of admissibility on the grounds that all domestic remedies had not yet been ex-
 hausted; and the Commission ruled against it. Nevertheless, Ivcher submitted a
 final appeal to the Constitutional Tribunal, which dismissed it in June. In December
 the Commission submitted its report to the Government but did not publicize its
 conclusions.
 As a result of the political violence which accompanied the internal conflict of the
 1980's and early 1990's, several hundre td t      persons were displaced from
 their original homes, thereby creating serious socioeconomic problems which, for the
 most part, remain unsolved. The Government's Support Program for the Repopu-
 lation and Development of Emergency Zones (PAR) estimates the total number of
 internally displaced persons at some 600,000, while te National Roundtable on the
 Displacement of People Affected by Political Violence, an umbrella organization cre-
 ated in 1993 that coordinates the activities of 58 nongovernmental organizations
 (NGO's) that work with the internally displaced, estimates the number of inhab-
 itants of rural areas and indigenous communities who were displaced at approxi-
 mately 425,000. Roughly 80 percent of these may be found in andaround Lima and
 a number of other major citi      o     es (PAR) besides this rural-to-urban displacement,
 there was substantial rural-to-rural migration, as well as many persons whose
 homes were destroyed and whose ives were disrupted, but who resisted the en-
 croachnent of terrorist groups by forming civilian self-defense committees and
 thereby managed to remain in their home communities. There is also a large popu-
 lation of indigenous Ashaninkas in the central jungle region who face not ony a ter-
 rorist threat but the expansion onto their lands of certain oil exploration companies,
 which do not consult them in advance (see Section 5).
 While the PAR estimates the number of internally displaced persons who already
 have returned to their home communities at 350,000, the Roundtable claims that
 only some 68,000 have done so. However, both the PAR and the Roundtable are in
 agreement that only 15,000 so far. have been assisted by the PAR in their return
 to their home communities. According to the Roundtable, as many as 15 to 20 per-
 cent of the returnees already have returned to their displacement homes, due to dis-
 satisfaction with the arrangements that awaited them in their home communities.
 In addition, approximately 40 percent of the returnees have not reestablished them-
 selves firmly in their communities of origin and tend to migrate back and forth be-
 tween their original homes and displacement homes. The PAR tends to concentrate
 on infrastructure development in the communities to which displaced persons are
 destined to return, building roads, bridges, utility lines, schools, health centers, and
 the like. The PAR also provides returnees with an initial supply of agricultural
 tools, seeds, food, medicines, blankets, and kitchen utensils. The NGO's, on the
 other hand, focus on the training of the returnees in self-advocacy and on the devel-
 opment of vocational skills. The PAR provides no assistance to those displaced per-
 sons who chose not to return to their original communities.
 A special problem related to the displaced persons is the lack of basic documenta-
 tion, such as birth certificates and voter registration cards. A second problem is the
 legal cloud over the estimated 5,000 displaced persons who also fall into the cat-
 egory of "requisitoriados," that is, persons who were forced to join terrorist groups
 or were falsely accused of associating with such groups and continue to have deten-
 tion orders issued against them (see Section l.d.). Most of these individuals speak
 only Quechua, a fact which increases their vulnerability and reduces even further
 their capacity for economic and social integratio n  urban areas.
 The law includes provisions for granting refugee and asylee status in accordance
 with the provisions of the 1951 U.N. Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees
 and its 1967 Protocol. The Government cooperates with the U.N. High Commis-
 sioner for Refugees in granting asylum  and refugee status, and recognizes the
 
 
 Catholic Migration Commission as the official provider of technical assistance to ref-
 ugees and applicants for asylum. There are 761 persons in the country with refugee
 status. These refugees are allowed to live and work normally while awaiting receipt
 of their permanent residency. The issue of the provision of first asylum did not arise
 in 1998. There were no reports of the forced return of persons to countries where
 they feared persecution.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 The Constitution provides for the right of citizens to change their government, al-
 though the law bars groups that advocate the violent overthrow of the Government
 .from particip-ting in the political process. Voting is by secret ballot and is manda-
 tory for all citizens between the ages of 18 and 70. However, members of the armed
 forces and the police, as well as prisoners, are ineligible to vote.
 In accordance with provisions in the 1993 Constitution, President Fujimori ran for
 a second 5-year term in 1995, and was reelected over 12 other candidates, receiving
 65 percent of the vote. Voters also elected the 120 members of the unicameral Con-
 gress; 69 seats are held by members of Fujimori's Cambio 90/Nueva Mayoria move-
 ment, and the remaining 51 members represent 11 parties. The Elections Law of
 1997 requires.each of the participating political parties to prepare its national list
 of ranked candidates, and the 120 members of the unicameral legislature are elected
 from these party lists in proportion to the number of votes received by each party.
 In 1996 the congressional majority, faced with the constitutional provision limit-
 ing presidents to no more than two consecutive terms in office, passed a law inter-
 preting President Fujimori's 1995 victory as his first under the new Constitution,
 ereby permitting him to run for a third consecutive term. The administration's at-
 tempt to maintain its hold on power created a constitutional crisis. In 1997 Con-
 gress removed three members of.the Constitutional Tribunal who had voted against
 the interpretation allowing a third term, and the Tribunal ceased to function effec-
 tively, unable to rule on any constitutional issues for lack of a quorum. The three
 members of the Constitutional Tribunal filed a complaint with the IACHR, which
 the Commission found admissible. In-December the press reported that the Commis-
 sion had called on the Government to reinstate  the three judges on the Tribunal
 and formally given the Government 60 days in which to comply with its rec-
 "ommendations.
 The controversy over President Fujimori's eligiblity to seek reelection continued
 throughout the year. The undermining of the Constitutional Tribunal by congres-
 sional action was particularly significant in setting the stage for Fujimori's run for
 a third term in 2000. As many as 1.4 million signatures were gathered in a petition
 drive for a referendum on whether or not the law permitting Fujimori to run for
 a third consecutiye term should be rep ealed. However, the National Board of Elec-
 tions ruled that according o a 1996 law, the. referendum could be held ony if 48
 members ofiCngress favored it, thereby reversing its earlier decision permitting the
 signature  driveto= proceed without congressional approval. On August 27, the ref-
 .erendum was effectively killed when only 45 members voted for it. Thus the right
 to a referendum, Which is established in the Constitution, was abrogated by legisla-
 tive action with no opportunity for judicial review.
 In October 1997, Congress appointed a subcommittee to investigate infiltration by
 _the intelligence service of the voter registration agency, incompetence in contract ad-
 ministration, and massive embezzlement of funds. When the subcommittee produced
 a critical report, the Director of the National Voter Registration Bureau and a num-
 ber of his senior stafffled the country in March.
 In a particularly egregious act of electin-relatd-maniplation in May, Congress
 altered the voting procedure on the National Board of Elections to favor a potential
 - Fujimori candidacy. With two of the five seats on the Board already occupied by per-
 sons who could-be  reied o consistently to take pro-Fujimori positions, Congress
 raised the number of voteneeded to approve challenges to specific candidacies from
 the previous simple majority of three to four, therebyd ensuring thatno challenge
 to a Fujimori candidacy was likely to succeed. H
 Women and somes minorities actively participate in government and-politics, a-
 thoughuthey-are underrepresented. There are 13 female members in the 120-sat
 Congress. In addition, 1 of 15 cabinet ministers-and several vice ministers were
 women; as are 3 of the 33 judges of the Supreme Court. A nationwide- drive was
 conducted to replace the citizenship papers and voter registration cards lost by
 women-ho were displaced by the internal conflict and who returned to their origi-
 nal communities in time for the 1998municipal elections, as well as for the 2000
 national elections. For the first time in the country's electoral history, the October
 municipal elections were held under the new law that mandated that all party can-
 
 
 753
 didate lists for congressional and municipal elections include at least 25 percent
 women and at least 25 percent men. In conjunction with the municipal election cam-
 paign, four women's organizations undertook nationwide programs to identify fe-
 male candidates and promote women's lobbies, increase the number of female vot-
 ers, prepare a women'spoltical agenda, and train women who were elected to office.
 Peruvians of Asian descent hold leadership positions in government; President
 Fujimori is of Japanese descent and the president of the Council of Ministers is of
 Chinese descent. There is a substantial number of members of Congress with mixed
 ancestry, and a recent vice president was a Quechua speaker, as was a recent Min-
 ister of Transportation and Communications. However, it is rare for indigenous peo-
 ple, who make up 45 percent of the population, to reach the highest leadership
 ranks in the public sector. The black minority, unofficially estimated at 8 to 10 per-
 cent of the total population, is not represented at all in the leadership of any branch
 of the Government, and there are no blacks in the Congress.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 In general, the Government permitted numerous NGO's dedicated to monitoring
 and advancing human rights to operate freely. However, until September 10, the
 Minister of the Interior had denied the ICRC the o pportunity to conduct interviews
 with detainees without witnesses present in DINCOTE detention cells in Lima (see
 Section 1.c.). Military commanders often limited the freedom of local and inter-
 national human rights monitors to investigate abuses in the emergency zones.
 Government, military, judicial, and police officials, as well as some majority mem-
 bers of Congress, continued to criticize human rights groups for their alleged bias
 against the authorities and in favor of the 'leftist guerrillas." Dialog between the
 nongovernmental human rights community and the authorities was almost non-
 existent. However, as part of the celebration of the 50th anniversary of the Univer-
 sal Declaration of Human Rights, government officials and NGO representatives
 shared the same platform at a number of events, including a congressionally spon-
 sored celebration at which the Minister of Defense spoke, a first for such a high-
 level military figure.
 Most human rights NGO's are independent, thorough, and usually objective. In
 1985 a number of them joined forces to form an umbrella organization, the National
 Coordinating Committee for Human Rights. The Coordinadora, which comprises
 some 50 member organizations, adheres strictly to a policy of not politicizing its po-
 sitions on human rights issues, although its constituent members may do so in their
 own names. The Coordinadora is in the process of integrating its Lima-based and
 province-based member organizations into a more cohesive body so that it can be
 in a better position to act quickly and forcefully and to speak with a unified voice.
 Since Jorge Santistevan's appointment as the first Human Rights Ombudsman in
 1996, his office has grown steadily in stature and is considered to be the most inde-
 pendent and effective force in the country for bringing citizens justice. The Ombuds-
 man enjoys investigative independence, as well as the ability to inform the public
 of his conclusions and recommendations. However, he has no enforcement authority.
 Santistevan's achievements include the work of the Pardons Commission, which he
 chairs (see Section I.e.); his recommendations regarding alleged abuses in the Gov-
 ernment's family planning program (see Section 5); and the influence he has exerted
 on the Congress to repeal a number of laws and policies that discriminated against
 women (see Section 5).
 During the year, the U.N. Working Group on Arbitrary Detention, the Inter-
 national Federation of Human Rights, the U.N. Committee Against Torture, and the
 Inter-American Commission on Human Rights all made fact-finding visits. In all
 four cases, members of these groups were allowed ready access to prison facilities
 and were granted interviews with every government official they wished to meet.
 Although the Government had invited the IACHR, the mission received telephone
 death threats. In addition, Bishop of Ayacucho Juan Luis Cipriani, later named
 Archbishop of Lima, asserted that the IACHR would emphasize evidence of wrong-
 doing and abuse, rather than what he termed the authorities' genuine respect for
 human rights. In a statement at the end of its visit, the IACHR noted the Govern-
 ments positive actions, e.g., the creation of the office of the Human Rights Ombuds-
 man, the abolition of faceless judges, the classification of torture as a crime, and
 the overall improvement in the climate of security. However, the IACHR criticized
 the Government for its manipulation of the judicial and electoral systems and its
 intimidation of the press, which had resulted, it noted, in a judiciary lacking inde-
 pendence, in democratic institutions 'subservient to the interests of the executive,
 and in a press that practiced self-censorship due to fear of official retaliation (see
 Sections i.e., 2.a., and 3). Specifically, the IACHR called on the Government to re-
 
 
 store the power of the Constitutional Tribunal to rule on constitutional issues, to
 return to the National Judiciary Council the power to nominate and dismiss judges
 and prosecutors, and to cease the recurring practice of overruling, harassing, trans-
 ferring, removing, and even prosecuting judges whose decisions did not coincide with
 the Government's views.
 Legitimate fear of physical attack by Sendero Luminoso seriously hampered the
 ability of human rights monitors to carry out their work in some parts of the coun-
 try. While they have documented human rights abuses by the security forces care-
 fully, human rights groups have, at the same time, repeatedly named Sendero
 Luminoso as the principal violator of citizens' rights. In both its annual reports and
 periodic press releases, the Coordinadora has criticized regularly the violence per-
 petrated by both Sendero Luminoso and MRTA.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution provides for equal rights for all citizens, and specifically pro-
 hibits discrimination based on ethnic origin, race, sex, language, religion, opinion,
 or economic condition. Nevertheless, discrimination against women, people with dis-
 abilities, indi enous people, and racial and ethnic minorities continued.
 Women.-iolence against women, including rape, spousal abuse, and the physical
 and sexual abuse of women and girls, is a chronic problem, according to local human
 rights groups and law enforcement offices. Such abuses are aggravated by insen-
 sitivity on the part of law enforcement and judicial authorities toward female vic-
 tims of abuse and by a media image of the traditional relationship between the
 sexes that encourages a controlling attitude by the husband toward his wife. Nation-
 wide statistics on the extent of domestic violence are not available. However, in
 Lima, 6,294 cases of domestic violence were reported in 1996. Between 1990 and
 1996, 32,030 cases were reported. Human rights organizations believe that, whether
 for fear of retaliation from the accused spouse, or because of the cost involved in
 pursuing a complaint, or for some other reason, a large number of domestic violence
 cases remain unreported.
 Although a basic statute criminalizing spousal abuse has existed since December
 1993, significant improvements in the law were enacted in March 1997. These
 changes simplified the procedures for reporting cases of domestic violence, made the
 process less expensive, and broadened the judicial remedies available. The 1997 law
 gives not only judges but also prosecutors the power to protect a victim of domestic
 violence from further abuse by enjoining the convicted spouse or parent from return-
 ing to the family's home. In the past, when abusive spouses argued that their home
 was owned jointly by both husband and wife and that they therefore should be al-
 lowed to return to it, judges tended to let that argument outweigh the interest of
 the accused victim. The new law also expands the number of persons authorized to
 file complaints of domestic violence to include the victim's parents or grandparents,
 other relatives, and even other unrelated persons living in the home in which the
 violence was committed. Whereas previously victims of domestic violence had to
 have a specialist in legal medicine certify the presence of their injuries and to pay
 for the report themselves, the new law eliminates the required fee and stipulates
 that the report may be prepared by any health professional. Many women have com-
 plained that their charges of domestic violence were brushed aside with indifference
 by police officers who either did not understand the issue or wrongly assumed that
 complaints of spousal abuse could be filed only at one of the handful of "women's
 police stations" exclusively dedicated to processing charges of domestic violence. The
 new law clearly requires all police stations to receive such complaints. The Ministry
 of Women's Advancement and Human Development, in conjunction with a non-
 governmental women's rights organization, has prepared a national program to sen-
 sitize police to the problem of domestic violence and to train officers at all police
 stations in the processing of domestic violence cases.
 According to the Human Rights Ombudsman, many rape victims have complained
 that court-appointed medical examiners inappropriately delved into their past sex-
 ual histories. They also accused judges of looking more favorably on rape victims
 who were virgins prior to the rape and of believing that a woman who was raped
 somehow must have enticed her attacker to commit the crime.
 In April 1997, Congress repealed a statute whereby convicted rapists could be ab-
 solved of their crime if they married their victim. The Human Rights Ombudsman
 appealed to Congress to amend the Criminal Code to provide greater protection to
 victims of sexual violence. The Ombudsman sought elimination of the provision in
 the Code that affords rapists and other sexual predators the opportunity to avoid
 prosecution if they reach a private settlement with their victims. In addition, the
 Ombudsman favored rescinding the provision that specifies that in cases of sexual
 
 
 755
 abuse of victims over 14 years of age, only victims themselves may file a complaint.
 Many victims are afraid of personally filing a complaint of sexual abuse; particularly
 in cases where the perpetrators are police officers.
 In January the Human Rights Ombudsman published an initial report on allega-
 tions that first arose in October 1997 that a number of health workers in public hos-
 pitals and family planning clinics had induced female patients to opt for steriliza-
 tion by promising them food or another type of good or service or by not providing
 them with complete information about the alternatives available. The Ombudsman
 recommended that all clients of the family plannin proga  be provided with com-
 plete information about all the alternatives available to them, that no client be pres-
 sured into using any particular contraceptive method, and that, if sterilization is
 chosen, the patient be afforded a 72-hour waiting period during which to consider
 that option, prior to a final decision. Since only 10,000 men have been sterilized
 under the Ministry of Health's family planning program, compared with 130,000
 women, the Ombudsman recommended that the inistry integrate men fully into
 its family planning program, thereby disseminating reproductive and contraceptive
 information more equitably across gender boundaries. The Ministry of Heal  ac-
 cepted the Ombudsman's report and already has implemented many of his rec-
 ommendations. During the year, the Ombudsman's office received additional com-
 plaints of abuses committed by family planning personnel, raising the overall total
 to 159. These all are being investigated by special staff of the Ombudsman's office.
 The Constitution provides for equality between men and women, and the 1995
 amendments to the Employment Promotion Law, as well as other laws relative to
 marriage, divorce, and property rights, prohibit discrimination against women. In
 1997 Congress passed legislation that proibited the inclusion in any announcement
 advertising employment or other educational training opportunities of any require-
 ments that may be construed as discriminatory on the basis not only of sex but of
 race as well. Legislation in 1997 also repealed the old disqualification of unmarried
 or childless individuals for judgeships in the family courts. Since these positions
 have in the past been filled predominantly by female candidates, the legislation was
 regarded as broadening employment opportunities for single women. In May Con-
 gress passed legislation that stripped health-care professionals in police hospitals of
 their police rank and accorded them civilian status only. Since over 80 percent of
 such professionals are women, the Human Rights Ombudsman challenged the con-
 stitutionality of the new law and its implementing regulations, on grounds of dis-
 crimination. The Superior Court of Lima ruled against the Ombudsman, who then
 appealed the case to the Supreme Court.
 Traditional assumptions and misconceptions often impede access by women to
 leadership roles in both the public and private sectors. Because of societal prejudice
 and discrimination, women historically have suffered disproportionately from the
 country's pervasive poverty  and   unemployment. The government-supported
 "Mibanco" program represents an effort to improve women's ability to generate in-
 come by providing credit to small businesses started by enterprising women.
 Children.-The Government provides free, compulsory education through second-
 ary school. However, 5.7 percent of children between the ages of 6 and 12, and 17
 percent of adolescents aged 12 to 17, either have never attended school or have
 abandoned their education. Among children and adolescents who live in. poverty or
 extreme poverty, the corresponding figures are 16 percent and 43 percent, respec-
 tively. School nonattendance is highest in rural and jungle areas, and affects girls
 more than boys. In April Congress amended the Child and Adolescent Code to pro-
 vide pregnant school-age girls with the right to begin or continue attending school.
 Previously, many school principals did not permit girls to pursue their studies if
 they became pregnant.
 The Ministry of Women's Advancement and Human Development has a Children's
 Bureau which coordinates child- and adolescent-related policies and programs
 throughout the Government. In the nongovernmental sector, the National Initiative
 on the Rights of the Child is the largest NGO of its kind and coordinates the work
 of 27 Lima-based and province-based groups concerned with the problems of chil-
 dren. At the grassroots level, 1,010 Children's Rights and Welfare Protection Offices
 receive and resolve complaints ranging from physical and sexual abuse to child sup-
 port, abandonment, and undetermined guardianship. Some 55 percent of these of-
 fices are operated by provincial or district governments, while the remaining 45 per-
 cent are operated by schools, churches, and a variety of other community-based
 NGO's. Most of the units are staffed by law students; only the offices in the wealthi-
 est districts of the country have professionally trained lawyers, psychologists, and
 social workers. Cases that cannot be resolved by these offices typically are referred
 to the local prosecutors' offices of the Public Ministry. Nationwide, these offices re-
 ceived and resolved 20,000 cases in 1996. In December Congress enacted new legis-
 
 
 lation that provides that settlements adjudicated by these Children's Rights and
 Welfare Protection Offices are legally binding and have the force of judgments en-
 tered by a court of law.
 Violence against children and the sexual abuse of children continued to be serious
 problems. It is estimated that only 10 to 20 percent of incidents of such mistreat-
 ment and abuse are reported, since many persons believe-that problems of this kind
 belong within the family and should be resolved privately. Even so, in Lima alone,
 400 rapes of minors are reported annually. In 1996 there were 219,000 orphans in
 the country, of whom 25,000 were orphaned for reasons related to political violence.
 There were continuing reports of beatings and other mistreatment of adolescents on
 army bases, in connection with the forcible conscription of youngsters for military
 service (see Section 1.f.).
 According to recent statistics, 55 percent of all children and adolescents under 18
 years of age live under the poverty line. Of these, two-thirds live in rural and jungle
 areas. Of all children and adolescents under 18 years of age, 26 percent live in ex-
 treme poverty. As many as 62 percent of all children and adolescents live in
 unhealthy environments, the majority of them in rural and jungle areas. In 1996
 the infant mortality rate was 43 per 1,000, down from 70 per 1,000 in 1992. How-
 ever, this figure masks wide regional disparities: 35 per 1,000 in urban areas, com-
 pared with 71 per 1,000 in rural areas. Twenty-six percent of children under age
 5, and 48 percent of children ages 6 to 9, suffered from chronic malnutrition. The
 higher statistic for the older children is due  the fact that those children were born
 during a time of extreme economic hardship. In those homes where the mother has
 a low level of education, as many as 50 percent of the children suffer from chronic
 malnutrition and 114 per 1,000 die from preventable causes before they reach age
 Street crime committed by children and adolescents is extremely high. It takes
 the form of robbery, physical assault, andl vandalism, and is often carried out by
 gangs. According to a congressional commission which investigated the causes of
 crime, such gangs carry out 75 percent of all acts of vandalism, 29 percent of as-
 saults, and 23 percent of robberies. The majority of these crimes are committed
 under the influence of drugs and alcohol, and their underiying causes are unemploy-
 ment, non-attendance at school, and conflicted family relationships. Human rights
 groups concerned with the protection and welfare of children and adolescents called
 on the Government to repeal the measures it decreed in May, which made it pos-
 sible for 16- to 18-year-old criminal gang members to be tried in military courts and
 he sentenced to no less than 25 years in adult prisons.
 As many as 1.2 million children work to help support their families. Of this total,
 some 500,000 are under the age of 14, while 700,000 are between the ages of 15
 and 17. Normally, there are sharp increases in these figures during school vacations
 (see Section 6.d.).
 People With Disabilities.-The Constitution provides that severely disabled per-
 sons have "the right to have their dignity respected and to be provided by law with
 protection, care, rehabilitation, and security." At year's end, the President signed
 into law new comprehensive legislation that established the National Council for the
 Integration of People with Disabilities and specified the rights, allowances, pro-
 grams, and services that are ensured for the disabled. Among other provisions, the
 statute prohibits discrimination, mandates that public spaces be barrier-free and
 that buildings be architecturally accessible, and provides for the appointment of a
 specilit in disability rights in the office of the Human Rights Ombudsman. Never-
 theless, im practice, the Government devotes little attention to the disabled: in De-
 cember an international conference on the needs of the disabled was held in Lima,
 but not a single high-ranking government official chose to address it. Nor does the
 Government allocate sufficient funds to make genuine integration of the disabled
 into the economy actually possible. Although the new legislation prohibits discrimi-
 nation in the workplace, it is vague regarding the source of funds required to pay
 for the human assistance, technological support, and environmental adaptations
 that often are necessary to enable disabled workers to be productive. As a result,
 disabled individuals and the private agencies serving them generally must rely on
 the public's charity and on funding from international orgaizations.
 The 1993 census counted 288,526 disabled persons, or 1.3 percent of the popu-
 lation. However, the Ministry of Health and the Pan American Health Organization
 believe that the vast majority of disabled persons either do not wish to acknowledge
 their disability to census takers or do not know what constitutes a disability, and
 that the actual number of disabled persons within the population could be as high
 as 3 million, or 13.8 percent. The Government, in conjunction with the country's
 hospitals, plans to implement a national register of disabled persons. Since the pri-
 vatization of the social security and national health insurance systems, it has been
 
 
 difficult for many disabled persons to obtain coverage because insurance carriers
 typically believe that a severe disability necessarily increases a person's vulner-
 ability to accidents and illnesses.
 Although construction regulations have long mandated barrier-free access by per-
 sons with physical disabilities to buildings in which services to the public are lo-
 cated, no effort has been made to implement this provision. Nor do accommodations
 exist, such as accessible polling stations, interpreters for the deaf in government
 service offices, and Braille or recorded versions of the Constitution, which would
 permit the disabled to participate in the basic processes of democracy and citizen-
 ship.
 According to officials of the Institute for Social Security, fewer than 1 percent of
 severely disabled citizens actually work. Among those who do, many have been
 channeled into a restricted number of occupations traditionally assumed to be "suit-
 able" for the disabled, such as telephone switchboard operation and massage, in the
 case of the blind. However, some progressive programs do exist: two leading super-
 market chains have initiated the employment of mentally retarded adolescents and
 young adults; Lima's Center for Rehabilitation of the Blind and the St. Francis
 School for the Blind have pioneered the training of the blind in computer-related
 skills; and the Foundation for Supportive Development provides low-interest loans
 averaging $500 each to disabled persons who wish to start their own businesses.
 Nevertheless, in general, even well-qualified disabled persons face serious discrimi-
 nation by potential employers. For example, the basic statute governing the policies
 and procedures of the judicial branch specifically prohibits the blind from serving
 as judges or prosecutors, a discriminatory provision that the National Judiciary
 Council has interpreted to apply to all persons with disabilities. In addition,
 SEDAPAL, Lima's water utility, dismissed all its blind switchboard operators, osten-
 sibly as part of a nondiscriminatory, across-the-board cost-cutting measure. How-
 ever, the chief advocate for the disabled in Congress reports that all the blind opera-
 tors immediately were replaced by younger, sighted recruits. People with disabilities
 only recently have begun to organize and demand equal rights and opportunities as
 a minority.
 Indigenous People.-The Constitution prohibits discrimination based on race and
 provides for the right of all citizens to speak their native language. Nevertheless,
 the large indigenous population faces pervasive discrimination and social prejudice.
 Many actors impede the ability of indigenous people to participate in, and facilitate
 their deliberate exclusion from, decisionmaking directly affecting their lands, cul-
 ture, traditions, and the allocation of natural resources. According to indigenous
 rights groups, the provisions in the 1993 Constitution and in subsequent implement-
 ing legislation regarding the treatment of native lands are less explicit about their
 inalienability and unmarketability than were earlier constitutional and statutory
 protections. Pervasive discrimination and social prejudice intensify feelin s of inferi-
 ority and second-class citizenship. Many indigenous people lack such gasic docu-
 ments as a birth certificate or a voter's registration card that would normally iden-
 tify them as full citizens and enable them to play their part in society.
 The native population of the Peruvian Amazon, which the Government estimates
 at a little under 200,000 and organizations representing the native communities es-
 timate at between 200,000 and 300,000, faces pervasive discrimination and social
 prejudice. In accordance with local culture and traditions, most of the native com-
 munities have a spiritual relationship with their land, and the concept of land as
 a marketable commodity is alien to them. Nevertheless, according to the Director
 of the Human Rights Ombudsman's Native Communities Program, the only right
 still statutorily set aside for this native population with respect to its land is that
 of "unassignability," which prevents the title to such lands from being reassigned
 to some nonindigenous tenant, simply because that tenant happens to have lived on
 those lands for a substantial amount of time. On the other hand, the marketing and
 outright sale of the lands are no longer prohibited. In addition, many other factors
 have contributed to the marginalization of indigenous people in society. Poor trans-
 portation and communications infrastructure in the highlands and in the Amazon
 jungle region makes political mobilization and organization difficult. The geographic
 isolation of much of the indigenous population and the centralization of government
 action in Lima further marginalize indigenous people.
 Peruvians of Indian descent, who live in the Andean highlands, speak Aymara
 and Quechua, which are recognized as official languages. They are also ethnically
 distinct from the diverse indigenous groups who live on the eastern side of the
 Andes and in the tropical lowlands adjacent to the Amazon basin. Recent regula-
 tions that require all school teachers to have professional teaching certification
 caused many indigenous teachers to lose their jobs and be replaced by teachers who
 are professionally certified but who do not speak any of the local languages. As a
 
 
 result, the continued use of Aymara and Quechua as languages of instruction, as
 well as the very survival of indigenous cultures, has been put in jeopardy.
 In many jungle areas, encroachment on native lands can come from a variety of
 sources-colonists and coca growers in search of livelihood and profit, terrorists in
 search of new bases of operation, and business interests in search of exploitable nat-
 ural resources continue to encroach upon native lands. For example, there are ap-
 proximately 25 oil exploration fields in the Amazon region. The 45,000 Aguaruna
 and the 5,000 Huambisa people, who inhabit the frontier area where the 1995 Peru-
 Ecuador border conflict took place, are just two of many indigenous groups that
 complain about intolerable living conditions and inaccessible public services. In the
 same region, along the Pastaza River, the 4,700 Achuar people live in 36 commu-
 nities, only 12 of which have title to their land. In addition, the Achuar are fighting
 what they fear may be a losing battle against an incursion by oil exploration and
 drilling interests, as well as against a government-sponsored influx of colonists.
 Such encroachment can often damage the environment and negatively affect the
 health of the native people.
 The two main organizations that represent the interests of the native population
 of the Peruvian Amazon are the Inter-Ethnic Association for the Development of the
 Peruvian Jungle (AIDESEP) and the Confederation of Amazonian Nationalities of
 Peru (CONAP). Both organizations have recently joined the Permanent Conference
 of Indigenous Peoples, an umbrella body designed to coordinate the activities and
 unify the voice of the country's indigenous population. Both AIDESEP and CONAP
 are critical of the 1995 land law, which permits Amazonian land to be bought and
 sold if no one is living on it or otherwise making use of it. However, CONAP be-
 lieves that mining and other development operations are inevitable and, therefore,
 wants native communities to share appropriately the benefits of that development.
 AIDESEP, on the other hand, remains opposed to territorial encroachments by gov-
 ernment, commercial, and other interests.
 Although indigenous rights advocates protest the low priority assigned by the
 Government to the socioeconomic condition of indigenous people and the lack of con-
 sultation regarding matters affecting their welfare, the Human Rights Ombudsman
 believes that a significant change has taken place in the attitude of the authorities.
 In November the Government established an Indigenous Affairs Commission for the
 purpose of coordinating all available state services to meet the needs of indigenous
 people. The Commission, which is chaired by the Ministry of Women's Advancement
 and Human Development, has among its members officials from a variety of rel-
 evant ministries as well as four representatives of the Indian peasant population
 in the highland       a    areas and the native population of the Amazon jungle.
 Sendero Luminoso continued to be a leading violator of the rights of indigenous
 people. It recently concentrated its abuse of this population in the area between
 Cutivireni, in Junin department, and San Francisco, in Ayacucho department. By
 encroaching upon these territories and threatening their inhabitants with death if
 they do not join their ranks, Sendero Luminoso caused the residents of many indige-
 nous communities to flee, thereby intensifying the problem of internal displacement.
 In addition, there were continued reports of enforced recruitment of Ashaninkas by
 Sendero Luminoso.
 NationallRaciallEthnic Minorities.-The population includes several racial mi-
 norities, the largest of which are persons of Asian and African descent. Blacks, who
 tend to be concentrated along the coast, often face discrimination and social preju-
 dice, and are among the poorest groups in the country.
 Blacks do not hold leadership positions in government, business, or the military.
 Both the navy and the air force are widely believed to follow unstated policies that
 exclude blacks from the officer corps. The law prohibits employment advertisements
 in newspapers from specifying the color of the candidates sought, but employers
 often find discreet ways to relegate blacks to low-paying service jobs.
 p In March the Commission on Consumer Protection of the National Institute for
 the Defense of Free Market Competition and the Protection of Intellectual Property
 (INDECOPI) began to investigate complaints alleging various forms of discrimina-
 tion by retail establishments agaist prospective customers. When in response to
 complaints by prospective black patrons, the Commission ordered two all-night
 discos in Lima to cease excluding would-be customers on the basis of their race, the
 discos took their case to the courts, arguing that they were private clubs and could
 exclude whomever they wished. When the courts upheld the discos' position,
 INDECOPI proposed to Congress strong antidiscrimination legislation, which was
 approved and signed into law. The new statute provides that no consumer may be
 discriminated against on the basis of race, gender, socioeconomic level, language,
 disability, political affiliation, religious belief, or any other ground, by places of busi-
 
 
 ness that are open to the public. However, this legislation did not significantly deter
 discriminatory practices.
 According to two black human rights organizations, police routinely detain per-
 sons of African descent on suspicion of having committed crimes, for no other reason
 than the color of their skin, and rarely act on complaints of crimes against blacks.
 Blacks are unflatteringly portrayed in television comedies as individuals of question-
 able character.
 Although Peruvians of Asian descent historically have suffered discrimination,
 their social standing has improved markedly during the past decade, as Peru has
 sought to emulate Asia's earlier economic growth, and as the Asian community has
 achieved financial success. Besides President Fujimori, who is of Japanese descent,
 many other Peruvians of Asian descent hold leadership positions in business and
 government.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-It is estimated that only 5 percent of the total work
 force of 8.5 million belong to organized labor unions. More than half of all workers
 are in the informal sector of the economy. Workers are not required to seek author-
 ization prior to forming a trade union, nor can employers legally condition employ-
 ment on union membership or nonmembership. However, labor rights advocates
 claim that many workers are reluctant to organize for fear of dismissal.
 Unions represent a cross section of political opinion. Although some unions tradi-
 tionally have been associated with political groups, the law prohibits unions from
 engaging in explicitly political, religious, or profitmaking activities. The several
 union leaders who ran unsuccessfully for Congress in 1995 all did so in their own
 names, without official union sponsorship. Nevertheless, it is believed that some
 union activists who run for public office receive unofficial backing from their unions.
 In 1995 and 1996, Congress passed legislation amending the 1992 Employment
 Promotion Law, which all the main union confederations publicly criticized for re-
 stricting the rights of workers, including the freedom to bargain collectively. Unions
 also complained that the new legislation eliminated the right of dismissed workers
 to compulsory reinstatement, if it was proven that they had been unjustly dis-
 missed. In practice, the legislation has had a negative impact on the right of asso-
 ciation by making it easier for companies to fire workers involved in union activi-
 ties.
 There are no restrictions on the affiliation of labor unions with international bod-
 ies. Several major unions and labor confederations belong to international labor or-
 ganizations such as the International Confederation of Free Trade Unions, its inter-
 national trade secretariats, and regional bodies.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The Constitution recognizes
 the right of public and private sector workers to organize and bargain collectively.
 However, it states that this right must be exercised m harmony with broader social
 objectives. Labor regulations promulgated prior to adoption of the 1993 Constitution
 provide that workers may form unions on the basis of their occupation, employer
 afliation, or geographic territory. However, the regulations prohibit temporary,
 probationary, apprentice, and management employees from union membership.
 According to the regulations, union officials must e active members of their
 union, although they set limits on the number of individuals each union may des-
 ignate as "official" and on the amount of time officials may devote to union business
 on company time. No legal provisions exist requiring employers to reinstate workers
 who are found to have been unjustly fired for union activities.
 To become an official collective bargaining representative, a union must represent
 at least 20 workers. Labor regulations stipulate that representatives may partici-
 pate in collective bargaining negotiations and establish negotiating timetables. Man-
 agement negotiating teams cannot exceed the size of union teams, and both sides
 are permitted to have attorneys and technical experts present as advisers.
 For a strike to take place, a majority of all workers in a company, whether union
 members or not, must approve it by a secret bailoi. A second vote must be taken,
 if petitioned by at least 20 percent of the workers. However, labor rights advocates
 complain that many temporary workers are understandably reluctant to participate
 even in secret ballots, for fear of retaliation by their employers. The labor movement
 has criticized provisions in the new amendments to the Employment Promotion Law
 that make it easier for employers to dismiss employees and thereby to impede the
 right of workers to bargain collectively. However, there are no legal restrictions pre-
 venting unions from negotiating for higher levels of worker protection than the base-
 line standards provided for by law.
 Labor regulations also permit companies unilaterally to propose temporary
 changes in work schedules, conditions, and wages, and to suspend collective bar-
 
 
 gaining agreements for up to 90 days, if obliged to do so by worsening economic cir-
 cumstances or other unexpected negative developments, provided they give their
 employees at least 15 days' notice of such changes. However, labor rights advocates
 allege that, in practice, few employers respected this provision. If workers reject an
 employer's proposed changes, the Ministry of Labor is required to resolve the dis-
 pute based on criteria of "reasonableness" and "economic necessity." Whether the
 changes proposed by employers in such instances are upheld in full or in part, em-
 ployers are required to adopt all possible measures, such as the authorization of
 extra vacation time, in order to minimize the negative economic impact on their em-
 ployees.
 Although a conciliation and arbitration system exists to resolve management and
 labor disputes, union officials complain that their proportionate share of the costs
 of arbitration often exceeds their resources. In addition, union officials claim that,
 since the law prohibits temporary workers from participating in union organizing
 elections, more and more companies have resorted to hiring workers on temporary,
 personal-services contracts as a means of preventing a possible increase in union
 strength. Although the new legislation restricts the number of temporary workers
 hired to 20 percent of a company's work force, labor rights advocates alleged that
 this quota rarely was respected. Employers denied that they are biased against
 unions, arguing that the labor-stability provisions of the legislation have made long-
 term commitments to workers too expensive.
 Special regulations aimed at giving employers in export-processing and duty-free
 -zones a freer hand in the application of the new legislation provide for the use of
 temporary labor as needed, for greater flexibility in labor contracts, and for setting
 wage rates based on supply and demand. Although, as a result, workers in such
 zones have difficulty in unionizing, labor rights advocates admit that these zones
 are few in number and do not contribute substantively to labor's unionizing difficul-
 ties.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The Constitution prohibits forced
 or compulsory labor; however, there are periodic reports of this practice in remote
 Andean mountain and Amazonian jungle regions. In response to a complaint filed
 with the ILO, the Government acknowledged in 1994 that forced labor exists but
 stated that it had adopted measures to end the abuses. The Constitution does not
 prohibit specifically forced or bonded labor by children, and there were reports of
 such labor- in, the informal gold mines of Madre de Dios department. The Govern-
 ment has not adequately policed this practice, partly because of inadequate funding
 for what is- regarded as a low priority, and partly because of the geographical re-
 moteness of the informal gold mining region (see Section 6.d.). There is no forced
 labor in -urban areas.
 In recent months, the number of children and adolescents working in extremely
 harsh- conditions in the informal gold mining operations of Madre de Dios depart-
 ment has -declined, primarily because the use of modern mining technology has
 -eliminated the-need for them. However, those young laborers who still perform this
 work are typically pressed into service through a recruitment system known as
 "enganche," which is practiced in Puno, Juliaca, Sicuani, and Cuzco. Under this sys-
 tem, they are provided free transportation to the mines, and allegedly agree to work
 for at least 90 days before being paid. In addition, these workers lack proper medi-
 cal care, are forced to work long hours, often are subjected to beatings and rape,
 and at times are deprived of their pay altogether. The Government has not exer-
 cised due supervision over this child labor system, and the mine owners have failed
 to comply with the legal provisions that do exist with respect to juvenile workers.
 d. Status of Child Labor Practices and Minimum Age for Employment.-The Child
 and Adolescent Code of 1992 is the statute which governs child and adolescent labor
 practices. The legal minimum age for employment is 12. However, incertain sectors
 of the economy, higher minimums are in force: 14 in agricultural work; 15 in indus-
 trial, commercial, or mining work; and 16 in the fishing industry. Certain types of
 employment are prohibited, such as work underground; work that involves the lift-
 ing and carrying of heavy weights; work where the child or adolescent is responsible
 for the safety of others; night work; or any work that jeopardizes the health of chil-
 dren and adolescents, puts -at risk their physical, mental, and emotional develop-
 ment, and prevents their regular attendance at school.
 The Constitution provides for compulsory,. free education through secondary
 school. Nevertheless, largely because of widespread poverty, approximately one-third
 of all school-age children and adolescents work during datim e hours rather than
 attend classes, and only a few of them attend classes at night.
 Many children are pressed to help stqpport their families fronm a very early age
 by working in the informal economy, which escapes government supervision of
 
 
 761
 wages and working conditions. Other children and adolescents work either in for-
 many established enterprises, or as unpaid workers at home, or in the sex trade.
 Adolesent workers must be authorized to work and must be registered unless
 they are employed as domestic workers or as unpaid family workers. Adolescents
 only may work a certain number of hours each day: 4 hours for ages 12 through
 14, and 6 hours for ages 15 through 17. Adolescent employment must be remuner-
 ated in accordance with the principle of equal pay for equal work. In practice, the
 stipulations and prohibitions stated in the Child and Adolescent Code are violated
 routinely and pervasively, especially in the informal sector where government stand-
 ards very rarely are enforced. Forty percent of child and adolescent laborers work
 long hours in the agricultural sector. Many other children are employed in dan-
 erous occupations or in high-risk environments, such as gold mining, garbage col-
 lection, loading and unloading produce in markets and brickmaking, or in stone
 quarries and fireworks factories, among others.
 In recent years, government surveys have variously estimated the number of child
 and adolescent workers at anywhere from 500,000 to 1.9 million. A 1996 govern-
 ment study found that 8 percent of the work force is between the ages of 6 and 14
 (see Section 5). Child and adolescent labor tends to be seasonal, with the highest
 survey statistics being reported during school vacation periods. The Constitution
 does not prohibit specifically forced or bonded labor and children, and there were
 reports that it occurred (see Section 6.d.).
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The Constitution provides that the State pro-
 mote social and economic progress and occupational education. It states that work-
 ers should receive a "just and sufficient" wage to be determined by the Government
 in consultation with labor and business representatives, as well as "adequate protec-
 tion against arbitrary dismissal."
 On July 28, 1997, the Government raised the statutory minimum wage to $104
 (345 soles) a month. It generally is considered to be inadequate to provide a decent
 standard of living for a worker and family. According to some estimates, as much
 as half the work force earns the minimum wage or below.
 The Constitution also provides for a 48-hour workweek, a weekly day of rest, and
 an annual vacation. In addition, it prohibits discrimination in the workplace.
 While occupational health and safety standards exist, the Government lacks the
 resources to monitor firms or enforce compliance. In cases of industrial accidents,
 the level of compensation awarded to the injured employee usually is determined
 by agreement between the employer and the individual involved. In 1992 the Gov-
 ernment introduced reforms that eliminated the need to prove an employer's cul-
 pability in order to obtain compensation for work-related injuries. No provisions
 exist in law for workers to remove themselves from potentially dangerous work situ-
 ations without jeopardizing their continued employment.
