 PERU
 After 12 years of military rule, Peru returned to elected
 government in 1980. Fifteen political parties contested
 in a free and fair general election May 18. The winners
 took office July 28 when the new constitution, which
 incorporates many of the provisions of the Universal
 Declaration of Human Rights, went into effect.
 Along with providing extensive guarantees of personal
 rights and establishing a court of constitutional guaran-
 tees, the new constitution -- a fruit of the Constituent
 Assembly elected in 1978 -- continues to permit the Execu-
 tive to declare a state of emergency without legislative
 approval. However, the civilian government has not invoked
 this authority since taking office.
 On taking office, the government moved quickly and deci-
 sively to return the controlled media to their legal
 owners, grant limited labor and political amnesties,
 seek solutions for the profound problems of the judicial
 process and penal institutions, and convoke municipal
 elections. The government immediately reinstated the
 Ministry of Justice, which the military had suspended.
 It replaced the chiefs of the several police forces,
 making a special point of firing the Commander of the
 Civil Guard for issuing statements which appeared clearly
 to stray into areas of responsibility reserved for the
 civilian leadership.
 Both military and civilian governments made further pro-
 gress in 1980 toward providing opportunities for a better
 life for all Peruvian citizens. However, major problems
 remain: poverty, illiteracy, unemployment and underemploy-
 ment, and inadequate participation in national life by
 the millions who live in the remote parts of the highlands.
 1.   Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a.   Torture
 There are no credible reports indicating that the civilian
 government has condoned or participated in torture.
 Rather, since assuming power, it has placed special em-
 phasis on respecting the integrity of the person. The
 1980 constitution provides that any prisoner may ask
 for a court order for an immediate examination by a physi-
 cian of choice. The penal code also provides for punish-
 ment of government officials found guilty of" physically
 abusing a prisoner.
 With respect to the military government local human rights
 groups reported two instances of torture which allegedly
 occurred in May 1980. Civil Guard officers convicted
 in August 1979 in connection with the 1976 torture death
 
 
 517
 of a militant student leader received amnesties and re-
 turned to duty in late December 1979.
 In June, the Peruvian press and Amnesty International
 reported that Argentine and Peruvian security services
 tortured to death two Argentines and detained two others.
 The Peruvian uovernment acknowledged the detention and
 expulsion from the country of three Argentines but denied
 torturing or killing any of them. One was found dead
 in Spain a month later. Several Peruvian congressmen
 have filed criminal charges accusing the Commanding General
 and several other army officers of complicity in this
 case. However, under the 1979 constitution, criminal
 charges against Ministers of State and former Ministers
 of State (the current Commanding General of the Army
 served as Prime Minister until July 28, 1980) must be
 brought directly to the Supreme Court. Criminal proceed-
 ings against subordinate officers are still in progress,
 but moving very slowly.
 b.   Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 Cruel or inhuman treatment or punishment is illegal,
 but it does occur occasionally despite official efforts
 to curb abuse. Four police officers accused of being
 responsible for a violent search in December 1979 of
 Lima's main prison were bound over for trial in a civil-
 ian court in January 1980. No convictions have been
 reported.
 Peruvian penal facilities are generally grim, overcrowded
 and often unsanitary, and many hundreds of those incar-
 cerated have not been tried because of the extreme slowness
 of the judicial process. The constitution provides pris-
 oners with the right to be held in healthful and adequate
 penal facilities, but the government has not provided
 budget support for necessary improvements.
 The civilian government has started to address the serious
 problems of the penal system. Shortly after its reinstate-
 ment, the Ministry of Justice issued an administrative
 decree which initiated a reorganization of the penal
 system. The Minister of Justice and the Chamber of Dep-
 uties' Human Rights Committee made independent visits
 to the major prisons in the country. The ministry also
 completed a census of all prisoners and took steps toward
 transferring significant numbers of prisoners to less
 crowded facilities.
 c.   Disappearances
 There have been no charges of disappearances occurring
 under the civilian government. One of the Argentines
 that the Peruvian military authorities admitted detaining
 and expelling in June was later found dead in Madrid.
 No other reports of disappearances have been made.
 d.   Arbitrary Arrest and Imprisonment
 Although the 1980 constitution guarantees against arbi-
 trary arrest, it permits preventive detention for a period
 of up to 15 days in cases specifically involving terrorism,
 espionage, or illicit trafficking in narcotics. Similarly,
 while guaranteeing the right of habeas corpus, the consti-
 tution permits the government to suspend that right under
 
 
 518
 the declaration of a state of emergency. The civilian
 government has not made such a declaration, but in February
 1980 the military government suspended for one month
 the right of habeas corpus in Cusco Department under
 the emergency provisions of the 1933 constitution.
 The civilian government has not acknowledged holding
 any political prisoners. It declared a political amnesty
 almost immediately after coming into office but made
 no comment as to how many people were affected by the
 amnesty.
 The only case of detention taken up by prominent Peruvian
 human rights groups involved a person who was not released
 under the civilian government's amnesty, because he was
 convicted of killing a policeman. A motion by sympathetic
 members of Congress to secure the release of this indi-
 vidual failed to gain sufficient support for passage.
 e.   Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The civilian government is committed to support the exten-
 sive constitutional guarantees relating to the administra-
 tion of justice. However, the legal system has been
 fraught with serious problems due to lack of adequate
 financing and staffing. Delays from arrest to final
 sentencing of two or more years have been common, and
 corruption of judges is sometimes alleged. Access to
 the full benefits of the legal system still depends largely
 upon personal financial circumstances, as free legal
 assistance exists on paper but seldom in practice.
 In order to accelerate the judicial process and reduce
 the backlog of cases, the military government doubled
 the budget for the judiciary in January 1980, thereby
 permitting the creation in March of additional courts,
 prosecuting attorney positions and justices of the peace,
 and the acquisition of badly needed supplies. In July,
 the Minister of Justice promised to install courts of
 the first instance in police stations, and the Supreme
 Court announced the possible establishment of an additional
 criminal subdivision of that court in order to alleviate
 the pressure of backlogged cases. The Minister of Justice
 and the Supreme Court have yet to implement these propos-
 als, due primarily to the press of more immediate demands.
 In September, the Lima Bar Association offered to establish
 a legal consultation office at the main penitentiary
 in Lima.
 Although the constitution provides that the judiciary
 receive a minimum of 2 percent of the national budget,
 only 0.4 percent of the budget is presently being allo-
 cated to the judiciary.
 While the constitution provides that a defendant has
 the right to have an interpreter present if he does not
 understand Spanish, the stress on written presentations
 works to the disadvantage of the poorly educated in any
 language.
 Capital punishment is now permitted only for treason
 in time of war.
 
 
 519
 f.   Invasion of the Home
 The constitution guarantees the inviolability of the
 home except during a state of emergency when police are
 permitted to enter and search homes and seize suspects
 and property without a judicial warrant. The government
 has respected the inviolability of the home.
 2.   Government Policies Relating to the Fulfillment
 of Such Vital Needs as Food, Shelter, Health Care
 and Education
 The constitution defines at length the individual's right
 to health, education, employment and welfare. The military
 government instituted reforms which attempted to redistri-
 bute social and economic power, resulting in substantial
 initial gains in real income for industrial workers.
 Reforms in the educational system favored middle and
 low income families and resulted in advances in the lit-
 eracy rate in urban areas (now reported to be 84 percent)
 but leaving much to be done in rural districts where
 literacy is reported to be only 48.1 percent. The civilian
 government has expressed an even stronger commitment
 to improving the quality and reach of the educational
 system, a formidable task in a country with an estimated
 birth rate of 2.9 percent and where 43 percent of the
 population are under 15 years of age. About 85 percent
 of school-age children now have access to basic education.
 The military government made some headway toward improv-
 ing conditions in Peru's urban slums by bringing in some
 basic services and granting land titles to squatters.
 The civilian government has pledged to intensify this
 effort, with a special emphasis on improving health serv-
 ices, which the government acknowledges to be deplorably,
 inadequate. With an average life expectancy of 56 years
 and an infant mortality rate of 92 for every 1,000 births,
 Peru greatly needs improved medical attention. The effort
 to improve conditions in the urban slums will be made
 with the knowledge that the high rate of migration from
 rural areas to the cities continues to be a pressing
 problem in Peru. An estimated 63 percent of the population
 already lives in urban areas, and the urban population
 is reportedly increasing at an annual rate of five percent.
 The capital city, Lima, alone accounts for over one-fourth
 of Peru's population. 70 percent of the 10,000 doctors,
 3,000 dentists, 7,000 nurses, 3,000 pharmacists, and
 2,000 midwives are concentrated in Lima and other urban
 areas. As a result, access to basic services is limited
 outside of the urban centers. Some 600 rural districts,
 with populations totaling 1.6 million, have no modern
 medical services of any kind. In fact, it is estimated
 that 50 percent of the Peruvian population -- more than
 8 million people -- live in conditions of absolute poverty
 (below $180 annual per capita income in rural areas and
 below $235 annual per capita income in urban areas).
 Efforts to deal with basic needs have been and will be
 hampered by budgetary restrictions as a sluggish economy
 and service of a large external debt continue to claim
 a large share of national resources. However, due to
 the successful implementation of a stabilization program
 begun in 1978 and a dramatic boom in mineral and petroleum
 prices, Peru's international economic situation has im-
 proved dramatically since mid-1978. According to the
 
 
 520
 Central Reserve Bank, the trade surplus will exceed one
 billion dollars in 1980. Unfortunately, these recent
 improvements have not yet stimulated the domestic economy
 to the point that there is visible improvement in terms
 of basic human needs. Inflation continued at an annual
 rate of about 60 percent during 1980. Underemployment
 and unemployment remained high.
 Serious imbalances in the distribution of income persist.
 Ten percent of the population receive 50 percent of the
 income with the disparity between the urban coastal areas
 and the rural interior particularly significant. Real
 wages declined steadily from December 1973 to June 1979,
 with the most dramatic decline between 1973 and 1976.
 By September 1979, the real wage index began to rise,
 however. A 4.3 percent increase was realized between
 December 1979 and June 1980, and urban real incomes are
 expected to increase 4-7 percent in 1980 and climb higher
 in 1981.
 In general, Peruvian women suffer a pronounced economic
 disadvantage when compared with Peruvian men. The degree
 of that disadvantage is principally a function of social
 class and geographic location. Rural women are in the
 worst condition: 67 percent illiterate (42 percent for
 rural men) and subject to extremely hard physical labor.
 Women in urban areas, especially younger women and girls,
 have access to more opportunities for training and employ-
 ment. However, for many poor urban women abandoned and
 left with the children, those opportunities go unrealized.
 Allegations have been made that some officials of the
 military government engaged in corrupt contract practices.
 A committee of the Congress was established in November
 1980 to investigate some of the specific allegations.
 3.   Respect for Civil and Political Liberties, Includ-
 ing:
 a.   Freedom of Speech, Press, Religion and
 Assembly
 Independent magazines and non-daily newspapers enjoyed
 substantial freedom of expression during the final months
 of the military government, and many frequently and strong-
 ly criticized the government and Armed Forces. However,
 national circulation daily newspapers, radio and television
 remained under direct government control until the civilian
 government took office in July. One of the first acts
 of the new government was to seek congressional approval
 for a law giving the executive 120 days in which to solve
 the problem of the nationalized media. The executive
 asked for this delegation of authority in order to have
 the flexibility necessary to deal with the special cir-
 cumstances of each newspaper. In keeping with that objec-
 tive, the executive placed directors representing the
 legal owners in control almost immediately. In August,
 the civilian government announced the closing of the
 Censorship Office in the National Post Office.
 In early February, the military government detained and
 charged in a police court, with "offense against the
 nation" and sedition, a controversial newspaper publisher
 who had written inflammatory articles about the national
 
 
 521
 police force, and who, according to the government, pro-
 voked a police mutiny in the city of Cusco. In May the
 publisher received provisional liberty. The charges
 against him became moot when the new constitution took
 effect, as it does not permit the trial of civilians
 in military or police courts except for treason in time
 of war.
 The constitution guarantees freedom of religion and con-
 science, and no instances of persecution for religious
 beliefs occurred during 1980.
 The constitution also guarantees freedom of assembly.
 While the civilian government has not placed restrictions
 on the freedom of assembly, under the military govern-
 ment, police regularly used tear gas, high pressure water
 and, occasionally, truncheons to break up unauthorized
 demonstrations in the streets. In early March the National
 Commission on Human Rights reported that police fired
 into a crowd legally assembled for a leftist political
 rally, severely injuring four adults and one child.
 b.   Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 The constitution guarantees the right of free movement.
 There are no political or legal restraints on foreign
 travel or emigration. During 1980, the government liber-
 alized limits placed on foreign exchange expenditures
 for foreign travel.
 The military government offered to accept for resettle-
 ment 1,000 Cubans from among the more than 10,000 who
 had taken refuge in the Peruvian Embassy in Havana in
 April 1980. The Cuban government closed off the flow
 of refugees to the intermediate processing center. Thus
 only 742 Cubans arrived in Peru. The Peruvian government,
 with some assistance from the United Nations High Commis-
 sioner for Refugees, has provided housing, food, and
 clothing for these refugees. Efforts to permanently
 settle them in Peru have proved unproductive.
 Due to limited success in securing third country reset-
 tlement, mainly in Canada, about 500 of the refugees
 remain in Peru. Peru also provides a safe haven for-
 approximately 50 Chileans and an unknown but growing
 number of Bolivians.
 c.   Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 Universal suffrage for all Peruvians 18 years of age
 and older is provided for in the constitution. Voting
 is a duty for every eligible voter.
 The military government did not interfere with political
 party campaign activities during the 1980 general elec-
 tions. Some parties contended, however, that the govern-
 ment-controlled media did not accord them equitable cover-
 age. The government did provide seven hours per week
 of free radio and television time divided equally among
 the parties. Space was also made available in government-
 controlled newspapers.
 The constitution recognizes the right of workers in the
 private sector to form and join labor unions, bargain
 collectively with employers, and strike. with the excep-
 
 
 522
 tion of members of the Armed Forces, public sector employees
 have the constitutional right to unionize and strike.
 These rights are freely exercised by a vigorous if divided
 trade union and peasant movement. No major part of the
 labor movement is tied to or controlled by the government.
 Union leaders are consulted on labor policies through
 testimony before congressional committees and in high
 level talks with the Minister of Labor and the President
 of the Republic. In a flurry of strikes after the transfer
 of power in July, both in the private and public sectors,
 the civilian government respected the constitutional
 guarantees related to the labor sector.
 The constitution guarantees the right of women to parti-
 cipate in the political process, and also guarantees
 equality in employment. In practice, however, very few
 women occupy prominent positions in the public sector
 and relatively few in the private sector. There are
 no women members of the Cabinet or the Supreme Court
 and only one Ambassador. Fourteen women were elected
 to the Peruvian Congress, which has a total membership
 of 240.
 4.   Government Attitude and Record Regarding Inter-
 national and Non-governmental Investigation of
 Alleged Violations of Human Rights:
 In September 1980, Peru ratified the optional protocol
 of the United Nations Covenant on Civil and Political
 Rights. Also, the Peruvian constitution draws heavily
 upon the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the
 American Convention on Human Rights as well as on the
 United Nations Convenant on Civil and Political Rights.
 Peru's support for a strengthened human rights role for
 the Organization of American States was demonstrated
 by its active support for the candidacy of the Peruvian
 jurist elected Vice President of the Inter-American Human
 Rights Court. Another respected Peruvian human rights
 advocate is a member of the Committee of Experts of the
 United Nations Human Rights Commission.
 On July 29 President Belaunde joined the three other
 democratically-elected Andean Group Presidents in signing
 the Declaration of Lima. That declaration asserted that
 the defense of human rights is an international obligation,
 and joint action in protection of those rights does not
 violate the principle of non-intervention.
 
 
 523
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY; PERU
 1978     1979     1980
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL,..        54.7     70.7     53.4
 LOANS,...........         44.0     48.8     33.0
 GRANTS.............       l.7      21.9     20.4
 A.AID .................        22.0     34.1     18.7
 LOANS...............       19.0     28.8     14.0
 GRANTS..............        3.0      5.3      4.7
 (SEC.SUPPASSST.)..         0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.FOOD FOR PEACEE......        31.9     35.3     33.0
 LOANS..............        25.0 "   20.0     19.0
 GRANTS...........         6.9     15.3     14.0
 TITLE I-TOTAL...........       25.0     20.0     19.0
 REPAY. IN $-LOANS,....        25.0     20.0     19.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR,.,,,         0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE II-TOTAL ........         6.9     15.3     14.0
 E.RELIEF.EC.DEV & wFP,         4.4      5.2      3.3
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY....          2.5     10.1     10.7
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST,..         0.8      1.3      1.7
 LOANS..............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS.............        0.8      1.3      1.7
 CONTR. TO IFI.            0.0      0.0      0.0
 PEACE CORPS......         0.0      0.0      0.0
 OTHER............         n.8      1.3      1.7
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL,..         8.9      5.5 -    3.3
 LOANS..............        8.0      5.0      3.0
 GRANTS.............        0.9      0.5      0.3
 A.HAP GRANTS..........         0.0-     0.0      0.0
 B.CREDIT SALES-FSo...         8.0      5.0      3.0
 C.INTL MIL.ED.TRNG.,,.         0.9      0.5      0.3
 D.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK .          0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS .......         0.0      0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. & NIL...        63.6     76.2     56.7
 LOANS..............        52.0     53.8     36.0
 GRANTS.............        11.6     22.4     20.7
 OTHER US LOANS...........       74.9     62.8     40.1
 EX-IN BANK LOANS.......         0.7      0.0      o.O
 ALL OTHER ..............       74.2     62.8     40.1
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1978     1979     1980     1946-80
 TOTAL........    28.6    191.2    252.5   1434.1
 IBRD               0.1    123.8    116.0    791.4
 IFC                0.0      2.5      3.2     29.4
 IDA                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 rDB               26.7     6Q.2    132.5    556.5
 ADB                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 AFDB               0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 UNDP               1.3      2.7      0.8     45.2
 OTHER-UN           0.5      2.0      0.0     11.6
 EEC                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 
 
 524
