 PERU
 Peru has a freely elected democratic government, with an
 executive branch headed by a president, a bicameral
 legislature, an independent judiciary, and an autonomous
 attorney general/public defender. Political representation in
 Congress ranges from conservative to Marxist. Independent
 trade unions are active. Although there are allegations of
 government pressure on the media, all opposition groups can
 freely express their views. Peru's history has been punctuated
 by periods of military rule, most recently from 1968 to 1980.
 Peru held general elections in April 1985, and municipal
 elections were held in November 1986. The opposition claimed
 there were improprieties in a few close, important races; as of
 early January 1987, the elections board had not ruled on the
 validity of all the allegations registered. President Alan
 Garcia took office in July 1985, marking the first transfer of
 power between democratically elected presidents in 40 years and
 the first accession to power of the American Popular
 Revolutionary Alliance (APRA) in its 60 years of existence.
 The new administration has repeatedly stated the importance it
 places on respect for human rights.
 Peru has a mixed economy with a large private sector, and
 private property is generally respected. Natural disasters and
 low commodity prices have seriously affected the economy in
 recent years, and per capita income has declined to the 1966
 level. The Government has initiated an ambitious development
 program to improve conditions of the poor, focusing on mountain
 areas most affected by terrorism.
 Since 1980 the Maoist terrorist group "Sendero Luminoso"
 ("Shining Path") has worked to undermine democratic
 institutions. Rejecting calls for dialogue, and lacking
 widespread popular support, Sendero has assassinated local
 authorities, members of the security forces, and APRA party
 members, and has destroyed economic infrastructure. During
 1986 Sendero stepped up its attacks in the capital, Lima, and
 in rural areas, killing over 425 persons between January and
 August. Although not alone in committing abuses, Sendero is a
 major human rights violator and bears heavy responsibility for
 the rise in violence in Peru.
 Three police services play an important role in combating
 terrorism, reporting to the President through the Interior
 Ministry. The antiterrorist role of the armed forces has
 increased dramatically since 1983, as all executive branch
 authority is vested in the local military command in areas
 under a state of emergency. A state of emergency, declared by
 the President, suspends restrictions on arbitrary detention and
 search warrants and restricts the rights to movement and
 assembly. By 1986 such measures were in effect in 24 of Peru's
 181 provinces, including Lima.
 In 1986 there were reports of government abuses, including
 summary executions, disappearances, torture, and arbitrary
 arrests. Although allegations of disappearances continued to
 drop substantially, several cases of summary executions carried
 out by security forces were acknowledged by the Government in
 the course of the year.
 During prison riots in June, security forces allegedly executed
 between 100 and 128 inmates after they had surrendered. Some
 40 policemen accused of these summary executions are imprisoned
 awaiting investigation of this incident. Human rights groups
 expressed concern that summary executions had also taken place
 
 
 612
 PERU
 at another prison during the riots. In Ayacucho, the military
 acknowledged that an army patrol had violated orders and
 executed seven alleged terrorists, and had reported the
 killings as casualties in an armed confrontation.
 President Garcia has repeatedly stated his opposition to human
 rights abuses and his support for punishment of violators.
 After the prison riots, he promised a full investigation;
 however, the probe was repeatedly postponed, and none had begun
 by the end of the year. In the Ayacucho incident, the Army
 filed complaints with the military judicial system against the
 two officers in charge of the patrol and all other personnel
 responsible.
 The judicial system faces significant problems in dealing with
 accused terrorists and human rights offenders. Civilian judges
 complain of terrorist threats and lack of police protection.
 In October the Government introduced legislation to create a
 protected civilian court system for terrorism cases. Military
 trials of human rights violations are closed and have yet to
 produce a conviction. A Navy officer accused of human rights
 violations disappeared in February; the Government did not
 investigate his disappearance, despite allegations he had fled
 with the help of his superiors.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 Political killing has been a significant problem in Peru since
 1980 when Sendero Luminoso began its terrorist attacks.
 Rejecting dialogue and committed to the overthrow of democracy,
 Sendero assassinated policemen, soldiers, local officials, and
 recalcitrant peasants, sometimes after torture or mock trials.
 Sendero also targeted rural infrastructure, destroying bridges
 and electrical transmission towers. In the cities, Sendero
 frequently bombed restaurants, shopping centers, movie
 theaters, and foreign embassies, and set off car bombs. In the
 countryside, Sendero often raided villages at night, dragging
 local officials from bed to face a mock trial and execution.
 The military reported 2,123 terrorist incidents nationwide
 between January and September. Attacks in Lima and rural areas
 resulted in the deaths of approximately 527 people between
 January and December, including 107 police and military
 personnel and 420 civilians. Sendero attacks included the
 February execution of 11 peasants in Apurimac Province; the
 March assassinations of the Ica Department prefect, a navy
 officer, and 2 labor leaders; the May assassination of an
 admiral and 3 APRA party members, and the destruction of a
 major railroad bridge; June bombings in a Lima plaza which
 killed 2 civilians; bombing of a tourist train in Cuzco which
 killed 8 persons, including 2 Americans; the murder of 5
 development technicians in Ayacucho; and the October
 assassination of a bank president.
 Two other terrorist groups, the Tupac Amaru Revolutionary
 Mo('ement (MRTA) and the Peoples Revolutionary Command
 (CPR-MIR), were reported to have killed two people.
 Since 1983 the armed forces have assumed major antiterrorist
 duties. Terrorist casualties mounted as did allegations of
 both accidental and deliberate military killings of civilians,
 
 
 613
 PERU
 in addition to summary executions of terrorists. According to
 press and army communiques, the armed forces had killed about
 813 terrorists as of August. Peruvian human rights groups
 believe this figure includes summary executions of both
 suspected terrorists and innocent persons. Some observers
 claim that the number of extrajudicial killings by security
 forces, which had declined during 1985, rose in 1986. Such
 allegations often are difficult to evaluate: official
 communiques frequently lack important information about
 victims; local authorities often refuse to investigate; and the
 threat of violence discourages private observers from traveling
 in conflictive areas.
 Some claims of government abuses appear politically motivated.
 An alleged 1985 military bombardment of Chapi, a village with a
 population of 300, supposedly killed 3,000 people. A brief
 congressional investigation found Chapi deserted, but no proof
 of aerial bombardment, massive deaths, or any hard evidence of
 human rights violations. However, the Government's public
 acknowledgment that military and police forces went beyond the
 scope of their orders indicates that serious problems remain in
 the conduct of counterterrorist operations. The most recent
 example occurred in October in the towns of Pomatambo and
 Parcco. A military communique claimed that 13 terrorists had
 died there in a clash with an army patrol. Journalists later
 uncovered evidence that 12 of the persons had been summarily
 executed by soldiers and their corpses burned. The victims
 included 2 children and 2 persons over 80 years old. The
 military subsequently acknowledged that the patrol had executed
 7 suspected terrorists, and killed 5 others in a firefight; it
 said those responsible would be investigated and charged in
 military courts. The military reportedly has not cooperated
 with an investigation by a district attorney in the case. A
 congressional commission named to look into the incident has
 not received permission from the Congress to travel to the site.
 The security forces' actions in response to the June 18 riots
 by Sendero inmates at three Lima prisons were widely condemned.
 Sendero members had controlled special terrorist cellblocks for
 some time. The inmates were armed and in El Fronton prison had
 built tunnels and bunkers. The Government Peace Commission,
 established in late 1985, unsuccessfully attempted to persuade
 the rioters to release their hostages and permit authorities to
 regain control over the cellblocks. After consulting the
 Cabinet and his military advisers on June 18, President Garcia
 ordered military and police forces to retake the three prisons.
 Approximately 234 prisoners died in the 2-day assault on El
 Fronton, Lurigancho, and Santa Barbara prisons. At El Fronton
 the Navy initially reported 30 prisoners dead and 35 captured;
 the bodies of an estimated 78 prisoners were allegedly buried
 in the rubble of a maze of tunnels constructed and fortified by
 the inmates. At Lurigancho all 124 Sendero prisoners perished.
 At the Santa Barbara women's prison two prisoners died in the
 attack. The military excluded civilian authorities from the
 prisons, reportedly carried out cursory autopsies, and buried
 the bodies in scattered cemeteries without notifying relatives.
 As a result of the heavy death toll, the Government issued a
 communique June 21 in which it "presumed" that security forces
 had committed "excesses," and called upon the military, the
 Public Ministry, and the Congress to investigate. On June 24
 President Garcia announced that 95 policemen had been detained
 in connection with the summary execution of "30 to 40" inmates
 at Lurigancho, later revised to "over 100". Garcia reiterated
 his government's strong commitment to human rights and
 
 
 614
 PERU
 announced that those responsible for the killings would be
 punished. The Justice Minister and the Prison Institute
 director, who had been in office only a few months, resigned.
 Although Army General Jorge Rabanal commanded the overall
 operation at Lurigancho, an army investigation concluded that
 the police had carried out the executions. The police
 countered that the policemen were under Army command. The
 police inspector general's report submitted to Congress placed
 Police Chief Martinez Lira and General Rabanal at the scene of
 the executions. The Attorney General's report failed to
 establish responsibility. Congress, controlled by the
 government party, did not name an investigative commission
 until August 22; it then appointed an opposition member as the
 commission president without first consulting him. The person
 chosen resigned on August 26. No replacement was named, 'and
 the commission has failed to function.
 In July General Rabanal refused to appear before a local
 prosecutor who brought charges against him, citing conflicting
 appointments in a military judicial investigation which had
 charged him with negligence and abuse of authority in the
 Lurigancho episode. In August the Supreme Court ruled that the
 military court has jurisdiction over General Rabanal and the
 40 policemen involved in the assault. Human rights advocates
 and opposition politicians claim additional summary executions
 took place at El Fronton, but there has been no investigation
 of these charges.
 b. Disappearance
 Disappearances have declined'dramatically under the current
 administration, and this trend continued in 1986. The Public
 Ministry's human rights office received 175 reports of alleged
 disappearances as of October, while other Peruvian human rights
 groups claim to have received about 75 disappearance reports
 over approximately the same time period. Of the 276 cases
 reported to the Public Ministry in the first 15 months of the
 Garcia administration, 162 had been resolved as of October.
 Amnesty International has listed a total of 1,100
 disappearances as of December 1985; local groups have presented
 about 800 cases with more complete documentation to the United
 Nations Human Rights Commission Working Group on Forced or
 Involuntary Disappearances. The Public Ministry had 2,219
 cases reported prior to July 1985 when the present
 administration came to power. Of these, only 198 have been
 resolved; the remainder are under investigation. Although many
 of these cases are based on fragmentary data, the ministry has
 compiled much information on disappearances, seeking to enlist
 the aid of police and other officials.
 The vast majority of resolved cases found the alleged victim
 alive. Some disappearances involved persons who joined
 Sendero, or who were detained and released but whose families
 failed to notify the authorities. Claudio Bellido, a Sendero
 leader also known as Comrade Caszelly, whom security forces
 reportedly killed in October, had been listed as missing by
 Amnesty International for 2 years.
 While noting that the number of disappearances has declined
 since the present administration took office, domestic and
 international human rights groups have expressed serious
 concern about disappearances allegedly carried out by the
 security forces. Amnesty International lists about 90 of the
 El Fronton prison victims as "disappeared." Local human rights
 
 
 PERU
 groups, however, have no doubt that the prisoners unaccounted
 for were killed during or after the final assault. Human rights
 groups caution that disappearances in isolated areas are less
 likely to be reported. Some cases reported by the press are
 not investigated promptly. An example is the case of Teofilo
 Rimac Capcha, a Marxist who disappeared after being detained
 June 23 by the security forces in Cerro de Pasco. Not until
 August did the Army acknowledge that Capcha had been detained;
 the Army claimed that he had escaped from prison on June 25.
 As of October his case was not on the list of alleged
 disappearances maintained by the Attorney General. Leftist
 politicians dispute the claim that Capcha escaped and believe
 he was killed or remains detained. The Senate agreed in
 November to send a commission to investigate the disappearance,
 but as of the end of the year it had not done so.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 The Constitution prohibits torture and inhuman or humiliating
 treatment. Nevertheless, charges of brutality toward detainees
 and accused criminals have been commonplace, particularly in
 the Ayacucho Emergency Zone. In December the Government agreed
 that "excesses" had occurred in some cases, but asserted that
 officials who condoned such illegal acts were punished. The
 Government is investigating charges of brutality and torture in
 two cases involving suspicious deaths of suspects in police
 detention. In one case three policemen were implicated and are
 awaiting trial in the beating death of a robbery suspect,
 Nicanor Diaz Bautista. An autopsy of another robbery suspect,
 Erasmo German Javier Rodriguez, revealed that he had been
 beaten and subjected to electric shocks. These cases are under
 judicial investigation. Five accused terrorists, later freed
 for lack of evidence, claimed police had beaten and sexually
 mistreated them 'in Cuzco in November.
 Some local human rights groups and criminal lawyers state
 privately that the security forces frequently engage in abusive
 practices toward detainees. Prison conditions are extremely
 poor, and detainees are likely to encounter limited hygienic
 facilities, poor nutrition, ill-treatment by prison staff, and
 abuse from other prisoners who take advantage of lax
 supervision. The Government has moved to improve prison
 conditions. During 1986 it closed the infamous "El Sexto" jail
 and opened a more modern maximum security prison at Canto
 Grande. It continued to reduce prison overcrowding by
 releasing minor offenders and improved conditions at women's
 prisons.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 The Constitution requires that persons arrested be arraigned
 within 24 hours, except in cases of drug trafficking,
 terrorism, or espionage, for which the limit is 15 days. These
 restrictions are suspended in those areas, including Lima,
 under a state of emergency. Arraignment normally occurs in a
 timely manner. Arrested persons are entitled to have an
 attorney present when they make statements to the police.
 Public prosecutors from the Attorney General's office are
 supposed to be present during interrogations to ensure that
 statements are not made under threat or coercion. Human rights
 groups continue to express concern that these safeguards are
 not always respected by authorities, especially in cases
 involving terrorism in areas under a state of emergency. Thele
 groups claim security forces frequently detain citizens
 
 
 616
 PERU
 arbitrarily for brief periods, but statistics are lacking. The
 Government reported that several dozen persons, who were
 reported to have disappeared in 1986, later turned up in police
 or military custody.
 The Constitution recognizes the concept of judicial
 determination of the legality of detention. Human rights
 groups point out, however, that requests for such judgments in
 areas under a state of emergency frequently are ignored or
 dismissed, even though a state of emergency decree does not
 suspend this right. Although bail is available in most cases,
 in practice the Government denies it to accused terrorists.
 The Constitution prohibits compulsory labor or unpaid personal
 service.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The Peruvian judiciary is an independent branch of government.
 Judicial appointments are made for life; only Supreme Court
 justices require legislative approval. The legal system is
 based on the Napoleonic Code. Once criminal charges are filed,
 a judge determines whether probable cause exists. The next
 step is a judicial hearing process that may last up to 5
 months, followed by a public trial. Sentences may be appealed,
 and courts may send cases back to lower courts for additional
 investigation. Although public defenders exist, their numbers
 are inadequate; most defendants must pay for legal counsel or
 depend upon public defense lawyers. Until July, all terrorist
 trials were held in Lima; most persons accused of terrorism are
 held without bail.
 The courts face severe backlogs, a product of the sharp
 increase in terrorism cases, inefficiency, and, according to
 some observers, influence peddling. According to the
 Government, the majority of prisoners have not been sentenced
 and remain at some stage in the trial process. Local human
 rights groups have documented numerous cases of persons who
 have been detained without bail, awaiting trial, for periods up
 to 4 years. Terrorists reportedly have threatened judges
 handling terrorism cases. Numerous observers have criticized
 the release of detained terrorists as a result of insufficient
 evidence or probable extortion. Debate within the country
 indicates a growing consensus for a more efficient and secure
 judicial system. In December the Senate passed a government
 proposal to create a specialized court system with protected
 judges. The bill awaits lower house action.
 The Constitution mandates that civilians be tried in civilian
 courts. A military court exists for some military and police
 offenders. The Supreme Court is empowered to decide the venue
 of cases involving military and police offenders and, in cases
 involving the military, generally rules in favor of the
 military court, with one notable exception. In January the
 Supreme Court ruled that Navy Commander Alvaro Artaza be tried
 in a civilian court for the alleged disappearance of journalist
 Jaime Ayala in 1984. On February 2 Artaza was reportedly
 kidnaped. Local human rights groups, some of the media, and
 some opposition figures believe that he fled the country, with
 Navy assistance, to avoid prosecution. The Government has not
 investigated Artaza's disappearance.
 The civilian courts heard a number of major cases of alleged
 human rights violations by police in 1986, among them the July
 1984 death of peasant leader Jesus Oropeza, the March 1982
 
 
 617
 PERU
 killings of prisoners in an Ayacucho Hospital, and the November
 1983 death of Franciso Nufflo in a police station. Guilty
 verdicts were reached against police in 1986 in the Nufflo and
 Ayacucho hospital cases, as well as the November 1983 Soccos
 killings. The defendants appealed to the Supreme Court, which
 has yet to rule. The Supreme Court dismissed charges against
 Navy Commander Artaza for the January 1984 killing of six
 evangelical missionaries. A civilian court convicted and
 sentenced 11 police officers to between 10 and 25 years in
 prison for killing 32 Indian peasants in a campaign against
 guerrillas in November 1983. The defense filed an appeal of
 the guilty verdict in July.
 In the military courts, in addition to the trials of General
 Rabanal and 40 policemen for the Lurigancho prison killings, at
 least 3 other trials for alleged human rights violations are
 under way. These include the trial of Lieutenant Telmo Hurtado
 for the 1985 murders in Accomarca, that of army officer Oswaldo
 Diaz for the 1985 murder of three persons in Huanuco, and the
 trial of four persons for killings in 1985 in Pucayacu. These
 trials are not public. Human rights groups note that the
 Military Code of Justice contains no provision for murder or
 torture, and defendants are charged only with "negligence" and
 1abuse of authority." Corrective legislation passed the Senate
 and awaits lower house action. No member of the military
 services has been convicted in either the military or civil
 court systems for human rights violations.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The Constitution stipulates that police are required to have a
 judicial warrant to enter a private dwelling, and this is
 generally respected in practice. The requirement for a warrant
 is suspended in areas under a state of emergency, and security
 forces in those areas routinely conduct searches of private
 homes without a warrant.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 The Constitution guarantees freedom of speech and the press,
 and these rights are exercised effectively. With 7 television
 stations, 33 radio stations, 15 daily newspapers and some
 16 periodicals in Lima alone, every segment of the political
 spectrum has its voice. In March the Government returned
 25 radio stations confiscated by the former military government
 to their owners. The Government generally respects press
 freedoms. Some journalists, however, suggest that media debts
 to government banks and use of government advertising could
 lead to self-censorship. One television journalist claimed the
 Government moved to suspend a program on alleged Navy
 involvement in the disappearance of Commander Artaza. The
 Government denied the allegation, and the program was shown
 later. One leftist daily claimed security forces broke into
 its offices in June and prevented its publication for one day.
 The Interior Ministry denied the report, and the newspaper
 continues to publish. In November the Foreign Press
 Association protested official actions against the foreign
 press. These included the military's detention of three local
 and one foreign journalist investigating killings in Pomatambo.
 
 
 618
 PERU
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 These rights are expressly guaranteed in the Constitution and
 are normally respected in practice. Municipal authorities are
 usually forthcoming in approving permits for demonstrations.
 Unauthorized demonstrations occur and, for the most part, the
 Government deals with them in a nonconfrontational manner.
 However, during one illegal demonstration in November miners
 and riot squads clashed, leaving 30 to 50 demonstrators and
 police injured. The Government announced that seven
 unidentified policemen, including three officers, would be
 punished for the beating of Congressman Manuel Cortez Fernadez,
 who accompanied the miners. Until August, the right to
 assemble was suspended in those areas under a state of
 emergency. Using emergency powers, the armed forces Joint
 Command in May denied a request by the Socialist Revolutionary
 Party to hold a congress in Lima.
 The Constitution guarantees private workers the right to
 organize, to bargain collectively, and to strike. Unions are
 required to engage in direct negotiation and to seek
 conciliation at the Ministry of Labor prior to any strike
 action. Public sector workers, except for the members of the
 armed forces and senior government officials, have similar
 rights.
 According to the Government, 17.5 percent of the work force are
 organized in trade unions. Unions generally are not formally
 linked with political parties, but important national
 confederations are identified with particular political groups,
 ranging from the far left to the government party. Total
 membership in Communist and other far left unions is larger
 than in democratically oriented unions. Union leaders are
 consulted regularly by the Government. Peruvian labor
 organizations affiliate freely with regional and international
 trade union organizations of all ideological tendencies. Peru
 is an active member of the International Labor Organization.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 The Roman Catholic faith overwhelmingly predominates in Peru,
 and the Constitution formally recognizes the Church's
 importance. The Constitution also establishes the independence
 of church and state and guarantees freedom of religion and
 conscience. These rights are fully respected in practice.
 Members of minority religions encounter no difficulty in
 practicing their faith or in exempting their children from
 religious instruction in public schools. Missionary
 organizations operate freely in the country with the
 cooperation of government ministries.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 The Constitution guarantees the right of free movement and
 prohibits the exile of citizens. There are no political or
 legal constraints on foreign travel or emigration; however,
 freedom of movement is suspended in those areas governed by a
 state of emergency. Peru is a party to the 1967 United Nations
 Protocol on the Status of Refugees. Persons fleeing turmoil in
 other countries traditionally have been encouraged to return
 eventually to their country of origin but have not been forced
 to do so. Involuntary repatriation occurs only in the cases of
 persons accused of nonpolitical crimes.
 
 
 619
 PERU
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Peru is a democracy governed by a freely elected President and
 Congress. The political process is completely open and is
 vigorously contested by groups ranging from conservative to
 Marxist. However, Sendero Luminoso persistently seeks to
 disrupt elections. Particularly in remote mountain areas,.it
 kills candidates and elected officials and threatens voters.
 Suffrage is universal for persons over 18 years of age, except
 for members of the military. In April 1985, Peru held
 elections for a president, 2 vice presidents, and 240
 congressmen and senators. No serious allegations of fraud were
 raised.
 The July 1985 inauguration of President Garcia marked the first
 transfer of power between democratically elected governments in
 40 years and the first accession to power of the American
 Popular Revolutionary Alliance (APRA). The current
 administration has a majority in the Congress. Nationwide
 municipal elections took place in November 1986, contested by
 three major parties and more than a half dozen smaller ones.
 Although most of the contests occurred without incident,
 several important races were close, and led opposition groups to
 claim the Government had committed fraud or improprieties. As
 of late December the National Elections Board had not yet
 adjudicated these claims.
 Leadership of the various parties tends to be dominated by the
 urban elite whose educational, financial, and communications
 resources give them advantages over-the poor and rural-based
 sectors. Indians and the small black community remain
 underrepresented at top levels of government institutions and
 the professions.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The Government has welcomed visits by international human
 rights groups; In 1986 it received visits from Amnesty
 International, Americas Watch, the United Nations Human Rights
 Commission Working Group on Forced or Involuntary
 Disappearance, and a private group led by Adolfo Perez
 Esquivel, Argentina's 1980 Nobel Laureate. High level
 officials, sometimes including the President, met with these
 groups. Following the prison killings, Americas Watch and
 Amnesty International became increasingly concerned about the
 human rights situation. The Government did not comment on a
 September Americas Watch report. In August Amnesty
 International sent the Government a detailed list of its
 concerns; as of late December, the Government had not
 responded.
 A number of human rights groups work in Peru, associated under
 the private National Coordinator for Human Rights. The three
 largest groups are the Association for Human Rights formed in
 1983; the Catholic church's Episcopal Commission for Social
 Action; and the National Human Rights Commission. Smaller
 groups also exist in Lima and the departmental capitals. Lima
 is headquarters for the Andean Commission of Jurists, which
 sponsors human rights analysis in Peru and the Andean region.
 Local groups recognized some positive government steps in 1986
 but were concerned that the overall trend in human rights was
 
 
 620
 PERU
 negative; they said civilian institutions were unable or
 unwilling to investigate and punish violators. Members of a
 government-appointed Peace Commission resigned in January
 charging the Government failed to respond to its
 recommendations on terrorism and human rights. A new
 Commission was appointed, but its members resigned following
 the June prison riots. In October the Government established a
 National Human Rights Council under the Justice Ministry.
 Composed of official and private members, it has a broad
 mandate to promote respect for human rights.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 The Constitution grants women equality with men, and laws on
 marriage and divorce do not discriminate against women.
 Nevertheless, tradition still tends to impede the access of
 women to leadership roles in major social and political
 institutions. There are 3 women in the 60-member Senate and
 10 in the 180-member Chamber of Deputies. Women represent
 26 percent of the Peruvian labor force. In 1984, 61.9 percent
 of the female workforce were employed in commerce and services,
 16.6 percent in the industrial sector, and the remaining 19.5
 percent in other occupations, mainly as domestics. The average
 wage of male workers is double that of females.
 The rural indigenous population and Peru's small black
 community face situations similar to those of women. The
 former group traditionally has lacked access to public
 services. Composed of several distinct geographic regions,
 Peru is a classic case of differential development: public
 investment traditionally has been focused on the coast, drawing
 migrants to the cities, especially Lima. One-third of the
 population is in the capital area and accounts for two-thirds
 of the gross domestic product. The Government has considerably
 increased the flow of resources and services to poor, largely
 Indian rural areas. Development efforts, however, have been
 impeded by the difficulty and cost of providing services to
 areas out of the mainstream of hispanic culture and economic
 activity. As a result of this dichotomy and of historical
 prejudices, the economic and social needs of Peruvians of
 European ancestry are more likely to be met than those of mixed
 or pure Indian heritage.
 CONDITIONS OF LABOR
 Peruvian law prohibits the employment of children under 14
 years of age but allows the employment of older children who
 are literate. Although minimum-age legislation generally is
 enforced in all sectors of the official economic system,
 chronic social problems lead many destitute children to seek a
 living on the streets.
 Employers are required by law to pay a minimum wage. Ministry
 of Labor inspectors are charged with enforcing compliance with
 workplace safety and health regulations. Both public and
 private sector employees are covered under the state-run Social
 Security Institute health plan. Workers have had an 8-hour
 workday since 1918, and the official workweek is 40 hours.
 
 
 621
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.PISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COJNTRY: PERU
 1984     1985      1986
 ---       ----------------------------------------------------
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL..         164.6      79.1     29.6
 LOANS ..............   .... 119.0     25.5      0.0
 GRANTS ................    45.6      53.6     29.6
 A.AID ....................... 118.9      37.9     25.9
 LOANS ................... 100.0        0.5      0.0
 GRANTS .............    ... 18.9      37.4     25.9
 (SEC.SUP.ASSIST.).            0.3       3.0      7.0
 B.FOO FOR PEACE .......        42.9      38.8      0.0
 LOANS ..............     ... 19.0     25.0      0.0
 GRANTS ...............     23.9      13.8      0.0
 TITLE I-TITAL.........       . .19.0      25.0      0.0
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS .....        19.0      25.0      0.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR .....         0.0       0.0      0.0
 TITLE II-TOTAL .........        23.9      13.8      0.0
 E.RELIEF.EC.DEV & WFP.          2.7       4.0      0.0
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY .....        21.2       9.8      0.0
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST,..           2.8      2.4      3.7
 LOANS .................     0.0       0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ...............      2.8       2.4      3.7
 PEACE CORPS ......         0.0      0.0       0.0
 NARCOTICS ........         2.8       2.4      3.7
 OTHER .............. O             0.0      0.0
 II.4IL. ASSIST.-TOTAL,...        10.7       8.7      0.6
 LOANS ..............     ... 10.0      8.0      0.0
 GRANTS ...............       0.7       0.7      0.6
 A.MAP GRANTS ..........         0.3       3.0      0.0
 S.CREOIT FINANCING ....        10.0       8.0      0.0
 C.INTL MIL.ED.TRNG....          0.7       0.7      0.6
 D.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK...          0.0       0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS ........         0.0       0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. & NIL,..        175.3      87.8     30.2
 LOANS ..............   .... 129.0     33.5      0.0
 GRANTS.. .. ..........     46.3      54.3     30.2
 -       ---------------------- -------------------------------
 OT4ER US LOANS ..........         0.3       1.3      0.0
 EX-IM BANK LOANS .......         0.0       0.0      0.0
 ALL OTHER .................     0.3       1.3      0.0
 -----------------------------------------------------
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1984     1985      1986     1946-86
 TOTAL ........    317.6     73.3      23,5   3326.8
 IBRO              122.5     31.0      13.5   1690.9
 IFC                 9.2     16.8     10.0     100.1
 IOA                 0.0      0.0       0.0     OO
 10               184.8     24.3      0.0    1466.7
 ADS                 0.0      0.0      0.0       0.0
 AFDB                0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 UNOP                1.1      1.2       0.0     54.5
 OT4ER-UN            0.0      0.0       0.0     14.6
 EEC                 0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 
 
 622
