 Peru has a freely elected democratic government, with an
 executive branch headed by a president, a bicameral
 legislature, a separate and independent judiciary, and an
 attorney general's office (the Public Ministry). Peru's
 history has been punctuated by periods of military rule, most
 recently from 1968 to 1980. President Alan Garcia and his
 center-left American Popular Revolutionary Alliance (APRA) won
 the last general elections in 1985 by a large margin. The
 next elections are scheduled for April 8, 1990.
 Public security responsibilities are shared by the police and
 the military. The Interior Ministry and its police services
 have the primary counterterrorist role in the city of Lima and
 in the 114 provinces which are not unde' a state of
 emergency. The military leads the effort to combat subversion
 in the 69 provinces which are currently under a state of
 emergency. The states of emergency place all executive branch
 authority in the local military command, suspend restrictions
 on arbitrary detention and the requirement for search
 warrants, and restrict rights of movement and assembly. More
 than 50 percent of Peru's population of 22 million lived under
 a state of emergency in 1989. Peru's history of military
 coups has weakened civilian control over the military. There
 is little oversight of military activities in the emergency
 zones by civilian judges or prosecutors, and the
 constitutional rights of persons detained by the military are
 routinely ignored.
 In Peru's miied economy, private property is generally
 respected.- Unfavorable terms of international trade, lack of'
 foreign investment, capital flight, and internal structural
 problems led in 1989 to stagnant exports, rising unemployment,
 fiscal disaster, and one of the world's highest inflation
 rates. Austerity measures produced a deep recession and a
 50-percent cut in per capita annual income to an estimated
 $800, without curbing inflation.
 The chief factors driving human rights violations in Peru
 remain the terrorist activities of the Sendero Luminoso
 (Shining Path) Maoist guerrillas. The Sendero regularly
 assassinates anyone perceived to be an opponent, or merely
 uncooperative, including ordinary citizens, typically Indian
 residents of the Andean highlands. As measured by the number
 of reported deaths of government workers (144 civilian, 243
 police, and 105 military), 1989 was the most violent year
 since Sendero announced its "popular war" in 1980. Sendero
 also increased its control over Peru's major coca-growing
 region, the Upper Huallaga Valley, where it both represented
 peasant coca growers in their dealings with narcotics
 traffickers and cooperated with traffickers to thwart law
 enforcement efforts. The Senate Commission on Violence
 estimated that Sendero was responsible for a total 1,526
 deaths in 1989. Several other smaller terrorist groups were
 also active. Independent human rights groups charge that the
 Tupac Amarl Revolutionary Movement (MRTA) committed 161
 political murders in 1989 and that the Rodrigo Franco Command
 (CRF) murdered eleven.
 Human rights abuses by government security forces also
 increased in 1989, although independent investigations were
 increasingly difficult to carry out because military
 commanders restrict access to emergency zones. The Public
 Ministry reports a backlog of over 3,000 pending cases of
 disappearances, over 500 of them filed in 1989. There were
 
 
 709
 credible reports of summary executions, arbitrary detentions,
 and frequent use of torture by police and the military. The
 Senate Commission on Violence estimated that government
 security forces were responsible for a total of 1,228 deaths
 in 1989. Trials of military personnel accused of human rights
 violations move slowly, if at all. In December two police
 officers were sentenced to prison terms for their roles in the
 1986 massacre of 124 prisoners at Lurigancho prison. The 6
 army officers and 69 other police personnel on trial were all
 acquitted.
 A special congressional commission on paramilitary activities
 was established after the April and May assassinations of two
 members of the Chamber of Deputies. Commission members
 concluded that extremist members of the ruling APRA party,
 working with elements of the Ministry of Interior, are using
 the Rodrigo Franco Command (CRF) vigilante terrorist group to
 conduct operations against suspected antigovernment terrorists
 and sympathizers.
 It is estimated that at least 3,198 persons (civilian and
 military) were killed in terrorist-related violence in 1989,
 an increase of over 50-percent from the previous year.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing
 Political and other extrajudicial killings rose again in
 1989. Sendero Luminoso continued to assassinate teachers,
 engineers, development and human rights workers, Indian
 peasants, and political candidates, as well as government,
 police and ruling party officials. Official government
 sources reported more than 1,450 civilian deaths from
 terrorist violence. The independent National Coordinator for
 Human Rights calculated a total of 823 civilian political
 assassinations, 720 of them by Sendero, through the first 10
 months of 1989. The Senate Select Committee on Violence and
 Pacification calculates that Sendero's forces committed 1,526
 killings in 1989. Sendero's killings thus remained primarily
 aimed at the general public; by comparison, government
 security forces suffered 157 deaths at Sendero's hands. Due
 to the isolation of many rural areas where Sendero is most
 active, the number of victims almost surely is underreported.
 Sendero continued to use violence in the countryside,'
 particularly assassinations, to impose its control over
 certain areas, punish peasants who withhold their support, and
 eliminate opposition. In one such incident, Sendero killed at
 least 45 peasants in three settlements in Huancavelica
 department on June 9. The townspeople were rounded up,
 community leaders and those who had refused Sendero's earlier
 call for a work stoppage were selected for "trial," and then
 shot, stabbed, or had their skulls smashed as family and
 neighbors looked on. Another massacre, also probably by
 Sendero, took place in the village of Canaire in Ayacucho
 department, in which 35 were killed on February 27.
 In the cities, Sendero used attacks more for propaganda and
 intimidation purposes. In a major effort to disrupt the
 nation's November 1989 municipal and April 1990 presidential
 elections, it expanded its attacks on government and APRA
 party officials to include opposition officeholders and
 
 
 710
 PERUI
 candidates for public office, regardless of party affiliation.
 Sendero attacked and killed several foreigners in 1989,
 including tourists, development workers, and journalists.
 A second terrorist group, the MRTA, has expanded beyond its
 original base of operations in Lima and environs to field its
 own paramilitary cadres in some rural zones, most notably in
 northern San Martin department. Though the MRTA chiefly seeks
 the destruction of'property through the selective bombing of
 banks, factories, foreign businesses, and diplomatic
 installations, these attacks killed at least 163 people in
 1989. Among those killed was a police sergeant during a
 September attack on the Lima residence of Economy and Finance
 Minister Cesar Vasquez Bazan.
 A third terrorist group, the CRF, also increased its
 activities in 1989. Suspected of being controlled by elements
 of the APRA party and the Ministry of Interior, the CRF
 carried out a campaign of intimidation, bombings, and
 assassinations. Among those targeted by CRF in 1989 were
 journalists, human rights workers, labor union members,
 lawyers, leftist politicians, and others the CRF accused of
 working to advance the cause of Sendero or MRTA. According to
 the Senate Committee on Violence, CRF was responsible for 11
 murders in 1989, a figure which closely tracks with that of
 independent human rights organizations.
 There are no official statistics on the number of summary
 executions in 1989. Because the number of confirmed
 disappearances sharply rose for the second consecutive year,
 it appears probable that the number of summary executions also
 increased in 1989. In an August 1989 report, Amnesty
 International (AI) charged that not only did the number of
 extrajudicial killings and disappearances in emergency zones
 grow "in a spectacular manner" during 1988 and the first half
 of 1989, but that for the first time these practices were no
 longer confined to the emergency zones, nor were the victims
 only from indigenous peasant communities in the Andean
 highlands.
 Several notable cases of probable military killings occurred
 in 1989. On May 17, some 100 troops of the Third
 Ollantaytambo Infantry Battalion entered the town of Calabaza,
 Satipo, Junin department. According to survivors, accounts
 filed with the Attorney General's office, the townspeople were
 assembled, and two hooded individuals (said to be former
 Sendero members cooperating with the army) selected
 approximately 20 persons. The prisoners were taken to a
 ravine, tortured, and killed, although several escaped. The
 next day the bodies of 11 townspeople, including those of 3
 students aged 14, 16, and 17 years, were found on the shores
 of the Calabaza river.
 The last surviving witness of the May 14, 1988, army massacre
 of at least 28 villagers in Cayara, Ayacucho department, was
 killed in circumstances suggesting army involvement. Martha
 Crisostomo Garcia was shot to death after eight hooded
 individuals in military dress burst into her house in Huamanga
 at 3 a.m. on September 8, 1989. The ninth witness to
 disappear or to be killed since the Cayara massacre,
 Crisostomo had identified the body of one of those killed,
 thus implicating General Jose Valdivia, then political-military
 chief of the Ayacucho emergency zone. A Public Ministry
 
 
 711
 investigator concluded that there was clear military
 responsibility for the Cayara massacre. The ruling party
 member leading the congressional investigation into the
 killings, however, concluded there had been "no excesses
 committed on the part of the military," even though the
 commission has yet to produce its official report. At year's
 end, the investigation remained stalled.
 Also in May, Delfin Ortiz Serna, a witness to the November
 1988 killing of a journalist, who had filed a deposition
 implicating the military, was shot to death. In neither the
 Calabaza massacre nor the murder of Crisostomo, nor in any
 other 1989 incident of alleged military or police violations
 of a civilian's human rights, were the results of official
 executive branch investigations ever made public, nor were
 charges brought against security officials.
 The public military trial of 77 army and police officials
 accused of the June 1986 killing of 124 inmates at the
 Lurigancho prison in the aftermath of a failed Sendero
 uprising concluded in December with two convictions--and 75
 acquittals due to "lack of evidence." Although police Colonel
 Rolando Cabezas Alarcon and a police lieutenant were sentenced
 to prison terms of 15 and 7 years respectively, none of the
 military-officers implicated were convicted. The military
 justice code contains no specific language for dealing with
 cases of killing, kidnaping, or torture--only "negligence" and
 "abuse of authority."
 The assassinations of Chamber of Deputies members Eriberto
 Arroyo Mio (April 27) and Pablo Li Ormeno (May 6) prompted the
 Chamber to establish a commission to investigate paramilitary
 activities. The commission's preliminary report was submitted
 in mid-August, "hypothesizing" that APRA party youths are the
 actual perpetrators of the bombings, murders, and threats
 being committed in the name of the CRF, with Minister of
 Interior Agustin Mantilla as the driving force behind the
 CRF. Commission members received a number of death threats;
 the daughter of commission member Manuel Piqueras was briefly
 detained by armed men who threatened her father. After the
 APRA congressional leadership declared the commission
 dissolved, the non-APRA commission members issued a final
 report in October, again implicating APRA and Minister
 Mantilla. The APRA members had not issued any separate report
 by year's end. Interior Minister Mantilla has resolutely
 denied any involvement in the CRF or similar groups. Although
 several suspects were detained and later released, by year's
 end no criminal charges were pending in connection with any
 actions undertaken by the CRF.
 The CRF is also suspected in the January murder of Ayacucho
 journalist Juvenal Arroyo, along with his wife and two
 children. In April Tingo Maria radio personality Guillermo
 Lopez Salazar was shot to death in his home by suspected CRF
 terrorists. Sendero killed Peru's most prominent
 environmental reporter Barbara D'Achille in May. American
 journalist Todd C. Smith was kidnaped, tortured, and killed by
 unknown assailants in Uchiza, San Martin Department in
 November.
 Miners Federation Secretary General Saul Cantoral was kidnaped
 and murdered by unknown assailants on February 13. Also in
 February, a demonstration of striking farmers in Pucallpa,
 Ucayali department (not then an emergency zone) was broken up
 by police who may not have known that last-minute approval had
 
 
 712
 been given for the demonstration. Eight died and dozens were
 wounded after the police fired first tear gas and then bullets
 into the crowd. Some 300 persons were arrested; most were
 quickly released. Campesino organizers claim 28 remain
 unaccounted for and are presumed dead.
 In late August and early September, several dozen bodies were
 found floating down the Huallaga river near Santa Lucia in the
 north central department of San Martin. Many of the bodies
 had been decapitated and were also missing hands and feet.
 Although no organization claimed responsibility for the
 deaths, public speculation centered on the possibility that
 the military had killed drug traffickers, Sendero members, or
 other civilians. Others pointed to the possibility of a war
 betweeh rival drug gangs or to Sendero having killed
 traffickers or civilians. The inability of police or private
 human rights groups to ascertain responsibility for these
 deaths, much less arrest those responsible, is indicative of
 the level and variety of major violence prevalent in Peru
 today.
 b. Disappearance
 Since 1983 there have been an estimated 2,800 to 3,500 cases
 of disappearances involving the security forces, the majority
 of which occurred prior to 1985. Local human rights groups
 report having received formal complaints of 297 new cases of
 disappearances in the first 10 months of 1989, compared to the
 170 cases reported by the United Nations Working Group on
 Disappearances in 1988. Most cases involved Army detention of
 persons suspected of terrorist lins in the emergency zones,
 but there have been notable cases in Lima as well. Though a
 large percentage of those detained by security forces within
 the security zones have reappeared,'human rights groups
 believe that most of the remainder were or will be summarily
 executed. The bodies of disappearance victims are rarely
 found. Based on the testimony of survivors, it appears that
 most victims are taken to military bases for interrogation.
 Some are turned over to the police after lengthy detentions
 and are later freed for lack of incriminating evidence. Human
 rights groups argue persuasively that the rest are summarily
 executed by the armed forces. An unknown number of
 "disappeared" persons are unaccounted for because they joined
 the ranks of MRTA or Sendero, either voluntarily or
 involuntarily.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 Although the Constitution prohibits t6rture and inhuman or
 humiliating treatment, charges of brutality toward detainees
 are common. Human rights groups state that suspected
 subversives held by the Government are routinely tortured at
 military detention centers; lawyers and others familiar with
 the police and judicial system concur. In 1987 the Public
 Ministry toted that the majority of detainees held by military
 authorities showed signs of mistreatment or torture. In 1989
 there were reliable accounts from released detainees of
 torture or mistreatment both by police and the military.
 The 1987 terrorism law requires that persons detained for
 terrorism be interrogated only in the presence of a defense
 attorney and a Public Ministry prosecutor. In these cases, a
 court indictment must be sought within 15 days of arrest or
 the prisoner must be released. Reliable reports of violations
 
 
 713
 of these standards occur frequently in areas governed by the
 military under a state of exception. There is some dispute as
 to whether under Peruvian law the military is required to
 adhere to these terrorism law requirements under a state of
 exception, but Peru is obliged to meet such standards under
 its international treaty obligations. In any event, the
 military frequently ignore these standards. The International
 Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) in 1989 regained some access
 to detainees in the military-controlled emergency zones and to
 police detention centers where interrogations occur prior to
 indictment.
 Many victims of Sendero terrorism also show signs of having
 been tortured before death, Torture of those victims often
 follows a brief "popular trial," normally held in the presence
 of rural villagers as a method of intimidation. Sendero uses
 particularly brutal methods of execution, including slitting
 throats, strangulation, stoning, and burning.
 Prison conditions are extremely poor, and prisoners are likely
 to experience unsanitary facilities, poor nutrition and health
 care, and ill-treatment by prison staff. Many prison
 cellblocks have reportedly fallen under Sendero or MRTA
 control, with guards refusing to venture into them.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 The Constitution, the penal code, and antiterrorist
 legislation clearly delineate the arrest and detention
 process. However, most if not all of these protections are
 suspended in those areas under a state of emergency. In areas
 not subject to a state of emergency, a warrant approved by a
 Public Ministry prosecutor is required for arrest. Persons
 arrested must be arraigned within 24 hours, except in cases of
 drug trafficking, teriorism, or espionage, for which the limit
 is 15 days. Detainees have the right to choose their own
 attorney, or the Government must provide counsel at no
 charge. Arrested persons are entitled to have an attorney
 present when they make statements to the police. Under the
 1987 terrorism law, police must also notify the detainees'
 family and human rights groups of an arrest, although in
 practice this is not consistently done. There is no bail or
 provisional liberty for persons accused of terrorism.
 Arrest procedures are different in the rural emergency zones.
 The armed forces do not need an arrest warrant, and detainees
 are often denied access to an attorney during interrogation
 and to family members during their imprisonment. All
 detainees, including those in the emergency zones, have the
 right to seek judicial determination of the legality of their
 detention, but this right is routinely disregarded by military
 commanders in the emergency zones. Of the several thousand
 prisoners held by the military inside the emergency zones,
 human rights groups know of few who were turned over to
 civilian authorities for prosecution. Arbitrary arrests and
 detentions in the emergency zones in 1989 are estimated to be
 in the hundreds.
 In 1989 the military continued the practice of detaining
 persons who enter the emergency zones to investigate human
 rights cases or to instruct citizens on their constitutional
 rights. Labor union organizers also often found themselves
 detained under the broad terms of the terrorism law. In the 3
 days before the mid-August start of.a miners' strike, at least
 34 organizers were detained and charged with terrorism.
 
 
 714
 PERU
 Another 10 were arrested the following week. By September 2,
 all had been released and charges had been dropped against all
 44.
 The Constitution prohibits, and there have been no known cases
 of, involuntary exile in the past 9 years. With regard to
 forced or compulsory labor, see Section 6.c.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The judiciary is one of three separate branches of
 government. Supreme Court judges, 23 in all, are nominated by
 the President from slates supplied by an advisory committee,
 and must be approved by the Senate. In the Peruvian legal
 system; which is based on the Napoleonic Code, once criminal
 charges are filed, a judge determines whether probable cause
 exists. The judicial process prior to trial may last several
 months, followed by a public trial. Defendants have the right
 to be present at the trial, at which verdicts are rendered by
 a judge or a panel of judges. Sentences may be appealed, and
 judges may send cases back to lower courts for additional
 investigation. Many judges on the Superior and Supreme Courts
 are active in political parties, and there are occasional
 claims that decisions have been politically motivated.
 Courts face severe backlogs, a product of inefficiency,
 influence peddling, and the sharp increase in terrorism
 cases. There are too few public defenders for the large
 caseloads. The Ministry of Justice reported in July 1988 that
 there was a backlog of nearly 45,000 criminal cases. Human
 rights groups have documented numerous cases of persons who
 have been detained without bail, while awaiting trial, for
 periods of up to 4 years. There are also widespread charges
 of corruption and the suborning of judges, police, and
 witnesses at all stages of the judicial process. Narcotics
 traffickers reportedly have been able to buy their release
 from jails. Outgoing Minister of Justice Cesar Delgado
 Barreto acknowledged in September that fully two-thirds of all
 prison inmates are awaiting trial for crimes of which they
 have been accused, with only one-third having been judged,
 found guilty, and sentenced.
 Threats and intimidation of judges handling terrorism cases
 represent a serious problem, accounting in part for the low
 conviction rate of accused terrorists. Barely 5 percent of
 those arrested for such actions are convicted, a notoriously
 low rate that leads to police frustration with the judicial
 process and to public tolerance of police abuses (this figure
 does not include those held in military facilities inside the
 emergency'zones). In 1987 Congress created special tribunals
 to hear terrorism cases, and promised greater security
 measures to protect judges and witnesses. There were
 immediate problems with finding judges who were willing to
 serve on these courts, with providing the guarantees of safety
 required in the enabling legislation, and with the large
 backlog of cases. Overwhelmed by these problems, the special
 tribunals were abolished in April 1988. There continues to be
 criticism of the lack of cooperation between the Interior
 Ministry's technical police, who investigate and arrest, and
 the Public Ministry prosecutors, who conduct their own
 investigations as a part of the trial process.
 Although the Constitution mandates that civilians be tried in
 civilian courts, President Garcia proposed in July 1989 that
 
 
 715
 PERU
 civilian terrorists be tried by military tribunals throughout
 the country, both in and outside the emergency zones.
 Although this proposal was not adopted, special civilian
 courts were established late in the year to try terrorism
 cases in Lima and the rural emergency zones. The Supreme
 Court decides whether military or police offenders are tried
 in civilian courts or in a separate military court system.
 The military generally asserts its jurisdiction in these
 cases, and the Court typically rules in its favor. In the
 first attempt to have a civilian court try a military officer
 since 1986 (that case was thwarted when the officer fled the
 country), nine army personnel, including at least one officer,
 are to be tried in Sullana, Piura department, for the April
 1989 murder of Army Sgt. Jorge Yanez Ceci after a round of
 drugs and drinking. The civilian courts are making slow
 progress on several cases involving alleged police violations
 of human rights. Ongoing cases include those against police
 charged in the 1981 killing in detention of Cusco University
 student Marco Antonio Ayerbe, the 1982 killing of prisoners in
 an Ayacucho hospital, the 1982 death of Francisco Nufflo, and
 the 1986 torture of detainees in a Cusco police station. Two
 police officers (of 71 police on trial) were sentenced to
 prison in December 1989 for their roles in the June 1986
 Lurigancho prison massacre (Section l.a.).
 Military trials may be closed to the public at the discretion
 of the ruling magistrate, and little is known about specific
 cases. Although the military claims that human rights
 offenders are severely disciplined, no member of the armed
 forces has ever been convicted in either military or civilian
 courts for human rights violations. Cases reportedly still
 pending in military courts include charges against: a
 lieutenant for the 1985 murder of 69 persons in Accomarca; an
 officer for 3 1985 Huanuco deaths; and officers accused of
 summary executions in 1986 in Parco and Pomatambo. The
 military prosecutor asked for sentences ranging between 6 and
 25 years against the 77 accused security force members (6 army
 officers, 20 police officers, and 51 police) accused of
 involvement in the June 1986 massacre of prisoners at
 Lurigancho prison. The prosecutor requested a 25-year
 sentence for police Colonel Roland Cabezas and 6 years for
 army General Jorge Rabanal. Cabezas received a 15-year prison
 sentence. Police lieutenant Jaime Oswaldo Marquina was
 sentenced to 6 years. All other defendants, including army
 General Rabanal, were found not guilty due to "lack of
 evidence."
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The Constitution stipulates that the police need a judicial
 warrant to enter a private dwelling, and this requirement is
 generally respected in practice. The requirement is suspended
 in the emergency zones, however, and security forces in those
 areas routinely conduct searches of private homes without
 warrants.
 g. Use of Excessive Force and Violations of Humanitarian
 Law in Internal Conflicts
 Approximately 1,748 combatants, including some 1,400 presumed
 terrorists, died in armed clashes in 1989. Previously the
 Government claimed to have killed 4,500 terrorists from
 1980-1988, including 630 in 1988. Though the military may
 
 
 716
 inflate these counts, confirmed killings of terrorists may
 also be underreported because Sendero attempts to retrieve all
 its casualties, including fatalities, after clashes with the
 military. Local human rights groups charge-that a significant
 but unknown number of captured terrorists and innocent
 civilians were executed by the military. Sendero's disregard
 for the rules-of war and humanitarian law are infamous. As AI
 reported in August, "the violent adversaries of the Government
 routinely torture, mutilate and assassinate their captives."
 Both Sendero and the military are known to have blocked
 passage of relief supplies and humanitarian assistance. The
 international relief organization Medicins Sans Frontieres
 suspended its efforts in the emergency zones.
 Abuse of the rights of prisoners (able-bodied, wounded, and
 sick alike) was widespread by both security and terrorist
 forces. The military's violations of international norms
 ranged from the routine blindfolding of prisoners, to the
 frequent refusal to admit to holding certain persons in
 detention, to the less frequent summary execution of unarmed
 prisoners. Responding to a Sendero ambush of a military
 patrol, army helicopters on June 19 strafed a village near
 Aguaytia in the Upper Huallaga valley, killing or injuring an
 unknown number of civilians.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 The Constitution provides for freedom of speech and the
 press. With 8 television stations, dozens of radio stations,
 and 15 daily newspapers in Lima alone, Peruvians have access
 to a very broad range of opinion and information. The media
 are highly partisan. The Government owns one of the two
 national television networks, a radio network, and three
 newspapers; APRA operates two newspapers, and close advisors
 of the President control a third. The independent media are
 quick to criticize any branch of the Government. Most major
 opposition parties boast their own newspapers, and opposition
 figures also have frequent access to the government media.
 There were occasional and credible complaints of government
 pressure on the media and restrictions on journalists.
 However, there was no discernible trend in these incidents,
 nor did they constitute government policy.
 Journalists were often barred from traveling in the rural
 areas of the emergency zones, and those who attempted to do so
 were occasionally detained by the military, although they were
 generally released within hours. There were also frequent
 complaints of police confiscation of video and photographic
 material of events the Government did not want publicized.
 Police arrested Janet Talavera, the interim director of the
 pro-Sender.o newspaper El Diario, in June. She was detained
 under the provisions of the legislation prohibiting "apologies
 for and encouragement of terrorism." Additional charges of
 committing terrorist acts were later filed; she was awaiting
 trial at year's end. Police raided the offices of El Diario
 on November 2, arresting a dozen workers and closing the
 paper. Nonetheless, it appeared irregularly for the remainder
 of the year, edited and printed clandestinely. Luis Arce
 Borja, the paper's permanent director, is also under
 indictment for "apologies for and encouragement of terrorism"
 and spent most of the year living in Europe. A local lawyer
 
 
 717
 PERU
 attempted to invoke the same statute against Cesar
 Hildebrandt, one of the country's most prominent journalists,
 who was at the time the editor of the influential magazine Si.
 Hildebrandt alleged that the move was orchestrated from the
 Presidential Palace. Whatever the truth, the move ultimately
 came to naught. The antiterrorism statute has been applauded
 by some journalists as necessary; others fear that it can be
 used to stifle press freedom.
 Journalists were sometimes the victims of violence and
 threats. Four noted journalists were killed in 1989 (see
 Section l.a.); the College of Peruvian Journalists reported
 that as many as 22 persons involved in the news media were
 killed. The owner of the Panamericana Radio and Television
 network, Hector Delgado Parker, was kidnaped by MRTA on
 October 4, and his bodyguards killed. MRTA announced Delgado
 Parker would be "tried" for unspecified "crimes against the
 people." There were also death threats against other
 journalists. The local ANSA correspondent temporarily fled-
 the country in May after a reported threat.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 These rights are expressly provided for in the Constitution
 and are normally respected in practice except in areas under a
 state of emergency (where the right of assembly is
 suspended). Public meetings in plazas or streets require
 advance permission, which can only be denied for reasons of
 security or public health. Municipal authorities usually
 approved permits for demonstrations in nonemergency zones.
 Many unauthorized demonstrations also occurred, and, for the
 most part, the Government dealt with them in a
 nonconfrontational manner. However, as opposition groups
 adopted more provocative and violent tactics, the Government
 often denied permits or broke up marches. Police resorted
 more often to clubs, tear gas, buckshot, and firetruck-mounted
 water cannons to disperse unruly or threatening crowds. At
 least eight (and possibly many more) were killed in February
 when police opened fire on a demonstration of striking farmers
 in Pucallpa (see Section l.a.).
 There are no particular restrictions placed on political
 activity by trade associations or professional bodies. Such
 organizations are permitted to, and routinely do, maintain
 relations or affiliate with recognized international bodies in
 their respective fields.
 For a discussion of freedom of association as it applies to
 labor unions, see Section 6.a.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Roman Catholicism predominates in Peru, and the Constitution
 formally recognizes the Church. The Constitution also
 establishes the separation of church and state and ensures
 freedom of religion and conscience. These rights are
 respected in practice. Members of minority religions
 encounter no government interference in practicing their faith
 or in exempting their children from religious instruction in
 public schools. Organized religions are free to establish
 places of worship, train clergy, engage in religious
 publishing, and proselytize. Foreign-born clergy are not
 barred from entry; rather, they constitute a significant
 presence, even within the dominant Catholic Church.
 Missionary organizations operate freely in the country.
 
 
 718
 �A ER
 Nonetheless, particular members of various religious
 organizations-report having received death threats from
 Sendero, MRTA, or the CRF during 1989. Several religious
 workers were killed. These incidents appear prompted by the
 terrorist group's perception that a given individual's
 activities "strayed" from pastoral to political. Some
 religious officials fear, however, that Sendero is
 increasingly antagonistic to organized religion in general.
 They cite the December bombing of a Catholic church, increased
 amounts of Sendero vitriol directed against the church, a
 spate of killings of religious workers, and reports of death
 threats in some areas of the country against those who
 celebrate Christmas. MRTA bombed three Mormon churches, which
 it publicly accuses of having links to U.S. corporate
 interests.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 The Constitution provides for the right of free movement, and
 there are no political or legal constraints on foreign travel
 or emigration. Approximately 150,000 Peruvians emigrated to
 other nations in 1988, and similar numbers are believed to
 have emigrated in 1989. Departure taxes and passport costs,
 although substantially reduced at year's end, nonetheless
 constitute a prohibitive expense for millions of Peruvians.
 Freedom of movement is legally suspended within the emergency
 zones and travelers may be detained by authorities at any
 time. Other domestic and international travel is not known to
 be restricted for political reasons. There have been no major
 resettlement efforts by the security forces in several years.
 Persons fleeing turmoil in other countries traditionally have
 been encouraged to return eventually to their country of
 origin or to emigrate to third countries, but have not been
 forced to do so. Involuntary repatriation occurs only in
 cases of persons accused of nonpolitical crimes.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Peru is a democracy governed by a freely elected president and
 congress. The political process is open, subject to
 monitoring by an autonomous National Elections Board, and
 elections are vigorously contested by parties ranging from
 conservative to Marxist. In the November 1989 municipal
 elections, for example, 10 political movements fielded
 candidates for mayor of Lima. Sendero Luminoso persistently
 sought to deny citizens their political rights--particularly
 in the more remote areas--by killing candidates and elected
 officials and threatening voters. Sendero leaders have
 repeatedly and publicly stated their intention to disrupt the
 1990 presidential elections, just as they tried to disrupt the
 November 1989 municipal elections. By September 30, over 590
 mayors and city aldermen elected in the general municipal
 elections'of 1986 had been forced from their posts by
 terrorist threats or violence. Over 75 mayors and other
 municipal, district, and provincial officials were killed by
 Sendero during 1989. After Sendero assassinated Fermin
 Azparrent, the Mayor of Ayacucho City, on September 19,
 Sendero warned that any mayoral or city alderman candidate in
 Ayacucho who did not withdraw his candidacy within 24 hours
 would also be killed. All but one candidate withdrew (and he
 moved to Lima). A second candidate reentered the race the
 
 
 719
 PERUL
 week of the election. Nationwide, 252 districts (12.5 percent
 of the total) fielded no candidates for municipal office.
 Suffrage is both universal and mandatory for persons 18 to 70
 years of age, except for active duty police or military, who
 are barred from voting or holding public office. Balloting is
 direct and secret. Although the fine for failing to vote was
 raised from $4 to approximately $50 (roughly equal to a
 month's minimum wage) on the eve of the November elections,
 the National Elections Board announced afterwards that the
 fine would not be enforced. Elections are held every 5 years
 for president and the two vice presidents, as well as for the
 Senate and Chamber of Deputies. The president is barred from
 running for consecutive terms of office. Elections for the
 nation's newly established regional parliaments are to be held
 every 3 years, at the time of the nation's municipal
 elections. Under the Constitution the Government is headed by
 a powerful executive. More thdn 95 percent of all new laws
 are enacted through unilateral presidential decrees.
 Nonetheless the legislature (currently also dominated by the
 APRA party) freely and openly debates government policies and
 does on occasion vote against government positions.
 The political system, although legally open to all, is
 dominated by Peruvian males of European or mixed European and
 indigenous background.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 Access by the ICRC to the emergency tones and to detainees
 which had been denied in mid-1988 was restored in early 1989
 and ICRC personnel visited over 100 security detainees in
 September. AI last sent a formal delegation to Peru in
 November 1988 and was received by various members of the
 Cabinet. Outside of the emergency zones, the Government did
 not impede or restrict their access. In May 1989 AI forwarded
 a draft report to the Government for comment but did not
 receive a reply. AI published the report, "Peru: Human
 Rights and State of Emergency," in late August, noting that
 "grave violations of human rights" had increased throughout
 the previous 18 months. In November AI released a second
 report, "Caught Between Two Fires," charging that "torture,
 mutilation, 'disappearance,' murder, and rape have become a
 hallmark of the armed forces* 'campaign against terrorism.'"
 The Ministry of Defense issued an immediate, heated denial but
 did not further address the charges.
 Local human rights organizations complain that they are
 limited by the military in their efforts to investigate human
 rights abuses in the emergency zones and that their requests
 to the Government for information are usually ignored.
 Although most groups state that they are usually not harassed
 or threatened by the Government, incidents continued to
 occur. In September three visiting human rights lawyers and
 five local residents preparing a seminar on constitutional
 rights were arrested on terrorism charges in San Marcos
 province of Cajamarca department. They were held for 2 1/2
 days before all charges were dropped and the eight were
 released. Human rights groups also received threats from
 terrorist groups, mostly from Sendero, but also from the CRF.
 Due to violence and the specific threat of continued violence,
 a number of human rights and humanitarian assistance
 
 
 720
 organizations were forced to close their offices in certain
 emergency zones during 1989.
 A number of local private human rights organizations
 constitute the independent National Coordinator for Human
 Rights. These include the National Human Rights Commission,
 the Institute for Legal Defense, the Association for Human
 Rights, and the Catholic Church's Commission for Social
 Action. Other smaller groups work in the departmental
 capitals and other cities. These groups are generally
 credible observers, investigating and reporting on human
 rights abuses to the extent possible, regardless of the
 perpetrator.
 In 1989 the Government repeatedly complained that both local
 and international human rights groups distort or exaggerate
 Peru's human rights problems. The Government's general
 unresponsiveness to specific inquiries, however, has done
 little to improve its credibility. Peru is a member of the
 United Nations Human Rights Commission.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 The Constitution grants women equality with men, and laws on
 marriage, divorce, and property rights do not discriminate
 against women. Nevertheless, tradition impedes the access of
 women to leadership roles in major social and political
 institutions.
 Spouse abuse is a chronic problem. Anecdotal police reports
 indicate that such abuse is increasing in frequency as the
 nation's political and economic frustrations grow. In late
 1988 a special police center, staffed by policewomen, was
 established in Lima to provide legal, medical, and psychiatric
 assistance to abused spouses and children. A number of
 women's organizations and feminist groups are active in Peru.
 Peru's large indigenous population and its small black
 population were also subject to pervasive social
 discrimination, although far less so than before the Velasco
 resolution of 1968. The former group, mostly speakers of
 Quechua, Aymara, and other native languages, traditionally has
 lacked access to public services. Peru is a classic case of
 differential development, with public investment traditionally
 focused on the coast, drawing migrants to the cities,
 especially Lima. Recognizing this fact, the Government has
 increased the flow of resources and services to poor, largely
 Indian, rural areas. Development efforts, however, have been
 impeded by the difficulty and cost of providing services to
 remote areas which are out of the mainstream of Hispanic
 culture, and by the continued disruption of these efforts by
 Sendero. As a result of current problems, as well as historic
 and continued prejudice, the economic and social needs of
 Peruvians of European ancestry continued to be met to a far
 greater eitent than those of Peruvians of black, mixed, or
 pure Indian heritage.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 The Constitution provides for the right of workers freely to
 associate and form labor unions without previous
 authorization. In practice, however, there are legal
 
 
 721
 restrictions on the right to organize (see below), and a
 requirement to register with the Ministry of Labor in order
 for the union to become legal and capable of performing its
 functions. Suspension or dissolution of labor unions is
 forbidden by the Constitution, but it can be done legally
 through the civil court system at the request of the union
 itself, or by cancellation of the union's registration by the
 Ministry. Unions may form industrywide federations which can,
 in turn, form confederations, all of which can be affiliated
 with international labor organizations. Private and public
 sector unions of workers performing the same type of work
 cannot join together as a confederation at any level. Police
 and military are proscribed from forming unions.
 About 18 percent of the labor force is organized. Organized
 labor, however, is found in industries responsible for about
 70 percent of Peru's gross national product. The majority of
 unorganized Peruvian workers are those in the countryside and
 those involved in the vast underground "informal" sector that
 work outside government regulations.
 Although a significant percentage of Peruvian organized labor
 belongs to independent unions and federations, those unions
 with a political party affiliation are routinely manipulated
 to serve political interests.
 The Confederation of Peruvian Workers is a member of the
 Inter-American Regional Organization of Workers and is
 affiliated with the International Confederation of Free Trade
 Unions. The Communist party-controlled General Confederation
 of Peruvian workers is affiliated with the Communist-controlled
 World Federation of Trade Unions and its Latin American
 organization, the Permanent Congress for Trade Union Unity of
 Latin America.
 The Constitution provides for the right to strike "according
 to law." There is no strike law, however, even though
 Congress has considered various implementing bills since the
 Constitution was promulgated in 1979. By Supreme Executive
 Decree (which defines some strike behavior in the absence of a
 formal law), workers in the private sector must give 72-hour
 notice to the employer and the Ministry of Labor before going
 on strike. When direct negotiations between workers and
 employers break down, the Government intervenes and
 constitutes a tripartite (government, management, labor) board
 to review the situation. If no agreement is reached, the
 Government then weighs the overall economic implications of
 the employer's and the workers' positions and makes a decision
 (which can be appealed in the civil court system). The
 Government may then make a final offer which, if rejected,
 will open the way for declaring the strike illegal. A
 government determination that the strike is illegal can lead
 to the dismissal of workers or union leaders and permits
 employers to hire strikebreakers legally. Despite these
 restrictions, innumerable strikes, often wildcat in nature,
 did take place in 1989. There are no norms regulating strikes
 in the public sector and all such strikes were therefore open
 to legal challenge. In spite of the constitutional right to
 strike, nearly all strikes in Peru are declared illegal.
 However, the penalties on the workers who strike illegally are
 seldom implemented.
 The International Labor Organization (ILO) Committee on
 Freedom of Association, at its meetings in June and November
 1989, considered at length several pending complaints against
 
 
 722
 the Government of Peru. Among these complaints were
 allegations from several trade union organizations that the
 Government has used force to repress trade union demonstrations
 and strikes resulting in the injuiy and death of strikers and
 demonstrators, including the alleged murder of 88 peasants who
 were participating in a meeting; and, that it has violated
 trade union autonomy by searching union offices, detaining
 their leaders, and interfering in their organizations. The
 complaints also alleged that the Industrial Relations Bill and
 administrative actions of the Government violate the right to
 strike. The Committee deplored the violence, requested the
 Government to submit further information, and agreed with the
 union allegations regarding the Industrial Relations Bill.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 By law, employers cannot discriminate against union members or
 organizers. In practice, however, union activists are
 sometimes harassed by employers who threaten to fire them, or
 who pay off the workers to leave the enterprise. (There were
 reported incidents during the year of more serious harassment
 of labor union activists, including arbitrary detention (see
 Section l.d.), kidnaping, and killing (see Section l.a.). The
 workers can appeal their case through the Ministry of Labor
 or, in case a decision is not acceptable to both parties,
 through the civil courts. Throughout this process, which can
 be lengthy, the worker is kept on the company's payroll until
 a final legal ruling is obtained.
 The right to bargain collectively is provided for by the
 Constitution, but there are restrictions on what can be
 negotiated. In the public sector, for example, only working
 conditions can be negotiated, and then only if the changes do
 not involve expenses greater than the funds already budgeted.
 In the private sector, collective bargaining can cover both
 working conditions and pay. Labor laws and regulations are
 applied uniformly throughout the country, including in an area
 of the Amazon Basin, granted in a Peru/Colombia border
 agreement, which is analogous to a free trade zone
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 The Constitution prohibits compulsory labor, and this is
 usually respected in practice. There have been reports of
 compulsory labor on plantations in remote areas of the country
 where law enforcement is all but nonexistent. Sendero has
 also been accused of forcibly recruiting peasants to either
 join its ranks or render support services.
 In its 1989 report, the ILO Committee of Experts urged the
 Government to adopt pending legislation prohibiting practices
 which violate ILO Convention 105 on forced labor.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 The law prohibits the employment of children under 14 years of
 age. In the formal sector of the economy, the law allows for
 the employment of older children in some jobs, for a limited
 period of time, and for a curtailed workweek at full pay.
 According to a 1987 Senate report, however, 1.1 million
 children 6 to 14 years of age work. Unofficial sources
 estimate that about half a million children work in the Lima
 area alone. A June 1989 survey of 133 working children by the
 Agrarian University in Lima showed that 78 percent of them
 were between 10 and 12 years old. Some 40 percent sold
 
 
 723
 PERU
 assorted merchandise as street vendors, and 53 percent went to
 school only occasionally or not at all. One-third worked 7
 days a week, and 57 percent of the total worked between 2 and
 5 days a week.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 Labor code provisions concerning conditions of work'are
 routinely ignored for the majority of the working population.
 The code provides for an 8-hour day and an official 48-hour
 week for men, and 45 for women. There are goveinment
 standards for health and safety by inddstry, but these are
 rarely enforced, either by the employer or the Government
 (which has no inspectors). Accidents are common, and there is
 usually no emphasis on prevention; once accidents occur,
 employers normally make compensation.
 All workers are entitled to 30 days' paid vacation. Those in
 the private sector have to work a minimum of 260 days
 (excluding 30 days' sick leave) or forfeit their vacation.
 The minimum wage is increased regularly by the Government, but
 it continues to lag inflation. Equal to about $40 per month
 on the parallel market, the minimum wage is not sufficient to
 provide a decent standard of living for a worker and family.
 However, many Peruvians are paid more than the minimum wage
 and many others supplement their income through multiple jobs
 and/or subsistence farming.
 
 
 724
