 PERU
 Peru has a freely elected democratic government, with an
 executive branch headed by a president, a bicameral
 legislature, and an independent judiciary. Full political
 freedom is provided for in law and is respected in practice.
 Political representation in Congress ranges from conservative
 to Marxist. Independent trade unions are active, and
 opposition groups have excellent access to the media. In
 April 1985, Alan Garcia of the American Popular Revolutionary
 Alliance (APRA) party was elected President. He took office
 in July, marking the first transfer of power in forty years
 between two democratic governments. The new president has
 vowed to redress social and economic inequities, and to
 respect human rights.
 Peru has a mixed economy with a large private sector, and
 private property is generally respected. Natural disasters
 and low commodity prices have seriously affected the economy
 in recent years, and per capita income has declined to about
 the 1965 level.
 In 1985, the Maoist terrorist group Sendero Luminoso
 repeatedly carried out attacks in Lima and rural areas,
 killing police, military, and civilians, and began to use car
 bombs. The terrorists sought unsuccessfully to disrupt the
 1985 electoral process.
 Beginning in 1983, some in the security forces responded to
 Sendero with violence of their own,-engaging in extrajudicial
 killings, disappearances, torture, and arbitrary detentions.
 Most of these violations occurred during 1983 and 1984 in the
 Ayacucho Emergency Zone where the declaration of a state of
 emergency delegated full civil and military authority to the
 armed forces. (Now applied in an area covering 19 provinces
 out of 126, the state of emergency suspends the rights of
 assembly and movement, lifts search warrant requirements, and
 allows indefinite detention of suspected criminals.) During
 1985, reports of such abuses by security forces dropped
 sharply, reflecting both the previous and the present
 Governments' desire to improve respect for human rights.
 However, government investigations revealed that on two
 occasions in August members of the security forces had killed
 a total of 76 persons in the Ayacucho area. President Garcia
 responded swiftly, relieving three top military commanders,
 and the Government brought charges against the alleged
 offenders. The President and military leaders reaffirmed
 their opposition to the use of illegal methods against
 terrorists. The President also formed a Peace Commission of
 private individuals to explore the possibility of dialogue
 with the terrorists and to review pardons for persons claiming
 to have been unjustly accused of terrorism.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 Political killing became a significant problem in Peru in the
 early 1980's, following the initiation of armed activities by
 the Maoist terrorist group Sendero Luminoso. Committed to the
 overthrow of Peru's democratic system, Sendero targeted the
 police and the military, local officials, and peasants,
 sometimes after submitting victims to torture or mock trials.
 
 
 664
 PERU
 Although the bulk of its attacks occurred in the remote
 mountain region of Ayacucho, Sendero also operated in other
 rural and urban areas, including Lima. During 1985, Sendero
 carried out several car bombings and a substantial number of
 machine gun attacks in the capital, often against police
 officers and military members. In late October, it attacked
 APRA party offices, killing four civilians, and assassinated a
 prison director, which served to confirm Sendero's intention
 to continue to engage in terrorism despite the change in
 administrations. All legitimate political groups in Peru,
 including the Marxist left, have condemned the brutal
 terrorism of Sendero Luminoso. Two other insurgent groups,
 the Tupac Amaru Revolutionary Movement (MRTA), an unrelated
 Castroite, urban-oriented group whose leaders reportedly have
 been tied to Cuba and Nicaragua, and its off-shoot the
 People's Revolutionary Command (CRP), were active in Peru in
 1985, causing disruption and damaging property, but apparently
 causing no fatalities.
 Beginning in January 1983, when the armed forces began to
 concentrate their counterterrorist effort in certain areas of
 the country, terrorist casualties mounted, but increasing
 numbers of innocent civilians died as well. Total deaths
 related to antiterrorist operations of the security forces are
 estimated by human rights groups as being in the thousands for
 1980-85, including about 200 military and police personnel.
 Precise information is lacking on the number of civilian
 victims and their identities (terrorist or non-terrorist) as
 well as the identity of their assailants (terrorists, security
 forces, or peasant self-defense forces). Until September 1985
 the Government did not issue communiques on clashes with
 terrorists in the emergency zones, and the threat of violence
 discouraged private observers from traveling in rural areas.
 Some allegations of government abuses appeared to be
 politically motivated, and the picture is further obscured by
 narcotics-related violence in the Tingo Maria area, as well as
 traditional peasant inter-communal conflicts, which may have
 increased in recent years. Nevertheless, Peruvian and foreign
 human rights groups believe that the security forces may have
 summarily executed a significant number of terrorists and
 suspected terrorists as it fought Sendero. Observers believe
 that the number of extrajudicial killings involving the
 security forces has declined significantly since early 1985,
 possibly in response to international and domestic pressure.
 However, foreign and domestic groups remained concerned about
 deaths caused by peasant self-defense forces. Membership in
 those forces was alleged to be involuntary in some cases.
 .In his July inaugural address, President Garcia rejected the
 use of illegal methods to fight terrorism. He reacted quickly
 when in September the media reported the discovery of seven
 bodies in an unmarked grave in Pucayacu (the scene of other
 mass graves discovered in 1984) and the deaths of as many as
 69 peasants in the village of Llocllapampa, in the Accomarca
 district. Both locations are in the Ayacucho Emergency Zone,
 under military control. The Government ordered the military
 to investigate and report within a week. These reports
 revealed that three military members and a driver were
 responsible for the killings of seven persons in August at
 Pucayacu, and that an Army sublieutenant and three other
 officers were responsible for the Accomarca massacre of some
 25 to 69 peasants. A separate investigation by the Senate
 Human Rights Commission supported these conclusions. In
 response, the President forced the resignation of the Head of
 the Armed Forces Joint Command and relieved of their command
 
 
 PERU
 two generals who had direct responsibility for the Ayacucho
 Emergency Zone. The President and senior military officials
 subsequently made numerous statements demanding an end to
 extrajudicial killings and announced a revision of
 counterterrorist strategy. The eight implicated individuals
 have been charged in both the military and the civilian court
 systems; the Supreme Court is to decide final jurisdiction.
 Local human rights groups applauded the Government's steps,
 but called for investigations into earlier cases of reported
 killings, and for assurances that alleged offenders would be
 tried in civilian courts.
 The deaths of 30 terrorists in October during a police search
 of Lurigancho Prison led to additional allegations of
 extrajudicial killings. However, the Government offered
 persuasive evidence that other prisoners had caused the fire
 that killed 26 of the 30 inmates who died, and that police had
 not abused their authority.
 In another case, the Chamber of Deputies Human Rights
 Commission confirmed the finding of a mass grave with 15
 bodies including 7 children in the town of Bellavista.
 According to campesinos, the killing took place on September 3
 -by military men. Reportedly there are other graves in the
 area still not dug up. Further, according to newspaper
 reports, other mass graves had been discovered in the town of
 Huacar containing bodies of people who had previously been
 arrested by security forces.
 As part of its antiterrorist campaign, the Government has made
 clear its desire to incorporate insurgents into democratic
 society, if they renounce violence. In September, the
 Government created a Peace Commission, composed of six private
 citizens, with a mandate to study dialogue with the terrorists
 and the possibility of amnesty. Sendero has rejected dialogue
 to date and the Commission had by the end of the year made
 little headway. Some commissioners complained they were not
 receiving sufficient government support. In October the
 Government announced that two groups comprised of over 150
 Sendero terrorists and peasant support members had turned
 themselves over to the authorities and had sought their
 protection.
 b. Disappearance
 Domestic and international human rights groups have expressed
 serious concern about disappearances allegedly carried out by
 the security forces. Working with local human rights groups,
 Amnesty International presented a list of about 1,100
 disappearance cases to the Government in early 1985. Local
 groups submitted about 500 of these cases with fuller
 documentation in June to the United Nations Human Rights
 Commission Working Group on Forced or Involuntary
 Disappearances. According to these groups, about 180
 additional disappearances occurred between January and August,
 a figure which reflected a significant decrease in the number
 of new reports of disappearance cases. The Belaunde
 Government admitted some excesses had occurred, but claimed
 that the number of disappearance cases was exaggerated and
 indicated that it would submit evidence to back these claims
 to the United Nations Human Rights Commission.
 Almost all of the disappearances are alleged to have been
 carried oUt by the military or the police, generally in the
 Ayacucho Emergency Zone. Peruvian human rights groups believe
 
 
 666
 PERU
 that victims frequently are detained in military
 installations. Although some individuals eventually are freed
 or legally detained, most remain unaccounted for. The fact
 that the seven persons killed by the security forces in
 Pucayacu had all been detained immediately prior to their
 deaths has been cited by human rights groups as evidence that
 disappearances continued to be a problem, notwithstanding the
 overall decline in alleged cases since the beginning of 1985.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 The Constitution prohibits torture and inhumane or humiliating
 treatment. Nevertheless, charges of security force brutality
 toward detainees and accused criminals have been commonplace
 since the military first took control of the emergency zone in
 December 1982. Although such accusations are frequently
 difficult to verify, a local prosecutor affirmed that the'
 bodies of the seven Pucayacu victims bore signs of torture.
 Survivors of the Accomarca killings claim that soldiers raped
 numerous female victims before killing them. A Senate
 Commission, however, was unable to prove this allegation.
 Local human rights groups and criminal lawyers generally
 concur privately that police frequently engage in abusive
 practices toward accused persons, such as beatings. Prison
 conditions in Peru are extremely poor, and detained persons
 are likely to encounter limited hygienic facilities, poor
 nutrition, ill-treatment by prison staff, and abuses by other
 prisoners who take advantage of lax prison supervision. The
 Garcia administration has expressed outrage over these
 conditions and has acknowledged the need to improve them,
 particularly conditions of dangerous and violent criminals
 (including terrorists) and female prisoners (whose minor
 children frequently live with them in prison). The Government
 has also initiated a major anti-corruption drive to end
 abusive practices, including the dismissal of 369 police
 officers.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 The Constitution requires that persons arrested be arraigned
 within 24 hours, except in cases of alleged drug trafficking,
 terrorism, or espionage, for which the limit is 15 days.
 Arraignment normally occurs in a timely manner. Arrested
 persons are entitled to have an attorney present when they
 make statements to the police. Public prosecutors (from the
 Public Ministry) customarily are also present during such
 statements, and they are supposed to ensure that statements
 are not made under threat or coercion. Human rights groups
 continue to express concern that these safeguards are not
 always respected by authorities in terrorism cases in areas
 under a state of emergency.
 Though not mentioned specifically in the Constitution, habeas
 corpus is a concept in Peruvian law supported by the
 Constitution and respected in practice. However, the state of
 emergency permits authorities to detain individuals
 indefinitely in those areas in which it is in effect. Local
 human rights groups claim that security forces in the Ayacucho
 Emergency Zone frequently detain citizens arbitrarily for
 brief periods, but the groups lack overall statistics on the
 number of such incidents. Although bail is available in most
 cases, in practice the Government successfully seeks to deny
 it to persons accused of terrorism.
 
 
 PERU
 The Constitution prohibits compulsory labor or unpaid personal
 service.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The Peruvian judiciary is an independent branch of
 government. Judicial appointments are for life; only Supreme
 Court justices require legislative approval. The legal system
 is based on the Napoleonic Code. Once criminal charges are
 filed, a judge determines whether probable cause exists. The
 next step is a judicial hearing process that may last up to
 five months, followed by a public trial. Sentences may be
 appealed, and courts may send cases back to lower courts for
 additional investigations. Although public defenders exist,
 their numbers are inadequate; most defendants must pay for
 legal counsel or depend upon pro bono lawyers, including some
 provided by Peru's human rights organizations. For security
 reasons, all terrorism trials are held in Lima; most persons
 accused of terrorism are held without bail in Lima prisons.
 The courts face severe backlogs, the product of the sharp
 increase in cases of alleged terrorism, inefficiency, and,
 according to some observers, influence peddling. According to
 the Government, 17,000 of Peru's 22,000 prisoners have not
 been sentenced and remain at some stage in the trial process.
 Local human rights groups have documented numerous cases of
 persons who have been detained, without bail, awaiting trial
 for periods up to four years. In September the Government
 dispatched 100 additional prosecutors to a Lima prison in
 order to reduce this backlog. Terrorists reportedly have
 threatened judges handling terrorism cases and in October took
 one hostage for eleven hours.
 Throughout 1985, Marxist opposition parties denounced the
 detention of between 150 and 300 alleged political prisoners.
 The opposition maintained that most of these persons had not
 committed violent crimes, but rather had been accused under
 the broad antiterrorism statute to punish them for carrying
 out legitimate political or labor union activity. Both the
 Belaunde and Garcia administrations have denied the existence
 of such political prisoners. In his July inaugural address,
 President Garcia recognized that some persons might have been
 arrested unjustly, and called upon the executive and judicial
 branches to address the problem. In September the President
 announced the formation of the Peace Commission, one of whose
 duties is to study individual cases and recommend presidential
 pardons where merited. Several dozen alleged political
 prisoners reportedly have been freed since July; about 150
 remain in jail.
 The Constitution requires that civilians be tried in civilian
 courts. A separate military court system exists for military
 offenders. There is wide disagreement over the conditions
 under which military members can be tried in the civilian
 court system.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The Constitution stipulates that police require a judicial
 warrant to enter a private dwelling, which is generally
 respected in practice. The requirement for a warrant is
 suspended in areas under a state of emergency, and security
 forces in those areas routinely conduct searches of private
 homes without a warrant.
 
 
 PERU
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 The Constitution guarantees freedom of speech and the press,
 and these rights are honored in practice. The media reflect
 viewpoints across the political spectrum and frequently
 criticize the Government. Neither the Belaunde nor the Garcia
 administration has sought to censor the media. In October the
 Government annulled the law of disrespect (Ley de Desacato)
 under which some journalists had been charged in previous
 years. Journalists are not required to belong to a
 professional association. In addition to the numerous
 privately owned media outlets, the Government owns two
 newspapers, two television and radio networks, and a news
 service.
 The declaration of a state of emergency does not affect
 freedom of speech and press. However, legal restrictions on
 travel, as well as the threat of terrorist violence, have
 restricted journalists' work in the emergency zones. Two
 journalists were killed during 1985, one by an unidentified
 assailant and one by a police officer; motives for both
 killings were unclear.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 These rights are expressly guaranteed in the Constitution and
 are normally respected in practice. Municipal authorities are
 usually forthcoming in approving permits for demonstrations.
 For the most part, the Government deals with even unauthorized
 demonstrations in a non-confrontational manner. The right to
 assembly is among those specifically suspended in those areas
 under a state of emergency.
 The Constitution guarantees private workers the right to
 organize, to bargain collectively, and to strike. Unions are
 required to engage in direct negotiation and to seek
 conciliation (at the Ministry of Labor) prior to any strike
 action. Public sector workers (except for the armed forces
 and high officials) have similar rights. In practice, all
 workers organize and strike freely.
 According to the Government, 17.5 percent of the work force is
 organized. Total membership in Communist and other far left
 unions is larger than that in democratically-oriented unions.
 Unions generally are not formally linked with political
 parties, but important national confederations are identified
 with particular political tendencies, ranging from the far
 left to the government party. Union leaders are consulted
 regularly by the government. Peruvian labor organizations
 affiliate freely with regional and international trade union
 organizations of all ideological tendencies. Peru is an
 active member of the International Labor Organization (ILO).
 The Committee on Freedom of Association of the ILO has
 criticized the Government for failing, despite numerous
 requests, to respond to charges that arrests and violent
 deaths occurred during a general strike in 1983.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 The Roman Catholic faith is overwhelmingly predominant in
 Peru, and the Constitution formally recognizes the Church's
 importance. The Constitution also establishes the
 
 
 669
 PERU
 independence of church and state and guarantees freedom of
 religion and conscience. These rights are respected fully in
 practice. Members of minority religions encounter no
 difficulty in practicing their faith or in exempting their
 children from religious instruction in public schools.
 Missionary organizations operate freely in the country with
 the cooperation of government ministries.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 The Constitution guarantees the right of free movement and
 prohibits the exile of citizens. There are no political or
 legal constraints on foreign travel or emigration. Freedom of
 movement is suspended in those areas governed by a state of
 emergency.
 Peru is a signatory of the 1967 United Nations Protocol on the
 Status of Refugees. Persons fleeing turmoil in other
 countries traditionally have been encouraged to return
 eventually to their country of origin, but have not been
 forced to do so. Involuntary repatriation occurs only in the
 cases of persons accused of nonpolitical crimes.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Peru is a democracy governed by a freely elected President and
 Congress. The political process is completely open and is
 vigorously contested by groups ranging from conservative to
 Marxist. Suffrage is universal for persons over 18 years old
 (except for members of the military). In April 1985 Peru had
 free and fair elections for a president, two vice-presidents,
 and 240 members of the two houses of Congress. In July the
 incumbent administration (whose Popular Action party was
 defeated in the elections) turned power over to the rival
 American Popular Revolutionary Alliance Party (APRA), marking
 the first transfer of power between democratically elected
 presidents in 40 years. The current president's party has a
 majority in the congress.
 Leadership of the various parties tends to be dominated by the
 urban elite, whose educational, financial, and communications
 resources give them advantages over rural-based elements.
 Indians and the small black community remain underrepresented
 at top levels of all governmental institutions and
 professional associations. The new Government has made it a
 top priority to increase the flow of resources and attention
 to the poor, largely Indian, rural areas.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 Amnesty International and Americas Watch expressed serious
 concern during 1985 about extrajudicial killings,
 disappearances, torture, and arbitrary detention in Peru. The
 Belaunde administration reluctantly admitted that unauthorized
 excesses had occurred in the course of the antiterrorism
 campaign in isolated cases but continued to dispute the
 veracity of complaints made by these groups, as well as by
 domestic human rights groups. The Government claimed that the
 vast majority of the 1,100 disappearance cases presented by
 Amnesty International involved persons who had been legally
 detained, or involved fictitious persons. The Government
 
 
 670
 PERU
 facilitated working visits to Peru by the United Nations Human
 Rights Commission's Working Group on Forced Disappearances in
 June, and by an international group in July that included
 Nobel Prize winner Adolfo Perez Esquivel.
 The new Garcia administration has welcomed investigations by
 domestic or foreign groups in human rights. A recent
 editorial in the government-owned daily La Cronica lauded
 Amnesty International and its 1985 World Report. The newly
 established Senate Human Rights Commission played a major role
 in the investigation of the Pucayacu and Accomarca killings.
 While voicing concern about the human rights situation, local
 human rights groups have reacted favorably to the new
 Government's approach and believe they have much better access
 to officials than before.
 A number of human rights groups exist in Peru. In January,
 1985, thirteen groups formed the National Coordinator of Human
 Rights. The three largest groups are the Association for
 Human Rights (APRODEH), formed in 1983; the Evangelical
 Commission for Social Action (CEAS), a Catholic church group;
 and the National Commission of Human Rights (CONADEH), formed
 in 1980. Lima is also the headquarters of the Regional Andean
 Commission of Jurists. In September the Government formed a
 Peace Commission composed of private citizens, including a
 member of the Catholic Church hierarchy. It was charged with
 seeking a dialogue with terrorists, with a view to
 reincorporating the latter into democratic society. It was
 also to have begun to study pardons for persons who are
 allegedly unjustly accused of terrorism.
 Although local groups remained concerned about the human
 rights situation, they acknowledged that the new Government
 had carried out unprecedented steps to assert its
 constitutionally mandated authority over the military and to
 address human rights violations.
 Freedom House rates Peru "free."
 ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND CULTURAL SITUATION
 Peru's population was estimated at 19.7 million in 1985,
 growing at an annual rate of 2.6 percent. Per capita gro was
 calculated at $1,040 in 1983, down from $1,254 in 1982.
 Composed of several distinct geographic regions, Peru is a
 classic case of differential development. Public investment
 traditionally has been focused on the coast, drawing migrants
 to the cities, especially Lima. The one-third of the
 population in the capital area accounts for two-thirds of
 gross domestic product (GDP). Many Indians live in Peru's
 poorest regions in the mountains. Development efforts have
 been impeded by the difficulty and cost of providing services
 to areas remote from the mainstream of the dominant
 hispanicized culture and the centers of economic activity. As
 a result of this dichotomy and of historical prejudices, the
 economic and social needs of Peruvians of European ancestry
 are more likely to be met than those of mixed or pure Indian
 heritage.
 Natural disasters and low commodity prices have had a negative
 impact on Peru's economy. The new Government has implemented
 a wage and price freeze and has promised an austerity budget,
 with important consequences for Peru's economic future. The
 Government has also promised that assistance to the distressed
 
 
 671
 PERU
 agricultural sector will be one of its top priorities. During
 the latter half of 1985, inflation dropped from an annualized
 rate of about 200 percent to between 43 and 51 percent. About
 60 percent of the labor force is either unemployed or
 underemployed. Foreign debt in 1985 reached $13.5 billion.
 Peru received an estimated $800 million annually in foreign
 assistance during 1983-1985. The new Government changed the
 previous policy of carrying out frequent mini-devaluations and
 has maintained a stable foreign exchange rate.
 Life expectancy at birth is 58 years, with an infant mortality
 rate of 96 per thousand. The literacy rate is 72 percent.
 Some 84 percent of children between the ages of 6 and 14 are
 enrolled in school. Fifty-one percent of the population have
 access to safe water and 70 percent have access to some type
 of health care. Figures for 1977 indicate that 49 percent of
 the urban population was below the absolute poverty level;
 although statistics on rural poverty are unavailable, the
 situation in those areas probably is worse.
 Peruvian law prohibits the employment of children under 14,
 but it allows the employment of older children who are
 literate. Although minimum-age legislation generally is
 enforced in all sectors of the official economic system,
 chronic social problems lead many destitute children to seek a
 living on the streets. The present administration has
 launched a campaign to protect these minors.
 Employers are required by law to pay workers the minimum
 wage. Ministry of Labor inspectors are charged with enforcing
 compliance with workplace safety and health regulations. Both
 public and private sector employees are covered under the
 state-run Social Security Institute health plan. Workers have
 benefited from an eight-hour workday since 1918, and the
 official work week is forty hours.
 Women represent 26 percent of the Peruvian labor force. In
 1984, 61.9 percent of the female workforce was employed in
 commerce and services, 16.6 percent in the industrial sector
 and the remaining 19.5 percent in other occupations (mainly as
 domestics). The average wage of male workers is double that
 of females. Women are well represented in government and
 professional occupations, although not as well in large
 businesses. There are three women in the 60-member Senate,
 and there are 10 women in the Chamber of Deputies (out of
 180). Several women's groups exist in Peru, but the scope of
 their activities is limited compared with that of human rights
 groups. The Constitution grants women equality with men, and
 laws on marriage and divorce do not discriminate against
 women. Nevertheless, tradition still tends to impede the
 access of women to leadership roles in major social and
 political institutions. A similar situation is faced by the
 rural indigenous population and by Peru's small black
 community. The former group traditionally has lacked access
 to public goods and services. The new Government has vowed to
 increase public resources to the rural poor.
 
 
 672
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: PERU
 1983     1984     1985
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL...         93.4    164.6     79.1
 LOANS ..............    ... 48.5    119.0     25.5
 GRANTS .............       44.9      45.6     53.6
 A.AID ....................    35.5     118.9     37.9
 LOANS ..............    ... 19.5    100.0      0.5
 GRANTS .............   ... 16.0      18.9     37.4
 (SEC.SUPPASSIST.)...         0.0      0.0       0.0
 B.FOOD FOR PEACE .......        55.9     42.9     38.8
 LOANS ..............    ... 29.0     19.0     25.0
 GRANTS .... . ........     26.9      23.9     13.8
 TITLE I-TOTAL ..........    . 29.0      19.0     25.0
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS .....        29.0     19.0     25.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR .....         0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE Il-TOTAL .........       26.9      23.9     13.8
 E.RELIEF.EC.DEV & WFPP        10.6       2.7      4.0
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY .....       16.3      21.2      9.8
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST..*          2.0      2.8      2.4
 LOANS .................    0.0       0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ...............      2.0      2.8      2.4
 PEACE CORPS ......        0.0      0.0       0.0
 NARCOTICS .........1.8              2.8      2.4
 OTHER ..............     0.2       0.0      0.0
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL...          4.6     10.7      8.7
 LOANS .................. o. ..4.0   10.0      8.0
 GRANTS ................    0.6       0.7      0.7
 A.NAP GRANTS ..........        0.0       0.0      0.0
 B.CREOIT FINANCING...           4.0     10.0      8.0
 C.INTL MIL.ED.TRNG ....        0.6       0.7      0.7
 O.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK...         0.0       0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS ........        0.0       0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. & NIL ..        98.0     175.3     87.8
 LOANS ..............    ... 52.5    129.0     33.5
 GRANTS .............   ... 45.5      46.3     54.3
 OTHER US LOANS ..........        26.3      0.3      0.0
 EX-IM BANK LOANS .......       26.3       0.0      0.0
 ALL OTHER .................     0.0      0.3      0.0
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1983     1984     1985     1946-85
 TOTAL ........   454.1    317.6      72.1   3302.1
 I8R0             302.2    122.5      31.0   1677.4
 IFC                8.0       9.2     16.8     90.1
 IDA                0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 IOB              142.3    184.8      24.3   1466.7
 ADB                0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 AFOD                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 UNOP               1.6      1.1       0.0     53.3
 OTHER-UN           0.0      0.0       0.0     14.6
 EEC                0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 
 
