Peru
Efforts to prosecute those responsible for gross human rights violations dating
from Peru’s armed conflict (1980-2000) have begun to show results, but
they still face formidable obstacles. These include a chronic shortage of funds
and resources, a lack of trained investigators, and a lack of cooperation by the
armed forces.
Military courts continue to investigate human rights violations committed by
military personnel during this period, even though the Constitutional Court
and the Supreme Court have ruled that they lack competence to do so.
Torture is an ongoing problem. Journalists face violence and harassment, particularly
in provincial cities. Human rights defenders are vulnerable to threats
and intimidation.
Confronting the Past
At the end of November 2005, former president Alberto Fujimori was in
detention in Santiago, Chile, awaiting possible extradition to Peru on charges
of corruption and human rights abuse. Arriving unexpectedly in the Chilean
capital by private jet from Japan on November 6, Fujimori cleared immigration
without difficulty despite an Interpol alert for his arrest. Chilean police
detained him early the following morning acting on a warrant issued by the
Peruvian Supreme Court. Apart from numerous accusations of corruption,
Fujimori faces charges for killings and “disappearances” in the early 1990s.
Before leaving Japan, where he had been in self-exile since 2000, Fujimori
had announced his intention to stand as a candidate in Peru’s April 2006
presidential elections.
The number of military and police personnel facing trial for human rights
abuses committed during Peru’s counterinsurgency campaign rose significantly
in 2005. As of October 2005, 383 former and still serving officers had
been charged in twenty-two cases, most of them having been forwarded to
the attorney general by the Truth and Reconciliation Commission in August
2003.
In August 2005, the trial began in open court of more than fifty members of
the “Colina Group,” a clandestine army death squad active during the government
of Alberto Fujimori (1990-2000). They are accused of numerous
killings and forced disappearances, including shooting dead fifteen unarmed
civilians at a fundraising barbecue in the Barrios Altos district of Lima on
November 3, 1991, and kidnapping and murdering nine students and a
teacher from the La Cantuta university on July 18, 1992.
Testimony showing that the squad acted under government orders is expected
from three former members who confessed in court to the charges. Two
of them were sentenced at the beginning of the trial.
There has also been progress in cases dating from the presidencies of
Fernando Belaúnde (1980-1985) and Alan García (1985-1990). The special
human rights prosecutor in Ayacucho, Cristina Olazábal, has filed charges in
at least twelve cases. In July 2005, Judge Miluska Cano of the Fourth Supra-
Provincial Criminal Court in Lima indicted 118 soldiers for first-degree
murder, extrajudicial execution, and forced disappearance in connection with
a massacre at Cayara in May 1988, in which thirty-nine civilians were killed.
These criminal investigations face serious obstacles, however. The attorney
general mandated two special prosecutors to devote themselves full-time to
human rights cases, but the government has provided no funds to train them,
adequately equip their offices, or cover their expenses. The armed forces
deny having information to identify those who served at counter-insurgency
bases implicated in abuses; military prosecutors continue to carry out parallel
investigations of their own apparently aimed at blocking civilian trials, and
the army and police consistently fail to carry out arrest orders. According to
the human rights ombudsman, courts have issued 252 warrants for the arrest
of military and police personnel for human rights violations (naming 277 soldiers,
sixty-four police officers, and fifteen marines). Yet only forty-three
arrest warrants have been put into effect.
The government has also failed to provide effective protection for witnesses
who testify in these cases. On two occasions in 2005 unidentified gunmen
shot at Luis Ramírez Hinostroso, a key witness in a torture trial which began in October in Huancayo. In a similar 2004 attack, Ramírez was hit in the
stomach by a bullet and had to undergo surgery.
Torture
Torture by police continues to be a problem, and judicial investigations in
such cases are slow and frequently superficial. Those responsible, if convicted
at all, usually receive light sentences and have to pay very small amounts in
compensation. The Human Rights Commission (Comisión de Derechos
Humanos, COMISEDH) a respected nongovernmental human rights group,
documented sixteen cases of torture from January through September 2005.
In four cases the victims died.
On a positive note, in January 2005 an Ayacucho court sentenced three soldiers
to six years in jail for the torture in July 2002 of a nineteen-year-old
military recruit. The recruit had been drugged and subjected to brutal sexual
abuse in the Domingo Ayarza army base in Ayacucho. The three perpetrators
were each ordered to pay the victim compensation of 6,000 soles (about U.S.
$1,800). A military judge, Maj. José Etel Espinoza, received a three-year suspended
sentence for covering up the crime. On appeal by the prosecutor, in
November the Supreme Court increased the sentences to ten years and eight
years, and boosted the compensation to 30,000 soles (about U.S. $9,000).
This was believed to be the stiffest sentence ever imposed for torture in Peru.
Attacks on Journalists
Journalists and radio commentators in Peru’s provinces are vulnerable to
physical attack, intimidation, and harassment for criticizing local authorities.
This pattern of abuse has been constant for many years and shows the precariousness
of respect for press freedom in Peru. The Inter-American Press
Association reported in March 2005 that violent attacks on journalists are on
the increase in Peru.
Pucallpa, a city in the coca-growing area of the Upper Huallaga valley, is a
dangerous place for radio journalists. On two occasions in February 2005,
armed men broke into the Radio Frecuencia Oriental radio station in Pucallpa, threatening journalist Paul Garay Ramírez with a gun on the first occasion,
and severely beating him on the second. Garay said that he had been reporting
on corruption in local government and in labor organizations. In
October, police arrested Luis Valdez Villacorta, the mayor of the province of
Coronel Portillo, after an alleged hit-man confessed that Valdez hired him to
murder journalist Alberto Rivera Fernández. A persistent critic of the provincial
government and close colleague of Garay, Rivera was shot dead in April
2004.
Human Rights Defenders
Peru has a diverse and vibrant range of nongovernmental human rights
groups that operate without governmental or legal restrictions. For years,
however, some have suffered anonymous attacks, threats, and harassment.
In September 2005, Salomón Lerner, former president of the Truth and
Reconciliation Commission, received death threats. While he was out of the
country, his secretary received a telephone call from an individual who told
her that Lerner should “consider himself dead.” Previously, Lerner had
received a series of insulting and anti-Semitic emails. Other commission
members received insulting messages accusing them of attacking the armed
forces. The threats coincided with efforts to discredit the commission following
the second anniversary of publication of its report on human rights violations
and abuses committed by both sides during Peru’s armed conflict
(1980-2000). Several critical articles appeared in the press signed by retired
soldiers implicated in abuses. The commissioners faced nine lawsuits from
senior retired officers who claimed that they had distorted the facts.
Also in September, COMISEDH, whose lawyers represent torture victims
and relatives of the “disappeared,” suffered two anonymous attacks. On
September 6, someone tied a dirty lock of human hair to the door of its
office in Ayacucho. A week later, unidentified armed individuals staged a nocturnal
raid on COMISEDH’s office in Lima, tampered with the alarm, and
disabled the phone and cable connections. Before they left the building they
fired shots to scare off a night-watchman. Nothing was stolen.
Prosecutors and forensic experts working on human rights cases have also
received threats. Cristina Olazábal, the special human rights prosecutor in
Ayacucho, received intimidating calls from anonymous callers on several
occasions while she was investigating extrajudicial executions at Accomarca
and the Los Cabitos military base in Ayacucho. In February and August
2005, three experts from the Medical Legal Institute (the forensic branch of
the public ministry) who were participating in the Los Cabitos investigation
received threatening text messages on their cell phones. Altogether, there
were forty-five incidents involving attacks, threats, and intimidation against
witnesses and relatives, judges, prosecutors, forensic staff, and human rights
activists from January through October 2005, according to the human rights
umbrella group National Human Rights Coordinating Group.
Peru’s minister of justice acknowledged that the government had failed to
provide adequate protection for participants in human rights trials. He promised
to coordinate with the minister of the interior to investigate the attacks
and increase the level of protection.
Key International Actors
The Inter-American Commission on Human Rights and the Inter-American
Court of Human Rights continue to consider Peruvian cases. In March 2005,
the Court ordered Peru to bring to justice those responsible for the extrajudicial
execution of labor leader Pedro Huilca Tecse, who was assassinated by
members of the Colina death squad in December 1992. Finally admitting
responsibility for his murder, the Peruvian government agreed to pay
U.S.$250,000 in compensation to his surviving relatives as well as undertake
various measures of symbolic reparation.
The United States and several European countries provided funds in past
years to support the work of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission.
Money for the prosecutorial effort that has followed the commission’s
report—for office equipment, computers, transportation, and the capital cost
of forensic equipment and laboratories—has come almost entirely from international
donors. In 2005, the European Union pledged 483,447 Euros
(U.S.$586,373) to assist prosecutors and forensic investigations.
By contrast, the United States decided to axe its program of support for judicial
reform initiatives. Overall aid to Peru was cut as a result of the Bush
administration’s policy of partially withholding assistance to countries that
refuse to sign a Bilateral Immunity Agreement to shield Americans from
prosecution by the International Criminal Court.