 PERU
 Peru is a republic with a dominant executive branch headed by President Alberto
 Fujimori. During 1993 Peru formally ended the constitutional crisis that began on
 April 6, 1992, when President Fujimori dissolved Congress and suspended the 1979
 Constitution. A new Constitution, drafted by a Constituent Congress elected in con-
 formity with a pledge made by President Fujimori to the Organization of American
 States (OAS), was approved in a nationwide referendum held in the presence of
 OAS observers on October 31. The new Constitution took effect on December 31; it
 accords more power to the executive than its predecessor but also provides for a
 more independent judiciary. The next elections for President and Congress are due
 in 1995.
 The legislative branch is a unicameral Constituent Congress with 80 members
 elected at large. President Fujimori's party, Cambio 90/Nueva Mayoria holds a 44-
 seat majority. Congress' authority to act as a check and balance on the executive
 branch, and especially the military, was weakened in April 1993.A provocative show
 of force and threats by army commander General Hermoza led the propovernment
 majority to close a congressional investigation into the July 1992 abductions of nine
 students and a professor from La Cantuta University in which the army and the
 National Intelligence Service were implicated. A civilian court has indicted 11 mili-
 tary personnel in the case, while a separate military court has indicted these 11 as
 well as 2 others. Eight officers were among those indicted, including one general of-
 ricer.
 In 1993 the executive branch also dominated the judicial system;hundreds of pro-
 visional judges and prosecutors appointed by President Fujimori in 1992 continued
 in their positions. Congress appointed an independent tribunal to review the 1992
 dismissals of several hundred judicial officials and to examine the qualifications of
 the President's appointees. By the end of 1993, the tribunal had approved about 70
 percent of his Supreme Court appointees, who continued in their positions. Most ter-
 rorism cases continue to be tried on treason charges in military courts, which lack
 most of the basic principles of due process. In November Congress enacted several
 reforms of the procedures for trying terrorism cases which addressed some, but far
 from all, of the due process problems of the courts.
 The police and the military share public security responsibilities. The military and
 the police both conducted counterterrorism activities in Lima; the military took the
 lead in provincial areas under a state of emergency. Emergency zone status contin-
 ued to provide for the suspension of certain constitutional guarantees. Currently 48
 percent of Peru's 22 million people live in such areas, including the 8 million resi-
 dents of Lima. Since 1990 the Peruvian authorities have gradually incorporated
 human rights concerns into their counterinsurgency strategy. Nonetheless, elements
 of the military and police continued to be responsible for serious but diminishing
 human rights abuses and, except in rare cases, continued to act with impunity.
 Peru's mixed economy combines free market capitalism with state ownership of
 some major industries. Minerals extraction and processing account for half of the
 foreign exchange earnings. The Government pursued a market-oriented economic
 stabilization and structural adjustment program, including privatization of state-
 owned firms, and the economy was slowly recovering from recession. However, the
 World Bank estimated that one half of Peruvians live in poverty, and half of those
 in extreme poverty.
 Significant reductions in political violence and in the volume of disappearances of
 suspected terrorists marked continued advances by government forces against the
 Sendero   Luminoso (Shining   Path) terrorist movement. Major problems in
 governmenthuman rights observance remained, however, particularly the lackof due
 process in terrorism trials, continued (albeit substantially fewer) executions and dis-
 
 
 530
 appearances, torture, and limited prosecution of government abuses. Impunity for
 those responsible for abuses continued to be a major concern.
 The chief sources of human rights violations remained Sender Luminoso and, to
 a lesser degree, government security forces. Sendero violations included assassina-
 tions of perceived opponents and the merely uncooperative, from government leaders
 and other officials to religious workers and peasants. Sender, lacking widespread
 popular support, used terror against civilians, regardless of their political allegiance.
 and selective assassination against grassroots leaders as an integral part of its
 strategy to create chaos and make the countr ungovernable. Peru's respected inde-
 pendent National Coordinating Committee or Human Rights (Coordinadora) re-
 ported that Sender was responsible for 516 assassinations of noncombatants in
 1993. Sender killed members of rural self-defens forces (rndas), carried out sev-
 eral massacres, including that of some 60 Ashaninka Indians and colonists on Au-
 gust 18, and continued using car bombs and other explosive devices to create terror
 and cause damage in urban areas.
 The military and the police continued to be responsible for numerous summary
 executions, disappearances, arbitrary detentions, torture, and rape, with a climate
 of impunity prevailing. Few abuses were fully investigated, and prosecution of secu-
 rity force members was rare. However, statistics from various sources, includingthe
 Coordinadora and the Public Ministry (an autonomous office of the Attorney Gen-
 eral), confirmed that the number of disappearances and extrajudicial executions at-
 tributable to security forces declined significantly in 1993 as compared to the pre-
 vious year. The Public Ministry reported that members of the security forces,
 rndas, and paramilitary groups connected to elements within the Government were
 believed responsible for 22 extrajudicial killings and as many as 57 disappearances
 through December. The Coordinadora, using different tracking methods, reported 31
 extritiudicial killings and 44 new disappearances attributed to such groups during
 the year.
 Many pople were arrested and convicted for terrorism without due process and
 without provisional liberty in cases in which evidence against them was lacking; po-
 lice or judicial errors kept innocent people in jail for lengthy periods. In some mili-
 tary trials, lack of due process and procedural errors led to defendants being given
 lengthy prison sentences under questionable circumstances. There were also credible
 reports that the Government used the legal system on several occasions to intimi-
 date political opponents and journalists. Violence against women remained perva-
 sive.
 There were positive developments during the year. The Government permitted
 visits by the Inter-American Commisssion on Human Rights and the U.N. Special
 Rapporteur for Extrajudicial, Summary, or Arbitrary Executions and in March lifted
 restrictions on the operations of the International Committee of the Red Crss
 (ICRC). The Government instituted human rights training for the military and a
 course in human dinity for the police. Police and military practices were altered,
 as reflected b  the  astically reduced numbers of disappearances and extrajudicial
 executions. However, government security forces continued to act with impunity.
 The Government also agreed for the first time to hold a regular dialog with the
 Coordinadora. While the dialog was not held on a regular basis nor were the meet-
 ings held in an open atmosphere early in the year, the process began to produce
 some concrete, though limited, results in late 1993.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.--Since 1980, Peru has suffered a
 bloody guerrilla war waged by the terrorist Sendero Luminoso and the Tupac
 Amaru Revolutionary Movement (MRTA). This war has caused 26,000 deaths and
 numerous human rights abuses by both sides.
 The Public Ministry reported that members of the security forces, rondas, and
 paramilitary groups were believed responsible for 22 extrajudicial killin s during
 the year. The Coordinadora estimated that military forces were responsie for 1
 extrajudicial killings, rndas were responsible for 11, and the police another 8.
 Sendere Luminoso was reported responsible for 516 political assassinations in 1993;
 the MRTA, 24; and unidentified subversives, 6. Another 38 persons were killed in
 terrorist bomb attacks perpetrated by Sendero. The number of killings committed
 by each side was probably underreported because of widespread distrust of the au-
 thorities and the judicial system. In addition, in 62 deaths the Coordinadora was
 unabltetoldce from available evidence whether the security forces or subversives
 were responsible.
 
 
 531
 The level of killings by government forces declined significantly from 1992 when
 Coordinadora estimated that 114 were killed. Most of the killings again took place
 in emergency zones where the level of conflict was highest. In February there were
 credible reports that a military patrol massacred eight villagers from the town of
 Agasmarca within an emergency zone. Credible human rights monitors reported
 that the army continued to be responsible for murders of university students ab-
 ducted in Huancayo. In September the body of student Carlos Lopez Granados was
 discovered in an irrigation ditch with bullet wounds and bearing signs of torture.
 His abduction followed the pattern of disappearances of three dozen other university
 students in 1992-93. In the north coast city of Trujillo in September, witnesses
 claimed police detained 17-year-old Jessica Chavez and her uncle Javier Cruz,
 while they were leaving a barbecue. Police brought their bodies to the morgue the
 next morning, claiming the two were terrorists killed in a police shoot-out. Jessica's
 mother claimed there were clear signs of torture on both corpses, which the autopsy
 report failed to mention.
 Rural self-defense committees, or rondas-armed and trained by the military-
 were also responsible for extrajudicial killings. Ronda members reportedly used
 bows and arrows, knives, and machetes to kill 10 residents of the jungle village of
 Delta-Pichanaki on September 11. Despite being identified by survivors of the mas-
 sacre, all but 4 of the 21 alleged perpetrators were released by local authorities after
 questioning.
 Most killings by security forces were neither investigated nor prosecuted. The
 military repeatedly used its court system, which tries all crimes committed by active
 duty personnel, to preempt civilian investigation and prosecution of cases involving
 military abuses. The most blatant case of military interference in an investigation
 of possible extrajudicial killings by the military occurred on April 20 when, after ap-
 pearing at a government hearing on the La Cantuta disappearances (see Section
 * b.), army commander General Nicolas Hermoza verbally attacked Congress and or-
 dered tanks into the streets as a show of force. As a result, Congress dropped its
 investigation in favor of one conducted by the military. The investigation into the
 November 1991 killing of 17 people in the Barrios Altos section of Lima was con-
 ducted briefly by civilian authorities and then closed due to lack of evidence.
 During 1993 there were credible, detailed accusations that the La Cantuta dis-
 appearances and the Barrios Altos killings had been committed by an army intel-
 ligence unit death squad. In May the third-ranking general of the Peruvian Army,
 Rodolfo Robles, pubhcly charged that the death squad existed with the full knowl-
 edge and consent of General Hermoza, under the direction of presidentia! intel-
 ligence advisor Vladimiro Montesinos, and maintained informal links to the Na-
 tional Intelligence Service (SIN). Senior government and army officials were alleged
 to have had knowledge of the unit's existence. The same army officials exercised au-
 thority over army judicial officers charged with investigating the allegations.
 In October President Fujimori announced that four army personnel had been ar-
 rested in the La Cantuta case. However, there were press reports that the four had
 been promised lenient treatment and large sums of money in return for not impli-
 cating higher ranking officers. The Supreme Council of Military Justice did not
 issue arrest warrants until mid-December, at which time, it claimed, five army offi-
 cers were detained. By January 1994, the Government announced that eight offi-
 cers, including General Juan Rivero Lazo, and five enlisted men had been indicted
 in connection with the case; the Government claimed that the officers were under
 detention. In December a civilian court judge also indicted 1I army personnel for
 the killings, but the army would not hand them over to civilian authorities. The Su-
 preme Court was to decide in January 1994 if jurisdiction in the case will be grant-
 ed to the civilian or the military court.
 There are only two confirmed cases in which army personnel were convicted for
 extrajudicial killings. Although the army stated there were convictions in four addi-
 tional cases, it was not possible to verify this as military court records remain under
 seal. In February army Lt. Javier Bendezu Vargas was convicted and sentenced to
 10 years in prison by a military court for directing the 1991 massacre of 14 villagers
 in Santa Barbara. Two subordinates were also convicted but received light sen-
 tences. Also in February, a military court convicted army Captain Telmo Hurtado
 for abuse of authority. for his role in leading a 1985 massacre of 69 villagers in
 Accomarca. He received a sentence of 6 years in prison and expulsion from the
 army, but there were credible reports that Hurtado was free and back on active
 duty in the army.
 Sendero continued to assassinate civilians, including peasants, farmers, villagers,
 indigenous people, civil authorities, and public servants. The number of people mur-
 dered by Sendero declined somewhat from 958 in 1992 to 516 in 1993. This decline
 does not appear to reflect any change in Sendero's tactics but is most likely due to
 
 
 the disorganization and reduced level of operations that followed the capture of
 Sendero founder Abimaesl Guzman and other top leaders in 1992.
 Sendero forces in the emergency zones stepped up attacks against those partici-
 pating in rondas. As part of its terror tactics, a Sendero Luminoso column mas-
 sacred almost 60 memrs of the Ashaninka tribe and colonists in the jungle prov-
 ince of Satipo, Junin department, on August 19. Many of the victims were members
 or supporters of rondas; others were women and children. The attackers killed their
 victims with machetes; they left dozens of others maimed and orphaned several
 hundred children. Between September 4 and 6, another Sendero column killed 25
 civilians-many of them ronda members-and two policemen in several towns in
 Huanuco department. While most of Sendero Luminoso's victims were civilians, 145
 were members of the security forces.
 b. Disappearance.-Disappearances began to decrease starting in 1991, and
 dropped more sharply after November 1992. The Coordinadora estimated that there
 were 2,957 unresolved disappearances between 1982 and 1992; the United Nations
 estimates 2,640 over the same time period. While some disappearances were inves-
 tigated, in general the military and police perpetrators acted with impunity. The
 number of cases of disappearances in 1993 was significantly lower than the previous
 year. The Public Ministry reported 57 new unresolved disappearances as of Decem-
 ber. The Coordinadora, using different tracking methods, reported 44 during that
 time. (In 1992, estimates of disappearances ranged from 145 to 280.) According to
 the Public Ministry the majority of its formal complaints about disappearances im-
 plicated members of the security forces in the emergency zones. Testimony from wit-
 nesses and survivors indicated that most victims were abducted by groups of plain-
 clothes men and taken to military bases for interrogation. Some were turned over
 to police and eventual terrorism trials, some were released, and some never
 eappeared.
 or instane, in Febroary 1993, armed masked men abducted two university stu-
 dents in Huancayo. Rony Guerra was thrown into a van and abducted in broad day-
 light; Milagros Flor Tupac was taken from her house in the middle of the night
 while her family looked on. The two students were among some 36 in Huancayo who
 have disappeared after being kidnaped in similar operations since July 1992. Twen-
 ty-two were found dead, with many bodies bearing signs of torture.
 In other cases, individuals have disappeared after-being formally detained by au-
 thorities. Alberto Leyva and Lucio Romero were arrestec on suspicion of terrorism
 by the navy in the village of Chio, Ucayali department, on January 15. The navy
 claimed they were released shortly thereafter; however, neither Leyva nor Romero
 ever returned to their homes after they were detained.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 Although the Constitution prohibits torture and inhuman or humiliating treatment,
 brutal treatment of detainees is common. Knowledgeable observers reported that
 suspected subversives held by government security forces were routinely tortured at
 military detention centers.
 Torture often takes place in the period immediately following detention. Police
 may hold a terrorism suspect incommunicado for 15 days, a period that can be ex-
 tended for another 15 days in cases of treason (aggravated terrorism). The law also
 requires that persons detained for terrorism be interrogated in the presence of a
 Public Ministry prosecutor. Violations of these standards are frequent, however, es-
 pecially in the emergency zones (which include Lima). The requirement that an at-
 torney be present during the initial stages of detention and interrogation in treason
 cases was eliminated by decree law in 1992. Lawyers are still expected to be present
 when the detainee signs any written document.
 A group of law students arrested in Lima in late 1992 and acquitted in late 1993
 made credible claims that they were subjected to beatings, sleep deprivation,
 threats, and taunting by police during 2 weeks while blindfolded and handcuffed.
 One of the students alleged he was taken to a beach in the middle of the night and
 thrown into the surf with his hands tied in an apparent effort to force a confession.
 In another case, 16-year-old Rafael Flores Vela claimed that, during detention in
 Tarapoto on suspicion of terrorism on September 13, police beat him with an iron
 bar for 5 hours during interrogation. The police spent the next 9 days, Flores
 charged, trying to heal his wounds with anti-inflammatory drugs. They then re-
 leased him without charges. Flores had to be hospitalized immediately thereafter
 because both his shoulders were broken. Authorities reportedly opened an investiga-
 tion of the implicated police officers.
 Besides beatings, common methods of physical torture included electric shocks,
 water torture, asphyxiation, and being hung on a hook from a rope attached to
 hands tied behind the back. Common orms of psychological torture included sleep
 deprivation, taunting, and death threats against both the detainee and his or her
 
 
 533
 family members. Prisoners were almost always blindfolded during torture and not
 permitted to see their interrogators.
 There continued to be credible reports of rape perpetrated by elements of the se-
 curity forces in the emergency zones. In one case, Maria de Ia Cruz Pari detained
 by police on terrorism charges, was taken to a beach at night and raped during the
 15-day interrogation period. When de ia Cruz discovered she was pregnant, police
 claimed that her cousin, also accused of terrorism, was responsible. However, highly
 credible sources corroborated de Ia Cruz's story, and the initiation of pregnancy co-
 incided with the period of her detention.
 In another incident, villagers of the jungle town of Aucayacu accused soldiers of
 breaking into nine different houses during the night of March 22, and raping the
 women and girls they found. A 16-year-old girl filed a written complaint with the
 local army commander, recounting how a soldier put a rag in her mouth to stop her
 from screaming during the rape. The girl reported that the commander "between
 d   hter, accused her of lying about the incident. Human rigbts groups
 continued to document cases of rape by the security forces; some reports indicate
 rape is used as an interrogation tool. There are no known cases in which a member
 of the security forces has been punished for rape.
 Many victims of Sender terrorism also showed signs of having been tortured.
 Torture of those victims often follows a brief "people's trial," normally held in the
 K resence of onlookers as a method of intimidation. There were credible accounts that
 endero tortured victims to death by means such as slitting throats, strangulation,
 stoning, and burning. Mutilation of the body is common. In the Ashaninka massacre
 in Satipo, Sendero cut off the ears and fingers of numerous victims.
 Prison conditions continued to be poor, despite physical improvements to some of
 Lima's prisons. Prisoners continued to be exposed to unsanitary facilities, poor nu-
 trition and health care, and harsh treatment by both prison staff and fellow in-
 mates. Picsi prison near Chiclayo, for example, which held twice the number of pris-
 oners for which it was designed, has no running water. The prison in Huancayo is
 prone to flooding, and electrical wires are exposed in various parts of the building.
 Detainees, kept in windowless cells, are not allowed outside at Lima's Palace of Jus-
 tice and are taken to the bathroom only once a day.
 Corruption continued to be rampant among prison staff, who have been implicated
 in offenses such as sexual blackmail, selling narcotics and weapons, and arranging
 escapes. Prisoners have to bribe guards to get a mattress, and guards routinely sub-
 ject inmates to beatings, torture, and degrading treatment. The Government an-
 nounced plans to construct 20 new prisons around the country to alleviate the se-
 vere overcrowding due to the high number of terrorism detainees. Construction
 began on maximum security facilities in Ica, Huaraz and Cajamarca; the Govern-
 ment also began the renovation of several prisons, inciuding the large Castro Castro
 facility for terrorism detainees in Lima. The Government claims that these major
 construction projects will significantly improve prison conditions.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exie.-The new Constitution, the Criminal
 Code, and antiterrorist legislation delineate the arrest and detention process. How-
 ever, most if not all protections are suspended in those areas under a state of emer-
 Iency. In the emergency zones, security forces do not need an arrest warrant, and
 etamees were often held incommunicado and denied access to an attorney during
 the interrogation period.
 In areas not subject to a state of emergency, a judicial warrant is required for
 arrest, unless a perpetrator is caught in the act. Persons arrested must be arraigned
 within 24 hours, except in cases of terrorism, drug trafficking, or espionage, for
 which the limit is 15 days. Suspected terrorists may be held incommunicado for an
 additional 15 days (for a total of 30) before arraignment under 1992 treason decrees.
 If the military is the detaining authority, it must turn over detainees to the police
 within 24 hours (or as soon as practicable in remote areas). In many cases this law
 was flagrantly disregarded by the military.
 Detainees (except in emergency zones) have the right to choose their own attor-
 ney, or the Government must provide counsel at no cost. This does not always occur
 in practice, and human rights sources report instances in which court clerks were
 deputized to stand in as public defenders. There is no functioning bail system; a
 form of provisional liberty is available for persons not accused of terrorism, espio-
 nage, or narcotics offenses.
 The Public Ministry established a provisional national registry of detainees in
 1992 to track cases of persons arrested for terrorism offenses, but at year's end the
 registry was not yet fully operational.
 Following an interruption of its access to prisons in September 1992, the ICRC
 resumed its operations in March 1993. ICRC representatives were permitted to visit
 detainees in any place of detention, including prisons, jails, police stations, and mili-
 
 
 534
 tary bases. In addition, the ICRC had access to the provisional national registry of
 detainees, the Defense Ministry's detainee registry, and police detention records.
 According to the official government newspaper, El Peruano, nearly 70 percent of
 the country's prison population consisted of detainees awaiting trial. The average
 delay between arrest and trial on criminal charges was between 26 and 36 months.
 However, those tried on treason charges by the military courts generally wait no
 longer than 40 days between the time of detention and the beginning of the trial.
 Persons accused of terrorism must remain in custody while awaiting trial, no mat-
 ter how little evidence there is against them. During this time, only immediate fam-
 ily members may visit them for a total of 15 minutes per month. Since the
 antiterrorism decrees tock effect in 1992, there were numerous instances of individ-
 uals arrested and detained for long periods of time with little or no evidence against
 them. Darnilda Pardave Trujillo was arrested in October 1992 when she tried to
 leave the country; she did not know there was an arrest warrant out for her. Al-
 though her late sister had been a high-ranking member of Sendero Luminoso, there
 was no evidence that Darnilda Parave ever belonged to the terrorist organization;
 police interrogation and a search of her house turned up nothing. Pardave was
 found innocent by the district attorney, a lower court judge, and the superior court
 prosecutor. Nevertheless, she was not released until October 29, over a year after
 she was first arrested.
 There were also numerous cases in which police or the military presented detain-
 ees to the media as terrorists, parading them around in striped jail clothes. Occa-
 sionally such detainees were acquitted because they were innocent or for lack of evi-
 dence; many charged that they had been stigmatized by these public displays.
 The 1993 Constitution does not explicitly prohibit forced involuntary exile, unlike
 the 1979 Constitution, which was basically in effect until December 31. Several pub-
 lic figures, however, went into voluntary exile to escape what they perceived to be
 political persecution.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The Peruvian legal system is based generally on
 the Napoleonic Code. Defendants have the right to be present at the trial, although
 there were cases of trials in absentia. Verdicts are rendered by a judge or in the
 case of appeals, a panel of judges, following an investigation, and the Aling of
 charges. Sentences may be appealed, and judges may return cases to lower courts
 for additional investigation or correction of procedural errors. The judicial branch
 has never been fully independent, but the 1993 Constitution contains a number of
 provisions, including an improved system of naming judges, that might lead to a
 more independent judiciary in the future. Nonetheless, some 70 percent of the in-
 cumbent judges and prosecutors were appointed provisionally by President Fujimori
 after he seized extraconstitutional powers in 1992 and were never confirmed by
 Congress. Congress appointed an independent tribunal to review the 1992 dismis-
 sals of several hundred judicial officials and to examine the qualifications of Presi-
 dent Fuj'imori's appointees. By December its review was complete only at the Su-
 preme Court level, resulting in the dismissal of 30 percent of the President's ap-
 pointments. Nonetheless, the executive branch continued to play a major role in nu-
 merous aspects of the judicial system.
 There continued to be widespread charges of corruption and of suborning of
 judges, prosecutors, police, and witnesses at all stages of the judicial process, includ-
 ing the Supreme Court level. The high cost of litigation also limited access to the
 judicial system, as did the lack of public judicial services in many isolated areas of
 the country.
 Civilian courts made limited progress in tackling the judicial nacklog, a product
 of inefficiency, lack of infrastructure and personnel, archaic case law and criminal
 procedure law, and the sharp increase in terrorism cases. According to El Peruano,
 there were 12,268 detainees awaiting trial throughout the country on September 30.
 According to the Secretary General of the judicial branch, the case backlog in the
 Supreme Court alone (including cases held in the Public Ministry for Supreme
 Court review) was 8,506; the case backlog for the entire judicial branch was esti-
 mated at over 100,000.
 Sendero and MRTA threats and intimidation of judges were one of the justifica-
 tions for President Fujimori's overhaul of the antiterrorism trial system in 1992.
 Terrorism cases are now tried by anonymous tribunals made up of three "faceless"
 judges. An August 1992 decree law classified many terrorism cases as treason and
 therefore triable by military courts; the lesser cases are heard by civilian tribunals.
 Counterterrorism police, with some participation by the prosecutor, decide which
 cases are tried in military courts and which are tried in civilian courts. According
 to various human rights observers, approximately 75 percent of terrorism trials in
 military courts resulted in convictions. Treason convictions generally carry a sen-
 tence of life imprisonment. While the 1993 Constitution would permit imposition of
 
 
 535
 the death penalty, President Fujimori has stated that the Government will refrain
 from enacting implementing legislation for this provision.
 Proceedings in military courts did not meet internationally accepted standards for
 due process. Military trials are closed to the public and carried out in secrecy. De-
 fense attorneys do not have access to the evidence, nor can they interview police
 or military witnesses prior to the trial. Military judges rarely have any legal back-
 ground; they are active duty officers subordinate to their superiors. Military tribu-
 nals must pass judgment within 10 days. A case may be appealed to the War Coun-
 cil, which has 10 days to make its decision. A final appeal to the Supreme Council
 of Military Justice must be acted on within 5 days. These trials are secret and brief,
 with rules that inhibit the actions of defense attorneys; combined with a system in
 which the military makes arrests, prosecutes, and passes judgment, they clearly
 lack important elements of due process. Human rights groups charge that some de-
 fendants have been railroaded through military trials and sentenced before their
 lawyers were even notified that the trial had begun. These flaws have become even
 more significant because now those convicted of treason can be sentenced to death.
 In September the Government hosted a visit by an international panel of distin-
 guished jurists. The jurists studied the Peruvian legal and judicial system to deter-
 mine whether or not there was adequate due process, particularly in terrorism
 trials. In December the panel returned to Peru to present its findings and
 recomendations.
 Congress passed a law in November that modified several aspects of previous
 antiterrorism legislation. The right to habeas corpus, previously annulled for sus-
 pected terrorists, was restored at various stages of criminal proceedings, and a 1992
 aw was modified to permit judges to free persons arrested for terrorism whose judi-
 cial investigation (the first stage of criminal proceedings) turns up no evidence. The
 new laws also permit the high military court to review cases of military convictions
 of civilians if there is evidence of procedural error. Decree laws promulgated in 1992
 that permitted convictions in absentia and prohibited lawyers from defending more
 than one person at a time for terrorism were canceled.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Constitution requires security forces to have a judicial warrant to enter a private
 dwelling, but this requirement is suspended in the emergency zones, and security
 forces in those areas routinely conduct searches of private homes without warrants.
 The law requires that a Public Ministry prosecutor be present during searches.
 There were credible reports that on occasion, police planted subversive literature in
 the homes of individuals they suspected of terrorism but could not otherwise arrest
 for lack of proof. There were frequent credible reports of illegal telephone wiretaps.
 In Lima and other urban areas, the army often conducted "sweep" operations in
 which targeted neighborhoods were surrounded and sealed off and soldiers con-
 ducted house-to-house searches. Persons wanted for a crime and those found with
 unregistered weapons, subversive material, or without identity documents were de-
 tained for questioning.
 A number of rural communities-with arms, training and encouragement from
 the army-have organized self-defense forcesor rondas, to protect themselves
 against terrorist and bandit incursions. They have had a noticeable impact on curb-
 ing Sendero's presence in certain areas of the country. In some parts of Peru, rondas
 have existed for centuries as a form of social organization and to protect commu-
 nities from invaders and rustlers. However, many of the newer rondas were orga-
 nized under the direction of military authorities, with peasants sometimes coerced
 into participating. Sendero also forced peasants to join its military ranks, often for
 extended periods, coercing their participation in terrorist attacks and executions.
 g. Use of Excessive Force and Violations of Humanitarian Law in Internal Con-
 flicts.-Sendero Luminoso is the principal violator of humanitarian law in Peru's in-
 ternal conflict. Sendero frequently used arbitrary violence against civilians and non-
 military targets. It continued to detonate powerful bombs in public places, indis-
 criminately killing and injuring dozens of bystanders, and persisted in its practice
 of entering villages andkilling residents. Many of the victims, as in the August
 massacre in Satipo, were unarmed women and children. In armed confrontations,
 Sendero rarely took prisoners or attended to the wounded; its normal aim was to
 kill as many people as possible. Sendero also practiced forced military conscription
 of both adults and children.
 Although the Government stated that its security forces did not have a policy of
 carrying out actions against civilian targets, noncombatants were the victims of
 eaudicial killings (see Section L.a.). The army also forced peasants to participate
 in rndas. Military conscription of children is prohibited, and this prohibition was
 respected by government forces.
 
 
 536
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The new Constitution provides for freedom of
 speech and freedom of the press, and the Government generally respects this provi-
 sion. However, it contains a legal mechanism called "habeas data" which rants any
 citizen the right to demand access to information he or she considers slanderous.
 Some journalists see this as a potential tool to censor or harass the press, especially
 in view of past instances of intimidation of the press through arrests, lawsuits, and
 other forms of harassment.
 The media regularly criticize the Government. With 8 televisionstations, 3 cable
 systems, 72 radio stations, and 15 daily newspapers in Lima alone, Peruvians have
 access to a broad spectrum of information and opinion. The Government owns one
 television network, one radio network, and one daily newspaper. Most of the politi-
 cal parties or factions have access to the press. The television stations, although
 generally prgovernment, provide regular access to opposition figures. The print
 media are defined by extremes; almost all major newspapers and magazines are ei-
 ther strongly for or against the government.
 On several occasions governmnt officials made intimidating statements regarding
 press freedom. In January President Fujimori announced that the Nationl Intel-
 ligence Service would evaluate news reports for errors and "correct" misinformation.
 The Interior Minister accused journalists writing critical stories about human rights
 abuses of being "allies of terrorists" and implied they could face legal action. Army
 Commander General Hermoza threatened to take action over stones reporting his
 alleged link to the La Cantuta case of disappeared university students. In January
 two retired army generals were indicted by a military court for defamation when,
 in press interviews, they questioned the roles of General Hermoza and the Presi-
 dent's intelligence adviser Vladimiro Montesinos. One of the retired generals, Luis
 Cisneros, was eventually cleared of the charges, but the other, Alberto Arciniega,
 sought refuge at the Argentine Embassy and shortly thereafter was granted politicIl
 asylum in Argentina. The editors of two opposition magazines were subjects of sepa-
 rate civil defamation suits intended to halt their unflattering coverage of govern-
 ment officials, which the officials considered libelous.
 Other journalists have been imprisoned under Peru's antiterrorist laws, most no-
 tably La Republics reporter Magno Sosa, arrested in October 1992. Though the evi-
 dence against him was thoroughly discredited, he remained in jail for nearly 5
 months. Sosa was freed in February, but at least 10 other journalists faced criminal
 charges over their alleged links to terrorist organizations. Several others have re-
 ceived death threats. While terrorists and drug traffickers were sometimes believed
 to be the source, opposition journalists say government security forces were also in-
 volved.
 The Government distributed its substantial advertising outlays as a form of politi-
 cal patronage. Some media owners claim the Government pressured private sector
 advertisers to boycott antigovernment publications and used tax inspectors to har-
 ass the media. Many media owners are involved in other economic activities that
 require government licensing or involve bidding on government contracts. This re-
 sulted in a degree of self-censorship, particularly in the broadcast media.
 Human rights groups and the media also documented credible reports that the
 Government tried to silence debate on the new Constitution before the October 31
 referendum, particularly in the emergency zones. There were reports that dozens of
 persons were arrested for promoting opposition to the new Constitution. All were
 eventually released, but human rights groups concluded that the Government used
 the security forces to harass people who vocally opposed the new Constitution (see
 Section 3).
 Opposition media access to government information was restricted. Government
 press offices refused to send news releases and other information to some magazines
 or to allow them access to government transportation when the President visited re-
 mote parts of Peru or other countries.
 The Government generally respected academic freedom as long as it did not in-
 volve direct confrontation with security practices. Sendero and, to a lesser extent,
 MRTA, resorted extensively to threats and abuse against faculty, staff, and students
 in an effort to gain control of a number of universities. However, since the military
 took control of campus security at several universities in 1991 and 1992, the terror-
 ist groups have maintained a lower profile. The Government does not interfere in
 the teaching, discussion, or publication of a variety of opinions; however, all forms
 of indoctrination by subversive groups are prohibited.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-These rights are expressly pro-
 vided for in both the 1979 and the 1993 Constitutions and are normally respected
 in practice, except in areas under a state of emergency (where the right of assembly
 is suspended). Public meetings in plazas or streets require advance permission,
 
 
 537
 which may be denied only for reasons of public safety or health. Municipal authori.
 ties usually apprved permits for demonstrations in Lma and nonemergency zones.
 Many unauthorized public meetings occurred, and the police occasionally used clubs,
 tear gas, and water cannons to break up marches or disperse large or unruly
 crowds. These tactics were mostly used against striking public service workers.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-Both the 1979 and the 1993 Constitutions provide for
 freedom of religion, and this provision is respected in practice. Roman Catholicism
 predominates in Peru, and the Constitution formally recognizes that church "as an
 important element in the historical cultural, and moral development of the nation."
 The Constitution also establishes tie separation of church and state. Conversion to
 other religions is respected, and missionaries are allowed to enter the country and
 proselytize. Adherence to a particular faith does not necessarily confer an advantage
 in secular life.
 Sendero Luminoso rejects religion and, in 1993, continued to threaten and intimi-
 date religious workers and organizations. Among Sendero's activities in this regard
 were direct death threats against priests and other religious workers, acts of vandal-
 ism, and destruction of church property. This included the use of some small bombs
 at Mormon churches in Cuzco in February.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emiration, and Re-
 patration.-The 1979 and the 1993 Constitutions provide for the right of free move-
 ment and there are no political or legal constraints on foreign travel or emigration.
 Freedom of movement is suspended in the emergency zones but is generally per-
 mitted under control of the army. Nonetheless, travelers may be detained in the
 emergency zones by authorities at any time.
 The 1993 Constitution prohibits the revocation of citizenship. Repatriates (both
 voluntary and involuntary) are not treated any differently from other Peruvians.
 Peru has provisions for granting asylum and refugee status; the procedures have
 been used by small groups of persons in recent years, principally Cubans. Persons
 granted asylum or refugee status may apply for citizenship. Refugees are not forced
 to return to countries in which they fear persecution.
 On many occasions, Sendero tried to interrupt free movement within the country,
 conducting "armed strikes" during which civilians were obliged to stay home or risk
 reprisals. Public and private vehicles operating during such strikes were subject to
 attack. Sendero's armed strikes were less successful in 1993 than they were in pre-
 vious years.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 During 1993 Peru returned to constitutional government. After President
 Fujimon dissolved Congress and suspended portions of the 1979 Constitution on
 April 5, 1992, a Constituent Congress was elected in November 1992 to draft a new
 Constitution. This Constitution was approved in an October 31 referendum by 52
 percent of the voters. Organization of American States (OAS)observers issued a
 press release after the election describing the balloting as fair. Nevertheless, the
 OAS observers noted police harassment of opposition campaign workers. Human
 rights groups and the media also documented credible reports that the Government
 tried to silence debate on the Constitution before the referendum, particularly in the
 emergency zones. Dozens of people were arrested for promoting opposition to the
 document, but all were eventually released.
 The Constitution provides for the right of citizens to choose and change the laws
 and officials that govern them. Voting is mandatory by secret ballot for all Peru-
 vians between the ages of 18 and 70. Prisoners and members of the armed forces
 and police are ineligible to vote. Only groups that advocate violent overthrow of the
 Government are barred from participating in the political process. Opposition
 grups representing a wide variety of opinion and ideology were tolerated by the
 Fujimori administration. However, the April show of force by the army in response
 to Congress's efforts to investigate the La Cantuta case was a major step backward
 in the military's post-1980 respect for, and acceptance of, civilian rule.
 Countrywide municipal elections were held in January. A wide variety of political
 party and independent candidates representing the entire political spectrum ran for
 office. An OAS observer mission, as well as independent domestic monitors, con-
 cluded that these elections were conducted freely and fairly, with significant popular
 participation.
 The next elections are scheduled for 1995. Under the new Constitution (unlike the
 former), President Fujimori may seek reelection.
 There are no laws that restrict women and minorities from participating in gov-
 ernment and politics; both women and minorities (including indigenous people), for
 example, are represented in the Congress and some senior leadership positions (e.g.,
 
 
 538
 Attorney General and Supreme Court justice). President Fujimori is from a racial
 minority. However, discrimination has often led to the exclusion of these groups
 from leadership positions in government and business.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Numerous nongovernmental organizations (NGO's) dedicated to monitoring and
 advancing human rights operated freely and independently, although they were
 often the targets of persecution and harassment. The military often restricted the
 ability of local human rights workers to investigate human rights abuses; the Gov-
 ernment usually ignored human ights groups' requests for information; and many
 human rights monitors could not visit some key prisons. Legitimate fears of attack
 by Sendero also limited the ability of human rights monitors to investigate reported
 cases of abuse.
 Some groups are closely identified with the Government. The vast majority of
 NGO's, however, are independent and generally objective in their views. Several
 local private human rights groups joined in 1985 to form an umbrella organization
 known as the National Coordinating Committee for Human Rights, or the
 Coordinadora. Over 40 groups from around the country are either voting or observer
 members of the Coordinadora. These groups are widely considered to be credible,
 thorough, and impartial observers.
 Lcal groups repeatedly denounced Sendero Luminoso as the largest violator of
 human rights in Peru, while simultaneously documenting the many violations by
 government forces. Nevertheless, President Fujimori, other government officials,
 and the progovernment press often unfairly accused human rights groups of being
 defenders of terrorism and of criticizing only government abuses, not those of
 Sendero. Strong documentary evidence proves that Coordinadora members have
 been balanced in their denunciations of abuses by both sides.
 Government forces continued to harass or detain local human rights leaders
 throughout the year. A human rights leader in Ayaviri Puno department, was de-
 tained at a toll booth in May on charges of "being the human rights secretary and
 participating in suspicious meetings with teachers." The individual, who had sur-
 vived two Sendero Luminoso attempts on her life, was released shortly thereafter
 for lack of evidence.
 Father Jose Manuel Miranda, a Spanish Catholic priest and member of the
 Coordinadora's board of directors, was listed in a report by the Interior Ministry as
 "the Sendero Luminoso coordinator in Ica." Police reportedly tried to implicate Fa-
 ther Miranda in subversive activities in Ica, where he regularly visits prisoners in
 his capacity as both priest and human rights activist. The Spanish Embassy pro-
 tested the Government's treatment of Father Miranda, and the Coordinadora re-
 quested that the Government and the police specify what evidence or charges they
 had against Miranda. There was no reply by year's end.
 President Fujimori announced in March that he would ask the Congress to draft
 legislation to regulate NGO's, "including human rights organizations." The next day,
 a government-party Congressman declared that such legislation was necessary be-
 cause NGO's "lacked supervision." The Congressman questioned the sources of fund-
 ing for groups that he claimed attacked Peru's image. All NGO's in Peru are pres-
 ently registered with the Government and submit an annual report on funding and
 staffing. New legislation on NGO's was not introduced in 1993.
 In response to a request from human rights groups, the Government established
 a commission chaired by Justice Minister Vega, to conduct a monthly dialog with
 the Coordinadora. However, after the first meeting in April, the Government failed
 to convene the meetings on a regular basis, and downgraded its participation to
 midlevel representatives. The dialog with midlevel representatives has met more
 regularly; while it produced few concrete results, the Government agreed in Novem-
 ber to review speciic detention cases raised in the meetings. Some individuals have
 been released from prison as a result.
 Several foreign NGO's sent representatives to Peru to investigate the human
 rights situation. The Washington Office on Latin America, Americas Watch, and
 Amnesty International visited Peru. However, the Government turned down Ameri-
 cas Watch's requests to visit prisons and officials refused to meet with them. In con-
 trast, the Government offered full cooperation to a delegation of the Inter-American
 Commission on Human Rights that visited Peru in May. The delegation met with
 a wide array of human rights leaders, government officials, opposition politicians,
 and individuals wishing to discuss specific cases. Members of the delegation also vis-
 ited several prisons.
 Another positive development was the Government's decision to invite the United
 Nations Special Rapporteur for Extrajudicial, Summary, or Arbitrary Executions,
 
 
 539
 Dr. Bacre Waly Ndiaye, who visited Peru in May. The Government facilitated access
 for the Special Rapporteur, who declared he was pleased with the Government's co-
 operation. The Special Rapporteur also met with a wide variety of people both in
 and out of the government and traveled to investigate specific cases.
 After the Government limited access to prisons for the ICRC in late 1992 the
 ICRC suspended its operations. They were resumed in March 1993 with unhindered
 access under a new agreement with the Government. The ICRC has not reported
 any attempts to restrict its operations since that time.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The 1993 Constitution guarantees equal rights to all citizens and specifically pro-
 hibits discrimination based on ethnic origin, race, gender, language, religion opin-
 ion, or economic condition. Nevertheless, discrimination based on sexual preference
 is pervasive. According to Peru's only gay rights group, the Homosexual Movement
 of Lima, gays and lesbians are often the target of harassment by police, and hate
 crimes against them are rarely investigated.
 Women.-The Constitution grants women equality with men, and laws on mar-
 riage, divorce, and property rights do not discriminate against women. Nevertheless,
 tradition often impedes access by women to leadership roles in major social, busi-
 ness, and political institutions.
 Sexual violence, including spousal abuse, is a chronic problem.A survey by a wom-
 en's rights group in San Martin department indicated that 94 percent of adult
 women there had been battered. The Association for the Promotion and Develop-
 ment of Women also asserted that there were on average 35 rapes per month in
 that department. According to the Judicial Committee of the Peruvian Congress,
 there were over 10,000 official complaints of mistreatment of wonen in Arequipa,
 Peru's second-largest city, during the first 7 months of the year.
 A special police center, staffed by policewomen, operates in Lima to provide legal,
 medical, and psychiatric assistance to abused spouses and children. Police in Lima
 receive numerous formal complaints of rape daily but estimate that less than 10
 percent are reported. Reports indicate that approximately half of all rapes are per-
 petrated against minors.
 A number of women's organizations and feminist groups were active and worked
 to devise legal and educational means to improve treatment of women in Peru.
 Children.-The Government's ability to address children's human rights and wel-
 fare is generally inadequate. President Fujimori has on numerous occasions empha-
 sized the need to improve education at all levels. However, public schools remain
 severely underfinded, and millions of children suffer from malnutrition and live in
 extreme poverty. In addition, minors can be tried as adults for terrorism offenses
 (see below).
 A large percentage of children are born out of wedlock; many of the fathers fail
 to support the children or their mothers. In addition, orphans have become common
 throughout Peru, due in large part to the guerrilla war. It is not unusual for indi-
 gent parents to give up their children, either through adoption or by sending them
 away as house servants. In L'ma alone, there are thous.nds of homeless, orphaned,
 or abandoned children. As a result of these problems and Peru's economic crisis,
 many children are forced to work in the informal economy to support themselves
 (see Section 6.d.). As noted above, reports indicate that approximately half of all
 rapes in Peru are perpetrated against minors.
 Decree law 25564, issued by President Fujimori in June 1992, provides for minors
 aged from 15 to 18 to be tried as adults for terrorism offenses. Several dozen minors
 are awaiting trial or serving time in various Peruvian prisons. In October 1993, the
 Children's Rights Committee of the United Nations reported that Peruvian minors
 accused of terrorism "do not benefit from the safeguards or guarantees normally of-
 fered by the juvenile administration of justice system."
 Indigenous People.-The 1993 Constitution prohibits discrimination based on race
 and guarantees the right of all citizens to speak their native language. However,
 since the Spanish conquest, Peru's large indigenous population has faced pervasive
 discrimination and social prejudice.
 In general, indigenous people are unable to participate in decisions affecting their
 lands, cultures, traditions, and the allocation of natural resources. These decisions
 are made by the central Government in Lima. Colonists, coca cultivators, guerrillas
 and business interests steadily encroach on native lands. The civil an dpoliticai
 rights of indigenous people are generally protected to the same extent as the rights
 of other Peruvians. However, many indigenous groups live in isolated areas, which
 affects the Government's ability to offer them services, security, and enforcement
 and protection of civil and political rights.
 
 
 540
 The largest indigenous groups are speakers of Quechua and Aymara (recognized
 as official anguages), but there are several dozen other native language groups. In-
 digenous people lack access to public services and support in their native 1ands.
 Government investment is focused largely on the coast, drawing impoverished mi-
 grants to the cities, especially Lima. Groups native to Peru's jungle region find it
 more difficult each year to cope with the influx of colonists, terrorists, narcotics traf-
 fickers, and businesses seeking to exploit natural resources. These groups struggle
 to maintain their land, environment, native languages and culture. Malnutrition
 and disease are rampant among many of these tribes.
 National/Racial /Ethnic Minorities.-Peru's population includes several small ra-
 cial minorities, the largest of whom are blacks of African descent and Asians.
 Blacks, who tend to be concentrated along the coast in particular face pervasive dis-
 crimination and social prejudice, and are among the poorest groups in Peru. This
 discrimination tends to exclude blacks from leadership roles in government, mili-
 tary, and business institutions. The few blacks who have been relatively successful
 financially have done so in the sports and entertainment fields.
 People with Disabilities.-Although the 1993 Constitution states that disabled
 persons "have the right to respect of their dignity and to a regime of protection, at-
 tention, readaptation, and security,* the Government spends relatively little on as-
 sisting the handicapped or preventing discrimination against them. There is little
 public infrastructure with facilities for people with disabilities, such as wheelchair
 ramps on streets or in buildings, and no law mandating provision of access for them.
 Disabled persons face discrimination when seeking employment; Lima's streets are
 often the scene of both physically and mentally handicapped people seeking alms.
 The government-owned television station is the only one that broadcasts a news pro-
 gram with a sig language interpreter each evening. The number of disabled per-
 sons increased  amatically as a result of injuries during the guerrilla war.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-Only 5 percent of the total work force is estimated
 to belong to organized labor unions. (Up to two-thirds of Peruvian workers are lo-
 cated in the informal sector of the economy.) Workers do not need prior authoriza-
 tion to form a trade union nor, by law, can employment be conditioned on union
 membership or nonmembership. Existing unions represent a cross-section of politi-
 cal opinion. Though some unions have been traditionally associated with political
 groups, unions are prohibited by law from engaging in explicitly political, religious,
 or profit-making activities. There are no restrictions on memberships in inter-
 national bodies.
 One of the express intents of the Fujimori administration in drafting the country's
 new Constitution was to remove Socialst and populist elements from the 1979 Con-
 stitution. The new Constitution eliminates the concept of "labor stability" and gives
 business owners more flexibility in hiring practices. It provides that the State recog-
 nizes the rights to organize a trade union, engage in collective negotiations, and
 strike. These rights are to be exercised democratically, however, and the right to
 strike must take account of broader social interests. In a November report, the
 International Labor Organization (ILO) Committee on Freedom of Association (CFA)
 indicated that a number of Fujimori administration decree laws could restrict the
 right of association. These provisions set minimum numbers of employees to form
 an occupational union, require that candidates for union office in an enterprise have
 worked at least 1 year in the company, and contain prohibitions on all political ac-
 tivities, on probationary workers joining unions, and on membership in more than
 one union.
 Employees exercising management or decisionmaking authority are excluded from
 the right to organize or strike, as are the police and military. A strike must be ap-
 proved by a majority of all concerned workers in a company, whether union mem-.
 hers or not, in a secret ballot. A new vote must be taken upon petitionof 20 percent
 or more of the workers. The relative infrequency of strikes in 1993 reflected the
 country's economic depression and an underemployment rate which exceeds 70 per-
 cent. Pew workers were willing to strike when there were dozens of unemployed
 available for each job in the formal sector of the economy. Reprisals against striking
 workers were reportedly infrequent.
 Union members and officials continued to be targets of terrorist assassination and
 intimidation attempts. The Peruvian labor movement and its leaders have been gen-
 erally hostile to terrorist groups and fought their infiltration into the labor move-
 ment. Union officials suspected of terrorist links have been detained by the Govern-
 ment. The ILO's CFA continued to request a judicial inquiry into the deaths of
 teachers following their arrest by the army in 1991, but was satisfied that the ter-
 rorist perpetrators of the murder of labor confederation general secretary Pedro
 
 
 541
 Huilca had been convicted. The CFA noted that it lacked the means to second guess
 the Government's report that Juan Andahua Vergara, another union leader said to
 have been murdered in 1992, died of natural causes. There were no allegations of
 union leaders or members being killed by government forces in 1993 because of
 their union affiliation.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectiuely.-The 1993 Constitution recog-
 nizes the right of public and private workers to organize and bargain collectively.
 However, these rights must be exercised in harmony with broader social interests.
 Labor regulations promulgated prior to the ratification of the new Constitution pro-
 vide that workers may form unions based upon profession, employment, industry,
 or geographic location. Probationary, apprentice, or management employees are ex-
 cluded from union membership. A minimum of 20 members are required to form a
 union within a company and up to a minimum of 100 members is required for larger
 union groups. The amount of paid leave that union officials may devote to union
 business on company time is limited to 30 days per year.
 The Government set up a system of conciliation and arbitration to resolve dis-
 putes in collective bargaining impasses. Union officials have complained that their
 proportionate share of the cost of arbitration exceeds their resources. Some union
 officials believe that increasing numbers of companies utilize a policy of hiring work-
 ers on temporary  personal services contracts to prevent union affiliation. However,
 employers deny the accusation of antiunion bias and assert that labor stability pro-
 visions of the law have made long-term commitments to workers too expensive.
 Employees cannot legally be dismissed for union affiliation or union activities.
 Special regulations permitting greater flexibility in application of the Labor Code in
 export and duty free zones provide for use of temporary labor as needed, flexibility
 in abor contracts, and a wage system based u pon supply and demand.
 New collective agreements must remain in force at least one year but parties can
 agree to a longer period for all or a portion of that contract. Agreements automati-
 cally lapse upon expiry unless the parties expressly agree otherwise. The parties
 have the option to make any part or any clause of the agement "permanent." If
 an agreement is permanent, renegotiation is not required. A prerequisite for the
 conclusion of a collective agreement at the industry or trade level is a majority in
 terms of both the numbers of workers and enterprises.
 Companies may propose changes of work schedules, working conditions, and
 wages in collective bargaining agreements based on "extraordinary" circumstances
 (not statutorily defined but case law demonstrates that this is limited to economic
 circumstances in which the continuity of the company's activity is at grave risk). As
 part of the law however companies must follow certain procedures before making
 any such modifications. Prior to submitting a petition to the Ministry of Labor, an
 employer must first negotiate directly with the union and attempt to find alter-
 native measures. The employer must set forth in writing the extraordinary cir-
 cumstances proposed modifications, and causes for justification. If these negotia-
 tions fail, the employer may request the Ministry to rule whether the cause of the
 proposed modification is extraordinary and present evidence to support the claim.
 Workers have the right to disagree with the employer's claims and present any evi-
 dence they wish.
 Prior to accepting a petition the Ministry of Labor can refer the case to concilia-
 tion. Then the Ministry makes a determination on whether extraordinary cir-
 cumstances exist; if this determination is negative, the parties are directed to con-
 tinue negotiation. In the event of a positive decision, workers have the statutory
 right to appeal to the Ministry and,  necessary, the judiciary. The Government re-
 ports that since the implementing regulation was enacted in March, there were no
 modifications to collective agrements based on economic necessity.
 In November the ILO's CFA stated that many provisions of the Fujimori adminis-
 tration's Decree Law No. 25593 dealing with labor were not in conformity with
 international norms on the right to organize and bargain collectively and rec-
 ommended their modification. The 1WO expressed conern about the Government's
 ower to cancel union registration administratively, the 1-year minimum validity of
 abr agreements, the automatic lapsing (unless negotiated as permanent) of all
 prior negotiated salary and work rule provisions of collective agreements, the exces-
 sively broad definition of essential public services, permitting nonmembers to par-
 ticipate in union strike votes, and the Government's power to suspend strikes under
 certain circumstances.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-Forced or compulsory labor is pro-
 hibited, as is imprisonment for debt. However, there were periodic reports of the
 practice of forced labor in remote mountainous Andean and Amazonian jungle re-
 gions of the country. In response to one complaint filed with the ILO, the Govern-
 ment acknowledged the existence of such practices but blamed them on a lack of
 
 
 542
 
 collaboration by local authorities and employers, and a shortage of resources to en-
 force existing regulations.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-Education through primary school
 is compulsory and free. Workers from 16 to 21 years of age are subject to special
 provisions in the labor law. Their apprenticeship cannot exceed 18 months; and they
 must be paid at least the minimum wage, should be accorded specialized training,
 and can comprise no more than 15 percent of a company's work force. Due to the
 country's economic conditions, an estimated 90 percent of school-ae children work,
 most in the informal economy without government supervision of wages or condi-
 tions, in order to help support their families. There have been reports of children
 working in remote gold mining .perations as well as in the informal segment of the
 textile industry, but little informationis available on the extent of these practices.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The 1993 Constitution provides that workers
 should receive a "just and sufficient" wage to be determined by the Government in
 consulation with labor and business representatives and "adequate protection
 against arbitrary dismissal." The Constitution also provides for a 48-hour workweek,
 a weekly day of rest, and yearly vacation. Discrimination in the workplace is prohib-
 ited. The minimum wage (applicable only in the formal sector of the economy) is
 fixed by the Government in consultation with labor and business representatives.
 The minimum wage, which has not been raised since February 1992, was $34 per
 month, which is generally considered grossly inadequate to support a worker and
 family.
 While occupational health and safety standards exist, the Government lacks the
 resources to monitor compliance. With underemployment rates above 70 percent in
 the informal unorganized sectors of the economy, what one worker might consider
 a dangerous situation many others would willingly accept for sake of employment.
 Compensation for industrial accidents generally is worked out individually between
 the worker and owners. Reforms eliminating the need to prove culpability to obtain
 workman's compensation for injuries were too new for their effectiveness to be de-
 termined by year's end.
