 PERU
 Twelve years of military government in Peru ended on July 28,
 1980, when President Fernando Belaunde was inaugurated
 following'national elections in May, and a new constitution,
 the product of an elected 1979 Constituent Assembly, came into
 effect. The traditional form of government prescribed by the
 Constitution - a democratic republic, with an executive branch,
 bicameral legislature, and autonomous judicial system - quickly
 took hold. An independent Public Ministry, headed by the
 Attorney General, plays an ombudsman role, while a Tribunal of
 Guarantees provides constitutional interpretation.
 The fiscally conservative Belaunde Government is pursuing a
 market-oriented development policy, committed .to opening the
 economy, including lowering trade and foreign investment
 barriers. The current world recession makes its goal of
 :equitable economic growth difficult.
 An increase took place in 1982 in the relatively recent problem
 of political terrorism by a fanatical Maoist group, "Sendero
 Luminoso," which originated in the highlands department of
 Ayacucho. In response to terrorist violence, the Government
 declared intermittent, limited states of emergency entailing
 the suspension of certain specific constitutional guarantees in
 several provinces in and adjacent to Ayacucho, as well as a
 two-month state of emergency in Lima's.metropolitan area.
 The Peruvian Government is proud of its record of commitment to
 civil and political rights under the current constitutional
 system and charges the terrorists with violating the rights of
 their victims. In turn, there have been instances where the
 police, in reacting to terrorist actions, were responsible for
 human rights violations. These seem to have been cases of
 excesses by individuals,,.however, rather than the result of
 -government policy. The greatest continuing problem in
 respecting individual rights remains the glacially slow
 judicial'-system and overcrowded prisons, although in both areas
 there was progress in 1982.
 While specific areas of-potential concern in the area of press
 freedom are cited below, their effect to date on the
 independence of this vital institution has been relatively
 minor. The press is free to criticize all institutions in
 Peru, and does so.
 The most important development in 1982 was the continuing
 consolidation of democratic institutions. However, the
 challenge of terrorism is a serious one that worsened in 1982.
 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Killing
 -Terrorist violence intensified in Peru during 1982. Those
 killed-included police (36 in the first eleven months) and
 selected civilian targets (reportedly 50), as well as an
 estimated 28 terrorists, most of whom were killed in armed
 confrontation.
 Authoritative statements about the motivation of Sendero
 Luminoso - the radical Maoist offshoot of the Peruvian
 Communist Party which currently is the only serious terrorist
 group in the country - are scarce. Its victims are usually
 police killed in action, local authorities, local businessmen,
 and alleged informers, sometimes executed after the terrorists
 hold a "people's trial."
 
 
 612
 A wide variety of sources concur that, in ordinary
 circumstances, police forces do not violate clearly established
 guidelines on the use of deadly force. But in one serious 1982
 exception, there were charges that enraged police killed three
 hospitalized terrorist suspects in the immediate aftermath of a
 Sendero Luminoso raid and jailbreak in Ayacucho during which
 two policemen were killed. Judicial proceedings against the
 police suspected of the hospital killings are in process.
 The Government has punished police who exceed their authority.
 In confrontations with hostile crowds, police occasionally
 resort to firearms when attacked. The most significant
 incident was in March 1982 at Tarapoto, when police removing a
 highway roadblock were set upon by hostile farmers.  Five
 farmers were killed and 15 wounded, while 22 police were
 injured.
 b. Disappearance
 Disappearances are not a problem in Peru. The Latin American
 Federation of Families of the Disappeared chose Lima as the
 cite of their third conference, held in November 1982,
 precisely because of Peru's good record on this score. The one
 allegation of a disappearance in 1982 is being investigated by
 the Government.
 c. Torture
 The Constitution specifically declares confessions obtained by
 "illicit coercion, threat, or violence" invalid, and makes the
 use of violence for this purpose a criminal offense. Instances
 of physical and psychological abuse do occur, most commonly in
 the initial stages of detention, but are not condoned by the
 Government. An important check against such practices is the
 routinely followed requirement that an official of the
 independent Public Ministry be present during the initial
 stages of arrest.
 Nevertheless, charges against some police officers for a case
 of police torture in 1981 are still being processed. In its
 1982 report the Washington Office on Latin America alleged that
 there have been cases of torture, mostly involving persons
 accused under the anti-terrorism law.
 d. Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment
 Physical punishment is not administered as a sentence for
 crimes. Prison conditions, however, remain cruelly degrading,
 due in large measure to overcrowded conditions and
 deteriorating physical plant, legacies of the years of neglect
 in prison construction during the military government.
 Although budget stringencies impede rapid improvement, the
 contract for a new prison was let in 1982 with the aid of a
 loan from Spain. Allegations of mistreatment and even beatings
 by prison guards are frequent but difficult to verify. Such
 mistreatment is categorically forbidden by government
 authorities, but charges of abuse by individual guards
 persist.
 The prison situation is exacerbated by the cumbersome Peruvian
 judicial system and the complex trial process. Many accused
 persons, especially those charged with drug trafficking and
 terrorism, for which  there is no bail, spend months or years
 in prison before a determination of guilt or innocence is
 formally established. The Ministry of Justice, reestablished
 after being abolished during the period of the military
 government, is seeking to reform and improve the judicial
 system.
 
 
 613
 Following the March 1982 terrorist raid and jailbreak in
 Ayacucho, the Ministry of Justice systematically relocated
 suspected terrorists to El Fronton, a renovated island prison
 near Lima, as a security measure. As of December 1982, some
 400 prisoners were held on the island. Cases against all of
 those, as well as some 150 more, were going forward on charges
 of terrorism.
 e. Arbitrary Arrest and Imprisonment
 The Constitution requires that an arrestee be arraigned within
 24 hours for all crimes except drug trafficking, terrorism, or
 espionage' for which the limit is 15 days. Administrative
 difficulties sometimes preclude the 24-hour deadline from being
 met, but arraignment occurs in a timely manner. The 15-day
 limit is almost invariably respected.
 Terrorist violence led the Government to decree limited states
 of emergency in the Ayacucho area at various times during 1982
 ,and in the Lima metropolitan area from August through October.
 One constitutional right suspended was the 24-hour detention
 *rulei but there is no indication that police are abusing this
 .suspension. Similarly, police in affected areas are authorized
 ,to detain suspects without a court order, but the requirement
 for a Public Ministry official's presence remains in effect,
 #and detainees are either quickly.released or promptly
 arraigned.
 Habeas corpus is guaranteed by the Constitution. The
 newly-constituted Tribunal of Constitutional Guarantees will be
 the final appeals court for habeas corpus petitions.
 f. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The Peruvian judiciary is independent of the executive in both
 law and practice. The National Council of the Magistracy,
 under the Attorney General, selects nominees for judicial
 vacancies. Appointments are for life. Only Supreme Court
 justices require legislative confirmation. Charges of lower
 court malfeasance are investigated by the Supreme Court, while
 the National Council of the Magistracy investigates any
 complaints against the Supreme Court itself, and turns them
 over to the Attorney General if there are grounds for charges.
 The Supreme Court itself has responsibility for final action.
 All civil crimes are tried in civilian courts. Arrestees are
 entitled to have an attorney present when they make statements
 to the police. Public prosecutors are charged with assuring
 that defendants have legal representation. There are no public
 defenders below the Superior Court level, however, and indigent
 arrestees must rely on volunteers from the bar association, if
 available. :The Constitution presumes innocence, and guarantees
 a trial review system. The first is a closed judicial
 investigation by a, magistrate, while the second is a public
 trial in Superior Court for those found guilty at the lower
 level. The.Supreme Court hears final appeals.
 All these guarantees are respected. However, legal deadlines
 on judicial investigative trial proceedures are often not met
 due to a staggering.case backlog. Time limits are not imposed
 on the Superior Court, which may send a case back for further
 investigation as many times as it wishes.
 g. Invasion of the Home
 A judicial warrant is required to enter a private residence,
 the inviolability of which is constitutionally guaranteed.
 This guarantee is suspended in those areas where a state of
 
 
 614
 emergency is in effect, and police in some cases have invaded
 homes in other areas without warrent as part of their counter-
 terrorist efforts. In the Ayacucho area, Sendero Luminoso
 terrorists have broken into private residences, usually to kill
 the occupants.
 The Government has rejected claims from the far left that
 wiretapping, which allegedly occurred under the military
 Government, is still being practiced.
 2. Respect for Civil and Political Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 These rights are guaranteed by the Constitution. Publications
 of all political persuasions freely express their viewpoints,
 including harsh criticisms of government policies and
 officials. In 1982, the Government completed the
 indemnification to owners of those newspapers which had been
 confiscated by the preceding military Government.
 A 1981 law provides for a penalty of up to one year in prison
 for defamation of public figures. Proceedings against a small
 number of journalists are in progress. As part of the ongoing
 judicial process, one journalist spent 18 days under
 provisional detention. Meanwhile, however, his publication
 continued to headline the same allegation about a
 government-party congressman which had opened the case.
 In September, Congress passed legislation establishing a
 journalists' association (Colegio de Periodistas). This was
 widely welcomed by Peruvian journalists, since it accords them
 a professional status comparable to that of lawyers, doctors,
 and economists, and provides for a system of health and life
 insurance for its members. The association is funded by
 advertising earnings from the media. Some journalists,
 however, oppose the measure as potentially restricting the
 media's constitutional right to access.  They are also
 concerned about sanctions for violating vaguely-expressed
 standards of conduct which raise the possiblity that
 journalists who fall out of favor with a future government
 might be prevented from exercising their profession.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 These rights are guaranteed in the Constitution and are
 normally respected. The Government is forthcoming in granting
 permits for demonstrations, and, despite occasional incidents,
 for the most part deals with unauthorized demonstrations in a
 non-confrontational manner.
 The right to assembly is among those specifically suspended in
 those areas under a state of emergency, although this
 suspension was not stringently enforced in the Lima
 metropolitan area.
 The Constitution guarantees private sector workers the right to
 unionize, bargain collectively, and strike. Public sector
 workers (except for armed forces, judges, and high officials)
 have similar rights, although there are some restrictions. In
 practice, employees organize and strike freely.
 Legislation to regulate the right to strike is still under
 consideration in Congress. At the request of Peruvian trade
 unions, a committee of the International Labor Organization
 examined a version of the bill passed by the Senate in 1981.
 It dismissed some union complaints about the bill, but found
 others of sufficient merit to recommend modification of the
 legislation.
 
 
 615
 About 10 percent of the work force is unionized. The trade
 union movement is vigorous but divided, with total membership
 in communist and other far left unions somewhat larger than
 that of democratically-oriented unions. No significant part of
 the labor movement is tied to the Government. There is no
 Government persecution of unions or professional groups.
 Peruvian labor organization affiliate freely with regional and
 international trade union organizations of all ideological
 tendencies.
 Union leaders are frequently consulted by the President, the
 Prime Minister, and the Minister of Labor, as well as by
 congressional committees. The transitional Tripartite
 Commission became a formal National Labor Council in 1982. It
 provides an important means to enhance and formalize labor and
 employer participation in social and economic policy-making.
 The Communist confederation declined to participate, but
 continues to enjoy easy access to the Government.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 The Roman Catholic faith is overwhelmingly predominant in Peru,
 but the Constitution, while formally recognizing the Church's
 importance and promising official "collaboration," specifically
 establishes autonomy and independence of church and state.
 Freedom of religion and conscience is guaranteed, and other
 faiths are freely practiced. There are no reports of religious
 persecution or discrimination, nor any correlation between
 social or economic status and religious faith.
 d. Freedom of Movement within the Country, Foreign Travel,
 Emigration, and Repatriation.
 The Constitution guarantees the right of free movement. There
 are no political or legal constraints on foreign travel or
 emigration, nor are Peruvian citizens expelled for political
 reasons. Although freedom of movement is theoretically
 restricted in the areas under a state of emergency, in
 practice, movement in those areas is almost completely
 unimpeded.
 The special incentives law to encourage the return of Peruvians
 residing abroad expired during 1982. Nonetheless, the
 Government continues to stress its hope that Peruvians who
 established residence abroad for political reasons will
 return.
 Traditionally Peru is willing to receive limited numbers of
 refugees for both transit and resettlement, and Peruvian
 embassies are traditionally generous in granting asylum. The
 shock of 10,000 asylum-seeking Cubans arriving in the Peruvian
 Embassy in Havana in April 1980, and the difficulty of
 assimilating 742 of them in Peru, reduced enthusiasm for such
 an open policy. Peruvian policy continues to refuse to force
 refugees to return to the countries from which they fled; there
 were no instances of this in 1982.
 e. Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 Peru is a democratic country governed by a freely elected
 president and congress. The Constitution mandates universal
 suffrage for all Peruvians 18 years of age and older. The
 political process is completely open and vigorously contested
 by a broad variety of political groups.
 The Government has a working majority in both houses of
 Congress, but the legislature demonstrated its independence of
 
 15-480 0 - 83 - 40
 
 
 616
 the executive in several instances in 1982. An elaborate
 system of checks and balances appears to be functioning well.
 National elections, last held in May 1980, are scheduled for
 1985. A president must wait out one term after his term in
 office before being eligible to run for the presidency again.
 Municipal elections, held in November 1980, are scheduled for
 November 1983. These are conducted by the independent National
 Jury of Elections. Implementation of more autonomous
 mechanisms of government at the intermediate (departmental)
 level, in accordance with the Constitution, is proceeding
 slowly.
 The Constitution guarantees, inter ala, participation in the
 political process regardless of race or sex. There are 14
 women in the 240-member Congress, and the highest position held
 by a woman in the executive branch is vice-Minister.
 3. Government Attitude Regarding International and
 Non-governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations of
 Human Rights
 Peru is completely open to such investigation, as exemplified
 by its acceptance of the jurisdiction of the Inter-American
 Court of Human Rights. In 1982, Peru provided the Court with
 its first case, by requesting an opinion on the Court's writ.
 Local human rights groups exist throughout the country, and
 international organizations such as Amnesty International and
 the Catholic Bishops' Social Action Commission freely
 investigate allegations of violations. The President and other
 government leaders have criticized human rights groups which
 criticize them.
 There are several institutional human rights safeguards. The
 Human Rights Commissions in the two houses of Congress which
 have members from opposition as well as government parties
 consider individual allegations. They are also examining the
 human rights implications:of numerous decree-laws issued by the
 military Government.
 The independent Public Ministry, in addition to its direct role
 in ensuring proper treatment of. those arrested, receives
 complaints from all citizens against-all three branches of
 government, investigates them, and takes action as necessary.
 It received approximately 2,000 such complaints in the year
 beginning in September 1981. The role of the National Council
 of the Magistracy is described above.
 The Tribunal of-Constitutional Guarantees should begin to
 function soon. lmplementing legistation was approved by
 Congress in 1982, and members were.appointed by the executive,
 judicial, and legislative branches. In addition to its habeas
 corpus role, the Tribunal will be the ultimate arbiter on the
 constitutionality of laws.
 Human-rights organizations investigate and operate in Peru
 without hindrance, freely ventilate their findings and
 allegations in the media, and, if appropriate, lodge criminal
 charges with the Public Ministry. There is no indication that
 investigators put themselves at risk in pursuing their
 investigations.
 4. Economic, Social, and Cultural Situation
 Property rights are protected, although the civil code
 continues to deny women the equality in this area which the
 Constitution prescribes. In practice, the economic and social
 needs of Peruvians of European ancestry are more likely to be
 met than those of Peruvians of mixed or pure Indian heritage, a
 situation dating back to the colonial period. The military
 
 
 617,
 Government made significant efforts to rectify this situation.
 Equitable economic development is second only to the
 consolidation of democratic institutions on the Belaunde
 Government's list of priorities.
 The cornerstone of the economic program of the Belaunde
 Government remains the redirection of the economy from the
 military's unsuccessful system of state planning to a
 market-oriented system which encourages private (including
 foreign) investment. Job creation and increased real incomes -
 particularly among the poor - are among the highest priorities
 of the administration, but performance in 1982 fell short, due
 largely to depressed world economic conditions.
 Peru's 1980 per capita gross domestic product was $930.
 Median per capita income in mid-1982 was estimated at $640 for
 metropolitan Lima, and $600 in other major cities. Median
 rural income is lower. The country continues to be
 characterized by levels of poverty higher than the average for
 Latin America. According to a 1980 World Bank sponsored study
 (based on 1971-72 data), 28 percent of the Peruvian population
 lived below the absolute poverty level. This study also
 indicated that 53.4 percent of the population in the rural
 Sierra were below the absolute poverty level. These figures
 are only "best estimates." All indications are that the
 percentage of Peruvians below the absolute poverty level is
 higher now than it was in 1971-72.
 Unemployment and underemployment continue to be in the 50
 percent range. Other indicators are: a high level of
 malnutrition; an infant mortality rate estimated at 87.7 for
 every 1,000 live births (1980); 1980 life expectancy at birth
 of 59; and a low percentage of the population with access to
 safe water (47 percent in 1975 for the entire country, 78
 percent in rural areas).
 The country's population growth rate changed only slightly in
 the last 20,years:  it was 2.8 percent in 1960-70, 2.6 percent
 in 1970-79 and 2.7 percent in 1981. The population in 1981
 was estimated at 18.4 million.
 Progress continues in basic education, as evidenced by
 construction in and staffing of new primary school facilities.
 In 1972, the last year for which reliable figures are
 available, the adult literacy rate was 73 percent. Of the
 illiterate population, 72 percent reside in rural areas (70
 percent are women). The adjusted primary school enrollment
 ratio in 1978 was 112 percent (116 percent for males, 106
 percent for females).
 Peru, composed of three completely distinct geographic regions,
 is a classic case of differential development.  Residents of
 the undeveloped mountain region migrate en masse to the coast,
 especially to Lima, which is unable to provide essential
 services to its burgeoning population. Nevertheless, living
 conditions on the whole are better in the coastal areas than in
 the highlands.
 The impact of the Belaunde Government's economic reform effort
 will be felt over the medium to long term. The plight of the
 poor, however, will not change drastically in the short term.
 The removal of costly subsidies on a number of basic goods -
 including gasoline - is one example. As in prior years,
 expansion of health, education, and other social services will
 be limited by budgetary constraints despite the Government's
 commitment to expand them. Low world commodity prices have
 adversely affected the country's export earnings.
 
 
 618
 Inflation, and the policies necessary to contain it, will also
 limit short-term improvement in real wages for blue collar and
 white collar workers. Real wages for both groups declined
 dramatically after 1973, rose slightly in 1980, and are now
 holding at 65 to 75 percent of 1973 levels.
 
 
 619
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - M:LLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: PERU
 10     19a1      1932
 l.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL...         53.4     3O.2      35.2
 LOANS.............. ..   .33.0      47.0      '4.2
 GRANTS .............        20.4     33.2     11.0
 A.AZO  .................        13.     34.1      35.8
 L        AANS ...........  14.3    21.0     2 .o
 GRANTS .............        .4.7      6.5       7.8
 (SEC.SURP.ASSIST.) ..          0.0      0.0      0.0
 8.FUOa FOR otA7....             33.0     42.5      16.2
 LOANS ...    ......   ... 19.0      1.0     16.2
 GRANTS.............        14.0     23.5      0.0
 TITLE I-TITAL ...........       19.0     19.0      16.2
 REPAY. IN S-LOAS:S19.0                  19.0     16.2
 PAT. IN FUR. CURR .,.           0.0      0.0       0.0
 TITLE Il-TOTAL .........        14.C     ?3.5       0.0
 E.R LIEF.e3.DV .  F,            .3     6.       0.0
 VOL.:ELLaP AGENCY..            10.?     16.7      0.0
 C.C)TH:R cCON. ASSIST:           1.7      3.?       3.
 LOANS..............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................     1.7      3.2      3.2
 PtACc CORPS....            0.0      0.0      0.0
 NARCOTICS........          1.6      3.0      2.9
 OTHER ............        0.1      0.2      0.3
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL..          3.3      4.3       5.0
 LOANS .... ..  ...............  3.0   4.0      4.5
 GRANTS.............,        0.3      0.!       0.5
 A.MAP GRANTS ..........         2.0      0.0      0.0
 S.CReDIT SALES-RMS....          3.0      4.0      4.5
 C.INTL MIL.ES.TRNG....         U.3      0.3      0.5
 0.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK...          0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS 0.......         0.0      0.0      0.0
 lII.TOTAL ECON. . MIL..          56.7     4.5     60.2
 LOAN5 ..............        3 . 0   51.0     48.7
 GRANTS.............                  33.5     11.5
 OTHER US LOANS ..........    .   4.3      16.0       0.0
 EX-IM SANK LOANS,.   ,.         6.2     13.1       0.0
 ALL OTHER .............    .... 40.1     2.9       0.0
 ASSISTANCE FROM !NTeRNATIONAL AGECIES
 193U     193I      1982     1946-32
 TOTAL ........ ....  5    456.6    529.3   2405.8
 IBRO             116.0     143.0    378.1   1312.5
 IFC                 3.2      8.!     18.2     56.0
 IDA                 0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 IDB               132.5    3U5.0    130.0    977.4
 A�0                 0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 AFDd                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 UNOP                0.8      0.1      0.0      45.3
 OTHER-UN            0.0      0.0      3.0      14.6
 EEC                 0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 
 
 620
