	PERU
The 1993 report presents an excellent overview of the major human rights issues confronting Peru last year: lack of independence of the legislative and judicial branches; lack of due process guarantees for accused terrorists; impunity for human rights violators; and continued political violence. Generally well researched, balanced and forceftilly written, the report addresses many, although not all, of the points raised in last year's Critique. Certain areas still need to be sfrenghthened. For example, some statements are not legally precise, while important facts are not always correlated with other developments. Finally, the report fails to mention that international attention has been a primary reason for the Peruvian government's increased observance of human rights.
The report demonsfrates an impressive effort to gather statistics from different sources, both official and non-govemmental. Because statistics often differ depending on the different tracking methods used, the inclusion of a variety of sources helps present a balanced picture. The report provides general information on each particular subject, as well as many compelling individual cases that bring the issues to life.
The report aptly highlights the case of La Cantuta. (In 1992, nine students and a professor were abducted from the Enrique Guzmán y Valle University — also known as La Cantuta — while it was under military confrol. They were never seen alive again, and their remains were discovered after persistent efforts by their relatives, journalists and members of the political opposition.) Events in this case since the publication of the report have brought into sharper focus the issues of impunity and lack of indendence of the judiciary and the legislature, which the report rightly emphasizes. Because military personnel were implicated in this case — including Army commander Nicolás Hermoza and President Alberto Fujimori's close adviser, Vladimiro Montesinos of the National Intelligence Service — it was being tried under military jurisdiction; however, a civilian court had also asserted jurisdiction after the discovery of human remains and personal belongings of the disappeared. Under then-applicable law, the Supreme Court had to decide the proper forum by a four-vote majority. The five-member panel of the Supreme Court deciding the issue deadlocked in a 3-2 vote for military jurisdiction on February4, 1994. In accordance with the prevailing rules, a sixth judge was chosen to cast an additional vote; however, the pro-government majority in Congress preempted the vote with a hastily drafted law allowing the case to be tried in a military court. Although that court subsequently convicted nine out of the ten indicted officers, it also summarily ruled that no officers from the National Intelligence Service or from the Army's High Command had been involved. The ruling was widely seen as an example of impunity, given the credible evidence against Montesinos and Hermoza; additionally, given the procedural irregularities, the
271
CRITIQUE 1993
lawyer for the relatives of the victims predicted that the convicted officers would receive pardons.
It would also have been valuable for the report to have included individual cases in the section relating to denial of a fair public trial, especially given that it identifies this as one of Peru's major human rights problems. For example, the "Repentance Law," whereby confessed guerrillas receive a reduction in their sentences if they surrender and a withdrawal of charges if they provide information on others, presents an opportunity for significant abuse. In order to protect the identity of these informants, the persons they accuse are denied all possibility of confi"onting them. This is of particular concern because persons have been convicted on the testimony of just one so-called "repentant" terrorist. The section on children in particular would have profited from the inclusion of individual cases. There are currently a number of minors charged as adults under the anti-terrorist laws, in violation of Peru's obligations under the Convention on the Rights of the Child. Lima's Instituto de Defensa Legal has reported the cases of five minors who are in jail in Pucallpa based on confessions purportedly written by them; however, the confessions are written in Spanish, which the children do not speak well.
The report's greatest failing is an incomplete and decontextualized analysis of the data it cites. For example, the report correctly points out that there has been a sharp decrease in the number of "disappearances" and extrajudicial killings compared to last year. While this in itself is noteworthy, it does not necessarily indicate a long-term trend or demonstrate that the government is moving closer to the rule of law. In a report on his June 1993 mission to Peru, the UN Special Rapporteur on Extrajudicial, Summary or Arbitrary Executions indicated that, while figures dropped during the first eight months of 1993, there was a considerable increase during September. He also pointed out that the overall decrease in "disappearances" and extrajudicial killings attributed to the government may be due to a change in anti-insurgency policy, which now favors the mass detention of suspected guerrillas rather than executions and/or disappearances. Since April 1992, according to official statistics, 7,700 persons have been detained by the military or anti-terrorist police. Given that Peru's anti-terrorist decrees do not afford due process guarantees and provide for life imprisonment in cases of treason, the change in tactics does not necessarily translate into an improved observance of internationally recognized human rights. As the report notes, "torture often takes place in the period immediately following detention," and suspected subversives are reportedly "routinely tortured at military detention centers." Although the report offers no statistics on torture, it is reasonable to conclude that a sizeable number of the thousands of persons detained on suspicion of "terrorism" are subjected to some form of torture or misfreatment. The decrease in deaths and disappearances must be viewed against the sharp increase in arbifrary detentions and the accompanying abuse of detainees.
272
_PERU
In a marked improvement over its predecessor, the 1993 report devotes considerable attention to the lack of procedural guarantees under the anti-terrorist and treason decrees issued after President Fujimori's "self-coup" of April 5, 1992, an issue that continues to be of major importance. The report notes that many of the accused are innocent but remain in jail, in part because, until late November 1993, the law did not allow the release of the accused tintil the judicial process was concluded. Given the backlog in civilian court dockets, this would mean months, if not years, of unjust imprisonment. The Instituto de Defensa Legal, a respected non-governmental organization, has documented 177 cases of innocent prisoners and believes there are many others. Although the report's treatment of Peru's legal system is commendably detailed, it still fails to convey the utter absence of normative conditions that characterizes even a minimally adequate trial process. For example, the report does not mention that the military "trials" utilize procedures lifted from the military's rules for use in the theater of military operations.
Security force personnel who have helped prepare evidence against the accused do not even appear as witnessess, although their evidence is infroduced. The police and military are authorized to investigate and make arrests with virtually no restrictions or judicial supervision. Confessions are obtained from witnessess who may be held up to a month incommunicado. Taken together, the reality is more extreme than a "lack [of] important elements of due process." From start to finish, it is unworthy of any attempt to characterize it as a legal or lawful process.
The report attempts to strike a balance by including atrocities by both the government and insurgent groups. However, as last year's Critique pointed out, it again sacrifices legal precision by referring to "human rights violations" by the Shining Path and other insurgent groups. Since then, the State Department has modified its reporting instructions to e?q)licitly authorize the undifferentiated treatment of government and non-governmental actors under the same human rights rubric. While offering the reader a more complete picture of the level of violence in Peru, this approach suggests an incorrect characterization, as the introduction to this Critique argues. In addition, while this year's report includes for the first time a section on the "Use of Excessive Force and Violations of Humanitarian Law in Internal Conflicts," it does not use it properly. Most of the insurgents' atrocities should have been reported in this section.
The report also attempts to balance the government's violations of human rights with its progress in this area. While the government's achievements are portrayed fairly, they are not fully analyzed. For example, in explaming that the government's dialogue with the Coordinadora Nacional de Derechos Humanos, the umbrella organization of over forty independent human rights groups, achieved the release of certain prisoners, the report does not adequately convey the degree to which the dialogue fell short of its original promise. The Coordinadora had proposed a detailed agenda for discussion, which included far-ranging topics such
273
CRITIQUE 1993
as the independence of the judiciary, prison conditions, the estabUshment of the National Registry of Detained Persons, reforms to the anti-terrorist laws, and the investigation and punishment of those responsible for grave violations of human rights. The government's representative, the Minister of Justice, accepted the agenda but subsequently both he and other government representatives failed to discuss it in any of the five meetings with the Coordinadora. The report also notes that in November 1993, the Congress modified some provisions of the anti-terrorist laws. While the changes are potentially significant, they do not attempt to address the trials of civilians in military courts, identified by the report only as not providing due process guarantees. Moreover, human rights groups have since reported that the practical effect of these reforms is severely undermined by the courts' failure to implement them properly. The government signaled resistance to further changes to the anti-terrorism laws with the declaration by Justice Minister Fernando Vega Santa Gadea that military courts will continue to try civilians.
A serious omission in the report is the role of international pressure in influencing the government to change its conduct. The section on governmental attitude regarding international and non-govenraiental investigation of alleged violations is completely silent on this important subject. The United States has played a crucial role in insisting that the Peruvian government implement those reforms that the report cites as accomplishments. The report fails to mention that the United States placed a number of conditions on its support for the issuance of a loan to help Peru with its balance of payments. These included establishing a permanent dialogue with the Coordinadora, allowing international organizations to inspect prisons, and investigating certain cases previously identified by the US Congress as violations of human rights. Furthermore, the United States placed conditions on the disbursement of approximately $100 million in non-humanitarian aid, suspended after the "self-coup" of April 1992. Among these conditions were investigation of the La Cantuta case and the establishment of a commission of jurists to analyze and suggest reforms to the judiciary system. (On the other hand, it should be noted, the Clinton Administration based its June 1993 armouncement of its proposed $115 million package on a seriously flawed, unbalanced and overstated assessment of improvements in human rights and democractic institutions.)
The Peruvian government's reaction to international pressure, especially that of the United States, has been one of grudging compliance with some — not all — demands. The government made it clear at the beginning of the year that it was only entering into the dialogue with the Coordinadora to please the United States. At the same time it accused human rights organizations of trying to tarnish Peru's image abroad just at the time that it was seeking to re-enter the world financial community. As the report mentions, the government allowed the ICRC to once again work in prisons; however, it refused to allow access to prisons to
274
_PERU
Human Rights/Americas in 1993. Since the ICRC does not publish reports on prison conditions and Human Rights Watch/Americas does, this suggests that the Peruvian government is unwilling to submit to public scrutiny concerning its treatment of detainees.
The U.S. also protested in April when the Army refused to cooperate with the Congressional investigation of the La Cantuta case and paraded tanks in Lima in an obvious show of force; as a result. President Fujimori issued a public statement in support of the legislature's independence. The repdrt mentions that the government modified in part the anti-terrorist laws, partly based on the suggestions of the commission whose establishment was suggested by the U.S.; however, as mentioned above, the modifications do not address military jurisdiction, which the commission severely criticized. After the passage of the La Cantuta law, the State Department issued a press statement that it would find it "difficult" to release the first $30 million of aid previously suspended, which it had been poised to deliver to the Peruvian government. In response. President Fujimori invoked the sovereignty of Peru to pass the laws it chose. However, his argument is not credible, since he did not state that Peru would not seek U.S. aid. Because the report plays an important role in the formulation of US policy, it should have highlighted the fact that U.S. efforts had a modest role in certain improvements in the observance of human rights in Peru.
275
CRITIQUE 1993
