 PERU
 Respect for individual human rights has been
 increasingly emphasized in Peru in recent years.
 Instances of government brutality have been rare.
 Peruvians can generally look to the law for pro-
 tection against arbitrary treatment. The concept of
 equality is gradually being strengthened in a society
 long marked by the denial of opportunity for a
 better life to the large number of Indians and other
 disadvantaged rural poor. Major problems remain:
 poverty, illiteracy, unemployment and underemployment
 and inadequate participation in national life by the
 millions who live from subsistence agriculture in the
 highlands. But efforts are underway to break with the
 past, to modernize Peruvian society through fundamental
 economic and social change.
 Peru's military Government took power in 1968 proclaiming
 the urgent need for a revolution to end poverty, remedy
 social injustice and assure the country's freedom from
 foreign domination. The resulting program of reforms led
 in subsequent years to the expropriation and conversion
 into cooperatives of large landholdings throughout
 Peru, the nationalization of private foreign and domestic
 investments in extractive and basic industries, the
 introduction of the concept of worker-ownership of large
 enterprises and a substantial expansion of educational
 services. The control of the prices of basic human
 necessities through state subsidies was a fundamental
 feature of this program.
 Peru began to run into severe financial difficulties
 in 1976. The maintenance of consumer subsidies, unpro-
 ductive investments financed by foreign loans, heavy
 armaments purchases, worldwide inflation and lagging
 prices for the country's exports all contributed to
 the crisis. The military Government has reacted by
 
 (324)
 
 
 325
 imposing an austerity program under which subsidies
 and other government spending have been sharply
 curtailed. The resulting inflation in consumer prices
 has created social and labor unrest, notably evident
 in the general strike and riots of May 1978 to which
 the Government responded with force. Twelve people
 were killed and fifty were injured. Since 1968
 the military Government has ruled by decree, closing
 the Congress, abolishing local elections and reducing
 the independence of the judiciary. Although the 1933
 Constitution with.its guarantees of civil liberties
 has remained technically in force, the Government
 has overridden its provisions on several occasions
 by evoking the sweeping powers accorded the military
 junta by the "Revolutionary Statute" of 1968.
 Peru is now, however, in the process of returning to
 representative and constitutional government. An
 Assembly elected in a nation-wide election in June 1978
 is writing a new Constitution. General elections are
 to be held, and a civilian, constitutional government
 installed, by mid-1980.
 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Torture
 Peruvian Government officials do not condone torture
 or other similar abuses against the individual.
 Article 337 of the penal code provides for punishment
 of government officials guilty of physically abusing
 a prisoner. The Peruvian magazine-Equis reported
 in November 1978 that six policemen had been charged
 by a court with torturing and killing a militant
 student leader in 1976 who died in police custody.
 According to the magazine, their trial will be
 the first of its kind in Peruvian judicial history.
 b. Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 
 
 326
 Cruel or inhuman treatment or punishment by police
 and prison authorities is illegal, but does occur
 from time to time despite official efforts to curb
 abuse. Peruvian penal facilities are primitive, dirty
 and overcrowded, however, and prolonged imprisonment
 can itself therefore be considered inhuman or
 degrading. On the few occasions American prisoners
 have been physically abused during detention or
 interrogation, the United States Government has
 protested vigorously and has received assurances
 that such mistreatment will not be condoned. Police
 officials have indicated that investigations of these
 cases would be carried out but to date no information
 is available on results.
 c. Arbitrary Arrest or Imprisonment
 There have been a few instances of arrest and temporary
 detention of labor leaders and radical politicians
 without due process during states of emergency evoked
 in the past year. These occurred during the general
 strike and widespread disturbances in May 1978 and during
 a teacher's strike in July. Article 57 of the 1933
 Constitution guarantees protection against arbitrary
 arrest. Article 70 of the Constitution permits the
 Executive, when necessary for security reasons, to
 declare a state of emergency and suspend the
 Constitutional guarantees of habeas corpus, inviolability
 of the home, peaceful assembly, freedom of movement,
 and freedom from banishment or deportation.
 d. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 There is no evidence that the Government violates,
 as a matter of policy, the guarantee of a fair
 public trial for those accused of crimes. However,
 the overburdened legal system produces delays and,
 according to legal authorities and the press, under-
 paid and overworked judges and other judicial
 officials are on occasion susceptible to corruption.
 Theoretically, free legal assistance is available
 to those unable to pay, but this system often
 
 
 327
 fails to function in practice. Thus, the poorest
 and the socially disadvantaged have less than
 full access to the judicial system. The Peruvian
 system, in the tradition of the Napoleonic Code,
 calls for written rather than oral presentations.
 Poorly-educated defendants, especially those who
 speak only Quechua or Aymara, can thus find them-
 selves at a disadvantage in proceedings which they
 only inadequately understand.
 e. Invasion of the Home
 The 1933 Constitution guarantees the inviolability
 of the home except during a state of emergency
 when police are permitted forcibly to enter and
 search homes and to seize people and property
 without a judicial warrant. Such forcible entries
 and searches occurred during the general strike
 of May 1978, but the number probably did not exceed
 twenty. There have been no reports of such incidents
 occurring subsequently in the absence of a state
 of emergency.
 2. Governmental Policies Relating to the Fulfillment
 of Such Vital Needs as Food, Shelter, Health Care
 and Education
 The reforms instituted by the military Government
 resulted in the redistribution of social and economic
 power in parts of the countryside while industrial
 workers realized substantial gains in real income.
 A strong historic commitment to educational opportunity
 along with recent reforms in the administration and
 content of educational programs have benefitted children
 of low-to-middle income families throughout the
 country. About 85 percent of school-age children now
 have some access to basic education.
 Government efforts to improve conditions in Peru's
 urban slums have included measures giving juridical
 
 
 328
 and administrative structure to slum communities,
 provision of basic services and recognition of
 urban squatters' title to the land. Despite these
 achievements, the rural majority and a very sizeable
 minority of urban inhabitants remain ill-fed,
 badly-housed and inadequately served in health
 and education.
 Government efforts to deal with basic needs have
 been hampered by budgetary restrictions. The current
 austerity program, developed in conjunction with
 an International Monetary Fund loan agreement,
 has compounded these problems. Real wages have
 declined for all categories of workers during
 the last two years, unemployment and inflation
 have increased substantially and nutritional levels
 have declined among the poor, according to reports
 reaching religious and volunteer organizations.
 As indicated above, strikes and demonstrations
 were called in May of 1978 to protest the removal
 of subsidies on food and transportation.
 Left-wing magazines have charged that corruption
 in government contracting, particularly in the
 purchase of military equipment, has siphoned off
 funds which otherwise would have been available
 for development and welfare. No substantiating
 evidence has as yet been presented, and a special
 committee of the Constitutional Assembly established
 to investigate "illicit enrichment" has yet to bring
 any specific charges.
 3. Respect for Civil and Political Liberties, Includ-
 ing:
 a. Freedom of Thought, Speech, Press, Religion
 and Assembly
 Independent magazines enjoy freedom of expression
 except during brief periods of emergency conditions,
 and have strongly criticized the Government
 
 
 329
 
 and Armed Forces. National circulation daily
 newspapers, radio and television have been under
 direct government control, but in July 1978 the
 Government issued a new press law which leaves
 open the possibility of the return of the dailies
 to private owners and workers. Implementing legis-
 lation is still required to put this complicated
 law into effect. A recent revision of the code
 of military justice makes civilians liable to
 prosecution before military courts for derogatory
 criticism of military institutions. This legislation
 has been rejected as legally invalid by the Constituent
 Assembly and condemned by the independent press.
 So far no one has been charged under the revised
 law, although sharp criticism of the Armed Forces
 continues.
 The Constitution guarantees liberty of conscience
 and religion, and there have been no recorded instances
 of persecution for religious beliefs in recent times.
 Freedom of assembly is also guaranteed by the
 Constitution although, as previously noted, that
 right has been suspended under the state of emergency
 provision during periods of labor unrest.
 Workers in the private sector enjoy the right to
 unionize as a result of interpretations of, and
 governmental decrees founded on, Article 27, Title II
 of the 1933 Constitution guaranteeing free association.
 The right to strike is not guaranteed by the Con-
 stitution, but a series of laws, executive decrees
 and ministerial resolutions over the last five decades
 have had the practical effect of assuring this right to
 unions in the private sector. However, its free
 exercise is suspended during a state of emergency.
 The Government may use force to break strikes, as
 it did in the mines in 1978.
 b. Freedom of Movement within the Country, Foreign
 Travel and Emigration
 There are no political or other legal restraints
 
 
 on foreign travel or emigration. During this period
 of austerity the Government has imposed heavy travel and
 passport fees to discourage international travel
 and limit foreign exchange expenditures. Internally,
 the movement of mine workers was restricted for several
 weeks in five departments in central and southern
 Peru under state of emergency provisions during a
 period of labor unrest in the late summer of 1978.
 A group of mine workers was forcibly removed
 at that time from Lima and sent back to their places
 of residence. Article 67 of the 1933 Constitution
 guarantees the right of free movement.
 c. Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 In June 1978, all literate citizens eighteen years
 of age and older were able to participate in Peru's
 first national election in fifteen years. (The
 literacy requirement denies suffrage to approximately
 1.5 million Peruvians of voting age, most of whom are
 Indians. Suffrage for illiterates is now being
 debated in the Constituent Assembly and may well
 be included in the new constitution.) The election
 was characterized by open, often free-wheeling
 campaigning by a dozen political parties representing
 a broad spectrum of political thinking. State-
 controlled television, radio and newspapers
 equitably provided free time to all participants. No
 candidates were arbitrarily disqualified, and
 there was no evidence of electoral fraud or coercion. -
 The results were respected by the Government and the
 electoral authorities. However, eight leftist candidates,
 three labor leaders and two journalists were deported
 during the campaign preceding the election, under
 state of emergency provisions, for advocating a
 general strike. When all but one of the leftist
 candidates were elected, the Constituent Assembly
 paid their return fare to Peru and swore them
 in as delegates with concurrent parliamentary
 immunity. The Government also lifted the deportation
 order on the other deportees. The President
 
 
 331
 subsequently commented that the deportations had
 been an error.
 Article 86 of the 1933 Constitution guarantees
 the right of women to participate in the political
 process, and the draft article approved by the
 Assembly committee responsible for this section of
 the Constitution extends these guarantees of equality
 to employment. The Government recently began to
 provide family planning services to women under
 the national population policy of 1976. A few
 women occupy prominent positions in the public
 and private sectors. Two women are members of
 the 100-member Constituent Assembly and have led
 debates on issues significant to women; others
 hold judicial and other public offices at the
 provincial and municipal levels. Less change is
 evident among the poor, however, where most women
 have remained in traditional roles. The Ministry
 of Agriculture supports a nation-wide volunteer
 organization dedicated to training campesino
 women for economic activity outside the home.
 4. Government Attitude and Record Regarding Inter-
 national and Non-Governmental Investigation of
 Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 There have been no reported requests to the Government
 for international investigation of alleged human rights
 abuses.
 The Government has supported efforts by the Organization
 of American States to strengthen inter-American
 human rights activities, and has nominated respected
 Peruvian human rights advocates to such bodies
 as the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights.
 Peru ratified the American Convention on Human Rights
 on July 11. During the past year, the Government also
 ratified the United Nations Covenants on Civil
 and Political Rights and on Economic, Social and
 Cultural Rights. Peru has historically been committed
 
 
 332
 to the principle of strict non-intervention in
 the internal affairs of other states but supports
 multinational human rights institutions and machinery.
 
 
