 PERU
 Since 1980 Peru has had a freely elected democratic
 government, composed of an executive branch headed by a
 president, a bicameral legislature, and a separate and
 independent judiciary. After two rounds of intensely
 contested national elections in April and June, Alberto
 Fujimori, a former university president, was inaugurated on
 July 28, succeeding Alan Garcia Perez of the American Popular
 Revolutionary Alliance (APRA) as President.
 Public security responsibilities are shared by the police and
 the military. The Interior Ministry and its police services
 have the primary counterterrorist role in the capital city of
 Lima and in the 95 provinces not under a state of emergency.
 The military leads the effort to combat subversion in the 88
 provinces, which are currently under a state of emergency. A
 state of emergency designation places all executive branch
 authority in the local military command, suspends restrictions
 on arbitrary detention and the requirement for search
 warrants, and restricts the rights of movement and assembly.
 The number of provinces declared in emergency for at least
 part of the year has risen by seven since 1989, the ninth
 straight annual increase. The state of emergency was lifted
 in Ayacucho's capital province in October for the first time
 since it was declared in 1981. An estimated 25 percent of
 Peru's population of 22 million lived under a state of
 emergency during all of 1990. Another 35 percent, those
 living in the capital, spent approximately half the year under
 police-directed, military-supported states of emergency. The
 police and the military in the emergency zones are under the
 authority of the emergency zone commander, not civilian
 authorities. The constitutional rights of persons detained by
 the military are routinely ignored.
 The Garcia administration left behind a mixed economy in deep
 depression, ravaged by four-digit inflation, and devoid of
 foreign exchange reserves. On August 8, President Fujimori's
 Government announced a severe stabilization program designed
 to close the fiscal deficit within a few months. Although the
 program has reduced inflation, the cost was an even deeper
 recession, further exacerbating the difficult, economic
 situation of the lower and middle classes.
 The chief causes of human rights violations in Peru remain the
 terrorist activities of the Sendero Luminoso (Shining Path)
 Maoist guerrillas and, secondarily, the Governent's
 difficulty in mounting a disciplined response. Security
 forces personnel were responsible for widespread and egregious
 human rights violations. It is estimated that at least 3,452
 persons (civilians and military) were killed in
 terrorist-related violence in 1990, an increase of over 8
 percent from the previous year and 75 percent higher than the
 1988 total. Sendero regularly assassinates anyone perceived
 to be an opponent, or even merely uncooperative, including
 ordinary citizens, typically Indian residents of the Andean
 highlands or the Amazonian jungle. Sendero and the pro-Cuban
 terrorist group Tupac Amaru Revolutionary Movement (MRTA) both
 increased their control over parts of Peru's major coca-growing
 region, the Upper Huallaga Valley (UHV). Peruvian human
 rights observers have determined that Sendero is responsible
 for the majority of the killings in the UHV. Human rights
 abuses by government security forces also increased in 1990,
 although independent investigations remained difficult to
 
 
 737
 PERU
 carry out due to fears of possible Sendero reprisals and
 because military commanders restrict access to emergency
 zones. There were widespread credible reports of summary
 executions, arbitrary detentions, and torture and rape by the
 military, as well as less frequent reports of such abuses by
 the police. Independent human rights groups recorded 302 new
 cases of disappearances during 1990, a marked decline from
 1989's record total.
 The Fujimori Government announced its intention to institute a
 number of reforms aimed at improving the nation's grave human
 rights situation by establishing a national human rights
 commission, revampinq the criminal code, and overhauling the
 penal system. President Fujimori himself made impassioned
 pleas for the autonomous judiciary to reform itself. Mostly
 due to the overwhelming economic crisis facing the nation,
 however, the new Government was unable to effect any of these
 fundamental changes during the first months of its 5-year term.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing
 For at least the fourth straight year, political and other
 extrajudicial killings rose again in 1990. Sendero Luminoso
 continued to .assassinate teachers, engineers, development and
 human rights workers, Indian peasants, and political
 candidates, as well as government, police, and ruling party
 officials. Due to the isolation of many rural areas where
 Sendero is most active, the number of victims is
 underreported. The Senate Commission on Pacification and
 Violence estimated that Sendero was responsible for a total of
 1,512 deaths, including 188 police/military deaths, in 1990;
 security forces for 1,218; the MRTA for 68; the paramilitary
 Rodrigo Franco Command (CRF), tied to elements of the APRA
 party, for 5; campesino organizations (rondas campesinas) for
 259 deaths; and narcotics traffickers for 106. Peruvian human
 rights groups, which maintain their own sources of
 information, independently confirm the general trends reported
 by the Senate Commission.
 Sendero often massacred Indian villagers, accusing them of
 supporting the Government because of the presence of local
 peasant civilian self-defense forces ("rondas campesinos") in
 their communities. In Acosvinchos, Ayacucho on January 15 a
 Sendero-led column of approximately 200 convoked the villagers
 of San Lucas and Vinchos-Pata to a "popular assembly" and
 accused them of aiding the rondas. Thirty-nine villagers,
 ranging in age from 1 year to 70 years, were executed; 29
 others were wounded. Sendero killed at least 37 peasants,
 including women, children, and the elderly, in the Indian
 community of Naylamp de Sonomorro on April 12, and another 46
 peasants in Dos de Mayo province between June 26 and 28.
 Sendero often attacked those seen as defending the existing
 legal or social order. In a major effort to disrupt the
 nation's April and June presidential elections, Sendero
 expanded its attacks on government and political party
 officials, including opposition officeholders and candidates
 for public office. Independent candidate for deputy in the
 legislature, Panamerican television reporter Marino Meza
 Rosales, and four of his supporters were kidnaped by Sendero
 
 
 PERU
 terrorists March 12 in Huanuco. Meza Rosales was burned
 alive. More than 200 local elected or appointed
 office-holders were assassinated during 1989 and 1990.
 Sendero executed former Social Security Director Felipe
 Salaverry in Lima on April 17 and assassinated former APRA
 Senator and Labor Minister Orestes Rodriguez Campos and his
 son on September 22. Sendero shot and killed Congressman
 Alejandro Victoria Mendoza of the Cambio 90 party in Lima on
 December 16. Javier Puiggros, noted PPC party leader, was
 shot and killed by Sendero on November 23. Sendero also waged
 a violent campaign against union organizers. Many union
 leaders reported receiving threats from Sendero, and at least
 six union directors of industrial relations were assassinated
 by Sendero in Lima during 1990.
 Foreign national origin is now considered by Sendero a
 sufficient reason to kill. Two French tourists were
 assassinated by Sendero after their interprovincial bus was
 intercepted by a Sendero column in Apurimac Department on
 January 13. After the assembled passengers were forced to
 listen to a lengthy political lecture, the two foreigners were
 singled out and publicly executed. Employing a-common
 initiation rite, the Sendero leader required the youngest
 recruits present--in this case, estimated at 10 to 14 years of
 age--to perform the executions. Two tpurists from Australia
 and New Zealand were murdered in Ayacucho in May; Sendero was
 believed to have been responsible.
 A second terrorist group, the MRTA, continued to expand beyond
 its original base of operations in Lima into several rural
 zones. Althoughthe MRTA chiefly engages in the destruction
 of property through selective bombing, MRTA attacks killed at
 least 68 people in 1990. The MRTA claimed responsibility for
 the January 9 Lima assassination of Major General (Ret.)
 Enrique Lopez Albujar Trent, former Defense Minister in the
 Garcia government. The MRTA allegedly kidnaped Congressman
 Gerardo Lopez of the Cambio 90 party on September 23. Judge
 Cesar Ruiz Trigoso was assassinated by the MRTA in Lima on
 November 16. Both Sendero and the MRTA were also responsible
 for kidnaping, torturing, and executing the leadership of a
 number of Indian tribes, including the Ashaninka, Yaneshe, and
 Campa.
 A third terrorist group, the Rodrigo Franco Command (CRF),
 suspected of being controlled by elements of the APRA party,
 carried out a campaign of intimidation, punctuated by
 occasional bombings and selective assassinations. The CRF
 name is probably sometimes used as "cover" by elements of the
 military operating in the emergency zones, especially in
 Ayacucho. Among those targeted by CRF in 1990 were
 journalists, human rights workers, labor union members,
 lawyers, leftist politicians, and others the CRF accused of
 working to advance revolutionary terrorism. CRF activities
 appear to have decreased in Lima during 1990; the decline was
 especially notable after the APRA's departure from power in
 late July.
 While many rondas units actively worked in a variety of
 legitimate fields, including community development and
 self-defense, there were also credible reports that some
 rondas committed serious human rights abuses, including the
 torture and extrajudicial execution of terrorist suspects or
 even of ronda members of rival communities. Rondas of nearby
 villages are blamed for the May 18 sacking of the village of
 Pampacores, Huanta, Ayacucho and for the deaths of 15
 
 
 789
 PERU
 villagers. Those killed were accused of having ties to
 Sendero. One of the most graphic cases of rondas abuse
 occurred after a March battle between rondas and Sendero in
 Huancayo. The rondas captured nine guerrillas alive,
 decapitated them, and, as a sign of the rondas' capabilities
 and allegiance, sent the heads in burlap bags to local
 military authorities.
 There were several notable cases of probable military killings
 in 1990. Most such incidents occurred in the emergency zones,
 but an army patrol is believed to have been responsible for
 the killing of 14 peasants in two villages in Cuzco Department
 on April 23 and 24. The'army column detained some 30
 residents of Tirani and Nanrapata; they were publicly stripped
 and some were tortured or raped. The military is also
 believed to have been responsible for the execution of 10
 women and 7 men whose bodies were found in a common grave in
 Chilcahuaycco, Ayacucho on October 19. All 17 appeared to
 have been killed by a bullet to the head. Army Sergeant
 Jhonny Zapata Acuna (known as "Centurion") was arrested by
 military authorities and charged in civilian courts with
 directing the massacre. Unknown assailants kidnaped the
 Vice-Rector of Huancayo University, Jaime Cerron Palomino, and
 his driver, Armando Tapia, on June 8. Their tortured bodies
 were found June 18. Some published reports assert that Cerron
 and Tapia had been detained by the military. Other reports,
 however, point to an ongoing strategic battle between Sendero
 and MRTA for control of the University.
 In neither of these cases nor in the majority of other 1990
 incidents of alleged human rights violations by military
 personnel were the results of official executive branch
 investigations ever made public. Military officials assert
 that a number of enlisted men and officers were held on
 charges within the military justice system relating to human
 rights violations. For the most Dart, these assertions were
 difficult to confirm as the military courts have sealed
 relevant records. Additionally, the military justice code
 contains no language for dealing with cases of killing,
 kidnaping, or torture-only "negligence" and "abuse of
 authority." A number of police personnel were imprisoned
 during 1990 for a variety of offenses, including the torture
 and murder of detainees outside of the emergency zones. Five
 days after their "disappearance," the tortured bodies of
 university student Zacarais Pasco Humani and Professor
 Marcelino Valencia Alvaro were exhumed on September 29 from
 the grounds of the local police station in Santo Tomas, Cuzco
 Department. Charges were filed against police personnel
 accused of the murders. In early August, President Fujimori
 summarily dismissed over 250 high-ranking police officials,
 some reportedly for links to paramilitary groups or human
 rights offenses. A number of command changes were also made
 in the military services. However, there were no similar mass
 dismissals in the army, the government institution most
 frequently implicated in human rights abuses.
 A series of assassinations of persons involved in human rights
 or legal work occurred at the University San Cristobal of
 Huamanga (Ayacucho Department) in mid-July. The circumstances
 of the killings at or near the university, the birthplace of
 Sendero, led many human rights groups to blame the military or
 the CRF. Others refused to rule out Sendero responsibility
 for at least some of the attacks, however. The decapitated
 bodies of two young women were found dumped near the
 University on September 2. The inability of police or private
 
 
 740
 PERU
 human rights groups to ascertain responsibility for these
 deaths, much less arrest those responsible, is indicative of
 the Peruvian justice system's inability to produce results in
 even the most egregious of terrorist cases.
 There are no official statistics on the number of summary
 executions in 1990. Given the overall rise in political
 deaths, it appears probable that the number of summary
 executions likewise increased.
 Investigations into several earlier cases of military excesses
 remained blocked and legal avenues to seek redress for gross
 violations were increasingly inoperative. The inquiry into
 the May 1988 killings of at least 28 villagers in Cayara,
 Ayacucho was curtailed after 9 witnesses were killed and the
 special prosecutor repeatedly threatened. Amnesty
 International (AI) noted in an April 1990 report that there
 was "overwhelming evidence to support the accusation that the
 army deliberately carried out the killings and that both
 military and civilian authorities had sought to cover up the
 events. The military authorities in Ayacucho Department
 systematically obstructed attempts by judicial authorities to
 investigate the killings, impeded access to the area, and
 prevented residents from leaving the community."
 In June the Appeals Court of the Supreme Council of Military
 Justice confirmed the December 1989 lower military court
 convictions of two police officers for their roles in the 1986
 killing of 124 inmates at the Lurigancho prison in the
 aftermath of a failed Sendero uprising. The Appeals Court let
 stand the sentencing of police Colonel Rolando Cabezas Alarcon
 to 15 years in prison and increased from 7 to 10 years the
 sentence to be served by Cabezas' aide, police Lieutenant
 Javier Marquina Bringas. The Court also overturned the "not
 guilty" verdicts of eight additional police personnel,
 sentencing seven of them to 6 months in prison. Police
 General Martinez Lira was sentenced to 30 days' confinement.
 Six army officers were acquitted. In September Congress
 instituted a new investigation into the 1986 prison
 uprisings. Former President Garcia voluntarily waived his
 right to immunity.
 The presumed number two leader of Sendero Luminoso, Osman
 Morote Barrionuevo, was sentenced in civil court on November
 11 to serve 20 years in prison for his part in a number of
 Sendero-directed activities, including over a dozen murders.
 The fact that he was found not guilty on some of the charges
 against him suggests the court closely weighed the evidence
 against him on each count. Morote's conviction and
 sentencing, which came after 2 1/2 years in detention and
 several aborted trials, was perhaps the most important
 antiterrorist conviction in Peru's criminal courts since 1980.
 b. Disappearance
 The Public Ministry (an autonomous Attorney General's office)
 reports that there have been close to 5,000 cases of
 disappearances since 1983, with the majority of the formal
 complaints the security forces. Local human rights groups
 reported receiving 302 new cases of disappearance in 1990,
 only 62 of which occurred after the change in government.
 These numbers are markedly lower than the 404 cases reported
 by the United Nations Working Group on Disappearances in
 1989. In March the Commission on Human Rights (COMISEDH)
 released summary figures for disappearances during the year
 
 
 PERU
 1989. Of 441 cases in which friends or family formally filed
 legal complaints of a disappearance, only 135 cases had been
 resolved. Ninety-three persons were freed from detention, 37
 detentions were admitted by the authorities, and 5 persons
 were found dead.
 Most 1990 disappearance cases involved army detention of
 persons suspected of terrorist links in the emergency zones,
 but there were cases in Lima as well. The vast majority of
 disappearances were reported in the violence-torn Departments
 of Apurimac and Ayacucho. The bodies of disappearance victims
 are rarely found. Based on the testimony of survivors, it
 appears that most victims are taken to military bases for
 interrogation.- Some are turned over to the court system after
 lengthy detentions and are freed for lack of incriminating
 evidence. Others are imprisoned on terrori-sm charges. Human
 rights groups are firmly convinced that the rest are summarily
 executed by the armed forces. An unknown number of
 "disappeared" persons are unaccounted for because they joined
 the ranks of the MRTA or Sendero, either voluntarily or
 involuntarily. It is believed that the number of persons
 "disappeared" or forcibly recruited by Sendero is greatly
 underreportedi as Sendero routinely threatens family and
 survivors with death if they report the incident or otherwise
 cooperate with government authorities.
 Javier Alarcon Guzman, a Director of the General Confederation
 of Peruvian Workers (CGTPl) and engineering professor at the
 National University of Engineering, disappeared on December
 15, 1989, while traveling in the emergency zone of the Junin
 Department. Human rights workers Angel Escobar Jurado and
 Guadalupe Ccalloccunto Olano both "disappeared" after their
 separate detentions by presumed military personnel (see
 Section 4). Ccalloccunto was one of approximately 35 persons
 who disappeared in the city of Ayacucho during the few days
 preceding the June 10 elections. Only 3 of the 35 have
 reappeared-released from military detention. Catholic
 University student Ernesto Castillo Paez "disappeared" on
 Lima's Villa El Salvador District on October 21. A number of
 credible witnesses asserted he was last seen being forced into
 the trunk of a patrol car from the national police's 74th
 *Commandancia. Despite Congressional hearings and
 investigations, the police denied any involvement in the case,
 and Castillo remained unaccounted for at year's end.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 Although the Constitution prohibits torture and inhuman or
 humiliating treatment, charges of brutality toward detainees
 are common. Human rights groups charge that suspected
 subversives held by the Government are routinely tortured at
 military detention centers; lawyers and others familiar with
 the police and judicial system concur. The Public Ministry
 noted that the majority of detainees held by military
 authorities showed signs of mistreatment or torture. In 1990
 there were reliable accounts from released detainees of
 torture or mistreatment both by police and the military. The
 torture of miner Fidel Intusca Fernandez prompted a Senate
 investigation after Intusca's September escape from the
 Lucanas military barracks in Puquio, Ayacucho. An
 unidentified major and four enlisted men were accused in the
 case. No formal charges, however, were presented against any
 military personnel. Credible reports of rape by elements of
 the security forces in the emergency zone were so numerous
 
 
 PERU
 that such abuse can be considered a common practice,
 condoned--or at least ignored--by the military leadership.
 Torture often occurs in the period immediately following
 detentions. The 1987 terrorism law requires that persons
 detained for terrorism be interrogated only in the presence of
 a defense attorney and a Public Ministry prosecutor. In these
 cases, a court indictment must be sought within 15 days of
 arrest or the prisoner must be released. Reliable reports of
 violations of these standards occur frequently in areas
 controlled by the military under a state of emergency.
 Many victims of Sendero terrorism also show signs of having
 been tortured before death. Torture of those victims often
 follows a brief "popular trial," normally held in the presence
 of rural villagers as a method of intimidation. Sendero uses
 particularly brutal methods of execution, including slitting
 throats, strangulation, stoning, and burning. Mutilation of
 the body is common both before and after death.
 Peruvian prison conditions are appalling, bordering on the
 medieval. Prisoners are exposed to unsanitary facilities,
 poor nutrition and health care, and ill-treatment by prison
 staff. More than 65 inmates died in Lima's prisons during
 1990 due to severe malnutrition. Corruption is rampant among
 prison staff, who have been implicated in a multitude of
 offenses, from sexual blackmail and the selling of narcotics
 and weapons to inmates, to arranging prison escapes. Certain
 prison cellblocks have fallen under Sendero or MRTA control
 and guards refuse to venture into them. On July 8, MRTA
 leader Victor Polay and 48 other accused MRTA terrorists
 escaped from Canto Grande prison, possibly with official
 complicity. Shortly after his inauguration later that month,
 President Fujimori vigorously denounced the penal system as "a
 clear violation of human rights." President Fujimori made
 prison reform an important domestic policy issue; by year's
 end the first 130 of thousands of nonconvicted detainees had
 been released, pending trial. Revised penal and penal
 procedures codes were nearly completed. A variety of other
 reform efforts, though initiated, had not yet been completed
 by year's end, and for most detainees there were no
 appreciable improvements.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 The Constitution, the Penal Code, and antiterrorist
 legislation clearly delineate the arrest and detention
 process. However, most if not all of these protections are
 suspended in practice in those areas under a state of
 emergency. In areas not subject to a state of emergency, a
 warrant approved by a Public Ministry prosecutor typically is
 required for arrest. Persons arrested must be arraigned
 within 24 hours, except in cases of drug trafficking,
 terrorism, or espionage, for which the limit is 15 days.
 Detainees have the right to choose their own attorney, or the
 Government must provide counsel at no cost. Arrested persons
 are entitled to have an attorney present when they make
 statements to the police. Under the 1987 terrorism law,
 police must also notify the detainees' family and human rights
 groups of an arrest, although in practice this is not
 consistently done. Detention centers do not maintain publicly
 available registers detailing detentions, charges, transfers,
 and releases of detainees. There is no functioning bail
 system; a form of provisional liberty is available, more in
 
 
 PERU
 more than twice that long. There were also widespread charges
 of corruption and the suborning of judges, police, and
 witnesses at all stages of the judicial process. There
 continued to be criticism of the lack of cooperation between
 the Interior Ministry's technical police, who investigate and
 arrest, and the Public Ministry prosecutors, who conduct their
 own investigations as a part of the trial process. In
 announcing the creation of a commission to review the grounds
 for the continued detention of thousands of prison inmates,
 President Fujimori estimated in October that barely 4,000 of
 the nation's 18,000 detainees had ever been convicted of any
 crime. The first national prison census in at least 4 years
 was begun in November.
 Threats and intimidation of judges handling terrorism cases
 represent a serious problem, accounting in part for the low
 conviction rate of accused terrorists. Barely 5 percent of
 those arrested for such actions are convicted (this figure
 does not include those held in military facilities inside the
 emergency zones), a notoriously low rate that leads to police
 frustration with the judicial process and to public tolerance
 of police abuses. In 1987 Congress created special tribunals
 to hear terrorism cases and promised greater security measures
 to protect judges and witnesses. There were immediate
 problems with finding judges who were willing to serve on
 these courts, providing the guarantees of safety for the
 judges required in the enabling legislation, and the large
 backlog of cases. Overwhelmed by these problems, the special
 tribunals were abolished in April 1988--only to be
 reestablished in October 1989.
 The Supreme Court decides whether military or police offendets
 are tried in civilian courts or in a separate military court
 system. The military generally asserts its jurisdiction in
 cases involving its personnel, and the Court typically rules
 in its favor. There were some notable cases of military
 personnel charged or convicted in civilian courts during 1990
 for human rights-related crimes. Army General (now retired)
 Clemente Noel Moral, former political-military commander for
 Ayacucho, was among those sentenced in November to serve 2
 years in prison for "obstruction of justice" and "abuse of
 authority," following the 1983 killings of eight Peruvian
 journalists and their guide in Uchuraccay, Ayacucho. Army
 Sergeant Jhonny Zapata Acuna was charged in civilian court for
 the October 1990 massacre of 17 persons at Chilcahuaycco,
 Ayacucho. New cases against police include two cases against
 those charged in the September torture and murder of two
 persons in Cuzco Department (see Section l.a.) and the August
 19 robbery and murder of patrons and employees at a Lima
 nightclub by several police personnel. Ten police officers
 (of 71 police on trial) were sentenced to prison terms in June
 1990 for their roles in the June 1986 Lurigancho prison
 massacre. None of the six army officers charged was convicted
 (see Section l.a.). There never were any trials, however, of
 security personnel involved in the simultaneous massacres at
 El Fronton and Santa Barbara prisons.
 Military trials may be closed to the public at the discretion
 of the ruling magistrate, and little is known about specific
 cases. As AI accurately noted in its April 1990 report,
 "military courts exercise jurisdiction over police and
 military personnel but are not known to have punished gross
 human rights violations by forces on active service in the
 emergency zones, even in cases of mass killings where
 investigators have concluded that the armed forces were
 
 
 744
 PERU
 theory than in reality, for persons not accused of terrorism,
 espionage, or narcotics offenses.
 Arrest procedures are different in the rural emergency zones.
 The armed forces do not need an arrest warrant, and detainees
 are often denied access to an attorney during interrogation
 and to family members during their imprisonment. All
 detainees, including those in the emergency zones, have the
 right to seek judicial determination of the legality of their
 detention, but this right is routinely disregarded by military
 commanders in the emergency zones. Of the detainees held by
 the military inside the emergency zones,.human rights groups
 know of very few who were turned over to civilian authorities
 for prosecution.
 Arbitrary arrests and detentions in the-emergency zones in
 1990 are estimated to be in the hundreds. Incommunicado
 detention of suspects was a common practice by combatant
 forces-government and rebel alike-operating in the endergency
 zones. Dozens of persons of whose detention the Government's
 security forces had denied knowledge nonetheless later were
 found to have been held in military detention centers. The
 armed forces routinely deny access by court officers, public
 prosecutors, and others to militaty installations where
 prisoners are known to be held.
 The Constitution prohibits forced involuntary exile, and there
 have been no known cases of it in the past 10 years. In
 August, however, a former governmental human rights
 prosecutor, Carlos Escobar Pineda, was granted political
 asylum in the United States. Escobar sought asylum in 1989,
 after his investigation into the May 1988 army massacre of 28
 villagers in Cayara, Ayacucho was closed. Nine of the
 prosecution's witnesses were murdered, and all received death
 threats. '
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 In the Peruvian legal system, which is based generally on the
 Napoleonic code, once criminal charges are filed, a judge
 determines whether probable cause exists. The judicial
 process prior to trial may last as long as several years,
 followed by a public trial. Defendants have the right to be
 present at the trial, at which verdicts are rendered by a
 judge or a panel of judges. Sentences may be appealed, and
 judges may send cases back to lower courts for additional
 investigation. Supreme Court judges, 28 in all, are nominated
 by the President from slates supplied by an advisory
 committee, and must be approved by the Senate. Many judges on
 the Superior and Supreme Courts are active in political
 parties, and there are occasional claims that decisions have
 been politically motivated. In December the Government
 announced troubling restrictions on the use of habeas corpus
 and writs of amparo, saying these rights had been "abused" by
 the legal defenders of terrorists. There were only some three
 dozen terrorism convictions nationwide during the entire year.
 Courts face severe backlogs, a product of inefficiency,
 archaic case law and criminal procedural law, and the sharp
 increase in terrorism cases. There are too few public
 defenders for the large caseloads. The Ministry of Justice
 reported in 1990 that there was a backlog of nearly 50,000
 criminal cases. Human rights groups documented hundreds of
 cases of persons who have been detained without bail while
 awaiting trial for periods of up to 4 years--in a few cases
 
 
 745
 PERU
 responsible." A military court reportedly heard the Cayara
 massacre (see Section l.a.) case in closed session in January
 1990 without the presence of witnesses or relatives of the
 victims. All charges were dropped against the military
 personnel and the case "suspended." The Supreme Council of
 Military Justice formally closed the case on January 31,
 effectively terminating efforts to prosecute the case. The
 Government decreed in December that security personnel charged
 with crimes in connection with their service in the emergency
 zones will be tried in military courts.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The Constitution stipulates that the police need a judicial
 warrant to enter a private dwelling, and this requirement is
 generally respected. The requirement is suspended in the
 emergency zones, however, and security forces in those areas
 routinely conduct searches of private homes without warrants.
 Congress initiated investigations in September following the
 revelation that both the Garcia and Fujimori Governments
 illegally tapped the telephones of their domestic political
 opponents.
 A number of rural communities organized rondas to protect
 against terrorist and bandit incursions. While in parts of
 the nation rondas have existed for centuries as a form of
 social organization and to protect residents from invaders and
 rustlers, many of the newer rondas were actively organized,
 and sometimes imposed, under the direction of the military
 authorities. While many members joined voluntarily to defend
 against Sendero and many leaders are locally elected, there
 were numerous reports of the forced recruitment of peasants in
 some areas to serve as rondas members.
 Sendero was also credibly accused of repeated forced
 recruitments. Sometimes civilians were press-ganged into
 providing guide, manual labor, or other services. Sendero
 forced peasants to join their military ranks, often for
 extended periods, requiring their involvement in terrorist
 attacks or even executions. This practice not only provided
 the terrorists with the appearance of popular support and
 overwhelming numbers, but it made identification of the real
 terrorists much more difficult.
 g. Use of Excessive Force and Violations of Humanitarian
 Law in Internal Conflicts
 Although Peru signed.in July 1989 the two Protocols additional
 to the Geneva Conventions relating to the protection of
 victims of international and noninternational armed conflict,
 local human rights groups are certain that a significant but
 unknown number of captured terrorists and innocent civilians
 were summarily executed by the military in 1990. Sendero's
 disregard for the rules of war and humanitarian law are also
 well known (see Section 1.a.). As AI reported, "the violent
 adversaries of the Government routinely torture, mutilate and
 assassinate their captives." Both Sendero and the military
 are known to have blocked passage of relief supplies and
 humanitarian assistance to populations in their areas of
 control.
 There was widespread abuse by both security and terrorist
 forces of the rights of prisoners, able-bodied, wounded, and
 sick alike. The military's violations of international norms
 
 
 746
 PERU
 ranged from the routine blindfolding of prisoners, to the
 frequent refusal to admit that certain persons were being
 detained, to the less frequent summary execution of unarmed
 prisoners. For its part, Sendero simply does not acknowledge
 the holding of any prisoners by its forces. On this point,
 Sendero's credibility is extremely high: those captured alive
 are almost invariably executed.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including;
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 The Constitution provides for freedom of speech and the
 press. With eight television stations, one cable television
 system, 72 radio stations, and 18 daily newspapers in Lima
 alone, Peruvians have access to a very broad range of opinion
 and information. The Government owns one of the three
 national television networks, a radio network, and two
 newspapers. During 1990 the Fujimori Government moved to
 "depoliticize" news coverage in state-owned media outlets.
 Most major opposition parties boast their own newspapers, and
 opposition figures also have frequent access to the government
 media.
 There were fewer complaints during 1990 of government pressure
 on the media or of restrictions on journalists. There was,
 however, a series of charges of "apology for terrorism" filed
 against numerous journalists and media outlets for publishing
 interviews with MRTA leader Victor Polay Campos after the
 MRTA's mass prison escape in July. Otherwise, there was no
 discernible government policy, under either President Garcia
 or President Fujimori, to harass or pressure the media.
 Journalists were sometimes barred from traveling in the rural
 areas of the emergency zones, and those who attempted to do so
 were occasionally detained by the military, although they were
 generally released within hours. There were also some
 complaints of police confiscation of video and photographic
 material of events the Government did not want publicized.
 These instances were not common, however, and, in general, the
 level of journalistic access to the emergency zones improved.
 Antimedia actions by the police, not always supported by
 requisite court authorizations, focused on the two newspapers
 universally viewed as competing public "fronts" for Sendero
 and MRTA terrorist operations. Repeated police actions in
 late 1989 and early 1990 effectively removed the pro-Sendero
 newspaper El Diario from public circulation. Only a few
 issues appeared, edited and printed clandestinely, after
 February. Janet Talavera, the interim director of El Diario,
 who was detained in June, 1989, under the provisions of the
 legislation prohibiting "apologies for and encouragement of
 terrorism" and subsequent terrorism charges, was still
 awaiting trial at year's end. Luis Arce Borja, the paper's
 permanent director, also remained under indictment for
 "apologies for and encouragement of terrorism" and spent the
 year living abroad. There were also several police raids
 against the pro-MRTA newspaper Cambio during the first half of
 the year; several staff members were arrested on terrorism
 charges. On a few occasions, police confiscated Cambio press
 runs from distributors and public newsstands. For the most
 part, however, the newspaper continued to publish openly and
 regularly.
 
 
 PERU
 In separate actions MRTA and Sendero forces occupied the
 offices of more than a dozen radio stations and wire services,
 forcing the media outlets to transmit political propaganda
 messages. Sendero also destroyed a government television
 relay station in Huaraz in May. At least a half-dozen rural
 radio stations were bombed during the year by Sendero.
 Unknown terrorists exploded a bomb at the printing plant of
 Expreso newspaper in March. The offices of Channel 11
 television, owned by Lima's independent mayor, Ricardo
 Belmont, were twice attacked with explosives.
 Journalists were sometimes the victims of violence and
 threats. The College of Peruvian Journalists reported that as
 many as 10 persons involved in the news media were killed in
 1990. Newspaper editor Pedro Macedo Figueroa was killed by
 Sendero terrorists on October 24 in Ancash. Local
 investigative jouhnalist and lawyer Oswaldo Calderon Almonacid
 was killed by unknown assailants on October 6 in
 Huancavelica. In June, in the first action of its kind, the
 Organization of American States' (OAS) Inter-American Court of
 Human Rights ordered the Government of Peru to take steps
 necessary to protect the lives of the witnesses to the
 November 1988 murder, reportedly at the hands of the military,
 of journalist Hugo Bustios. (One witness, Delfin Ortiz Serna,
 was shot to death by unknown assailants in May 1989; other
 witnesses were intimidated.) The Court also summoned the
 Government to an August public hearing. The Government took
 steps to provide security for the witnesses and to comply with
 the court order. By year's end, however, the military
 personnel publicly identified in the case had yet to be
 charged or detained. The owner of the Panamericana Radio and
 Television Network, Hector Delgado Parker, kidnaped by the
 MRTA in October, 1989, was freed on April 21, 1990, after his
 station broadcast a number of MRTA statements and reportedly
 paid a multimillion dollar ransom. Following his criticisms
 of Sendero, Raul Gonzalez, a noted journalist and researcher
 on Sendero, was publicly threatened with death in the May 28
 edition of El Diario. Several other journalists and academics
 writing on narcotics trafficking or subversion also received
 threats.
 Academic freedom is widely respected, but academics and
 students are sometimes the victims of threats and abuses.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 These rights are expressly provided for in the Constitution
 and are normally respected in practice except in areas under a
 state of emergency (where the right of assembly is
 suspended). Public meetings in plazas or streets require
 advance permission, which may only be denied for reasons of
 public safety or health. Municipal authorities usually
 approved permits for demonstrations in nonemergency zones.
 Many unauthorized demonstrations also occurred, and, for the
 most part, the Government dealt with them in a
 nonconfrontational manner. On a number of occasions, however,
 poorly disciplined police on the scene overreacted, responding
 with more than the minimum force necessary, resorting to
 clubs, tear gas, buckshot, and truck-mounted water cannons to
 break up marches or to disperse large crowds. Then-President
 Garcia formally apologized after police opened fire with
 buckshot February 7 on a peaceful March led by United Left
 presidential candidate Henry Pease. Pease, several
 supporters, and two journalists were slightly wounded. The
 police without reason attacked a May 7 Mother's Day protest
 
 
 748
 PERU
 march of recently fired municipal government charwomen, using
 clubs, water cannon, tear gas, and buckshot.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Roman Catholicism predominates in Peru, and the Constitution
 formally recognizes the Church "as an important element in the
 historical, cultural and moral development" of the nation.
 The Constitution also establishes the separation of church and
 state and ensures freedom of religion and conscience. These
 rights are respected in practice. Members of minority
 religions encounter ho government interference in practicing
 their faith. Organized religions are free to establish places
 of worship,.train clergy, engage in religious publishing, and
 proselytize. Foreign-born clergy are not barred from entry;
 rather, they constitute a significant presence, even within
 the dominant Catholic Church.
 Members of various religious organizations report having
 received death threats from Sendero, the MRTA, or the CRF
 during 1990 and several religious workers were killed by
 Sendero. Among those religious workers executed by Sendero
 were a Jehovah's witness, a Baptist minister, two Mormon
 missionaries, and a 70-year-old Catholic nun. Sendero bombed
 several houses of worship. The MRTA claimed responsibility
 for two bombings of Lima synagogues. Some of these and
 similar killings appeared to be prompted by a perception that
 the religious workers had engaged in "political" activity, but
 a number of religious officials fear that Sendero is becoming
 increasingly antagonistic to organized religion in general.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 The Constitution provides for the right of free movement, and
 there are no political or legal constraints on foreign travel
 or emigration. Freedom of movement is legally suspended
 within the emergency zones, and travelers may be detained by
 authorities at any time. Other domestic and international
 travel is not known to be restricted by the Government for
 political reasons.
 Sendero called for numerous "armed strikes" in various parts
 of the country, during which civilians were obliged to stay at
 home or risk violence if they traveled. There have been no
 major resettlement efforts by the security forces since the
 mid-1980s. There were, however, credible reports of the
 systematic, forced resettlement of several dozen peasant
 communities by the military in Huanta province, Ayacucho
 Department. There were also reports of Sendero forcibly
 resettling indigenous communities and holding villages against
 their will in Junin and Ayacucho Departments.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Peru is a democracy governed by a freely elected President and
 Congress, but the civilian Government's control of the
 security forces is severely limited. The political process is
 open, subject to monitoring by an autonomous National
 Elections Board, and elections are vigorously contested by
 parties ranging from conservative to Marxist-Leninist.
 Sendero Luminoso persistently sought to deny citizens their
 political rights-particularly in the more remote areas--by
 killing candidates and elected officials and threatening
 
 
 749
 PERU
 voters. However, Sendero failed in its repeated attempts to
 disrupt the April and June presidential elections, and more
 than 70 percent of the eligible voters nationwide twice defied
 the guerrilla calls for boycotts and went to the polls.
 Candidates for public office, election workers, and voters
 were all threatened, and in some cases killed, by Sendero for
 their participation in the electoral process.
 Elections are held every 5 years for president and the two
 vice presidents, as well as for the Senate and Chamber of
 Deputies. The President is barred from running for
 consecutive terms of office. Elections for the nation's newly
 established regional parliaments are to be held every 3 years,
 at the time of the nation's municipal elections. Suffrage is
 both universal and mandatory for persons 18 to 70 years of
 age, except for active duty police or military, who are barred
 from voting or holding public office. Balloting is direct and
 secret.
 Under the Constitution, the Government is headed by a powerful
 executive; an estimated 95 percent of all new laws
 historically have been enacted through unilateral presidential
 decrees. Nonetheless, the legislature freely and openly
 debated government policies, with members of the President's
 own party able to take positions in opposition. For the first
 time since enactment of the 1979 Constitution, a Congress was
 elected in April that is not dominated by the party of the
 President. The new Congress quickly asserted its independence
 and tested its ability to act as a counterbalance to the
 presidency.
 The political system, although legally open to all,
 historically has been dominated by Peruvian males of European
 or mixed European and indigenous background. The election of
 President Fujimori, the native-born son of immigrants, was
 widely seen both as a further opening of the political system
 and as a rejection of the elite-driven system by the majority
 of Peruvians who are neither wealthy nor of European heritage.
 Four of the 62 members of the Senate are women, as are 12 of
 the 180 members of the House of Deputies.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The year 1990 was an especially dangerous and difficult one
 for independent human rights observers in Peru. The Lima
 offices of the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC)
 and the Andean Commission of Jurists were bombed only minutes
 apart on February 18. The Lima offices of AI--which, by AI
 convention, do not report on the human rights situation of the
 host country-were heavily damaged in a bombing attack 2 weeks
 later, on March 4. No one claimed responsibility for any of
 the attacks, and there were no injuries. Human rights workers
 from at least three domestic human rights groups reported
 receiving death threats from Sendero and from the CRF. Angel
 Escobar Jurado of the Huancavelica Human Rights Commission was
 detained by six heavily armed men in civilian clothes on
 February 27. Human rights worker Guadalupe Ccalloccunto was
 abducted from her family's house in Ayacucho on June 10,
 probably by military personnel. Both Escobar and Ccalloccunto
 were still considered "disappeared" at year's end. Several
 human rights activists at the University San Cristobal of
 Huamanga, Ayacucho Department, were systematically
 assassinated in mid-July (see Section l.a.). Presumed Sendero
 
 
 750
 PERU
 terrorists kidnaped, tortured, and killed Zenon Ramirez, the
 human rights secretary of Huancayo's Provincial Federation of
 Urban Slum Residents, on October 6.
 The ICRC, Americas Watch (AW), the Washington Office on Latin
 America, and the World Council of Churches, among others, all
 sent representatives to Peru in 1990 to investigate the human
 rights situation. The World Council of Churches delegation
 was received by the President, the Ministers of Defense,
 Interior, and Justice in October, and traveled unimpeded to
 three emergency zone departments.
 The "Permanent People's Tribunal", an international antiwar
 organization, held several days of mock trials in Lima in
 July, receiving public testimonies from the victims and
 witnesses to human rights abuses. The tribunal--which was
 afforded substantial, nonintrusive security protection by the
 outgoing Government-found the Government, Sendero, and the
 MRTA all guilty of systematic violations of the Geneva
 Conventions and other international standards for human rights
 conduct.
 AI sent an "open letter" to all the presidential candidates in
 February, urging them to make the protection of human rights
 central to their electoral programs. The Secretary General of
 AI visited Peru in May. Although he was not received by
 President Garcia, he did meet with both presidential runoff
 candidates.
 One of President-elect Fujimori's first postelection
 activities was his June 15 meeting with the visiting Director
 General of the ICRC. Access by the ICRC to the emergency
 zones and to detainees, which had been denied in mid-1988 but
 restored in early 1989, continued during 1990. The ICRC made
 numerous visits to detention centers run by the Ministries of
 Justice and Interior. Despite repeated requests, however, the
 ICRC remained barred from all Ministry of Defense centers and
 some police detention facilities in the emergency zones, where
 incommunicado detention, torture, and other human rights
 violations are known to occur.
 A number of local private human rights organizations
 constitute the Independent National Coordinating Committee for
 Human Rights. These include COMISEDH, the Institute for Legal
 Defense (IDL), the Association for Human Rights (APRODEH), the
 Center for Peace Studies and Action (CEAPAZ), and the Catholic
 Church's Commission for Social Action (CEAS). A number of
 other, smaller groups work in the departmental capitals and
 other cities. These groups are generally credible observers,
 investigating and reporting on human rights abuses to the
 extent possible, regardless of the perpetrator. Local human
 rights organizations complain that they are limited by the
 military in their efforts to investigate human rights abuses
 in the emergency zones and that their requests to the
 Government for information are usually ignored. Legitimate
 fears of attacks by-Sendero also greatly limit the ability of
 human rights monitors to investigate reported cases of abuse.
 Both President Garcia and President Fujimori rebuffed repeated
 requests to meet with members of the National Coordinating
 Committee.
 In early 1990 the Garcia government repeatedly complained that
 both local and international human rights groups distorted or
 exaggerated Peru's human rights problems. The Government's
 general unresponsiveness to specific inquiries, however, did
 
 
 751
 PERU
 little to improve its credibility. Upon taking office on July
 28, President Fujimori decried the state of human rights in
 the nation and announced his intention to create a presidential
 national human rights commission. By year's end, however, the
 commission had yet to be constituted.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 The Constitution grants women equality with men, and laws on
 marriage, divorce, and property rights do not discriminate
 against women. Nevertheless, tradition impedes the access of
 women to leadership roles in major social and political
 institutions.
 Sexual violence, including spouse abuse, is a chronic
 problem. Police in Lima receive between 150 and 200 formal
 complaints of rape daily. Reports of such abuse increased in
 frequency during the year. A special police center, staffed
 by policewomen, operated in.Lima to provide legal, medical,
 and psychiatric assistance to abused spouses and children. A
 number of women's organizations and feminist groups are active
 in Peru.
 Peru's large indigenous population and its small black
 population were subject to pervasive social discrimination,
 although far less so than before the Velasco revolution of
 1968. The former group, mostly speakers of Quechua, Aymara,
 and other native languages, traditionally has lacked access to
 public services. Peru is a classic case of differential
 development, with public investment traditionally focused on
 thecoast, drawing migrants to the cities, especially Lima.
 Recognizing this fact, the Government has attempted to
 redirect the flow of resources and services to poor, largely
 Indian, rural areas. Development efforts, however, have been
 impeded by the difficulty and cost of providing services to
 remote areas and by the continued, targeted disruption of
 these efforts by Sendero. As a result of current problems, as
 well as historic and continued prejudice, the economic and
 social needs of Peruvians of European ancestry continued to be
 met to a far greater extent than those of Peruvians of black,
 mixed, or pure Indian heritage.
 The traditional tribal lands of indigenous communities in the
 jungles of Ayacucho, Apurimac, Junin, and Ucayali Departments
 were attacked by Sendero or MRTA guerrillas, or were seized by
 newly arrived colonists, often with the backing of narcotics
 traffickers. Hundreds of Indians, often armed with nothing
 more than bows and arrows, were killed in the resulting
 conflicts. A number of communities were massacred wholesale
 by Sendero, others were forcibly relocated or held captive.
 Ethnic and racial differences also became a factor in the 1990
 presidential elections, as some sectors attempted to build
 racist sentiment in opposition to the candidacy of Alberto
 Fujimori, the son of Japanese immigrants. President Fujimori
 and his two Vice Presidents proudly proclaim their racial
 origins, noting that one is Asian (Fujimori), one Indian
 (first Vice President San Roman) and one black (second Vice
 President Garcia). To his credit, Mario Vargas Llosa,
 President Fujimori's runoff opponent, roundly condemned
 race-baiting tactics.
 
 
 752
 PERU
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 The Constitution provides for freedom of association and,
 except for the judiciary, police, military, and military
 parastatals, the right to form labor unions without previous
 authorization. However, there are some legal restrictions on
 the right to form a union. There is, for example, a
 requirement to register with the Ministry of Labor for the
 union to become a legal entity capable. of performing its
 functions. Suspension or dissolution of labor unions is
 forbidden by the Constitution but can be done legally through
 the civil court system at the request of the union itself or
 by cancelation of the union's registration by the Labor
 Ministry. Unions may form industry-wide federations which
 can, in turn, form confederations, all of which may affiliate
 with international labor organizations. Private and public
 sector unions of workers performing the same type of work
 cannot join together as a confederation at any level. Shortly
 after taking office,-the Fujimori Government requested
 technical and financial assistance from the International
 Labor Organization (ILO) for a review of a proposed unified
 labor code; the ILO agreed to help. In late December the
 Government issued a new decree that allows the formation of
 new unions with a minimum-of 20 members, and allows multiple
 unions within the same workplace. The-measure also attempts
 to limit the power of the politically affiliated leadership of
 the existing labor organizations by allowing any two unions to
 form a confederation.
 About 18 percent of the labor force is organized. Organized
 labor, however, is. found in industries responsible for about
 70 percent of Peru's gross national.product. The majority of
 unorganized-workers are in the countryside and involved in the
 vast underground "informal" sector which works outside
 government regulations. Although a significant percentage of
 organized labor belongs to independent unions and federations,
 those unions with a political party affiliation are routinely
 manipulated to serve partisan political interests.
 The Confederation of Peruvian Workers is a-member of the
 Inter-American Regional Organization of Workers and the
 International Confederation of Free Trade Unions. The General
 Confederation of Peruvian Workers is affiliated with the
 Communist-controlled World Federation of Trade Unions and its
 Latin American organization, the Permanent Congress for Trade
 Union Unity of Latin.America.
 The Constitution provides for the right to strike "according
 to law." There is no strike law, however, even though
 Congress has considered various implementing bills since the
 Constitution was promulgated in 1979. By supreme executive
 decree (which defines some strike behavior in the absence of a
 formal law), workers in the private sector must give 72-hour
 notice to the employer and the Ministry of Labor before going
 on strike. When direct negotiations between workers and
 employers break down, the Government can intervene and
 constitute a tripartite (government, management, labor) board
 to review the situation. If no agreement is reached, the
 Government then weighs the overall economic implications of
 the employer's and the workers' positions and makes a decision
 (which can be appealed administratively). A government
 determination that a strike is illegal can lead to the
 dismissal of workers or union leaders and permits employers to
 
 
 753
 PERU
 hire strikebreakers legally. Despite these restrictions,
 countless strikes, often wildcat in nature, took place in
 1990. There are no norms regulating strikes in the public
 sector and all such strikes, common though they were, were
 open to legal challenge. In spite of the constitutional right
 to strike, nearly all strikes in Peru are declared illegal.
 However, the workers who strike illegally are seldom
 penalized. Following a series of disruptive public sector
 strikes late in the year, the Government issued a supreme
 decree restricting the right of government workers in
 "essential services" to strike. Although the right to strike
 remains, a minimum level of essential services must be
 maintained. "Essential services" was very broadly defined.
 In 1990 the ILO Committee on Freedom of Asgociation (CFA)
 examined several complaints involving Peru, including the
 alleged murder and disappearance of trade unionists, workers,
 and striking peasants; the alleged repression of trade union
 demonstrations and meetings; the alleged suppression of a
 teachers' strike and discrimination against the strikers; and
 alleged attempts by the Government to undermine a collective
 bargaining agreement with the power and light workers. The
 CFA asked the *Government to guarantee the teachers' right to
 strike, expressed its profound concern over the murder of 88
 peasants in 1989, and asked to be kept informed of
 corresponding judicial inquiries.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 By law, employers cannot discriminate against union members or
 organizers. In practice, however, union activists are
 sometimes harassed by employers who threaten to fire them.
 Others are paid off to leave the enterprise. Workers may
 appeal their cases through the Ministry of Labor or, if a
 decision is not acceptable to both parties, through the civil
 courts. In some cases, a worker is kept on the company's
 payroll until a final legal ruling is obtained. In other
 cases, a worker may be awarded back pay in a final settlement.
 There were reported incidents during the year of more serious
 harassment and intimidation of labor union activists,
 including arbitrary detention (see Section 1.d.), kidnaping,
 and killing (see Section l.a.). Sendero threatened in
 November to kill the entire leadership of the Federation of
 Civil Construction Workers because of their organizational
 efforts.
 The right to bargain collectively is provided for by the
 Constitution, but there are restrictions on what can be
 negotiated. In the public sector, for example, only working
 conditions may be negotiated, and then only if the changes do
 not involve expenses greater than the funds already budgeted.
 In the private sector, collective bargaining can cover both
 working conditions and pay.
 Labor laws and regulations are applied uniformly throughout
 the country, including in an area of the Amazon basin, granted
 in a Peru/Colombia border agreement, which is analogous to a
 free trade zone.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 The Constitution prohibits compulsory labor, and this
 prohibition is usually respected in practice. There have been
 a few, unverified reports of compulsory labor on plantations
 
 
 754
 PERU
 in remote areas of the country where law enforcement is all
 but nonexistent. Sendero has also been accused of forcibly
 recruiting peasants to either join its ranks or render support
 services. There were also complaints that the military was
 recruiting peasants to join self-defense militias, perform
 guard duty, or render other support services in some places in
 the emergency zones.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 The law.prohibits the employment of children under 14 years of
 age. In the formal sector of the economy, the law allows for
 the employment of older children in some jobs, for a limited
 period of time, and for a curtailed workweek at full pay.
 According to a 1987 Senate report, however, 1.1 million
 children 6 to 14 years of age work, mostly in the informal
 sector. Unofficial sources estimate that about half a million
 children work in the Lima area alone. A June 1989 survey of
 133 working children by the Agrarian University in Lima showed
 that 78 percent of them were between 10 and 12 years old.
 Some 40 percent sold assorted merchandise as street vendors,
 and 53 percent went to school only occasionally or not at
 all. One-third worked 7 days a week, and 57 percent of the
 total worked between 2 and 5 days a week.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 Labor code provisions concerning conditions of work are
 routinely ignored by most employers. The code provides for an
 8-hour day and an official 48-hour week for men, and a 45 hour
 week for women. There are government standards for industrial
 health and safety, but these are rarely enforced, either by
 the employer or the Government (which has no inspectors).
 Accidents are common, and there is usually no emphasis on
 prevention; once accidents occur, employers normally make
 voluntary compensation, however minimal.
 All workers are legally entitled to 30 days' paid annual
 vacation. Those in the private sector have to work a minimum
 of 260 days (excluding 30 days' sick leave) or forfeit their
 vacation. In an economy where unemployment and
 underemployment total an estimated 80 percent, however,
 vacation benefits and other conditions of work are readily
 sacrificed in exchange for steady or even temporary
 employment. The administratively set minimum wage is
 increased regularly by the Government, but it continues to lag
 behind inflation. Equal to about $50 per month, the minimum
 wage is not sufficient to provide a decent standard of living
 for a worker and family. However, many Peruvians are paid
 more than the minimum wage and many others supplement their
 income through multiple jobs or subsistence farming, or
 bothlNonetheless, according to a September 1990 World Bank
 report, 55 percent of all Peruvians live in extreme poverty.
 
 
 755
