Peru
Justice for past abuses continues to be a leading human rights concern in Peru.
While authorities have made some progress in holding accountable those responsible
for abuses committed during its 20-year armed conflict (1980-2000), most
perpetrators continue to evade justice. Investigations of massacres and disappearances
by government forces have been held up in part by lack of military
cooperation.
The efforts of Peruvian prosecutors to bring former President Alberto Fujimori to
justice in Peru finally bore fruit in September 2007, when the Chilean Supreme
Court, in a landmark decision, authorized his extradition on charges of human
rights abuse and corruption.
A law endangering the autonomy of nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) was
approved by Congress in 2006 but declared partially unconstitutional in 2007 by
the Constitutional Court.
Confronting the Past
The government Truth and Reconciliation Commission estimated in 2003 that
almost 70,000 people died or disappeared during the armed conflict. Many
were victims of atrocities committed by the Shining Path and another insurgent
group, and others of human rights abuses by state agents.
At this writing, former president Fujimori was imprisoned in Lima, awaiting trial.
He had been in self-imposed exile in Japan for five years, before traveling to
Chile, where he was arrested in November 2005. The crimes for which he faces
prosecution in Peru include his alleged involvement in the extrajudicial execution
of 15 people at a barbecue in the Barrios Altos district of Lima in November 1991
and the forced disappearance and murder of nine students and a teacher from La
Cantuta University in July 1992.
Efforts have been underway to investigate and prosecute former officials and military
officers implicated in scores of other killings and disappearances dating
from the beginning of the armed conflict. For example, at least 50 alleged members of the Colina Group, the death squad directly responsible for the human
rights crimes for which Fujimori was extradited, have been on trial in Lima since
August 2005. Yet, at this writing, only 17 former military officers and civilians had
been convicted for abuses attributed to state actors by the truth commission.
Lack of cooperation by the armed forces has hampered the investigations of
these cases. The military has often failed to provide information needed to identify
potentially key witnesses who served in rural counterinsurgency bases during
the conflict. It has also declined to identify military officials known to witnesses
only by their aliases.
Attacks on Journalists
Journalists who publicize abuses by local government officials are vulnerable to
intimidation in some parts of the country. In March 2007, Miguel Prez Julca, who
worked for a news program on a local radio station in Jan, Cajamarca province,
was shot twice in the head by two gunmen in front of his wife, who was also
injured, and two sons. He died while being rushed to hospital. Prez had been
reporting on police corruption and problems of public security in the city. Four
days after Prezs murder, three other journalists from Jan received death threats
in text messages on their cell phones. Prez was the third Peruvian journalist
killed in similar circumstances since 2004.
Torture
Torture and ill-treatment of criminal suspects continues to be a problem in Peru.
The Human Rights Commission (Comisin de Derechos Humanos, COMISEDH)
an NGO that represents torture victims in court proceedingsrecorded 78 complaints
of torture between January 2005 and October 2007. In recent years,
Peruvian courts have made some progress in holding accountable police who
abuse detainees. Since 2000, the Supreme Court has confirmed prison sentences
against 15 police officers, military agents, and prison guards for torture in seven
cases. In July 2007, two policemen received eight-year and four-year sentences for
a beating that led to the death of Ricardo Huaringa Flix in 2004. In September
2006, Peru ratified the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and
Other Cruel, Inhuman and Degrading Treatment or Punishment.
Death Penalty
The death penalty in Peru is restricted to cases of treason in wartime, and has not
been applied since the 1970s. However, following an armed attack in Ayacucho in
December 2006 in which eight people were killed, President Alan Garca presented
a bill to Congress to reintroduce the death penalty for terrorist crimes. The constitution
already contemplates the death penalty in such circumstances, but it
has not been incorporated into the Criminal Code. In January 2007, a bill to do so
was defeated in Congress by a substantial majority.
Human Rights Defenders
In November 2006, President Alan Garcia supported legislation that would allow
the government to supervise the activities of Peruvian NGOs that receive foreign
funding. After strong protests by civil society groups, an amended version of
the bill was passed that limited its application to organizations that receive government
funding or tax benefits. Privately-funded NGOs would still be required to
register their activities and expenditures with the government aid agency. In
September 2007, the Constitutional Court ruled that this requirement to report
expenditures was unconstitutional.
Key International Actors
In November 2006, the Inter-American Court of Human Rights ruled on a case
involving the indiscriminate killing in 1992 of 41 Shining Path prisoners at the
Miguel Castro Castro prison in Lima. The court ordered the government to pay
compensation of about $20 million to the families of the dead and to individuals
tortured during the operation. President Garca said that he could not accept paying
compensation to terrorists, and said he would ask the court for interpretation
of its decision.