PERU
As in past years, the report on Peru is among the most thorough, balanced and accurate in the volume. Such violations as the massacre in Cayara, Ayacucho and the attempted murder of Sonia Muñoz are described in detail, and the role of the government's security forces is accur^ely reflected.
The report also performs a valuable service in describing the courageous and effective work performed by Carlos Escobar, the spedal prosecutor for disappearances in Ayacucho. It notes the military's lade of cooperation and outright pressure which Escobar suffered, leading to the abrupt closure of his office in Ayacucho in November 1988, purportedly for insufficient funds. The report states that the Office of the Prosecutor {Fiscalía de la Nación) announced that Escobar's Ayacucho office would be reopened vnth another attorney. In fact, the Special Delegation for Disappearances in Ayacucho remains closed. Escobar has been transferred to Iquitos, in the jungle region, and no Fiscalía staff is now specially assigned to investigate disappearances.
The report provides an accurate description of the delays and inefficiency which attend the prosecution and investigation of human rights abuses by mihtary courts. It also provides the very short list of cases that are still pending before those courts. In the case of the massacre of prisoners in Liu-igancho in June 1^6, Army officers and members of the Guarda Republicana were finally indicted in 1988. Similar investigations are supposedly imder way for simultaneous killings by the Navy in El Frontón prison, but the Navy prosecutors, unlike their Army colleagues, fiatly refused to provide any information to the Senatorial commission of inquiry which investigated the prison incidents, and they have yet to produce indictments.
The report mistakenly states that the obligation to bring those accused of terrorism before a judge within 15 days of arrest is not apphcable in the emergency zones. Under Peruvian law, the state of emergency currently in effect in
137
Critique
those areas does not suspend this important due process guarantee. Consequently, the recurrent practice by the military and police of holding prisoners beyond this 15-day limit is plainly illegal imder Peruvian law, as well as in violation of Peru's international human rights commitments.
The report contains an accurate description of the pressiu'es exerted by government forces on human rights and humanitarian organizations in the emergency zones. It could have been added that Sendero Luminoso has recently turned to targeting the same organizations in a drive to expel them from the area. As a result, many international relief workers have left the Ayacucho region, and the provision of essential human services has deteriorated further.
The report also contains an accurate description of the ejqpulsion from Ayacucho of Juan E. Méndez of Americas Watch, on orders of the Political-Military Chief of the emergency zone. Military authorities in the area have long abused their powers in similar fashion against local and foreign journalists, and the civilian government has consistently refused to comment on the matter, thereby implicitly le^timidng those actions.
We are pleased that the State Department acknowledges the credibility of the several Peruvian human rights organizations. We disagree, however, with the statement that these organizations have concentrated their attention on violations attributable to the government, to the exclusion of those committed by the insurgent groups. Within the constraints presented by the difficulty of researching events in remote places, the Peruvian human rights groups have frequently criticized both Sendero and the Tupac Amaru Revolutionary Movement, demanded that they comply with international humanitarian law, and insisted that they enter into serious peace negotiations.
138
