 PERU
 Peru is a multiparty republic with a dominant executive branch. Under provisions
 of a Constitution enacted in 1993, President Alberto Fujimori was reelected to a sec-
 ond 5-year term in 1995, at which time his party also won a controlling majority
 
 
 622
 in Congress. The Constitution also created several new judicial institutions, includ-
 ing a Constitutional Tribunal, designed to enhance the independence of the judici-
 ary. However, the independence of both the legislative and judicial branches was
 brought into question when the congressional majority, faced with the constitutional
 provision imiting presidents to no more than two onsecutive terms in office, passed
 an interpretive law that would permit President Fujimori to run for a third consecu-
 tive term. The administration's attempt to maintain its hold on power created a con-
 stitutional crisis. Congress removed three members of the Constitutional Tribunal
 who had voted against the interpretation allowing a third term, the Tribunal
 stopped functioning to its fullest capacity, and Congress had not replaced the ousted
 judges by year's end.
 The police and military share the responsibility for internal security. Since 1980
 the security forces have directed most of their efforts against the Sendero Luminoso
 (Shining Path) and Tupac Amaru Revolutionary Movement (MRTA) terrorist groups.
 Although the threat posed by these groups continued to decline in overall terms, the
 MRTA's takeover of the Japanese Ambassador's residence from December 17, 1996,
 to April 22 demonstrated that it remained a real, albeit diminished, threat. Within
 the emergency zones, which cover 16 percent of the country, certain constitutional
 protections are suspended and the military is in charge. In the rest of the country,
 the civilian authorities generally maintain effective control of the security forces.
 Nevertheless, the military and the police were responsible for serious human rights
 abuses.
 The Government has implemented major economic reforms, transforming the
 economy from one based on heavy regulation to a market-oriented one. The Govern-
 ment has eliminated controls on capital flows, prices, and trade. It has privatized
 most state enterprises and plans to sell those that remain by the end of 1999. The
 inflation rate has dropped into single digits, and growth and foreign investment
 have soared. Per capita gross domestic product is estimated at $2,000. Major exports
 include copper as well as other minerals, fishmeal, and textiles. Illegal exports of
 processed coca are thought to have earned about $600 to $800 million annually in
 past years. The unemployment rate in Lima is estimated at 8 percent, but the na-
 tional rate of underemployment is about 40 percent. More than half of the economi-
 cally active population work in the informal sector of the economy, which largely
 functions beyond government supervision and taxation. The poor comprise 45 per-
 cent of the population, and slightly less than 20 percent of the population lives in
 extreme poverty.
 Althouh egregious abuses of human rights continued to decline, serious problems
 emerged m several areas. Security forces were responsible for torture and beatings.
 The officers found responsible for torturing armny intelligence officer Leonor La Rosa
 were sentenced to prison terms. Although overall prison conditions remained ex-
 tremely harsh, significant progress was made with the adoption of a more liberal
 prison regime covering inmates jailed for terrorism and treason. Arbitrary deten-
 tion, absence of accountability, lack of due process, persistent lengthy trial delays,
 and prolonged pretrial detention remained problems. The judicial system is ineffi-
 cient and subject to executive influence. The Government infringed on citizens' pri-
 vacy rights; the disclosure of a reported secret government intelligence program to
 monitor the telephones of a broad spectrum of government officials, opposition poli-
 ticians, journalists, business executives, and entertainers led to severe public criti-
 cism. The Government infringed upon press freedom; journalists accused the secu-
 rity forces of harassment and intimidation; and the Government revoked the citizen-
 ship of the foreign-born owner of a major television station after the station broad-
 cast negative stories about the regime. The authorities often hindered the operations
 of human rights monitors. Violence and discrimination against women, violence
 against children, and discrimination against the disabled, indigenous people, and ra-
 cial minorities remained problems. Child labor, including forced child labor, is also
 a problem.
 The office of Defender of the People, or Human Rights Ombudsman, increasingly
 gained the public's respect and confidence. The ad hoc Pardons Commission, whose
 work was interrupted by the MRTA hostage crisis, continued to recommend presi-
 dential pardons for individuals unjustly jailed for terrorism and treason. During the
 year, it won the release of an additional 250 detainees, bringing the total of those
 pardoned and released to 360. In response to the decreased terrorist threat, the
 Government abolished on October 15 both the civilian and military "faceless" tribu-
 nals, which had been responsible for many judicial abuses. Treason trials in the
 military courts continued as before, but with clearly identifiable judges; terrorism
 trials in the civilian jurisdiction were suspended, pending establishment of a new
 system of specialized terrorism courts.
 
 
 623
 Sendero Luminoso and MRTA terrorists continued to commit the great majority
 of killings and other egregious human rights abuses. Sendero Luminoso practiced
 torture and other forms of brutality, disrupted the home and family life of many
 citizens, and violated the rights of indigenous people.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no confirmed reports of
 politically motivated killings carried out by the security forces. However, according
 to press reports, some of the hostages freed from the Japanese Ambassador's resi-
 dence, who did not wish to be identified, alleged that at least 1 of the 14 hostage
 takers was killed by the security forces after surrendering.
 Fortunato Chipana Ccahuana, one of the 38 suspected MRTA terrorists arbitrarily
 detained and tortured in March by the military in Oxa ampa province (see Section
 1.c.), was at home when the security forces broke in, sNot him in the leg as he at-
 tempted to escape, and left him to bleed to death. The soldier responsible for
 Chipana Ccahuana's death was charged with unintentional murder.
 In early April, concurrent with media revelations that Army Intelligence Service
 (SJE) officer Leonor La Rosa had been tortured by fellow officers (see Section 1.c.),
 the press reported that 28-year-old Mariela Barreto, another SIB agent and former
 end of Colina death squad leader Santiago Martin Rivas, had been murdered
 and that police had found her dismembered and decapitated body on March 23.
 Then-Defense Minister Tomas Castillo Meza announced that the military courts
 would assert jurisdiction over the Barreto case, if a link could be found between it
 and the La Rosa case. Although President Fujimori promised an exhaustive inves-
 tigation, neither the Public Ministry nor the police had succeeded, by year's end, in
 determining a motive for the killing or a likely suspect.
 On July 30, seven soldiers rounded up Tony Gustavo Aduvire Condori and eight
 other university students, and drove them toward a military base in Tacna as part
 of the system of military conscription. The next day, police informed Aduvire's fam-
 ily that he had been found dead, with a fractured skull and other signs of brutal
 treatment on his body, a short distance from the base. Human rights groups assert
 that this incident is not unique, and that even though university students are ex-
 empt, the military authorities target students for forced conscription. The authori-
 ties charged seven soldiers in this case with unlawfully abandoning a person in dis-
 tress.
 In December the authorities relieved 16 soldiers from duty in Iquitos, arrested
 them, and charged them with robbing and killing 2 Japanese students who were ex-
 ploring the Amazon River on a raft in October. President Fujimori said that those
 responsible would be tried in civilian rather than military courts.
 The December 1992 killing of labor leader Pedro HuilIca Tecse had initially been
 presumed to have been carried out by Sendero Luminoso terrorists. However, in
 September 1995, jailed former SIE agent Mesmer Carles Talledo charged that
 Huillca Tecse's murder, as well as a number of other high-profile bombings and
 massacres, had been carried out by the Colina death suad whose activities are gen-
 erally believed to have been authorized and ontrolled by the National Intelligence
 Service. In November President Fujimori pardoned Cares Talledo for having been
 wrongly convicted of terrorism offenses, but his release did not bring about resolu-
 tion of the case. The Public Ministry, which had begun investigating Cares
 Talledo's allegations while he was still in jail, compelled him to submit to a psy-
 chiatric examination.
 During the year, Sendero Luminoso and MRTA terrorists killed 44 members of
 the security forces and 70 civilians (see Section 1.g.).
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of disappearances as a result of actions
 by the security forces.
 In January the Inter-American Court of Human Rights rejected the Government's
 request for clarification of a judgment awarding compensation in the Neira Alegria
 case. In June 1986, Victor Neira Alegria, Edgar Zenteno Escobar, and William
 Zenteno Escobar, three inmates at El Fronton, a high-security prison located on an
 island off the Lima coast, disappeared following a military assault on the prison
 where a mutiny was taking place. In a January 1995 decision, the Inter-American
 Court ruled that the Government had violated the right to life of the three inmates
 and ordered it to enter into negotiations with the Inter-American Commission on
 Human Rights (IACHR) as to the amount of compensation to be paid to the victims'
 families. After repeated unsuccessful attempts to secure the Government's coopera-
 tion in this matter, the Court, in September 1996, set the total amount of compensa-
 
 
 624
 tion for the three families at $154,000. Court authorities report having so far re-
 ceived no word that the Government has complied with the compensation order.
 In November the Inter-American Court of Human Rights ruled on the case of
 Catholic University student Ernesto Rafael Castillo Paez. On October 21, 1990, eye-
 witnesses saw Castillo Paez being forcibly detained and driven away by police. De-
 spite repeated attempts through the courts to have Castillo Paez released, the police
 denied all knowledge of his whereabouts. During the investigation and lega pro-
 ceedings, the lawyer representing the family was the target of a letter bomb attack
 that cost him an arm, while the family itself was subjected to repeated telephone
 death threats; both the lawyer and the family left the country. The Court found that
 the Government had violated Castillo Paez's right to life, liberty, and personal integ-
 rity, and ordered it to punish those responsible, to return the victim's remains to
 his family, and to ompensate the family for its loss. By year's end, the Government
 had taken no action in response to the ruling.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution prohibits torture and inhuman or humiliating treatment. However,
 in practice, torture and brutal treatment of detainees by security force personnel
 occur frequently. The victims are both suspected criminals and suspected terrorists.
 Torture most often takes place during the period immediately following arrest.
 Human rights groups report that the incidence of torture is high during police de-
 tention, in part because families are prohibited from visiting suspects while they are
 held incommunicado, and attorneys have only limited access to them (see Section
 1.d.).
 A survey by the Legal Defense Institute of 1,250 detainees in high-security pris-
 ons, conducted in 1995-96, found that 77 percent of respondents stated that they
 had been tortured or otherwise abused during police interrogation, while 87 percent
 of respondents said that no defense lawyer had been present during their question-
 ing and submission of sworn statements. In addition, human rights monitors and
 other credible eyewitnesses continued to report that security forces still routinely
 torture suspects at military bases and detention centers in some of the emergency
 zones. In these zones, which cover 16 percent of the country's territory and 23 per-
 cent of its population, certain constitutional protections are suspended due to high
 levels of terrorist activity, even though, according to human rights groups, at least
 some areas designated as emergency zones have not reported serious terrorist inci-
 dents for some time.
 In addition to beatings, common methods of torture and other inhuman or degrad-
 ing treatment included electric shock, water torture, asphyxiation, the hanging of
 victims by a rope attached to hands tied behind the back, and, in the case of female
 detainees, rape. Common forms of psychological torture included sleep deprivation
 and death threats against both the detainees and their families. Interrogators fre-
 quently blindfolded their victims during torture to prevent them from later identify-
 ing their abusers. The authorities rarely brought the perpetrators of torture to jus-
 tice.
 In March the army announced that, on the basis of information received from a
 repentant terrorist, it had successfully captured 38 alleged MRTA terrorists in
 Oxapampa province, a jungle region in east central Peru.The army asserted that
 the detention of the suspected terrorists had been carried out in full compliance
 with human rights norms and standards. However, many of the detainees had been
 beaten, subjected to water torture, and suspended out of a helicopter while their
 abusers demanded confessions from them as well as the identities of other MRTA
 suspects. In an April 6 interview, President Fujimori acknowledged that torture and
 other abuses by the army had taken place in Oxapampa during the anti-MRTA op-
 eration, characterized the armys actions as "unacceptable," and said that the per-
 petrators must be punished. The repentant terrorist -who had supplied the false in-
 formation on which the army's operation was based faced a charge of disloyalty. By
 year's end, the authorities had released all of the 38 Oxapampa detainees. One de-
 tainee bled to death from a gunshot wound (see Section L.a.). Based on reports from
 human rights monitors and those released from custody, the detainees were appar-
 ently innocent.
 The National Coordinating Committee on Human Rights ("Coordinadora) re-
 ported that members of the National Police's Bureau of Counterterrorist Intelligence
 arrested 23-year-old Nancy Patruska del Campo Caceres on May 27, and that sev-
 eral of her captors raped her. During her detention, the police kept her incommuni-
 cado and never allowed her relatives to visit her. The authorities brought charges
 against only one noncommissioned police officer in the case.
 There was some progress in the case of Juana barra Aguirre, who on August 29,
 1996, had gone with her 5-year-old daughter to the Monzon military base in
 Huanuco department after receiving word that a base official, who had reportedly
 
 
 left a firearm in her shop, was looking for her. Ibarra was held incommunicado, tor-
 tured, and raped. The authorities brought cases against those implicated in the at-
 tack in both civilian and military jurisdictions. The military court issued a ruling
 on February 17 that lessened the culpability of the officers accused in the case. That
 decision was appealed to the Supreme Council of Military Justice, which had not
 ruled on it at year's end.
 While most surviving victims of torture and brutality do not usually speak out for
 fear of reprisal, Army Intelli ence Service officer Leonor La Rosa publicly accused
 her torturers. In an April 6 hannel 2 television interview, La Rosa revealed that
 her superiors and fellow officers had tortured her. Speaking from a military hospital
 ward, she had difficulty walking and displayed burn marks from electric shocks on
 her hands. Public interest in the broadcast was heightened because the press had
 previously reported the discovery of the decapitated body of Mariela Barreto, an-
 other SIE officr and former g riend of Santiago Martin Rivas, leader of the noto-
 rious Colina death squad (see Section l.a.).
 Earlier disclosures to the media bad mentioned operations that the SIE planned
 to carry out against opponents of the Government. Acorg to La Rosa's account,
 she was first tortured in January, following an SIE investigation of the press leaks.
 In February she was tortured again after refusing to participate in an undercover
 operation linked to Air Chief General Waldo Richter.
 On April 8, the authorities relieved four SIE officers, including SIE head Carlos
 Sanchez Noriega, of their duties, arrested them, and charged them with abuse of
 authority under the Military Code. On May 9, a military court convicted them of
 abuse of authority and of negligence, sentenced them to 8 years in prison and fined
 them approximately $3,700, half of which was to be paid to La Rosa in the form
 of damages. The officers appealed their sentences. On June 5, La Rosa was released
 from the military hospital and transferred to a private clinic. At the same time that
 the four officers were charged, however, General Guido Guevara Guerra, head of the
 military justice system, announced that the military was looking into possible
 charges of disloyalty against La Rosa for her revelations to the media. Once the
 charges of disloyalty are resolved, La Rosa plans to pursue a course of treatment
 and rehabilitation abroad. The Government offered to pay for her transportation
 and 5 months of treatment. By year's end, no rulings had been issued, either on
 the convicted officers' appeal or regarding the disloyalty charges.
 The trial and sentencing of the four officers constituted a rare admission by the
 authorities that torture does take place. However, even though a few guilty officers
 were brought to justice, a culture of torture and brutality still exists within the se-
 curity forces.
 Sendero Luminoso also tortured persons. There were credible reports that its
 members tortured persons to death by slitting throats, strangulation, stoning, and
 burning.
 Prison conditions continued to be extremely harsh due to inadequate budgets the
 inconsistent quality of prison administration, and a slow and cumbersome judicial
 process that results in severe overcrowding. Prisoners in many facilities endured un-
 sanitary conditions, suffered from poor nutrition and health care, and were often
 victimized by both prison guards and fellow inmates. Corruption continued to be a
 serious problem among the poorly paid prison guards, many of whom were impli-
 cated in such offenses as sexual blackmail, extortion, the sale of narcotics and weap-
 ons, and the acceptance of bribes in exchange for favors, which ranged from provid-
 ing a mattress to arranging an escape. Since prison authorities do not supply ade-
 quate food and bedding, the families of prisoners must provide for these basic needs.
 high-security prisons, female inmates are allowed to see their children only once
 every 3 months. However, in others, such as Chorrillos women's prison in Lima,
 children 3 years and younger live with their jailed mothers.
 There were credible reports that at Chorrillos, which is generally acknowledged
 to be one of the better-run prisons, inmates have only internruttent access to running
 water, bathing facilities are inadequate, and kitchen conditions are unhygienic. Un-
 like many other prisons, Chorrillos makes available to its inmates the services of
 a social worker and provides them with training workshops in manual arts and
 housekeeping skills. In Lima's Lurigancho prison, the country's largest, over 6,000
 prisoners, or 24 percent of the male prison population, are housed in a facility origi-
 nally designed to accommodate 1,500. The problem of overcrowding at Lurigancho
 is made worse by the prison's shortage of staff. For the first 9 months of the year,
 a complement of no more than 200 guards supervised 6,000 inmates. However, fol-
 lowing a series of disturbances in September, the National Penitentiary Institute
 augmented the prison's security forces with additional, better trained guards. illegal
 drugs are available in abundance, and tuberculosis and ADS are reportedly at
 near-epidemic levels. Although some prisoners reportedly suffer from severe depres-
 
 
 sion, advanced neurosis, and schizophrenia, adequate mental health care is not pro-
 vided. Detainees held temporarily in windowless cells at Lima's Palace of Justice are
 not allowed outside for exercise and fresh air and are taken to the bathroom only
 once a day. According to the Catholic Bishops' Social Action Commission (CEAS),
 only 10 percent of the country's 89 jails provide adequate facilities.
 Although the unrest and bloodshed that were long characteristic of the
 Lurigancho facility have markedly diminished since the riots of 1986, the prison has
 not been free of conflict. On June 20, a number of inmates started a riot, which re-
 sulted in one death and six persons wounded. On September 4, an armed battle be-
 tween inmates took place at Lurigancho, reportedly related to gang rivalry in the
 prison; 7 inmates were killed and 10 were seriously wounded. On September 9, the
 ismembered body of another prisoner was discovered, according to the prison direc-
 tor. By the end of September, the death toll at Lurigancho had reached a total of
 15.
 On April 7, the Government sought to reduce prison overcrowding somewhat by
 transferring between 110 and 150 prisoners to Juliaca in preparation for their even-
 tual incarceration at the newly built-Challapalca facility in Tacna. In September the
 authorities transferred an additional group of prisoners to Challapalca from
 Lurigancho prison, following disturbances at the latter facility. Located at an alti-
 tude of 14,700 feet, Challapalca's cold temperatures and oxygen-thin air are ex-
 pected to have a negative effect on the health of prisoners. The prisoners to be
 transferred to Challapalca are reputed to be those considered the most violent and
 resistant to any attempts at rehabilitation.
 According to the CEAS, the solution to prison overcrowding lies not in the con-
 struction of new correctional facilities but in reform of sentencing procedures. At
 year's end, of a total prison population of 24,847, only 7,965 inmates, or 32 percent,
 ad been sentenced, while 16,882 detainees were still either awaiting trial or had
 not been finally sentenced. Accordingly, the CEAS has called for implementation of
 a system that allows detainees to post bail, so that first-time offenders would not
 have to wait in jail for their trials.
 In the past, human rights groups have criticized the Government for the extraor-
 dinarily harsh prison conditions reserved for prisoners jailed for terrorism offenses.
 In late 1996, the Government was about to unveil a new prison regime for terrorist
 detainees when the MRTA attack on the Japanese Am assadorrs residence took
 pdlae. As a result, not only was implementation of the new prison regime put on
 hold, but family visits to terrorism and treason prisoners were suspended. On June
 16, President Fujimori announced the resumption of more frequent family visits to
 MRTA prisoners and the impending implementation of new regulations for terror-
 ism and treason detainees.
 Under the new regime, the prisons increased patio time and the length of family
 visits for all detainees and relaxed the regulations governing physical proximity be-
 tween prisoners and visiting families. Each detainee's security-risk classification
 and behavioral history determine the amount of patio time and visiting time grant-
 ed, as well as the degree of physical proxmity aowed between prisoners and their
 families. Relatives of all detainees are able to visit at least once a week for at least
 1 hour, up from once a month for 30 minutes for adult relatives and once every 3
 months for 30 minutes for children. Low-risk detainees are also permitted visits on
 their birthday, on Mother's Day, Father's Day, and on Christmas.
 In response to the sIRTA hostage crisis, the Government in December 1996 also
 suspended all visits by human rights monitors to prisoners incarcerated on terror-
 ism and treason charges (see Section 4). In the case of the International Committee
 of the Red Cross (ICRC), the suspension violated the Government's 1992 agreement
 authorizing ICRC delegates to carry out such visits. ICRC visits to holding facilities
 were allowed. In mid-April the ICRe acceded to a government request that it with-
 draw its deputy chief delegate who, the Government suspected, had cultivated ex-
 cessively close ties with the hostage takers. Soon after the April 22 conclusion of
 the hostage crisis, church and other human rights monitors were permitted to re-
 sume their scheduled prison visits. However, the Government continued its ban on
 the ICRC's rison visits, arguing that security conditions still did not permit re-
 sumption of C  activities, even though by October the ICRC had totally replaced
 its hostage crisis team with new personnel. On December 2, President Fujimori an-
 nounced that as of December 8, the ICRC would be permitted to resume monthly
 prison visits to individuals convicted of terrorism and treason offenses.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-Arbitrary detention remains a problem.
 The Constitutions, crn    oe  dan titerrorist statutes delineate the arrest and
 detention process. However, a number of constitutional protections are suspended
 in the emergency zones where, for example, security forces do not need an arrest
 warrant in order to detain a suspect. The law permits the police to detain terrorism
 
 
 and treason suspects for a maximum of 15 days, and to hold them incommunicado
 for the first 10 days. The authorities prohibit families from visiting suspects being
 held incommunicado, and attorneys only have access to them during the preparation
 and giving of sworn statements to the prosecutor.
 Outside the emergency zones, the Constitution requires a written judicial warrant
 for an arrest to be made unless the perpetrator of a crime is caught in the act. With
 respect to detention without arrest, the Organic Law of the National Police con-
 tradicts the constitutional provision, permitting the police to detain a person for any
 investigative purpose. Although the authorities must arraign arrested persons with-
 in 24 hours they often violate this requirement in practice. In cases of terrorism,
 drug trafficking, or espionage, however, arraignment must take place within 30
 days. The military authorities must turn over persons they detain to the civilian po-
 lice within 24 hours- in remote areas of the country this must be accomplished as
 soon as practicable. Hlowever, the military sometimes disregard this requirement.
 In 1993 the antiterrorism laws were amended, authorizing lower court and supe-
 rior court judges to order the unconditional release of suspected terrorists if there
 is insufficient evidence to bring a case against them. However, judges rarely exer-
 cise this provision. As a result, accused terrorists must sometimes wait until their
 cases have been reviewed and dismissed by the Supreme Court before they are
 freed, a process that often lasts more than a year. Detainees have the right to a
 prompt judicial determination of the legality of their detention and adjudication of
 their habeas corpus petitions. However, according to human rights attorneys, judges
 have denied most requests for such hearings. According to the National Penitentiary
 Institute, the elapsed time between arrest and trial in civil, -criminal, and terrorism
 cases averages between 26 and 36 months. However, those tried by military courts
 on treason charges do not generally have to wait more than 40 days for their trial,
 following their arrest.
 The Constitution does not permit exile, and the Government respects this prohibi-
 tion.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-Under the 1993 Constitution, several new systems
 and institutions were created to enhance the independence and professionalism of
 the judiciary. However, in practice, the judicial system is inefficient, not fully inde-
 pendent of the executive branch, and therefore often compromised. Of the country's
 1,473 judges, only 403 have permanent appointments, having been independently
 selected. The remaining 1,070, including 16 of the 32 judges on the Supreme Court,
 have provisional or temporary status only. Critics charge that these judges, lacking
 tenure in office, are much more susceptible to outside pressures.
 The new systems and institutions include an improved method for the selection
 of judges; a Constitutional Tribunal, to rule on the constitutionality of congressional
 legislation and government actions; a National Judiciary Council to test, nominate,
 confirm, evaluate and discipline judges and prosecutors; a Judicial Academy for
 training judges and prosecutors; and an autonomous Human Rights Ombudsman.
 To increase the overall efficiency of the judicial branch, in 1995 the President cre-
 ated the Judicial Coordination Council to serve as an umbrella over a number of
 these new and other already existing judicial bodies. At the same time, he appointed
 an Executive Commission of the Judicial Branch whose mission is to implement
 wide-ranging reforms in the judicial system. Some improvements of a technical na-
 ture have been instituted, including a measure of decentralization in the adminis-
 tration of justice and more efficient recordkeeping.
 However, critics questioned the independence of the Constitutional Tribunal from
 its inception in 1995: while a majority of six of the Tribunal's seven members is re-
 quired to declare any law or government action unconstitutional, three of the Tribu-
 nal's original judges were politically or ideologically allied with the President and
 his party, observers expected that they would block any attempts to declare uncon-
 stitutional laws or actions favored by the administration. In addition, critics point
 to the fact that the constitutionality of a law may be challenged only during a 6-
 month period immediately following its enactment. Government opponents also
 claim that another indication of the President's wish to solidify executive control
 over the justice system was his appointment of a retired navy commander as Execu-
 tive Secretary of the Executive Commission of the Judicial Branch. The constitu-
 tional controversy over the new law Congress passed to enable President Fujimori
 to run for a third term led Congress to remove three Tribunal judges from office
 (see Section 3).
 There is a three-tier court structure: lower courts, superior courts, and the Su-
 preme Court. The justice system is generally based on the Napoleonic Code. In the
 civilian courts, criminal cases may move through a total of three distinct prosecu-
 torial and judicial phases. The first phase takes place in a lower court where a Pub-
 lic Ministry prosecutor investigates cases and submits an opinion to an examining
 
 
 judge who initially determines whether there is sufficient evidence to issue an in-
 dictment. If there is, the judge studies the case, assembles all necessary case docu-
 ments and files, and transfers the case for trial and sentencing to the superior court.
 In the second phase, a superior court prosecutor reviews the lower court decision
 and renders an advisory opinion to a superior court judge who may hold a trial. Vir-
 tually all convictions in the civilian courts continue to the final phase where appeals
 are heard by the Supreme Court.
 A 1993 amendment to the antiterrorism statutes eliminated convictions in
 absentia of suspected terrorists. As a result, all defendants now have the right to
 be present at their trial. Defendants also have the right to counsel. However, the
 Government often fails to provide indigent defendants with qualified attorneys.
 Under the military justice system, judges in the lower military courts have the
 power to sentence and are required to pass judgment within 10 days of a trial's
 opening. Defendants may then appeal their sentences to the Superior Military
 Council which, in turn has 10 days to make its decision. A final appeal may be
 made to the Supreme douncil of Military Justice which must issue its ruling within
 5 days. While terrorism cases are tried in civilian courts, cases of treason or aggra-
 vated terrorism may be tried only before military courts.
 In general, human rights groups have been most critical of the power of the mili-
 tary courts to try civilians and of the powerlessness of the civilian judicial system
 to review military court decisions. For example, in February Gustavo Adolfo Cesti
 Hurtado, an insurance broker who had retired from military service 13 years ear-
 lier, was arrested, prosecuted, convicted, and sentenced to prison by the military
 justice system, in a complicated case involving, in part, alleged insurance fraud in
 a military purchase of helicopters. When a civilian court approved a habeas corpus
 petition and ordered the military court to release Cesti, the military jurisdiction not
 only refused to do so but also chared the civilian judges with usurpation of power
 and sought to have them reassigned. In March Cesti's awyer presented the case to
 the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights, which submitted it to the Inter-
 American Court of Human Rights. In addition, human rights groups charge that the
 vaguely worded definitions of certain crimes in the antiterrorism statutes often lead
 military judges to issue sentences disproportionate to the crimes committed.
 Proceedings in terrorism cases in the civilian courts, and particularly those trea-
 son cases under the military justice system, do not meet internationally accepted
 standards of openness, fairness, and due process. Military courts hold treason trials
 in secret and, until mid-October, all terrorism and treason trials were carried out
 by so-called faceless judges, whose identities were hidden from view by a one-way
 glass partition. Many judges in the military justice system are believed to be active-
 duty line offiers with little or no prfessional legal training. Defense attorneys in
 treason trials are not permitted adequate access to the files containing the State's
 evidence against their clients; nor are they allowe~l to interview -police or military
 witesses, either before or during the trial. Human rights groups charge that some
 military judges have sentenced defendants without having first notified their law-
 yers     their clients' trials had even begun.
 Defendants in treason cases who are found not guilty by a military court may be
 remanded to a civilian court for a second trial based on the same facts, a practice
 criticized by human rights monitors as double jeopardy. This was the main issue
 that led the Inter-American Court of Human Rights, on September 17, to order the
 Government to release Maria Elena Loayza Tamayo from jail and pay her com-
 pensation. After the military justice system had absolved her of treason charges,
 Loayza, a university professor, was retried for terrrism by a civilian court, which
 sentenced her to 20 years in prison. The Government complied with the Inter-Amer-
 ican Courts ruling and released Loayza on October 16; however, the Government
 had not complied with the compensation order by year's end.
 The faceless courts were originally instituted as a means of protecting the judges,
 prosecutors, and witnesses involved in trying terrorists from possible reprisals by
 Sendero Luminoso and the META. However, the human rights community argued
 that, in view of the declining terrorist threat, the continuing use of faceless courts
 was no longer~ ustifled. In July 1996, the United Nations Human Rights Committee
 called on the Government to end the faceless tribunal system because of its lack of
 due process. This call was supported in September 1996 by visiting United Nations
 Special Rapporteur Dato'param Cumarawany, as well as by the IACHR, which
 proposed in its 1996 annual report a series of reforms that would bring the
 antiterrrism statutes into line with internationally accepted human rights norms
 aid an ndards. The January 1996 sentencing of US. citizen Lori Berensn to life
 imprisnment on treason charges stemming from her involvement with the MRTA,
 and the April 1997 confirmation of her sentence by the Supreme Council of Military
 Justice, focused additional interninatinl attention on the secrecy, unfairness, and
 
 
 629
 due process shortcomings of the faceless military courts. On September 29, the Gov-
 ernment announced its decision not to seek an extension of the civilian faceless tri-
 bunals beyond their scheduled expiration on October 15 and its intention to replace
 them with a new system of specialized terrorism courts. The military authorities de-
 creed an end to m       faless courts as well, also effective October 15.
 On November 19, the Executive Commission of the Judicial Branch announced
 the broad outlines of a system of specialized civilian terrorism courts to replace the
 abolished faceless tribunals. The military court structure, which handles all treason
 cases, is to remain in place, except that judges' identities are not to be concealed.
 The new civilian structure, to be based entirely in Lima, is to consist of first-in-
 stance tribunals that are to assemble case files and prepare them for transmittal
 to specialized terrorism courts at the superior court level and a specialized division
 of the Supreme Court, which is to hear appeals. First-instance tribunals and special-
 ized terrorism courts are to travel to the provinces as needed.
 The ad hoc Pardons Commission, established by Congress in 1996 for an initial
 term of 6 months, continued its mission to recommend presidential pardons for pris-
 oners believed to have been unjustly convicted of terrorism or treason. The Commis-
 sion comprises the Human Rights Ombudsman as Chairman, the Minister of Jus-
 tice, and representing the President, long-time prison reformer Father Hubert
 Lanssiers. The Government, which had suspended granting pardons immediately
 after the MRTA takeover of the Japanese Ambassador's residence, reinstated the
 -process after the April 22 conclusion of the hostage crisis. On December 3, Congress,
 Which had earlier extended the life of the Pardons Commission for a second and
 third 6-month term, authorized yet another 6-month extension, to August 31, 1998.
 By year's end, the Pardons Commission had received 2,541 applications, of which
 1,085 had been fully processed, 452 were under active investigation by the Commis-
 sion's staff, and 1,004 were still awaiting attention. During the year, 250 detainees
 were pardoned, bringing the total to 360. Of this total, 18 had been convicted of
 treason by military courts and the remaining 342 had been convicted of terrorism
 in civilian courts. Working along a second track and beginning in 1994, lawyers rep-
 resenting four major human rights organizations represented prisoners wrongly
 charged with terrorism or treason, presented their cases to the courts, and won the
 release of many. From January 1995 through December 1997, the courts declared
 innocent and freed 929 such prisoners, bringing the total of all prisoners unjustly
 incarcerated and either pardoned or exonerated to 1,289.
 Although human rights groups have welcomed the work of the Pardons Commis-
 sion, they claim that granting a pardon to those unjustly charged still leaves a cloud
 of suspicion over their heads. Accordingly, they argue that those pardoned should
 be declared innocent, should have any past criminal record expunged, and should
 be fully compensated for the years they spent in jail. The Pardons Commission
 agreed with this argument and at year's end was studying the best way to help
 them clear their names and reintegrate themselves into the community.
 President Fujimori for the second time rejected a bill to reform the Code of Crimi-
 nal Procedures, returning it to Congress for extensive revision. The latest reform
 proposal would have instituted new accusatorial, investigative, and trial procedures
 and granted greater investigative authority to civilian prosecutors.
 There were no reports of political prisoners. Sendero Luminoso and MRTA mem-
 bers charged with terrorism are not considered to be political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, -or Correspondence.-The
 Constitution requires security forces to have a written judicial warrant to enter a
 private dwelling. However, this requirement is suspended in the emergency zones,
 Where security forces routinely conduct searches without such warrants. The Con-
 stitution also provides citizens with the right to private communication, but the
 media reported that the Government violated this right. On July 13, Channel 2 tele-
 vision reported that government intelligence services had been secretly and system-
 atically monitoring the telephone conversations of no fewer than 197 individuals, in-
 cluding former U.N. Secretary General and presidential candidate Javier Perez de
 Cuellar, as well as government officials, opposition politicians, journalists, business
 executives, and entertainers. Channel 2 aired recordings of some of the intercepted
 conversations and later provided transcripts to the press. Experts interviewed by
 the media stated that, although many of the recordings were of cellular phone con-
 versations that could have been made by a commercially available scanner, a signifit
 cant number of the conversations had clearly been made from regular telephones
 in homes or offices and could have been monitored only by the intelligence services.
 The Channel 2 revelations triggered swift and intense public criticism. Opposition
 Congresswoman Anel Townsend and 13 journalists who had been targeted by the
 wiretaps fied suit, charging that the Government had violated their constitutional
 right to privacy. Prominent nonpolitical figures, such as the President of the Na-
 
 
 630
 tional Council of Industrialists and Businessmen, himself a wiretap target, criticized
 the telephone monitoring.
 In response to the criticism, on July 15 President Fujimori absolved the intel-
 ligence services of the accusations against them, asserted that private individuals
 with scanners had carried out the wiretapping, and charged the opposition with try-
 ing to further its own ends by portraying the Government as a dictatorship. Despite
 the appointment of a special prosecutor and the cooperation of Channel 2 reporters,
 no criminal charges in the case had been filed by year's end. A judge dismissed the
 civil damages suit filed by Congresswoman Townsend. A congressional committee
 began aninvesti ation of the charges; at year's end, it was still at work.
 Prompted by the terrorism and banditry that characterized the internal conflict,
 a number of rural communities organzed their own self-defense units, or "rondas,"
 which are often trained, armed, and encouraged by the regular security forces. How-
 ever, some military commanders have gone beyond encouragemeat and, at times, co-
 erced peasants into joining the rondas, thereby disrupting their home and family
 life.
 To a far greater degree, Sendero Luminoso and the M:RTA are known to have
 forced peasants to join their ranks and to participate in terrorist attacks and execu-
 tions, slly disrpting the private lives of many families. Several relatives of the
 younger MRTA members involved in the hostage taking at the Japanese Ambas-
 sador's residence claimed that their family members had been forced to join the
 MRTA.
 g. Use of Excessive Force and Violations of Humanitarian Law In Internal Con-
 flits.-According to statistics gathered by the Center for the Study and Promotion
 of Development from press reports and unofficial police records, the number of vio-
 lent attscks carried out by the Sendero Luminoso and MRTA terrorist groups in-
 creased slightly from 1996 levels. There were 662 such attacks in 1997, compared
 with 600 in 1996. However, the total number of deaths attributable to the internal
 conflict decreased sharply, from 283 in 1996 to 162 in 1997. The reduction in the
 number of fatalitie  s most noticeable among the civilian population. Whereas se-
 curity force deaths, including both military and police, decreased from 61 in 1996
 to 44in 1997, and terrorist deaths declined from 83 to 48, the civilian toll dropped
 significantly by comparison, from 139 deaths in 1996 to 70 in 1997.
 The Government's largely successful campaign against terrorism suffered a set-
 back in December 1996 when a group of MRTA terrorists took over the Japanese
 Ambassador's residence in Lima. The 14 heavily armed terrorists captured more
 than 500 hostages, including many  rominent individuals, and then proceeded to
 boobytrap and mine the premises.  ost of the hostages were freed within several
 days. In an April 22 rescue operation, a military team freed the remaining 72 hos-
 tages. Two of the soldiers who stormed the property and all 14 MRTA terrorists
 were killed during the operaT   1 hage subsequently died of complications re-
 sulting from a wound incurred during the mission. Although President Fujimori de-
 clared the mission a complete success, the press reported that some of the reed hos-
 tages, who did not wish to be identified, suggested that at least one of the MRTA
 terrorists was killed after surrendering (see Section L.a.).
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of speech
 and of the press. However, while the Government generally respects these provi-
 sions, security forces officials harassed and intimidated journalists.
 The media, which represent a spectrum ranging from left-leaning opposition to
 pro-government views, vigorously defend press freedom. In the greater Lima area
 alone, there are 16 daily newspapers, 7 television stations, 150 radio stations, and
 2 commercial cable systems. The Government owns one daily newspaper, one tele-
 vision network and two radio stations, none of which is particularly influential.
 Tensions increased during the year between the Government and the segment of
 the media that was very critical of certain government policies and actions, and
 whose investigative reporting about alleged official wrongdoing generated wide pub-
 lic criticism. The most controversial development in the area of press freedom con-
 cerned Baruch Ivcher, the Israeli-born, naturalized Peruvian majority owner of
 Channel 2 television station, which was outspokenly critical of the Government.
 Channel 2 reporters revealed torture by Army Intelligence Service officers; the sys-
 tematic wiretapping of journalists, government officials, and opposition politicians;
 and the income tax return of Vladimiro Montesinos, President Fujimori's seior in-
 telligence adviser (see Sections 1.c. and 1.f.). On July 13, the immigration authori-
 ties revoked Ivcher's citizenship, claiming irregularities in his original application
 13 years earlier. Ivcher lost control of Channel 2 under an interpretation of a law
 that provides that a foreigner may not own a media organization. He cannot regain
 
 
 managerial control of the station until all his appeals are exhausted, and the issue
 of his nationality is resolved (see Section 2.d.). With Ivcher's departure, his minority
 partners took over the station, at which point many of Channel 2's broadcast and
 administrative staff resigned in protest. The Government's action in this case was
 widely interpreted as an attempt to prevent the station from broadcasting any more
 negative stories about the regime. If this was the case, it appears to have succeeded,
 as very few stories critical of the Government appeared on Channel 2 since the
 change of management.
 Tncidents of harassment of media representatives increased to such an extent as
 to create the perception of an organized campaign of intimidation on the part of the
 Government, speifically, on the part of the armed forces and intelligence services.
 This perception created unease not only among critics of the Government but also
 among its traditional supprters. In addition to the telephone wiretaps of working
 journalists and senior media officials (see Section 1.f.), there were other disturbing
 incidents.
 During the hostage crisis at the Japanese Ambassador's residence, a Mexican re-
 porter working for a British television network left the country, claiming that he
 had received threats from the intelligence services after it was learned that he had
 talked a number of times by shortwave radio with the leader of the MRTA hostage
 takers. In July armed forces personnel reportedly beat the chief political reporter
 of Lima's most popular tabloid, after his newspaper changed iis editorial line from
 support of the Government to criticism of it. A number of reporters, columnists, and
 editorial writers complained that they were under constant surveillance and re-
 ceived anonymous telephone calls made by members of the intelligence services to
 both their homes and offices. Several media organizations also reported attempts at
 government intimidation by means of National Tax Administration audits. In addi-
 tion, media representatives report that the Government favors some media outlets
 over others with respect to the placement of advertising. The combination of wire-
 taps, strong-arm tactics, reports of surveillance, and other incidents of harassment
 and discrimination contributed to the widely held public perception of a government
 campaign against opposition media.
 There were frequent instances in which media sources reported misleading infor-
 mation, some of which was allegedly supplied by elements of the armed forces and
 intelligence services to further their own ends. Favorite topics of such misleading
 information campaigns were coup plots and rising tensions on the Peru-Ecuador bor-
 der.
 In Jul Congress passed a "rectification law," requiring media organizations to
 correct "actuai errors" within a reasonable time after publication. The law amended
 earlier controversial legislation that Would have automatically held media owners
 legally liable for errors published. In September the major print media established
 a self-regulatory press council, in an effort to preempt further government attempts
 to regulate the press.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution provides for
 the right of peaceful assembly, and the authorities generally respect this right in
 practice, except in the designated emergency zones where the right of assembly is
 suspended. Public meetings in plazas or streets require advance permission, which
 may be denied only for reasons of public safety or health. Municipal authorities usu-
 ally granted permits for demonstrations in all nonemergency zones.
 On June 5, over 3,000 protesters representing labor unions, student organizations,
 and oppsition palitical parties demonstrated against the ouster by Congress of
 three Constitutional Tribunal judges who had opposed a law that would have al-
 lowed President Fujimori to run for a third consecutive term in 2000 (see Section
 3). Over 100 mounted police used a powerful water cannon and tear gas to disperse
 the marchers. A number of them were briefly detained.
 The Constitution provides for freedom of association, and the authorities generally
 respect this right in practice.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for freedom of religion, and the
 Government generally respects this provision in practice. The Constitution recog-
 nizes the Catholic Church "as an important element in the historical, cultural, and
 moral development" of the nation, but also establishes the separation of church and
 State. Conversion to other religions is respected, and missionaries are allowed to
 enter the country and proselytize.
 Although teaching about_ man Catholicism has not been required in the public
 school system since the education reforms of the 1970's, most schools devote 1 hour
 a week to such study. Parents who do not wish their children to participate in these
 classes are expected to submit a written request for an exemption to the school prin-
 cipal. Non-Catholics who wish their children to receive a religious education in their
 
 
 own particular faith are free to organize such classes during the weekly hour allot-
 ted by the school for religious education, but must supply their own teacher.
 Sendero Luminoso rejects religion and occasionally still threatens and intimidates
 religious workers. Prior to 1996, members of the Mormon Church, in particular,
 were targeted by Sendero Luminoso bombings and extortion threats. However, Mor-
 mon Church officials report no incidents during the past 2 years, attributing this
 development to the overall decrease in Sendero activity and to the Church's decision
 not to send its missionaries into areas where terrorists are known to operate.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Constitution provides for the right to free movement. However,
 freedom of movement is suspended in the emergency zones, which cover 16 percent
 of the country's territory and where the security forces may detain travelers at any
 time. Nevertheless, travel in these zones is generally permitted under the armys
 supervision. Passengers on public transportation and drivers in private vehicles may
 be cheed at control points throughout the country.
 Sendero Luminoso occasionally still interrupts the free movement of people, and
 reports of its roadblocks in sections of the upper Huallaga Valley and in the depart-
 ment of Ayacucho were common.
 Although there are no political or legal constraints on foreign travel or emigration,
 the authorities can restrict persons with pending criminal and, in some cases, civil
 charges against them from leaving the country  e ariates, both voluntary and in-
 voluntary, are not treated differently from other citizens.
 The Constitution prohibits the revocation of citizenship. However, one of the sto-
 ries that received extensive media and public attention involved a series of appar-
 ently interconnected events that egan with the May 28 announcement of regula-
 tions implementing the new Nationality Law of January 1996. According to the new
 law, naturalized Peruvians can lose their citizenship for, among other reasons, com-
 mitting crimes against the State, national defense, and public security, as well as
 for reasons that "affect the public interest and the national interest." On July 10,
 the National Police chief announced that irregularities had been found in the file
 of Baruch Ivcher, the Israeli-born, naturalized Peruvian majority owner of television
 station Channel 2 which had carried stories of government abuse (see Section 2.a.).
 Although the authorities did not accuse Ivcher of committing any of the crimes spec-
 ified in the Nationality Law, the police chiefs announcement was followed by a July
 13 government decree invalidating Ivcher's naturalization 13 years earlier. On July
 14, Foreign Minister Francisco Tudela submitted his resignation, an action that he
 said in late September had been prompted by the Government's behavior toward
 Ivcher. On August 14, a lower court judge denied Ivcher's appeal of the decree, as
 did the Corporate Court of Public Law, on September 16. On December 23, Ivcher,
 who was out of the country throughout the legal process, was notified that he had
 lost yet another appeal in the courts. Although he still could resort to the Constitu-
 tional Tribunal, at year's end, he was trying to pursue his case through the inter-
 American human rights system.
 The Government cooperates with the United Nations High Commissioner for Ref-
 ugees in granting asylum and refugee status and recognizes the Catholic Migration
 Commission as the official provider of technical assistance to refugees and appli-
 cants for asylum. The Commission also advises Peruvian citizens fearing persecu-
 tion at home and seeking asylum abroad. There are 738 persons in the country with
 refugee status, of whom 451 are Cubans. These refugees are allowed to live and
 work normally, while awaiting receipt of their permanent residency, Of the 738,
 only 30 are still awaiting a permit. Even though permanent residents are free to
 apply for citizenship after 2 years in the country, few do. The issue of the provision
 of first asylum did not arise in 1997. There were no reports of the forced return of
 persons to countries where they feared persecution.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 The Constitution provides for the right of citizens to change their government, al-
 though the law bars groups that advocate the violent overthrow of the Government
 from participating in-the political process. Voting is by secret ballot and is manda-
 tory for all citizens between the ages of 18 and 70. However, members of the armed
 forces and the police, as well as prisoners, are ineligible to vote.
 In accordance with provisions in the 1993 Constitution, President Fujimori ran for
 a second 5-year term in 1995 and was reelected over 12 other candidates, with 65
 percent of the vote. Voters also elected the 120 members of the unicameral Con-
 gress. Sixty-nine seats are held by members of Fujimori's Cambio 90/Nueva Mayoria
 movement. The remaining 51 members represent 11 opposition parties. On June 25,
 Congress passed a new Electoral Law, which codifies the existing system whereby
 
 
 each of the participating political parties prepares its national list of ranked can-
 didates, and the 120 members of the unicameral legislature are elected from these
 p aty lists in proportion to the number of votes received by each party.
 The debate over President Fujimori's eligibility to seek reelection continued
 throughout the year. In August 1996, despite vocal opposition both in and out of
 Congress, President Fujimori's controlling congressional majority interpreted the
 constitutional provision limiting presidents to no more than two consecutive terms
 in office to permit him to run for a third consecutive term in 2000, claiming that
 it would be only his second term under the 1993 Constitution. Although opponents
 of the interpretive law proceeded to challenge its constitutionality before the seven-
 member Constitutional Tribunal, the Tribunal was unable to muster the six votes
 necessary to rule the law unconstitutional. This deadlock effectively transferred the
 legal question surrounding a third Fujimori candidacy to the National Board of
 Elections, which is charged with ruling on the eligibility of presidential contenders.
 However, the Board is not required to rule on the legality of such a candidacy until
 1999, when all presidential candidates file their papers.
 The three Tribunal judges opposed to the law called a press conference and an-
 nounced their nonbinding opinion that the law, although not necessarily unconstitu-
 tional, was "inapplicable to the Fujimori case. In response, a congressional commit-
 tee on May 5 accused the three judges of exceeding their authority, and charged Tri-
 bunal president Ricardo Nugent with failing to prevent the action of his three col-
 leagues. On May 23, a special committee of the Congress ratified the charges
 against the three associate judges and the Tribunal presldent, and referred the mat-
 ter of sanctions, including possible removal from office, for consideration by the full
 Congress.
 Legal scholars were divided as to whether the removal of Constitutional Tribunal
 judges required a simple majority vote or a two-thirds vote, an issue on which the
 Constitution is silent. Nevertheless, on May 29, amid press and public criticism at
 what was widely characterized as a "coup," Congress voted, by a simple majority
 of those present, to remove the three associate judges from office, for having ex-
 ceeded their authority by issuing a minority opinion as if it were a legally binding
 ruling of the Tribunal. At the same time, Congress voted to return for further com-
 mittee action the charges against Tribunal president Nugent. On May 30, Nugent
 announced his resignation from the Tribunal presidency, declaring his solidarity
 with the dismissed judges, and saying that his resignation was a moral imperative
 and the only way he could protest the treatment to which his colleagues had been
 subjected. However, by law, Nugent must remain in his position until Congress
 elects a successor. Although the congressional leadership quickly appointed a selec-
 tion committee to nominate candidates for the four vacant seats, by year's end it
 had not reached a consensus on the candidates, and the constitutional stalemate
 continued.
 The controversy over President Fujimori's eligibility to run for a third term in
 2000 resurfaced on December 10, when the congressional majority introduced a bill
 granting temporary and provisional judges and prosecutors the same rights and sta-
 tus as their permanent counterparts. Critics of the regime claimed that this law was
 intended to set the stage for these newly empowered officials to exercise their right
 to name the president and several members of the National Board of Elections in
 June 1998. The board, which is the ultimate court of appeal for all election-related
 disputes, is expected to rule eventually on the legality of a third Fujimori candidacy.
 Fujimori opponents believe that these untenured officials would succumb to outside
 pressure and favor naming the President's supporters to the board. Angered by the
 bill's introduction, the congressional opposition walked out of the chamber before
 the vote. After President Fujimori signed the bill into law, the president of the Con-
 gress suspended the plenary session and called a closed session, which granted the
 Permanent Commission of Congress extraordinary powers to legislate for 180 days.
 At year's end, the majority and the opposition were still negotiating terms and con-
 ditions to reinstate the plenary session and resume full congressional activity.
 A signature drive to petition for a national referendum on whether President
 Fujimori should be allowed to run again continued throughout the year. The drive,
 which began in 1996, had gathered some 400,000 of the 1.25 million signatures nec-
 essary by the time the MRTA hostage crisis pushed it out of public attention. How-
 ever, the drive regained momentum toward year's end and had reportedly gathered
 900,000 of the needed signatures.
 Opposition suspicions of possible fraud in the 2000 election were highlighted by
 charges in November by Congresswoman Townsend that the National Intelligence
 Service had planted undercover agents inside the National Voter Registration Bu-
 reau. Congress appointed a subcommittee to investigate these charges, but it had
 not published its report by year's end.
 
 
 634
 The right of citizens to elect local officials received a boost in small towns when,
 on Noveiber 23, 62 localities successfully carried out the country's first recall elec-
 tions. Approximately 120,000 citizens participated in the elections, voting to remove
 from office 43 mayors and 85 council members, and to retain in office 18 mayors
 and 44 council members. So many officials were removed that special elections need
 to be called in 17 of these municipalities to constitute new councils that would serve
 until the October 1998 municipal elections.
 Women and some minorities are represented in government and actively partici-
 pate in politics. There are 13 female members of Congress. In addition, 1 of 15 cabi-
 net ministers and several vice ministers are women, as are 3 of the 32 Supreme
 Court justices. A nationwide drive was conducted to replace the citizenship papers
 and voter registration cards lost by women who were displaced by the internal con-
 flict and who returned to their original communities, in time for the 1998 municipal
 elections and for the 2000 general elections. In addition, Congress passed two new
 laws governing general elections and municipal elections, which mandate that at
 least 25 percent of all party candidate lists for congressional and municipal elections
 be composed of women.
 Peruvians of Asian descent hold leadership positions in government; President
 Fujimori is of Japanese descent. There are several indigenous members of Congress
 and a recent vice president was a Quechua speaker. Wowever, it is rare for indige-
 nous people, who make up 45 percent of the population, to reach the highest leader-
 ship ranks in the public sector. The black minority, unofficially estimated at 8 to
 10 percent of the total population, is not at all rep~resented in the leadership of any
 branch of the Government, and there are no blacks in the Congress.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 In general, the Government permitted numerous nongovernmental organizations
 (NGO s) dedicated to monitoring and advancing human rights to operate freely.
 However, in response to the MVRTA hostage crisis, the Government suspended ICRC
 and other human rights monitors' visits to all prisoners held for terroris"m and trea-
 son offenses (see Section 1.c.). The visits were reinstated by year's end.
 Apart from the MRTA hostage situation, government, military, judicial, and police
 officials continued to criticize human rights grou s for their alleged bias against the
 authorities and toward the "leftist guerrillas." With the exception of the police, gov-
 ernment officials usually ignored requests by human rights groups for information
 and prohibited many monitors from visiting certain prisons. Military authorities
 often limited the freedom of local and international human rights workers to inves-
 tigate abuses in the emergency zones.
 Most nongovernmental human rights groups are independent, thorough, and gen-
 erally objective. A number of them joined forces in 1985 to form an umbrella organi-
 zation, the National Coordinating Coittee for Human Rights. The Coordinadora,
 which comprises 50 member organizations, strictly adheres to a policy of not mixing
 politics with human rights, although its constituent members may do so in their
 own names. The Coordinadora has embarked on a gradual process of integrating its
 Lima-based and province-based member organizations into a more cohesive body
 that would be more able to act quickly and forcefully and speak with a unified voice.
 The Coordinadora has intensified its collaborative efforts with the Human Rights
 Ombudsman. Some of its member organizations conduct intensive human rights
 education and citizen empowerment workshops to train local community leaders
 throughout the country in human rights problem-selving and citizen use of the Om-
 budsman's services. A number of the Cerdinadora's members have continued to
 work closely with the Pardons Commission, submitting for its consideration the doc-
 umented cases of innocent prisoners unjustly charged and convicted of terrorism
 and treason offenses (see Section i.e.).
 Since Jorge Santistevan de Noriega was ap pointed as the first Human Rights Om-
 budsman in April 1996, his office has steadily grown in stature and is considered
 to be the most effective force in the country for bringing justice to the people. At
 its Lima headquarters and various field offices, the Ombudsman receives citizen
 complaints, identifies patterns of human rights abuse by officials and of inefficient
 or unresponsive administration of services, and intercedes with the offending gov-
 ernment agencies to bring about appropriate remedies. In addition, as he did in the
 case of tortured SIE officer Leonor La Rosa (see Section 1.c.), the Ombudsman inde-
 pendently initiates investigations of alleged official wrongdoing and negotiates or
 calls for the implementation of corrective policies and procedures.
 Legitimate fears of physical attack by Sondero Luminoso seriously hampered the
 ability of human rights monitors to carry out their work in some parts of the coun-
 try. While documenting human rights abuses by the security forces, these groups
 
 
 635
 have, at the same time, repeatedly labeled Sendero Luminoso as the principal viola-
 tor of the people's rights. In both its annual reports and periodic press commu-
 niques, the Coordinadora has regularly criticized the violence perpetrated by
 Sendero Luminoso as well as by the MRTA.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution provides for equal rights for all citizens, and specifically pro-
 hibits discrimination based on ethnic origin, race, sex, language, re igion, opinion,
 or economic condition. Nevertheless, discrimination against women, the disabled, in-
 digenous people, and racial and ethnic minorities continued.
 Women.-Violence against women, including rape, spousal abuse, and the physical
 and sexual abuse of women and girls, is a chronic problem, according to local human
 rights groups and law enforcement offices. Such abuses have been aggravated by in-
 sensitivity on the part of law enforcement and judicial authorities toward female
 victims of abuse and by a media image of the traditional relationship between the
 sexes that encourages a controlling attitude by the husband toward his wife. Nation-
 wide statistics on the extent of the problem of domestic violence are not available.
 However, in Lima, 6,294 cases of domestic violence were reported in 1996. etween
 1990 and 1996, 32,030 cases were reported. Human rights organizations believe
 that, whether for fear of retaliation from the accused spouse, because of the cost in-
 volved in pursuing a complaint, or for some other reason, a large number of domes-
 tic violence cases remain unreported.
 Although a basic statute criminalizing spousal abuse has existed since December
 , significant improvements in the law were enacted in March, which simplified
 the procedures for reporting cases of domestic violence, made the process less expen-
 sive, and broadened the judicial remedies available. The new law gives not only
 judges but also prosecutors the power to protect a victim of domestic violence from
 rther abuse by enjoining the convicted spouse or parent from returning to the
 family's home. In the past, when abusive spouses argued that their home was jointly
 owned by both husband and wife and that they should therefore be allowed to re-
 turn to it, judges tended to let that argument outweigh the interest of the abused
 victim. Whereas victims of domestic violence previously had to pay for a medical re-
 port certifying the existence of their injuries, the new law eliminates the required
 fee. Many women have complained that their charges of domestic violence were
 brushed aside with indifference by police officers who either did not understand the
 issue or wrongly assumed that complaints of spousal abuse could be filed only at
 one of the handful of "women's police stations" exclusively dedicated to processing
 charges of domestic violence. The new law clearly mandates all police stations to
 receive such complaints. The Ministry of Women's Affairs and Human Development,
 in conjunction with a nongovernmental women's rights organization, is preparing a
 national proeam to sensitize police to the problem of domestic violence and to train
 officers in all police stations in the processing of domestic violence cases.
 The Human Rights Ombudsman was investigating numerous complaints by rape
 victims that court-appointed medical examiners  nappropriately delved into their
 past sexual histories. They also accused judges of looing more favorably on rae
 victims who had been virgins prior to the rape and of believing that a woman wo
 was raped must have somehow enticed her attacker to commit the crime, in March
 Congress repealed a statutewhereby convicted rapists could be absolved of their
 crime by marrying their victims. In October allegations appeared that a number of
 physicians in hospitals and family planning cidmcs had enticed female patients to
 opt for sterilization, either by promising them quantities of food or by not providing
 them with complete information about the alternatives available. At year's end, the
 Ministry of Health and the Human Rights Ombudsman were investiating the va-
 lidity of these charges. The Health Minister declared that anyone  iundto have
 committed any such acts would be punished.
 The Constitution provides for equality between men and women, and the 1995
 amendments to the Empeoent Promotion Law as well as other laws relative to
 marriage, divorce, and property rights prohibit discrimination against women. In
 the area of professional employment, Congress passed legislation in March that re-
 pealed the old disqualification of unmarried individuals for judgeships in the family
 courts. Since these positions have, in the past, been predominantly ioled by female
 candidates, the legislation was regarded as broadening employment opportunities
 for single women.
 The first 28 women permitted to enroll as cadets in the national police academy
 graduated as officers in 1995; the second class of women graduated in 1997. The
 army academy enrolled its first 50 female cadets in 1997; they are destined to serve
 
 
 in combat-support assignments only. The naval and air force academies are sched-
 uled to enroli their first female cadets in 1998.
 Nevertheless, traditional assumptions and misconceptions often impede access by
 women to leadership roles in both the public and private sectors. Because of societal
 prejudice and discrimination, women historically have suffered disproportionately
 more than men from the country's pervasive poverty and unemployment. The gov-
 ernment-supported "Mibanco" program represents an effort to improve women's
 ability to generate income by providing credit to small businesses started by enter-
 prising women.
 Chiudren.-The government provides free, compulsory education through second-
 ary school. Of those children enrolled in primary school, 12 to 15 percent abandon
 their education, while 17 percent of secondary school students do so. In educational
 achievement, both primary and secondary school children are, on the average, 2
 years behind their chronological age, while children who work as well as study are
 4 years behind.
 Following the World Summit on Children, in May the Government approved a na-
 tional plan for the protection and development of children, covering the years 1997-
 2000. The plan, which includes broad strategies for such sectors as health and edu-
 cation, places particular emphasis on the care and advancement of girls, and assigns
 to local community organizations special responsibility for finding ways to alleviate
 poverty.
 The Ministry of Women's Affairs and Human Development has a Children's Bu-
 reau that coordinates child- and adolescent-related policies and programs through-
 out the Government. At the grassroots level, 400 children's rights and welfare pro-
 tection offices receive and resolve complaints ranging from physical and sexual
 abuse to malnutrition, abandonment, and undetermined guardianship. Seventy-five
 percent of these offices are operated by provincial or district governments, and the
 remaining 25 percent by NGO's. Most of the units are staffed by law students; only
 the offices in the wealthiest districts of the country have professionally trained law-
 yers, psychologists, and social workers. Cases that cannot be resolved by these of-
 fices are typically referred to family courts. Nationwide, these offices receive and re-
 solve an average of 30,000 cases annually; an additional 1,000 to 1,500 cases are
 referred to the courts for resolution.
 The National Initiative on the Rights of the Child is the largest NGO of its kind
 and coordinates the work of 24 Lima-based and province-based groups concerned
 with the problems of children. It is estimated that only 10 to 20 percent of incidents
 of mistreatment and sexual abuse are reported, since many people believe that such
 problems belong within the family and must be resolved privately. Violence against
 children is a serious problem. According to some estimates, approximately half of
 all rapes are perpetrated against minors.
 In 1996 the infant mortality rate was 43 per 1,000, down from 70 per 1,000 in
 1992. However, this figure masks wide regional disparities: 23 per 1,000 in Lima
 and its environs, compared with 109 per 1,000 in Huancavelica. Twenty-seven per-
 cent of children under age 5, and 48 percent of children ages 6 to 9, suffered from
 chronic malnutrition.
 As many as 1.2 million children work to help support their families. Of this total,
 some 500,000 are under the age of 14, while 700,000 are between the ages of 15
 and 17 (see Section 6.d.). In 1996 there were 219,000 orphans in the country, of
 whom 25,000 were orphaned for reasons related to political violence.
 People With Disabilities.-The Constitution provides that severely disabled per-
 sons have "the right to have their dignity res .eted and to be provided by law with
 protection, care, rehabilitation, and security." Wowever, the Government devotes few
 resources to assisting the disabled, and they and the private agencies serving them
 must generally rely on the public's charity. The Government also makes little effort
 to ensure full and equal participation by the disabled in the political, economic, and
 social life of the country. The recent decision not to give the 1996 Paralympics swim-
 ming gold medalist recognition equal to that accorded all the country's nondisabled
 sports heroes reflected a widespread view of the disabled as separate and inferior.
 The 1993 census counted 288,526 disabled persons, or 1.3 percent of the popu-
 lation. However, the Ministry of Health and the Pan American Health Organization
 believe that most disabled persons either do not wish to acknowledge their disability
 to census takers or do not know what constitutes a disability, and that the actual
 percentage of disabled people within the population is 13 percent. Accordingly, the
 Government, in conjunction with the country's hospitals, plans to implement a na-
 tional register of disabled persons. However, there is only one rehabilitation hos-
 pital, and 10 of the 24 departments have no hospitals with a rehabilitation unit.
 Since the privatization of the social security and national health insurance systems,
 
 
 637
 it has been difficult for many disabled persons to insure against the inevitable loss
 of income or compensate for the extra costs of disability.
 There is no law mandating ramps and elevators to ease access to sidewalks and
 public buildings for people with physical disabilities. Nor do accommodations exist,
 such as barrier-free polling stations, interpreters for the deaf at government service
 offices, and Braille or recorded versions of the Constitution, which would permit the
 disabled to participate in the basic processes of democracy and citizenship.
 Many people with disabilities are channelled into a restricted number of tradi-
 tional occupations, such as the blind into telephone switchboard operation and mas-
 sage therapy. However, some progressive programs do exist: Two leading super-
 market chains have initiated the employment of mentally retarded adolescents and
 young adults, while Lima's Center for Rehabilitation of the Blind has pioneered the
 training of the blind for computer-related occupations. Nevertheless, in general,
 even well-qluaified disabled persons face serious discrimination by employers.
 Sedapal, the government-owned water utility, dismissed all its blind te epone
 switchboard operators, ostensibly as part of a nondiscriminatory, across-the-board
 budget-cutting measure. However, the chief advocate for the disabled in Congress
 reports that all the blind operators were immediately replaced by younger sighted
 recruits. People with disabilities have only recently begun to organize and demand
 equal rights and opportunities as a minority.
 Indigenous People.-The 1993 Constitution prohibits discrimination based on race
 and provides for the right of all citizens to speak their native language. Neverthe-
 less, the large indigenous population faces pervasive discrimination and social preju-
 dice. According to indigenous rights groups, the provisions in the Constitution and
 in subsequent implementing legislation regarding the treatment of native lands are
 less explicit about their inalienability and unmarketabiity than were earlier con-
 stitutionl and statutory protections. In addition, many other factors have contrib-
 uted to the marginalization of indigenous people in society. Poor transportation and
 communications infrastructure in the highiands and in the Amazon jungle region
 makes political mobilization and organization difficult. The geographic isolation of
 much ofthe indigenous population and the centralization of government action in
 Lima further marginalize indigenous people. All these factors impede the ability of
 indigenous people to participate in, and facilitate their deliberate exclusion from, de-
 cisionmaking dir ctly affecting their lands, culture, traditions, and the allocation of
 natural resources. Pervasive discrimination and social prejudice intensify feelings of
 inferiority and second-class citizenship. Many indigenous people lack such basic doc-
 uments as a birth certificate or a voter's registration card that would normally iden-
 tify them as full citizens and enable them to play their part in society.
 Amerindians who live in the Andean highlands speak Aymara and Quechua,
 which are recognized as official languages, and are ethnically distinct from the di-
 verse indigenous groups who live on the eastern side of the Andes and in the tropi-
 cal lowlands adjacent to the Amazon basin. Recent regulations requiring all school
 teachers to have professional teaching certification caused many indigenous teachers
 to be replaced by teachers who do not speak any of the indigenous languages. As
 a result, the continued use of Aymara and Quechua as languages of instruction, as
 well as the very survival of indigenous cultures, have been put in jeopardy.
 In many jungle areas, colonists and coca growers in search of livelihood and profit,
 guerrillas in search of new bases of operation, and business interests in search of
 exploitable natural resources continue to encroach upon native lands. The 45,000
 Aguaruna-Huambisa people, who inhabit the frontier area where the 1995 Peru/Ec-
 uador border conflict took place, are just one of many indigenous groups that com-
 plain about intolerable living conditions and inaccessible public services. In the
 same region, along the Pastaza river, the 50,000 Achuar people live in 36 commu-
 nities, only 12 of which have title to their land. In addition, the Achuar are fighting
 what they fear may be a losing battle against an incursion by oil exploration and
 drilling interests, as well as against a government-spnsored influx of colonists.
 Typically, the commercial exploitation of the land causes environmental damage and
 negatively affects the health of indigenous people.
 The two main organizations representing the interests of the 200,000 indigenous
 people of the Peruvian Amazon are the Inter- Ethnic Asociation for the Development
 of the Peruvian Jungle (AIDESEP) and the Confederation of Amazonian Nationali-
 ties of Peru (CONAP). In accordance with local culture and tradition, most indige-
 nous people have a spiritual relationship with their land, and the concept of land
 as a marketable commodity is alien to them. Both the AIDESEP and the CONAP
 are critical of the 1995 land law, which permits Amazonian land to be bought and
 sold if no one is living on it or otherwise making use of it. However, the CONAP
 believes that mining and other development operations are inevitable and therefore
 wants indigenous communities to share appropriately the benefits of that develop-
 
 
 638
 ment. The AIDESEP, on the other hand, remains opposed to territorial encroach-
 ments by government, commercial, and other interests.
 All indigenous rights advocates protest the low priority assigned by the Govern-
 ment to the economic and social condition of indigenous people and the lack of con-
 sultation regarding matters affecting their welfare. According to one indigenous
 rights group, this official neglect is reflected in a government decision to wind down
 the operation of the National Indigenous Institute and transfer its functions to a
 small bureau within the Ministry of Women's Affairs and Human Development.
 Sendero Luminoso continued to be a leading violator of indigenous rights. As a
 result of terrorist harassment and abuse, thousands of Ashaninkas in the central
 jungle area remain displaced. In addition, there were continued reports of enforced
 recruitment of Ashaninkas by Sendero Luminoso.
 National IRaciallEthnic Minorities.-Peru's population includes several racial mi-
 norities, the largest of which are persons of Asian and African descent. Blacks, who
 tend to be concentrated along the coast, face particularly pervasive discrimination
 and social prejudice and are among the poorest groups in the country.
 Blacks do not hold leadership positions in government, business, or the military.
 Both the navy and the air force are widely believed to follow unstated policies that
 exclude blacks from the officer corps. Employment advertisements in newspapers,
 which are not prohibited from specifying the color of the candidates sought and
 often find discreet ways to do so, typically segment the labor market into manage-
 rial and professional positions, which are reserved for white job seekers, and low-
 paying service jobs, which are set aside for black applicants. According to two black
 human rights organizations, police routinely detain persons of African descent on
 suspicion of having committed crimes, for no other reason than the color of their
 skin, and rarely act on complaints of crimes against blacks. Blacks are
 unflatteringly portrayed in television comedies as individuals of questionable char-
 acter.
 Although Peruvians of Asian descent have historically suffered discrimination,
 their social standing has improved markedly during the past decade, as Peru has
 sought to emulate Asia's economic growth, and as the Asian community has
 achieved financial success. Besides President Fujimori, who is of Japanese descent,
 many other Peruvians of Asian descent hold leadership positions in business and
 government.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-It is estimated that only 5 percent of the total work
 force of 8.5 million belong to organized labor unions. More than half of all workers
 are in the informal sector of the economy. Workers are not required to seek author-
 ization prior to forming a trade union, nor can employers legally condition employ-
 ment on union membership or nonmembership. However, abor rights advocates
 claim that many workers are reluctant to organize for fear of dismissal.
 Unions represent a cross section of political opinion. Although some unions have
 traditionally been associated with political groups, the law prohibits unions from en-
 gaging in explicitly political, religious, or profitmaking activities. The several union
 leaders who ran unsuccessfully for Congress in 1995 all did so in their own names,
 without official union sponsorship. Nevertheless, it is believed that some union ac-
 tivists who run for public office receive unofficial backing from their unions.
 In 1995 and 1996 Congress passed legislation amending the 1992 Employment
 Promotion Law, which all the main union confederations publicly criticized for re-
 stricting the rights of workers, including the freedom to bargain collectively and the
 right to work. Unions also complained that the new legislation eliminated the right
 of dismissed workers to compulsory reinstatement, if it was proven that they had
 been unjustly dismissed. As in the case of legally dismissed employees, such workers
 have the right to normal compensation of 1 years pay for each year of service. In
 addition they have the right to be compensated for up to 8 years of service, at a
 rate of 11/2 yeayear worked, or a maximum supplementary award
 equivalent to 12 years' pay.practice, the legislation has had a negative impact
 on the right of association by making it easier for companies to fire workers involved
 in union activities.
 In June 1996, the International Labor Organization (ILO) called on the Govern-
 ment to adopt new legislation to enhance freedom of association, including a re-
 quirement that reductions of personnel allegedly for economic reasons not be used
 as a device for neutralizing unionization campaigns, and the provision of the right
 to rin a union to new workers on probation.
 There are no restrictions on the affiliation of labor unions with international bod-
 ies. Several major unions and labor confederations belong to international labor or-
 
 
 ganizations such as the International Confederation of Free Trade Unions, its affili-
 ated trade secretariats and regional body.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The 1993 Constitution recog-
 nizes the right of public and private sector workers to organize and bargain collec-
 tively. However, it states that this right must be exercised in harmony with broader
 social objectives. Labor regulations promulgated prior to the Constitution provide
 that workers may form unions on the basis of their occupation, employer afiiation,
 or geographic territory. However, the regulations prohibit temporary, probationary,
 apprentice, and management employees from union membership. In addition, the
 regulations require a minimum of 100 members for the formation of professionally
 or occupationally based unions, and a minimum of 20 workers for the formation of
 a company-based union. In April the management in PetroPeru's Piura plant
 claimed that a group of workers seeking to form a union at the plant did not have
 the requisite number of prospective members to be recognized. However, when the
 workers petitioned the Ministry of Labor to verify the numbers, the Ministry found
 in favor of the workers and a union was certified.
 According to the regulations, union officials must be active members of their
 union, although they set limits on the number of individuals each union may des-
 ignate as "official" and on the amount of time officials may devote to union business
 on company time. No legal provisions exist requiring employers to reinstate workers
 who are found to have been unjustly fired for union activities.
 To become an official collective bargaining representative, a union musT represent
 at least 20 workers. Labor regulations stipulate that representatives may partici-
 pate in ollective bargaining negotiations and establish negotiating timetables. Man-
 agement negotiating teams cannot exceed the size of union teams, and both sides
 are permitted to have attorneys and technical experts present as advisers.
 For a strike to take place, a majority of all workers in a company, whether union
 members or not, must approve it by a secret ballot. A second vote must be taken,
 if petitioned by at least 20 percent of the workers. However, labor rights advocates
 complain that many temporary workers are understandably reluctant to participate
 even in secret ballots, for fear of retaliation by their employers. The labor movement
 has criticized provisions in the new amendments to the Employment Promotion Law
 that make it easier for employers to dismiss employees and thereby to impede the
 right of workers to bargain collectively. However, there are no legal restrictions pre-
 venting unions from negotiating for workers higher levels of protection than the
 baseline standards provided for by law.
 In response to a complaint regarding the right to organize and bargain collec-
 tively an IO committee has noted that the new legislation fails to protect workers
 and their organizations against acts of antiunion discrimination and interference by
 employers. In addition, the committee found that the goal of voluntary collective
 bargaining negotiation is impeded by the requirement that, for an agreement to be
 concluded covering a particular occupation or profession, it must be approved not
 only by an overall majoriiy of the workers but also by the workers in a majority
 of the enterprises affected.
 Labor regulations also permit companies unilaterally to propose temporary
 changes in work schedules, conditions and wages, and to suspendcollective bargain-
 ing agreements for up to 90 days, if obliged to do so by worsening economic cir-
 cumstances or other unexpected negative developments, provided they give their
 employees at least 15 days notice of such changes. However, labor rights advocates
 allege that, in practice, few employers respected this provision. If workers reject an
 employers proposed changes, the Ministry of Labor is required to resolve the dis-
 pute based on criteria of 'reasonableness" and "economic necessity." Whether the
 changes proposed by employers in such instances are upheld in fullor in part, em-
 ployers are required to adopt all possible measures, such as the authorization of
 extra vacation time, in order to minimize the negative economic impact on their em-
 ployees.
 Although a conciliation and arbitration system exists to resolve management dis-
 putes with unions, union officials complain that their proportionate share of the
 costs of arbitration often exceeds their resources. In addition, union officials claim
 that, since the law prohibits temporary workers from participating in union organiz-
 ing elections, more and more companies have resorted to hiring workers on tem-
 porary, personal-services contracts, as a means of preventing a possible increase in
 union strength. Although the new legislation restricts the number of temporary
 workers hired to 20 percent of a company's work force, labor rights advocates al-
 leged that this quota was rarely respected. In response to the labor movement's per-
 sistent lobbying on this issue in international forums, employers denied the charge
 that they are biased against unions, arguing that the labor-stability previsions of
 the legislation have made long-term commitments to workers too expensive.
 
 
 Special regulations aimed at giving employers in export-processing and duty-free
 zones a freer hand in the application of the new legislation provide for the use of
 temporary labor as needed, for greater flexibility in labor contracts, and for setting
 wage rates based on supply and demand. Although, as a result, workers in such
 zones have difficulty in unionizing, labor rights advocates admit that these zones
 are few in number and do not contribute substantively to labor's unionizing difficul-
 ties.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The Constitution prohibits forced
 or compulsory labor. However, there are periodic reports of this practice in remote
 Andean mountain and Amazonian jungle regions. In response to a complaint filed
 with the ILO, the Government acknowledged in 1994 that forced labor exists but
 stated that it had adopted measures to end the abuses. The Constitution does not
 specifically prohibit forced or bonded labor by children, and there were reports of
 forced labor by children in the gold mines of the remote Madre de Dios department
 (see Section 6.d.). There is no forced labor in urban areas.
 d. Status of Child Labor Practices and Minimum Age for Employment.-Education
 through secondary school is compulsory and free. Nevertheless, because of wide-
 spread poverty, a high percentage of school-age children work during daytime hours
 rather than attend classes, and only a few of these children attend classes at night.
 Although the minimum legal age for employment is 16, children are pressed to help
 support their families from a very early age by working in the informal economy,
 which escapes government supervision of wages and working conditions. A recent
 government study found that 8 percent of the work force is between the ages of 6
 and 14 (see also Section 5). The Government's National Institute of Family Welfare
 cooperates with the United Nations Children's Fund and the Inter-American Devel-
 opment Bank in assisting street children and other child laborers.
 The legislation amending the Employment Promotion Law raised the upper age
 limit from 21 to 25 for participants in the special youth labor program, which allows
 employers to pay less than the statutory minimum wage as a means of encouraging
 the provision of specialized training for new young workers. It also increased the
 period of apprenticeship from 18 to 36 months. In addition, the legislation raised
 the portion of an employer's work force that may legally be composed of workers
 under these programs from 15 to 30 percent.
 Although the Constitution includes a general prohibition of forced labor, it does
 not specifically outlaw forced or bonded child labor (see Section 6.c.). Child labor is
 heavily used in the agricultural sector and in informal gold mining but not in other
 major export industries, such as petroleum and fisheries. Recent studies by NGO's
 have found that approximately 4,500 youths under 18 years of age are employed in
 harsh conditions in the informal gold mines of Madre de Dios. Many of these work-
 ers are under age 15, and some are as young as 11. These child laborers were
 pressed into service through a recruitment system known as "enganche," which is
 practiced in Puno, Juliaca, Sicuani, and Cuzco. Under this system, they are provided
 free transportation to the mines and allegedly agree to work for at least 90 days
 before being paid. In addition, these child workers lack proper medical care, are
 forced to work long hours, are often subjected to beatings and rape, and at times
 are deprived of their pay. The Government has not exercised due supervision over
 this child labor system, while the mine owners have failed to comply with the legal
 provisions that do exist with respect to juvenile workers.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The Constitution provides that the State pro-
 mote social and economic progress and occupational education. It states that work-
 ers should receive a "just and sufficient" wage to be determined by the Government
 in consultation with labor and business representatives, as well as "adequate protec-
 tion against arbitrary dismissal." However, labor rights advocates complain that,
 while labor leaders have engaged in discussions with members of the Congress
 Labor Committee, they have been refused access to senior executive branch officials
 for the past 4 years.
 On July 28, the Government raised the statutory minimum wage to $130 (345
 soles) a month. It is generally considered to be inadequate to support a worker and
 family. According to some estimates, as much as half the country's work force earns
 the minimum wage or below.
 The Constitution also provides for a 48-hour workweek, a weekly day of rest, and
 an annual vacation. In addition, it prohibits discrimination in the workplace. While
 occupational health and safety standards exist, the Government lacks the resources
 to monitor firms or enforce compliance. In cases of industrial accidents, the level of
 compensation awarded to the injured employee is usually determined by agreement
 between the employer and the individual worker involved. In 1993 the Government
 introduced reforms that eliminated the need to prove an employer's culpability in
 order to obtain compensation for work-related injuries. No provisions exist in law
 
 
 for workers to remove themselves from potentially dangerous work situations with-
 out jeopardizing their continued employment.
