Philippines
This year's report, like last year's, provides a solid accounting of the human rights situation in the Philippines. The report is especially good in its frequent use of examples, providing detailed information to demonstrate broader points. Important criticisms leveled at last year's report have been addressed, such as the inadequate discussion of the problem of impunity. Moreover, the report is largely devoid of political biases that in past years had seriously marred the accuracy of the Philippines report.
The report gives considerable and deserved space to the failure of the Philippine government to prosecute soldiers and policemen implicated in human rights offenses. The report does understate the problem by saying that serious abuses by members of the security forces "frequently" went unpunished - "almost always" went unpunished would be more accurate. As the total number of human rights violations in the Philippines has declined, the failure to successfully prosecute those involved looms ever larger, and does not bode well for preventing the recurrence of serious human rights problems in the future. The report does well to point out that "a number of particularly egregious cases from past years still remained unresolved."
The section on extrajudicial killing contains an example in which the case against the police was dropped after the families of the victims "all eventually agreed to settlements out of court." This points to a broader issue not discussed in the report, namely, that criminal prosecutions can virtually always be settled finan-
cially. This practice is contrary to the Philippine criminal law and procedure, yet it is common, particularly in cases of human rights violations where the victims are poor and the members of the security forces have access to funds. It points to the failure of the justice system to distinguish between private causes of action, which are between individuals, and criminal matters, which are violations against the state and should be prosecuted regardless of any private settlement.
The report also does well to point out, what was neglected in last year's report, the increasing percentage of human rights abuses occurring outside of the context of counterinsurgency operations, such as with regard to police and military involvement in land disputes and illegal logging operations. This should put to rest assertions by the State Department in the past that all human rights violations were insurgency related. More attention should be given in the future to the connection between environmental degradation in the Philippines and human rights violations by government forces acting on behalf of business enterprises, legal or otherwise. This is most pronounced in the issue of logging, noted in the report, but occurs in other areas as well.
The discussion of the various nongovernmental human rights groups in the Philippines is generally accurate. However, it is incorrect to assert that the Task Force Detainees of the Philippines (TFDP) does not "distinguish between persons imprisoned purely for their political beliefs and those legitimately incarcerated for criminal acts." As the report states with
300
Philippines
respect to the government amnesty program, TFDP would include as political prisoners, persons "detained for committing criminal acts in pursuit of their political beliefs," in addition to those held for purely political offenses, such as subversion. The State Department need not accept the TFDP definition, but they should not distort it.
The report's discussion of the Citizen Armed Force Geographical Units (CAFGUs) not only points to the abuses committed by these militia units, but examines the institutional problems of the CAFGUs that help to explain their poor human rights record. The report describes civilian voluntary organizations (CVOs) as "unarmed." Although they are supposed to be unarmed, it is not uncommon for CVO groups to carry weapons while conducting patrols.
The report gives a good account of corruption in the Philippine National Police. It cites without attribution a statistic that "an estimated 5 percent of the 100,-000 man force" is considered corrupt or criminal. Although a definition of corruption might be needed, this figure would appear to grossly underestimate corruption and criminal activity in the national police force.
The discussion of abuses by the insurgent New People's Army (NPA), while generally accurate, contains one significant mistake. Concerning the widely publicized ambush of soldiers by the NPA in Surigao del Sur in February, the report states that surviving soldiers "claimed NPA troops executed wounded soldiers and mutilated corpses." The report should have added that equally
well publicized investigations, including one by the governmental Commission on Human Rights, concluded that these claims were false.
The report does its best with statistics on human rights violations published by the governmental Commission on Human Rights and by non-governmental organizations, primarily TFDP. As the number of serious violations in the Philippines has declined, there has been greater convergence in the figures reported. The report does a good job of describing the basis for the statistics of the various sources and explaining changes from previous years, neither of which is apparent simply from the statistics alone.
In the section on arbitrary arrest, the report incorrectly states that the 1957 Antisubversion Law defined membership in the Communist Party as "a continuing offense," allowing for warrantless arrests and searches. The law does not state this. The report gets it right in the section on interference with privacy family, home or correspondence, noting that a recent Supreme Court decision had determined that subversion was "a continuing offense," thus not requiring a warrant. This Supreme Court ruling was strongly criticized by human rights organizations as a serious abridgement of protections afforded by the law in cases of alleged subversion.
The section on a fair public trial states correctly that the "pace and quality of the legal system fall short of constitutional standards" and that the continuous trial system (requiring most cases to be completed in 90 days) has not prevented court dockets from becoming backlogged.
301
Philippines
The report should have addressed some of the reasons for the problems in the system (beyond the shortages of judges and courtrooms), such as the ready acceptance by judges of motions for postponements and the prevalence of bribery in the system.
The section on freedom of the press notes with insufficient alarm the fact that libel is criminally actionable in the Philippines. While President Aquino's successful libel suit received considerable attention, many such cases were filed by Philippine public officials against members of the press, often as a form of harassment. The broad circumstances in which a libel suit may be brought has had a serious impact on freedom of the press in the Philippines. Newspapers are forced to bear the considerable expense of settling cases to avoid going to court, which in the Philippines is inevitably an expensive and time-consuming undertaking.
The section on worker rights is as good as last year's, although this is often because entire paragraphs are simply repeated. On the negative side, the report fails to note the ongoing pattern of violence perpetrated by police and company security forces against strikers and labor activists. For example, the Center for Trade Union and Human Rights noted there were 157 victims of "trade union oppression" in the first 100 days of the Ramos administration (June 30-0ctober 6, 1992). Abuses reported included murder, attempted murder, arrest, detention, and physical and mental abuse.
While the report comments briefly on complaints by the Kilusang Mayo Uno (KMU), a nationwide labor federation, to
the International Labor Organization (ILO), it fails to note that the ILO expressed deep concern in November over the non-punishment of government agents found guilty of violating trade union rights. The ILO pointed out that this situation reinforces the climate of violence and insecurity among workers and has a damaging effect on the exercise of trade union rights. The ILO further criticized the government's refusal to disband the CAFGUs, which have been implicated in violence against workers.
The report states that private sector strikes are legal and without general restrictions. However, they fail to note that the emergency executive powers have been used to intervene even in a strike in a hot dog manufacturing company (Barney's Food International in September). In another example, six trade unionists from Grand Asia and Queensland Products were detained for nine months in the Rizal Provincial jail for taking part in a strike. They were finally released December 17 after police officers, who had charged them with illegal possession of explosives and unlawful assembly, had repeatedly failed to turn up in court to prove their accusations. They had not been allowed to post bail. These are clear interferences with the right to strike.
The figures on strikes are somewhat incomplete and misleading. It is true that the incidence of work stoppages was lower in 1992 than in 1991 - by 25% according to BusinessWor/d. And fewer employee-hours were lost in 1992 than in 1991 - around 36%. However, the quasi-judicial system for hearing and adjudicating workers claims did not seem
302
Philippines
to work as well in the past year - the number of strike notices filed after preventive mediation by the National Mediation and Conciliation Board actually increased by 18.33%, and those going to the Board which materialized into actual strikes rose some 200%. Of all work stoppages in 1992, some 68% were caused by allegations of unfair labor practices.
The report also fails, once again, to note that government employees are permitted to organize but not to bargain or to strike. The State Department should refer to Rule VIII, Rules and Regulations to Govern the Exercise of the Right of Government Employees to Self-Organizations, pursuant to the provisions of Section 15 of Executive Order 180, June 1, 1987.
The section on child labor is particularly unsatisfactory. It completely ignores the statement in July of Nieves Confesor, the new Secretary of Labor and Employment, that more than 2,000 child workers, from seven to 14 years of age, had been enlisted to spray cyanide on vegetable crops in Benguet and other rural provinces. The Secretary even cited a UN report stating that at least 24.5% of the children in these provinces were working on vegetable farms. The Labor Department's response, other than ordering some regional inspections, was to distribute "brochures to inform child workers about the harmful effects of cyanide and persuade them to be more careful in handling pesticides," as if that would force employers to change their practices.
Another example of overlooked child labor is the Golden Maple Industrial Cor-
poration, which makes Panda pens and cigarette lighters. A group of young women workers aged 12 to 25, who were live-in workers at the company, went on strike for months after the company refused to recognize their union. The workers also had Social Security contributions deducted from their wages that were never paid to the Social Security Office.
The section on the minimum wage once again understates the figures. In July, Labor Secretary Confesor admitted that the Department of Labor and Employment figures showed that barely 25% of the country's more than 300,000 registered business firms had complied with the minimum wage law and other labor laws. The report appears to have an error in this paragraph, as in one sentence it states that only 17% were paying the minimum wage, and in another it states that the highest noncompliance rate recorded was 40.8%. The reported official figures would seem to contradict both.
Despite examples offered last year to the State Department, the report still fails to discuss in any depth the problems of job health and safety in the Philippines. It simply reports that little information is available but fails to comment why.
303
