T?< P?@C@GG@E<J
The Philippines is a multiparty democracy with an elected president and legislature,
a thriving civil society sector, and a vibrant media. Several key institutions,
including the judiciary and law enforcement agencies, remain weak and
the military and police still commit human rights violations with impunity.
Armed opposition forces, including the communist New People’s Army (NPA)
and various Islamist Moro groups, also commit abuses against civilians.
President Benigno Aquino III maintains that the government is “working overtime”
to prevent new cases of human rights violations and to resolve previous
cases, and has pleaded for patience. Yet despite promises of reform, his
administration has made little progress in addressing impunity. Extrajudicial
killings of leftist activists and petty criminals continue, with the government
failing to acknowledge and address involvement by the security forces and
local officials.
Extrajudicial Killings and Enforced Disappearances
Hundreds of leftist politicians and political activists, journalists, and outspoken
clergy have been killed or abducted since 2001. The government has largely
failed to prosecute military personnel implicated in such killings, even though
strong evidence exists in many cases. Only seven cases of extrajudicial killings
from the past decade have been successfully prosecuted, none of which were
in 2011 or involved active duty military personnel.
Politically motivated killings have continued despite President Aquino’s
pledges to address the problem. Human Rights Watch has documented at least
seven extrajudicial killings and three enforced disappearances for which there
is strong evidence of military involvement since Aquino took office in June
2010.
On February 27, unidentified assailants shot and killed Rudy Dejos, a tribal
chieftan and local human rights officer, and his son Rudyric. The elder Dejos’s
body showed signs of torture. Prior to the killing, according to Dejos’s wife,
Philippine army soldiers had threatened him on several occasions. The police blamed the NPA for the killing before gathering any evidence, and have now
filed charges against an alleged NPA member. The family does not believe the
NPA is behind the killing.
A landmark Supreme Court decision in May and a National Commission on
Human Rights report in March said military officers were behind the “disappearance”
of four leftist activists in 2006 and 2007; Sherlyn Cadapan, Karen
Empeño, Manuel Merino, and Jonas Burgos. The government still has not
brought charges against the implicated officers; faced with this inaction, the
families themselves have filed cases against the officers.
Private Armies
Aquino campaigned on promises to dismantle the “private armies” of politicians
and wealthy landowners, which have long been responsible for serious
abuses. While Interior Secretary Jesse Robredo has claimed the Aquino administration
has dismantled almost half of the private armies in the southern
island of Mindanao, he has not presented any evidence. Promises to revoke
Executive Order 546, which local officials cite to justify the provision of arms to
their personal forces, also have not come to fruition. Aquino still defends the
use of poorly trained and abusive paramilitary forces to fight NPA insurgents
and Islamist armed groups. In October Aquino announced the deployment of
additional paramilitary personnel to provide security to mining companies.
The trial of senior members of the Ampatuan family for the November 23, 2009
massacre of 58 political opponents and others, including more than 30 media
workers, in Maguindanao in Mindanao, is ongoing.
Torture
The police and the military were implicated in numerous incidents of torture in
2011. While several investigations are ongoing, the rigor of investigations varies
and at this writing no one had been convicted under the 2009 Anti-Torture Act.
In September the Department of Justice filed charges of torture against a Manila
precinct chief, Senior Inspector Joselito Binayug, and six others, including one of his superiors, after a cell phone video was circulated in March 2010 showing
Binayug pulling on a rope tied around a criminal suspect’s genitals and beating
him during the interrogation. The whereabouts of the victim, Darius Evangelista,
remain unknown.
On July 23 in Sumisip, Basilan army scout rangers arrested 39-year-old baker
Abdul-Khan Balinting Ajid as an alleged member of the Abu Sayyaf armed
group. Soldiers allegedly stripped him naked, sexually assaulted him, and set
him on fire. While the military said several soldiers involved had been relocated
to Manila, the capital, and restricted to barracks, at this writing no criminal
charges had been filed against them.
Targeted Killings of Petty Criminals and Street Youths
So-called death squads operating in Davao City, Tagum City, and other cities
continue to target alleged petty criminals, drug dealers, gang members, and
street children. Aquino’s administration has not acted to dismantle such
groups, end local anti-crime campaigns that promote or encourage unlawful
use of force, or prosecute government officials complicit in such activities. At
this writing the National Commission on Human Rights had still not reported on
the outcome of multi-agency task force investigations into summary killings in
Davao City in 2009.
Conflict in Mindanao
A ceasefire remains in place between the Philippine government and the Moro
Islamic Liberation Front, and peace talks are ongoing. The army continues to
fight Abu Sayyaf, an armed group implicated in numerous attacks on and
abductions of civilians, particularly in Sulu and Basilan.
Conflict with the New People’s Army
Military clashes continue between government forces and the NPA, especially in
the Eastern Visayas, Negros, and parts of Mindanao.
The NPA has unlawfully killed and detained civilians and extorted “taxes” from
individuals and businesses. NPA leaders have often sought to justify targeted
killings by noting that “people’s courts” earlier condemned those killed for
“crimes against the people.” For instance, the NPA killed Raymundo Agaze in
Kabankalan City, Negros Occidental on August 19, and Ramelito Gonzaga in
Mindanao on September 2 following “people’s court” rulings. Philip Alston, former
United Nations special rapporteur on extrajudicial executions, concluded
that the NPA’s court system “is either deeply flawed or simply a sham.”
The Philippine army fabricated stories that several children taken into military
custody were NPA rebels. In several cases investigated by Human Rights Watch,
the army paraded the children in front of the media, publicly branding them
rebels despite conclusive contrary evidence. In two of the cases, the army
detained the children for several days.
The UN Children’s Fund has documented the use of children in armed conflict
by the NPA and the Moro Islamic Liberation Front, as well as by government
forces. The UN has reported a rising trend of government security forces using
schools as barracks and bases in contravention of national legislation prohibiting
such practice.
Reproductive Rights
Contraceptives, including condoms, are restricted in parts of the Philippines,
which prohibits and criminally punishes abortion without exception. The law
leaves open the possibility that a serious threat to a pregnant woman’s life
could be classified as a justifying circumstance barring criminal prosecution.
However, the Philippine Supreme Court has yet to adjudicate this possibility,
which does little to mitigate the serious consequences of criminalizing abortion
for women’s health and lives.
Despite vehement opposition from the Catholic Bishops’ Conference of the
Philippines, Aquino has remained publicly committed to a reproductive health
bill that aims to provide universal access to contraception and maternal health
care. The bill goes some way toward enhancing protection of sexual and reproductive
rights and the right to the highest obtainable standard of health, but still makes abortion a criminal offense. At this writing it remained before
Congress.
Philippine Workers Abroad
Approximately two million Filipinos work abroad, and in the first nine months of
2011 sent home an estimated US$13 billion. Hundreds of thousands of women
work in Southeast Asia and the Middle East as domestic workers, where they
are typically excluded from labor laws and are often subject to abuses including
unpaid wages, food deprivation, forced confinement in the workplace, and
physical and sexual abuse. In 2011 the Philippine government either proposed
or implemented bans on sending workers to countries with high incidences of
abuse. These bans have largely been ineffective, with host countries turning to
other labor sources instead. The Philippines has yet to extend labor protections
to household workers domestically, but played a key role globally by chairing
negotiations for the International Labour Organization Convention on Decent
Work for Domestic Workers, adopted on June 16, 2011.
Key International Actors
The United States is the Philippines’s most influential ally and, together with
Australia and Japan, among the country’s largest bilateral donors. The US military
has access to Philippine territory and seas under a Visiting Forces
Agreement, and the two militaries hold annual joint exercises. In fiscal year
2011-2012 the US government appropriated $12 million to the Philippines under
Foreign Military Financing for procurement of US military equipment, services,
and training. Of this sum, $3 million is contingent upon the Philippine government
showing progress in addressing human rights violations, including ending
extrajudicial killings. US Ambassador Harry Thomas, Jr. has publicly called on
the Philippine government to do more to end impunity for extrajudicial killings.
The European Union’s 2009 to 2011 €3.9 million ($5.3 million) program to
address extrajudicial killings and strengthen the criminal justice system concluded
in April.
In May UN member states elected the Philippines to the UN Human Rights
Council.