THE PHILIPPINES
This Report contains accurate •• and comprehensive information, but suffers as a whole from several defects in presentation. These tend to understate the seriousness of human rights abuses in 1983 and to diminish the government's responsibility for them.
Two recurring patterns account for the bulk of these distortions. First, in discussing practices such as torture that have been consistently identified as widespread problems, the Report often states that "some" instances of such abuse are alleged, leaving the impression that these are isolated occurrences rather than a consistent practice. Second, abuses that have been well documented by reliable organizations are consistently cited as "allegations" or "charges," and are thus given the same weight as discredited government responses, which are frequently reported without comment or, at times, apparently endorsed. In some instances, the Report simply states as fact what is actually the government's official defense of serious charges, as when it states that "[v]illagers in some cases abandon their homes to avoid being caught in combat zones" in discussing the program of forcible relocation of peasants by Philippine armed forces. The cumulative result of these patterns is that the Report tends to imply that substantial doubt exists about very serious practices that have been widely documented
-39-
by reliable bodies, while legitimizing government responses which have themselves been the object of substantial concern. Other distortions are produced by implying significant progress where little exists, as when the Report notes that "[t]he government .has implemented a new procedure which provides annual review of all preventive detention cases." Despite this procedure, President Marcos still retains the power to order anyone's detention indefinitely, without recourse to judicial authorities and with no possibility of judicial relief.* The Report does not state this more salient fact.
Additionally, the Report frequently seeks to absolve the Philippine government from clear responsibility for serious abuses by discussing them in vague terms or contrasting them with abuses by insurgent forces, which are portrayed as more serious.
Several of these patterns infect the State Department's treatment of political killings. Its presentation of information about this issue tends to imply that substantial doubt surrounds the circumstances and extent of political killings by government forces, while little comparable
* President Marcos recently agreed to temporarily suspend this power until June 1, 1984 as a concession to opposition groups which have demanded, as a condition to their participation in parliamentary elections scheduled for May 14, 1984, that he repeal the decree authorizing him to arrest and detain people.
-40-
uncertainty exists with respect to killings by insurgent forces. The Report's most forceful attribution of responsibility to government forces is its observation that "Government officials state that mistakes have sometimes been made by its security forces fighting in insurgent-affected areas." In contrast, it unequivocally asserts that "Ii]nsurgents frequently kill landlords and local officials in order to intimidate the population, extort contributions, execute vigilante justice, and demonstrate their strength."
When it discusses non-combatant killings attributable to security forces, the Report stretches to exonerate the government from clear responsibility. Introducing the subject of extrajudicial killings, the Report states:
The use of violence for political or personal reasons has not been uncommon in Philippine society. The boundaries between common criminal activity, personal vendettas, unauthorized reprisals by individual military or constabulary units, and legitimate counterinsurgency operations are not always clear . • . Clashes between insurgents and Government forces frequently occur, though human rights groups assert that some of these encounters are in fact summary executions of unarmed civilians.
In fact, human rights groups such as Amnesty International and the Lawyers Committee for International Human Rights have consistently documented numerous killings of civilians who have been taken into custody, and whose deaths are officially declared the result of military encounters. The Report fails
-41-
to note this fact, and instead lends weight to the government's widely discredited defense that such killings were the product of "encounters."
While implicitly crediting the government's response to charges of summary execution, the Report undermines the findings of human rights groups about this practice. It records the alarming fact that Task Force Detainees (TFD), the principal human rights monitoring group in the Philippines, documented more political killings by government forces in the first six months of 1983 (146) than in the entire year of 1982 (125), but casts doubt upon the integrity of these findings by including the gratuitous observation that TFD is "often critical of the Government." As the Report notes elsewhere, TFD is the most reliable human rights fact-finding body in the Philippines.
As with political killings, the Report's discussion of disappearances stretches to exculpate the government. After noting a shocking rise in reported cases of disappearance in 1983 (from 29 for the entire year of 1982 to 79 for the first half of 1983), the Report speculates that this rise may reflect increased instances of incommunicado detention of suspects detained on national security grounds in areas of active insurgency. In doing so, the Report at once implies that such detention is not, in itself, a serious form of abuse and disregards the strong possibility that many of the disappeared have been killed.
-42-
A serious omission in the Report is its failure to mention the common practice of taking persons seized as alleged subversives to "safehouses" — secret, unauthorized places of detention — where they are frequently tortured immediately following their arrest.
The Report also suffers because it does not indicate, as it should, that the government's failure to conduct vigorous investigations of military abuses is a major factor contributing to the dearth of successful prosecutions for violations by government forces. With respect to political killings, the Report merely notes the government's claim that "it is often difficult to gather evidence" and states that "Government investigations are often not pursued with vigor." In fact, visibly reliably investigations are rarely pursued.
Similarly, the Report omits reference to substantial evidence of deliberate government efforts to thwart investigations or prosecutions. Thus, it cites the prosecution for the murder of Dr. Remberto de la Paz and notes his family's belief that the wrong man is being tried, but fails to state that the Philippine military repeatedly refused the family's request for a photograph of the suspect so that witnesses could indicate whether he was the person they saw commit the murder. Similarly, in discussing government efforts to curb torture, the Report specifically notes that the Defense Ministry investigated Hilda Narcisco's
-43-
charges of rape and failed to find supporting evidence, but does not state that the Defense Ministry has refused Ms. Narciso1s repeated requests for a line-up so that she could try to substantiate her charges.
Where weaknesses in disciplinary efforts are mentioned, they are understated. For example, the Report states that a "combination of criminal prosecution and disciplinary administrative action has been used to deal with abusive personnel, although few receive severe punishment." While this statement is technically correct, a more informative account would have noted that the most common form of punishment for torture is mere transfer to another region.
The Report's discussion of habeas corpus emphasizes respects in which the right to petition remains meaningful, thereby understating respects in which the right has been abrogated. The Report correctly states that habeas corpus petitions often result in the production of persons and an end to torture but not their release if they are held without bail on national security grounds. It does not indicate that the Supreme Court recently reversed established doctrine in declaring the judiciary powerless to review the detention of persons held under a presidential detention order, a significant blow to human rights in the Philippines; it merely notes that the Court upheld the President's power of preventive detention.
-44-
The Report's account of trial procedures is accurate and, on the whole, responsible. Nevertheless, relatively minor omissions result in a presentation that fails to reflect several critical problems. For example, the Report notes delays of several years in trials in civilian courts and speculates that they result from "case backlogs, a shortage of judges, and the practice of hearing cases concurrently." The Report notes that trials in subversion and rebellion cases tend to last even longer, but offers no speculation for this increased delay. Attorneys in the Philippines have frequently charged that the military deliberately strings out such cases because they lack sufficient evidence to obtain a conviction, but wish to continue their harassment of government critics.
The Report notes a widespread cynicism about the independence of the judiciary and accurately notes that "courts rarely challenge the Government on major issues." But a complete account of this problem would have noted the long history of interference with judicial independence through the appointments process. Critical in this regard is the fact that shortly after he imposed martial law in 1972, President Marcos required all judges except those of the Supreme Court to tender their resignations, which remained with him until January 1983. The Report also fails to mention that since 1973 President Marcos has had sole power to appoint judges, while such appointments were previously
-45-
subject to approval by an independent body.
The section on press freedom is, on the whole, a responsible and balanced account. While noting that press organs have been more critical of the government since the assassination of Senator Aquino, the Report accurately notes that official restraints on press freedom continue to operate and that critical journalism has not been risk-free.
Nevertheless, several statements are misleading in subtle ways. The Report notes that "{s]ome observers feel . . . that the recently revealed presidential decree specifying heavy penalties for seditious utterances will limit free speech, although no one has so far been convicted of violating the decree . . . ." The serious implications of the decree to which this statement refers would have been clearer had the Report noted that journalists are singled out for punishment. Presidential Decree No. 1834 authorizes "life imprisonment to death"* for
any person, who having control and management of printing, broadcast or television facilities . . . shall use or allow the use of such facilities for the purpose of mounting sustained propaganda assaults against the Government or any of its duly constituted authorities which tend to destabilize the
* This has been widely understood to authorize life imprisonment or death. In private communications, however, the Philippine government has recently indicated this is intended to authorize life imprisonment "up until" the prisoner's death.
-46-
Government or undermine or destroy the faith and loyalty of the citizenry thereto ....
Also, it is misleading to note that "no one has so far been convicted of violating the decree" when convictions for national security offenses are rare (as the Report elsewhere
notes), while the threat of arrest and prosecution is pervasive.
The Report's treatment of labor rights is unduly positive. Noting limitations on the right to strike, it states that "the Government continues frequently to tolerate 'illegal' strikes." The Report should have stated that the government also frequently does not tolerate unauthorized but peaceful strikes, and sometimes uses military forces to rout strikers.
The Report's discussion of the Catholic Church's politically-related activities is incomplete without reference to the controversial prosecution for murder of three priests and six layworkers who organized sugar plantation workers in Negros Occidental. The case of Fathers Brian Gore, Niall O'Brien and Vicente Dangan and the layworkers have been the focus of international attention by human rights groups, who charge that the defendants face trumped-up charges because of their work on behalf of social justice.
More generally, the statement that "some" churchworkers active in human rights "have been arrested on charges of
-47-
subversion and rebellion" is an inadequate presentation of a pervasive pattern of harassment of Church activists. Jaime Cardinal Sin, the Archbishop of Manila, has described this pattern as a "systematic campaign to discredit the church and church workers."
Finally, as a general matter the Report would be strengthened by including more specific references to cases that are mentioned. For example, the Report cites three instances in which convictions have been obtained for political killings by security force personnel, but does not give the names of the defendants or victims, or other information that would be useful to readers interested in such developments.
-48-
