 THE PHILIPPINES
 The Philippines has a republican form of government with a
 democratically elected President and a bicameral legislature.
 President Corazon C. Aquino was sworn into office in 1986
 after a popular and nearly bloodless uprising ended the
 20-year rule of Ferdinand Marcos. A new Constitution was
 ratified in 1987, followed by Congressional elections the same
 year, local and provincial elections in 1988, and village
 elections in 1989.
 'The Armed Forces of the Philippines (AFP), which now number
 some 166,000 personnel, continued to be engaged against a
 Communist insurgency active in many of the country's 73
 provinces. The army, with 68,000.and the Philippine
 Constabulary (PC) with 42,000, are the largest elements of the
 AFP. The Integrated National Police numbers 40,000. The AFP
 has established local militia-units called Citizens Armed
 Forces Geographical Units (CAFGU's), with 52,000 men. In
 early December, elements of the armed forces identified with
 the "Reform the Armed Forces Movement" (RAM) joined with
 Marcos loyalists to launch a week-long coup attempt which
 resulted in over 100 deaths, mostly civilians caught in the
 crossfire. The Aquino Government was able to quell this
 threat from the right, and-trials of senior officers involved
 are scheduled for early 1990.
 During the year, the Communist Party of the Philippines (CPP)
 and its armed wing, the New People's Army (NPA), escalated
 campaigns of urban terrorism, political assassination,
 kidnaping, and extortion, resulting in widespread human rights
 abuses. In Mindanao the Muslim secessionist movement stepped
 up-its violent activities after a lull of several years.
 Xlements of the Army and the PC have also been involved in
 human rights violations.
 The -Aquino Government has made relief of the endemic poverty
 of the Philippines one of its highest priorities. In 1986
 government statistics showed that 59 percent of Filipinos
 lived below the poverty level. Facilitated by an upturn in
 the economy--estimated at 5.5 percent real growth for
 1989--the number of people living below the poverty level has
 -declined to 46 percent, according to government statistics.
 The Philippines has a population growth rate estimated at 2.4
 -percent, the highest in the region.
 The-dominant factoTs in the human rights situation in the
 Philippines are the continuing CPP/NPA insurgency with its
 campaign of terrorism (including assassination and kidnaping),
 and the reaction to it by elements of the security forces and
 CAFGUs that the Government has rarely been able to control or
 effectively try and punish. New evidence indicates, however,
 that some disappearances attributed to the security forces
 were in fact murders carried out by Communist guerrillas.
 The Aquino Government continued to express firm opposition to
 human rights abuses and devoted increased attention to human
 rights training programs, better discipline, and improved
 civil-military relations. While the incidence of
 extrajudicial killings and other acts of violence, as measured
 by local human rights groups, appeared to decline in absolute
 numbers from 1988, violence remained at a high level.
 The principal human rights concerns in 1989 included
 extrajudicial killings, great difficulties in trying and
 punishing those responsible for human rights abuses, and
 
 
 951
 THE PHILIPPINES
 displacement of civilians caused by military operations
 against rebel-groups. Other areas of human rights abridgments
 included-brutal treatment of prisoners and arbitrary
 detentions. The Aquino Governient has restored freedom of
 speech and press, assembly and association, the right of
 --citizens to change their government by democratic means and
 workers' rights--all of which were either denied or sharply
 abridged under the Marcos regime.
 RESPECT FOR BUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other'Extrajudicial Killing
 The number of political killings reported in the Philippines
 declined notably'in 1989, according to information from
 governmental and nongovernmental sources, although
 extrajudicial killings still occur frequently throughout the
 country. In addition, it is estimated that more than a
 thousand people lost their lives in 1989 due to the insurgency
 and counterinsurgency, although no definitive figures are
 available. 'In many of the cases of extrajudicial killing, the
 identity and motivation of the perpetrators are subject to
 dispute. In some incidents, there is evidence linking AFP
 'Personnel or police to the killing, either during
 counterinsurgency operations or in unauthorized or individual
 criminal activities. The Government's pronouncements against
 suoh abuses'ate clear, but cbnvictions of persons accused of
 unauthorized actions are" rare. In other cases, the killings
 are- Atributed to Communist insurgents engaged in a continuing
 campaign of political assassinations of government officials,
 including-provincial leaders, military officers, and police.
 The NPA had also acknowledged responsibility for several
 "massacres" of civilians. The discovery of mass graves gave
 substance to reports of an internal purge of suspected "deep
 penetration agents" in the CPP organization. In other
 instances, the evidence suggests that private vendettas and
 criminal activities resulting-in murder are sometimes
 incorrectly attributed to political assassins of the left or
 rig:ht.
 The official fact-gathering human rights institution in the
 Philippines is-the constitutionally mandated Commission on
 Human Rights (CHR). Charged~with investigating all alleged
 violations of human rights within the country, CHR has been
 criticized by some for being an apologist for the Aquino
 administration. Partially in answer to those charges and to
 produce more complete figures, CHR revamped its statistical
 compilation procedures in 1989 and revised its statistics for
 1988. Several private groups, of which Task Force Detainees
 (TFD) is the best known, also record complaints of human
 rights abuses. TFD reports only on abuses allegedly committed
 by goyernment-forces and not by those of the NPA. Its
 acceptance of sometimes poorly substantiated reports and its
 close association with the CPP have led to charges that it
 overstates the case against the Government. As a result,
 quantifications of human rights abuses in the Philippines,
 including political killings, are difficult to verify and are
 subject to ideological manipulation.
 Nevertheless, trends in the statistics from both CHR and TFD
 clearly indicate that the number of political killings
 decreased substantially during 1989. In the first 6 months of
 
 
 952
 THE PHILIPPINES
 1989, the CHR central office received complaints regarding 292
 victims of political killings (including multiple, individual,
 and attempted killings), compared to 856 in 1988. TFD
 reported 141 summary executions by government forces and an
 additional 132 persons killed in massacres (politically
 motivated killing of groups) from January 1 to November 14,
 compared to 445 victims in 1988.
 During 1989 the extent and seriousness of the NPA's violations
 of human rights received greater attention and publicity in
 the Philippine media. Earlier reports of an internal purge in
 which several hundred people were detained, tortured, and
 killed were given credence by the discovery of mass graves in
 Quezon, Albay, Laguna, Bataan, and Zamboanga del Sur
 provinces, tagged by the press as the "killing fields." A
 former NPA member testified that about 150 CPP/NPA members
 were killed between April and December 1988 in southern
 Luzon. Documents seized from the NPA describe arbitrary
 detention, torture, trial in kangaroo courts, and execution.
 Although most of the bodies remain unidentified, preliminary
 evidence indicates that the graves contain some persons whose
 disappearances had earlier been attributed by TFD and others
 to government forces or rightwing vigilante groups. In one
 instance, of the 27 bodies identified 11 were civilians.
 In June the NPA admitted attacking a United Church of Christ
 Philippines (UCCP) mission in Davao Del Sur, Mindanao, killing
 40 civilian churchgoers. Two of the victims were beheaded.
 In another case, an NPA unit reportedly killed seven members
 of a family and wounded five others in Zamboanga Del Norte.
 The NPA has also reportedly killed-a number of people who
 refused to pay "revolutionary taxes." For example, the widow
 of a sugarcane planter in Negros Occidental said the NPA
 abducted her husband after he refused to pay a monthly tax of
 about $140. His body, showing signs of torture, was found in
 a field 2 days later.
 The NPA also targeted government personnel for assassination,
 particularly security officials and police, by its "sparrow"
 hit teams. NPA units are believed responsible for the
 assassination of at least 80 constabulary and police officers
 in metropolitan Manila alone in 1989. Among those killed by
 NPA units were four members of the Philippine Presidential
 Security Group and three Americans: U.S. Army Colonel James
 Rowe of the Joint United States Military Assistance Group
 (JUSMAG) in April, and two civilian employees of a defense
 electronics contractor in September. The NPA said it killed
 Rowe because of his alleged involvement in counterinsurgency
 operations. Although no one has yet claimed responsibility
 for the September killings, which coincided with the visit of
 Vice President Quayle, the NPA subsequently promised
 additional strikes against Americans.
 Muslim Opposition groups stepped up their violent activities
 in an attempt to disrupt the November plebiscite on the Muslim
 Autonomous Act. They are believed responsible for a cargo
 truck ambush that killed six people, a grenade attack on a
 house that left seven dead, two casualties from shooting a
 passenger bus, an ambush of National Power Corporation
 vehicles that killed two Austrian consultants, and a bomb at
 the Commission on Elections headquarters that killed one
 person.
 There continued to be credible reports of killings by the
 military and CAFGU's in the field as well as a few by private
 
 
 953
 THE PHILIPPINES
 vigilante groups. The Government has acknowledged that in
 some cases the rules of engagement have not provided
 sufficient protection for innocent civilians. For example, an
 exchange of fire between Philippine Marines and NPA insurgents
 in Bulacan province in April resulted in the deaths of one
 Marine and nine others, all but one presumed to be
 noncombatants. Presidential and military investigating
 committees found no evidence of an intentional massacre, but
 recommended that the military examine its operational rules to
 ensure the safety of civilians. NPA ambushes or military-NPA
 encounters often occur in populated areas, and civilians are
 periodically caught in the crossfire. The NPA has been known
 to mingle with-civilians when engaging the AFP. There is
 credible evidence that military units in the field torture and
 abuse suspected NPA sympathizers during interrogation,
 sometimes leading to the death or execution and secret burial
 of the victim.
 The Government has repeatedly affirmed its commitment to the
 rule of law and issued instructions that the human rights of
 all Filipinos be respected. However, many cases have been
 reported in which soldiers or policemen have carried out
 murders, kidnapings, or other serious offenses, sometimes due
 td personal vendettas or criminal activity. In other cases, a
 commander of a small unit may lead his men in committing
 abuses. There is little evidence-in such cases that more
 senior military officials act to halt the abuses. Few of the
 alleged offenders are disciplined or dismissed, and even fewer
 have fa'ced judicial proceedings. According to the Department
 of National Defense (DND), only 27 complaints were filed in
 the first half of 1989 against individual members of the
 mili-tary/police/CAFGU for alleged human rights violations. Of
 these, 3 were referred to civil courts, 6 were dropped, 13
 were still under investigation, and 2 resulted in dismissal.
 The CAFGU's were established in 1987 to increase the
 Government's control over the local militia. Local officials
 are responsible for screening volunteers, and the AFP trains
 and leads the units through an officer'(usually a lieutenant)
 and several enlisted men. A total of 909 CAFGU companies have
 been organized with 52,000 authorized personnel. A number of
 human rights violations by the CAFGU's have been reported, and
 private funding of some units by landowners or businessmen has
 raised concern about the Government's ability to control the
 units. Most notorious was an August grenade-throwing incident
 in which nine people were killed.
 In other extrajudicial killings in 1989, it was often
 difficult to determine whether the motive was political,
 personal, or criminal. The July stabbing of Wenefredo Oton in
 Davao Del Sur may have been committed by an anti-Communist
 group which suspected him of Communist sympathies, or by the
 NPA because of his role in leading a fact-finding group to the
 scene of the June UCCP massacre by the NPA.
 A number of persons were killed during the March barangay
 elections, including an incumbent barangay captain and six
 candidates. (The barangay is the Philippines' smallest
 administrative unit, equivalent to a'village or city
 neighborhood. See Section 3 for more information on the
 barangay elections.) The timing hints at some political
 motivation and the murders remain unsolved. At least 17 labor
 leaders were killed in the first 8 months of 1989. Jose
 Eduardo Oca of the Port Workers Union and Meliton Roxas,
 president of the local union at the Nestle Philippines plant,
 
 
 954
 THE PHILIPPINES
 were prominent among those killed. Credible reports indicate
 that management, rival unionists, the NPA, or rightwing
 vigilantes were involved in various unsolved cases. The
 Government apprehended and tried suspected killers of labor
 unionists in several cases in 1989. By year's end, none of
 these trials had been completed.
 Church people were among the victims of killings. UCCP Pastor
 Visminda Gran, a former candidate of the leftist Partido Ng
 Bayan political party, and her husband Lovino Gran were killed
 in their home in Biliango, Misamis Occidental, in May by
 unidentified gunmen who stole numerous valuable articles; CHR
 is investigating. In another case, Catholic priest Dionisio
 Malalay and lay person Rufino Rivera were shot in April in
 Tabina, Zamboanga del Sur, allegedly by a former PC member and
 his cousin; the case is being tried in a civilian court in
 Zamboanga del Sur.
 During 1989 only one prominent case of politically motivated
 killing resulted in conviction. Alan Climaco, who shot human
 rights attorney Alfonso A. Surigao in Cebu in June 1988, was
 convicted of murder in March, sentenced to life imprisonment,
 and is currently serving the sentence. The Justice Secretary
 in October ordered that murder charges be filed against Major
 Rico Palcuto, a constabulary officer identified by Climaco as
 the mastermind of the killing.
 In a prominent case that underlines the great difficulties of
 the Government in convicting offenders, a military court in
 July claimed insufficient evidence in acquitting the nearly
 two dozen soldiers accused of murder in a widely publicized
 1987 incident in Lupao, Nueva Ecija, in which Philippine Army
 soldiers shot 17 civilians following a reported NPA ambush.
 Survivors identified four of the accused, but the military
 court gave greater weight to the testimony of two defendants
 who claimed that soldiers from a reinforcement unit (not among
 the defendants) killed the civilians. In 1987 the Government
 had said this case would be the first test of Philippine
 justice under the new administration. Two military
 prosecutors reportedly protested the court's decision to the
 AFP Chief of Staff. Military investigation of the incident
 continues.
 b. Disappearance
 Philippine law permits holding suspects in serious cases for
 up to 36 hours without formal charges. In some cases,
 citizens have been taken into custody by government
 authorities and held incommunicado for several days before
 being released or charged.
 Although some Philippine human rights groups continue to claim
 that disappearances are increasing, both CHR and TFD statistics
 show that fewer disappearances were reported in 1989 than in
 1988. Between January and June 1989, the CHR central office
 received complaints concerning 41 missing persons, compared to
 80 complaints in 1988. According to TFD, 60 persons were
 reported missing from January 1 to November 14, 1989, compared
 with 141 complaints in 1988. TFD believes that military
 officers or anti-Communist groups were responsible for these
 incidents, and that the missing persons may have been killed.
 There is credible evidence that rightwing groups, possibly
 with collusion by some military personnel, have been involved
 in a number of disappearances. For example, two social
 
 
 955
 THE PHILIPPINES
 workers, Nona Santa Clara and Angelina Llenaresas of the
 Ecumenical Council for Research and Development, were abducted
 in April in Naga City, Camarines Sur, and taken away in a
 military-type jeep. Thewhereabouts of the women are unknown.
 The discovery of mass NPA graves in Laguna, Albay, Quezon,
 Bataan, and Zamboanga del Sur, combined with reported internal
 NPA purges, challenged the assumption that all disappearances
 of,leftist political personalities were the work of rightwing
 vigilantes or rogue-military or police personnel. For
 example, the disappearances of Lilian Mercado and Efren
 Bonagua of the Bagong Alyansang Makabayan (Bayan) and Pearl
 Abaya of the Philippine Alliance of Human Rights Advocates
 (PAHRA) in.November 1988 were originally blamed on the
 military. Indications now are that the three were taken into
 -custody by the NPA for interrogation on suspicion of being
 -governmpnt spies. Abaya and Bonagua are reportedly alive but
 in hiding, while Mercado's status is unknown.
 The Government has strongly condemned politically motivated
 disappearances. President Aquino in December 1988 designated
 city and provincial government prosecutors as "human rights
 coordinators" who are to assist families in searching for
 missing relatives in military camps and detention centers.
 Hostage-taking,by rebels and armed criminal gangs for ransom
 and/or publicity is fairly common. According to newspaper
 accounts, a barangay captain and a constabulary soldier in
 Oriental Mindoro were abducted in January and held 59 days by
 the NPA before being "acquitted" by a kangaroo court. A
 ransom of $46,000 was asked for 10 nuns and church workers
 abducted in February in Lanao del Sur, but negotiations led to
 their release without ransom. A constabulary soldier was
 detained by rebels in Camarines Sur for 40 days before his
 release was negotiated in April. Also in April, the NPA
 captured a group of hikers in Mindanao and released most of
 them immediately, but held four of the group captive for 9
 days. An Iloilo radio station owner kidnaped in September was
 freed more than 2 months later after his family reportedly
 paid a ransom of $552,000. In October in Lanao del Sur,
 Muslim rebels held hostage the President of Dansalan
 University, his wife and grandchild, and 12 national power
 corporation executives. In October government forces seized a
 1987 document allegedly written by CPP/NPA leader Jose Maria
 Sison, in which he suggested that each of the 59 guerrilla
 fronts abduct and indefinitely detain 10 political leaders and
 military officers, to compel recognition of the movement.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 The Constitution prohibits torture and makes evidence obtained
 thereby inadmissible in court, but reports that torture is
 employed persist. Guidelines issued by CHR in May 1988 direct
 all law enforcement agencies and military elements to avoid
 unnecessary force in investigation, arrest, detention,
 interrogation, and other related activities.
 The CHR central office received complaints of torture or
 maltreatment of 44 people from January to June 1989. TFD
 claimed to have documented 312 cases of torture from January 1
 to November 14, 1989, compared to 784 cases in 1988. For TFD
 to accept a complaint,, a complainant need only assert that
 government investigators used some coercion, such as the
 threat of violence.
 
 
 956
 THE PHILIPPINES
 Juanito Itaas, an NPA member, allegedly involved in the April
 killing of Colonel Rowe, claimed in September that the
 military extracted his confession through torture; government
 officials deny the charge. Michael Tupas claimed he was
 tortured while detained in Bacolod, Negros Occidental in June,
 but CHR's investigation is stymied by his inability to
 identify his captors. Cornelio Salway, a former NPA member
 who voluntarily surrendered in February to military forces in
 South Cotabato, claims he was maltreated while in protective
 custody; the military investigation found no basis for the
 claim. American citizen Glen Doughty said in October that he
 was beaten and had water poured into his nose after the PC
 arrested him in Oriental Mindoro. Authorities stated that
 they suspect Doughty is the NPA hitman who killed two
 policemen in Metro Manila in 1985. (Doughty's claim of U.S.
 citizenship was originally doubted by the PC since he has a
 Filipino mother and speaks English with a Filipino accent.)
 There have also been reports of torture by the NPA, in many
 cases associated with the 1988-89 internal purge described
 earlier. Three NPA members testified in June before a
 congressional committee that they were dragged in chains,
 deprived of food, and beaten for months because their comrades
 suspected them of being government infiltrators. Other
 abuses, including suspension by the wrists and suffocation,
 have also been reported, although in these cases, too,
 conclusive proof is lacking.
 Although physical punishment is prohibited by law in the
 Philippine penal system, it occurs frequently in jails and
 prisons. Prison conditions are harsh, charges of brutality
 are commonplace, and violence often flares. Inmates at the
 Davao Penal Colony took prison visitors hostage in April and
 August to demand transfer to a more humane facility. Sixteen
 prisoners and five hostages, including an Australian
 missionary, were killed by the inmates or by security forces
 that stormed the prison. The AFP, CHR, and committees of the
 Philippine Congress have been investigating the Davao Penal
 Colony killings and examining allegations that police used
 excessive force.
 CHR in 1989 began a Visitorial Service Program to respond to
 complaints of torture or mistreatment of prisoners and to
 monitor prison conditions. CHR visited 305 jails nationwide
 in the first 10 months of 1989 and reported that some remedial
 actions had already been taken in response to its efforts.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 The 1987 Constitution requires a judicial determination of
 probable cause before issuance of an arrest warrant and also
 prohibits holding prisoners incommunicado or in secret places
 of detention. Nonetheless, there continue to be abuses.
 Detainees have the right to a judicial review of the legality
 of detention and, except for offenses punishable by a life
 sentence, to bail.
 CHR prescribed guidelines in 1988 on visitation rights of
 detainees and on the conduct of investigations, arrests,
 detentions, and related operations by government authorities.
 The guidelines direct all law enforcement agencies,
 commanders, and all units under their command to avoid
 unnecessary force and to follow the rules of court and
 National Police Commission policies on arrests and
 investigations. However, human rights groups continue to
 
 
 957
 THE PHILIPPINES
 receive complaints of abuses. The CHR central office received
 complaints that 54 people were illegally arrested or detained
 in the first half of 1989. CHR actively investigated these
 reports and assisted in the release of 48 persons during the
 same period. TFD claims 1,739 persons were improperly
 arrested from January 1 to November 14, 1989. Many were
 detained for a few hours as the result of mass arrests during
 army sweeps of areas harboring suspected rebels, and most of
 these were released within the time limits prescribed by law.
 Statistics from both CHR and TFD on illegal arrest and
 ,etention in 1989 show a decline of approximately 30 percent
 from the comparable period in 1988.
 In one incident, Catholic Priest-Benjamin Alforque was
 detained for several hours on the evening of April 25 as part
 of the investigation of Col. Rowe's murder. The military
 reportedly questioned Alforque about his visit to a CPP
 safehouse, but Alforgue claims that he was detained because of.
 an article he wrote criticizing the military.
 The military has been criticized for not fully complying with
 the law when handling suspected insurgents. Suspected
 Communist insurgents sometimes are held and interrogated for
 several days without legal proceedings. When CPP/NPA leaders
 Satur Ocampo and Carolina Malay were arrested in July, they
 were charged initially with firearms possession in furtherance
 of rebellion, a nonbailable offense, and were allowed
 visitation and lawyers. The Government does not recommend
 bail for senior CPP/NPA members on the grounds that release
 would be a clear and present danger to the community and that
 bail would not be adequate to ensure their appearance at trial.
 In order better to abide by constitutional and legal
 prerequisites, the AFP has sought to file charges against
 known CPP/NPA leaders in advance so that they can be held
 legally if caught. These charges include murder, kidnaping,
 physical injury, robbery, extortion, grave threats, and
 arson. The AFP has offered monetary rewards for the capture
 of rebels against whom it has filed charges.
 Philippine authorities rarely use internal or foreign exile
 for political purposes. However, former President Marcos (now
 deceased), his immediate family, and some of his associates
 were barred from return. The Government suspects these
 persons of conspiring with political and military opposition
 elements within the Philippines to destabilize the country.
 In a September 15 decision, the Supreme Court upheld the
 Marcoses' exile, citing the duty of the President to balance
 the general welfare against the exercise of individual rights.
 With regard to forced or compulsory labor, see Section 6.c.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The Constitution calls for an independent judiciary and
 provides that those accused of crimes shall be informed of
 charges against them and shall have the right to counsel.
 Trials in the Philippines are public; defendants are presumed
 innocent and have the right to confront witnesses against
 them, to present evidence, and to appeal their convictions.
 The right of defendants to a lawyer is generally respected in
 the larger metropolitan areas, but less frequently honored in
 the provinces, where lawyers are often unavailable.
 
 
 958
 THE PHILIPPINES
 The weakest link in the prevention of human rights abuses is
 the failure to prosecute and convict those accused of
 violations. A major element of that failure is the strong
 imperative of the military to protect its own members. Under
 the authority of a Marcos-era presidential decree, military
 courts continue to have jurisdiction over servicemen accused
 of human rights violations. Some human rights groups charge
 that military courts protect servicemen rather than render an
 impartial verdict. President Aquino has waived military
 jurisdiction in only a few cases. A bill to remove
 nonservice-related offenses from court-martial jurisdiction
 was approved by Congress and sent to the President shortly
 before the December coup attempt. Following the attempted
 coup and on the advice of military leaders, the President
 vetoed the bill.
 Ethical and legal lapses in the administration of justice are
 common, ranging from attorneys' use of dilatory tactics to
 corruption among some judges and prosecutors. Defendants
 routinely pay off police and court officials. The conviction
 rate for criminal offenses is very low. For example, only 3
 to 5 percent of drug cases in civilian courts result in
 convictions, a fact attributed by informed sources to bribery
 of police and judicial officials and to the use of political
 influence.
 Prosecution is often stymied by witnesses who are unwilling to
 testify because they fear reprisals. To address the problem,
 CHR has a limited witness protection program in place, and
 Congress is considering legislation to establish a more
 comprehensive program.
 Delays in completing trials present another serious problem.
 Traditionally, trials have been noncontinuous, generally
 scheduled at monthly intervals, and often last for years.
 Those charged with crimes who cannot afford bail languish in
 jail until their trials are completed. Of 14,245 inmates held
 nationwide in June, 12,552 had not yet been convicted or
 sentenced, according to press reports of prison statistics. A
 prominent example of delay of justice is the Benigno Aquino
 murder trial, which began in February 1987 and will likely
 continue into 1991. Now nearly 3 years into the trial, the
 defense has yet to begin its case.
 President Aquino has made reform of the justice system a key
 goal of her administration. In recent speeches, she has
 frequently criticized the slow delivery of justice and the
 unequal treatment of rich and poor. In August she took the
 extraordinary step of placing top officials in the Department
 of Justice on probation for failing to address the problems in
 the criminal justice system. A test program for completing
 trials within 90 days was extended to 1,200 of the nation's
 1,600 courts. Prosecutors are now required to complete
 pretrial investigations of eriims within 120 days.
 Prosecutors who do not meet these time standards have had
 their pay withheld. In the first half of 1989, prosecutors
 reportedly received 25,000 new complaints while disposing of
 38,000 cases. Despite this positive trend, a backlog of tens
 of thousands of cases exists. The Government has disciplined
 several inept or corrupt prosecutors. Judicial vacancies are
 now being filled more promptly, with the exception of lower
 level trial courts in the outlying regions which fail to
 attract qualified candidates.
 
 
 959
 THE PHILIPPINES
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Under the Constitution, search idarrants may be issued by a
 judge on a finding of probable cause. Restrictions on search
 and seizrre are generally observed. The Government does not
 interfere in family life or the right of parents to raise
 their children. The Government does not interfere with free
 persbnal use of the mails or other public communication
 systems except upon issuance of a court order during the
 course.of an investigation.
 g. Use of Excessive Force and Violations of Humanitarian
 Law in Internal Conflicts
 AFP efforts during 1989 to counter Communist insurgent
 activities (ambushes, extoxtion, etc.) had a major impact on
 civilian populations. In an effort to "dismantle" NPA
 political bases at the barangay level, the AFP has displaced
 large numbers of civilians in several provinces of Mindanao
 and on the Visayan island of Negros. The Government made
 -efforts to-provide food and medical supplies, but sanitation
 conditions were often poor and the-dislocations compounded the
 already,severe.health problems among the poverty-stricken
 civilians. The Government's Department of Social Welfare and
 Development (DSWD) reported 188,000 affected persons from
 January*1 to December 27 and an additional 30,000 affected by
 the December coup attempt. DSWD provided'relief services to
 187,000 people during the year. The Ecumenical Movement for
 Justice and Peace (EMJP) reported that 130,000 people were
 displaced from January to September 1989. Information from
 DSWD and EMJP shows that more thau half of the people
 displacedwere in Mindanao.
 In Southern Negros, an estimated 35,000 civilians were
 evacnaed from their homes in the spring and moved to
 ,temporary refugee shelters. The Philippine National Red Cross
 (PNRC) ran the shelters, and the International Committee of
 the Red Cross (ICRC) was allowed free access. More than 90
 children, already weakened by malnutrition and the process of
 evacuation, reportedly died of measles, pneumonia, and other
 causes while at the refugee shelters.
 In Aklan on the island of Panay, TFD and EMJP sponsored a
 factfinding mission in August. They reported that 215
 families left 9 villages due to military or NPA orders or fear
 for personal safety. The report also stated that curfews were
 in effect, that the military restricted food shipments based
 on the number of family members to deny food to the NPA, and
 that local citizens were required to carry residence
 certificates signed by the military commander.
 There. were occasional reports of indiscriminate strafing of
 civilians in villages suspected of supporting the rebels. In
 one incident in Quezon early in the year, 142 families
 reportedly left their homes after they were strafed.
 Allegedly, the AFP suspected they were supplying food to the
 rebels. The AFP lacked adequate medical resources to treat
 its own casualties, and wounded rebels were generally treated
 after wounded soldiers. There was no evidence, however, that
 they were systematically denied medical care when supplies
 were available. The Philippines is a party to Protocol II of
 the Geneva Convention, which governs the conduct of forces in
 an internal conflict.
 
 
 960
 THE PHILIPPINES
 The provision of medical care in rebel-controlled areas was a
 contentious issue in 1989. The Medical Action Group (MAG), a
 private organization which seeks to provide health care to
 victims Pf human rights violations and the urban and rural
 poor _nd which is alleged to be closely associated with the
 CPP, protested Executive Order (E.O.) 212 which required that
 treatment of rebels be reported to the Government's Department
 of Health. MAG reported that in September Dr. Antonio
 Principe was arrested in Davao City for violating E.O. 212,
 and 11 health workers, including two Dutch nurses, were
 briefly detained in Samar. The military suspected the health
 workers of treating NPA rebels.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Restrictions on freedom of expression were virtually all
 lifted in February 1986. The daily press which emerged is
 lively and highly competitive. There are some 30 daily
 newspapers in Manila and many more in the provinces. In all,
 about 1.4 million newspapers are sold each day around the
 country. Newspapers cover the political spectrum and do not
 hesitate to criticize the Government. CPP publications are
 illegal but circulate clandestinely, and Communist views are
 expressed in other media. Journalists have been able without
 penalty to meet and interview antigovernment rebels, including
 military mutineers and Communists. During the early December
 coup attempt, the Government closed three radio stations for
 broadcasting rebel propaganda.
 Radio and television are important news sources in the
 Philippines. There are 338 licensed radio stations. An
 estimated 82 percent of all households have radios. Four
 million television sets bring programming to 40 percent of
 Philippine families. In Metropolitan Manila, approximately 90
 percent of the households have radios or televisions. Most
 provincial television stations are affiliates of the five
 Manila channels. Like the press, radio and television
 stations report views across a wide political spectrum.
 Radio station owners and managers have complained about NPA
 efforts to intimidate them into broadcasting Communist
 propaganda. Several radio facilities and transmitters have
 been damaged by insurgents. In some areas, military personnel
 are stationed at transmitter sites to protect them. Stations
 that have broadcast material provided by the NPA have been
 warned informally by local military authorities that they face
 the risk of being closed down if they continue. Nonetheless,
 during 1989 no newspapers, radios, or television stations were
 closed by the Government for publishing or broadcasting
 Communist propaganda. Although the Government sequestered
 assets of some media organizations owned or controlled by
 close associates of the late President Marcos, there is no
 evidence in those cases of intent to control opinion, as
 opposed to monetary assets.
 Publications from abroad are not censored. Foreign
 journalists are able to report freely and generally move about
 the country, even in areas under rebel control. Major foreign
 newspapers and television networks have bureaus in Manila.
 Human rights groups have registered a few complaints about
 harassment of journalists. For example, in an incident at a
 funeral in March for an alleged Communist rebel, the military
 roughly handled and briefly detained 10 newsmen. In May a
 
 
 961
 THE PHILIPPINES
 journalist in Masbate claimed that the provincial commander
 forced him to eat a page of his newspaper after he had written
 a critical article. Such harassment is not frequent or
 systematic.
 Libel suits may discourage some journalists from commenting on
 sensitive topics, but the judiciary generally favors the press
 in such cases. When the Far Eastern Economic Review (FEER)
 was sued in February for describing a businessman's activities
 as environmentally destructive, the judge made an unusual
 decision impounding copies of the review but reversed himself
 within a few days. The lawsuit was decided in FEER's favor.
 Critics have charged that the Movie and Television
 Claisification Board (MTCB). whose mandate is to monitor films
 and television programs for pornographic content, has
 occasionally stifled political expression. However, no
 complaints were registered in 1989. The mandate of the MTCB
 is questioned by many as a violation of free speech and
 freedom of artistic expression, but it is likely to remain
 unchanged because of strong public support for its role in
 controlling distribution of pornography.
 Academic freedom is respected in theory and practice.
 Approximately 1.5 million students are enrolled in the
 nation's 78 state colleges and universities and 1,000 private
 schools and colleges. The Government does not censor subject
 matter in classes, university publications, or conferences.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Permits from local authorities are required for outdoor
 demonstrations in public places and are routinely issued.
 Nevertheless, rallies and marches are often held without
 permits. Manila area police were reportedly ordered in July
 not to disperse peaceful rallies as long as they do not
 disturb public order. Occasionally, however, police dispersed
 crowds which had assembled without having first secured
 permits and arrested demonstrators for illegal assembly or
 public disturbance. Typically, those arrested were quickly
 released and not brought to trial. Exceptions to the record
 of generally peaceful demonstrations have been recent protests
 in front of the U.S. Embassy by student and labor organizations
 with ties to the CPP; In September police used tear gas to
 disperse over a thousand demonstrators and briefly detained a
 number of people during the visit of Vice President Quayle.
 A broad range of private, professional, religious, social,
 charitable, and political organizations flourishes in the
 Philippines. Organizations are permitted to affiliate with
 recognized international bodies in their fields. The
 Communist Party of the Philippines is outlawed because it
 advocates the violent overthrow of the Government, but
 nonviolent Marxist parties are legal.
 For a discussion of freedom of association as it applies to,
 labor unions, see Section 6.a.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 There is no state religion. Freedom of religion is fully
 respected, and no official discrimination is practiced against
 any religious group or its members. Although over 80 percent
 of the population is Roman Catholic, the country's sizable
 Muslim minority, Protestant churches, indigenous Iglesia Ni
 
 
 962
 THE PHILIPPINES
 Kristo, Aglipay Church, and other sects enjoy full religious
 freedom. Foreign clergymen and missionaries of many faiths
 practice their profession freely.
 Religious minorities are represented among the leadership and
 rank and file of broad-based political parties. Government
 service is open to all on a nondiscriminatory basis, and there
 are senior civil and military officials who belong to minority
 religious groups.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Filipinos enjoy unhampered freedom to change their place of
 residence and employment within the Philippines. They
 regularly travel and work abroad. Movement within the country
 is generally unimpeded, although the military and rebel groups
 sometimes erect roadblocks in areas where they are conducting
 operations. Routine constabulary checkpoints were
 discontinued during the year.
 The right to emigrate from the Philippines is unrestricted.
 Citizens also have the right to return, although there have
 been a few exceptions in cases which the Government said
 affected national security. In 1988 the Government revoked
 the passport of Jose Maria Sison, the founder of the outlawed
 CPP, while he was living in Europe raising funds for the
 Communist movement. As noted in Section l.d., the Government
 prevented the return to the Philippines of the late President
 Marcos, his immediate family, and some of his associates.
 Although the Philippine Government does not accept refugees
 for internal resettlement, it has made a significant
 contribution by providing first asylum for 9,200 Indochinese
 boat people in Palawan and permitting the United Nations to
 operate a major processing center for 16,000 refugees in
 Bataan Province. Approximately 25,000 refugees passed through
 these facilities in 1989.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 The Constitution ratified in 1987 returned the Philippines to
 the presidential system of government similar to that which
 was in existence from 1946 to 1972. The Constitution
 establishes a bicameral legislature and an independent
 judiciary as checks on executive power. Presidential
 authority to declare martial law is curtailed. The
 Constitution calls for the creation of autonomous regions for
 Muslims in the southern Philippines and for minority groups in
 the Cordillera (mountainous region) of northern Luzon.
 The Philippines has a multiparty political system, based on
 secret ballots and free elections. Filipinos are free to
 organize political parties as long as they do not seek to
 overthrow the Government by force. Political parties have
 traditionally been weak, nonideological alliances of
 convenience. President Aquino herself has refused to join a
 political party. Democratic opposition to the Government is
 widely tolerated. In the House of Representatives, a single
 progovernment party enjoys a 75-percent majority. The
 23-member Senate is divided among 4 different parties and
 independents. Most legislation is initiated by members of
 Congress themselves, and debate is lively. Government-
 sponsored legislation is often criticized, amended, or
 
 
 *963
 THE PHILIPPINES
 defeated. The majority of provincial and city officials,
 elected in 1988, are members of progovernment political
 parties. Presidential, congressional, provincial, and
 municipal elections are scheduled for 1992.
 The Aquino Government took the final step toward full
 restoration of elected officials at all levels in March when
 it held elections for leaders in all but a handful of the
 country's 41,000 barangays. An electorate of 29 million chose
 nearly 287,000 Barangay officials from among 1 million
 candidates. Relatively limited preelection violence and a few
 reported isolated clashes with NPA elements in scattered parts
 of the country occurred during the campaign. The new barangay
 officials will serve until 1994.
 The voting age in the Philippines is 18. There are few
 restrictions on suffrage.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 Representatives of international human rights groups are free
 to travel in the Philippines and investigate alleged abuses.
 Resident delegates of the ICRC monitor prison conditions and
 assist persons displaced by conflict. Government
 representatives discuss human rights problems with outside
 governmental and nongovernmental organizations, and President
 Aquino and CHR routinely meet with those who visit. CHR held
 meetings with seven international delegations in the first 10
 months of 1989.
 The Philippine Government welcomes international sponsorship
 of human rights programs. The U.N. Center for Human Rights,
 along with CHR and other Philippine groups, sponsored a 3-day
 national seminar-workshop on human rights training in August.
 The ICRC, together with CHR and Department of National
 Defense/AFP, held a course for military trainers (interrupted
 by the coup attempt but completed afterward) on human rights
 and international humanitarian law.
 CHR conaiders human rights violations based on international
 inquiries and referrals from nongovernmental organizations as
 well as complaints filed locally by or on behalf of victims.
 CHR has a total staff of 600, including a "quick reaction"
 -team in Manila, branch offices in each of the country's 12
 regions, and provincial offices in areas where reports of
 human rights violations warrant. When a complaint is filed,
 CHR conducts an investigation, gathering evidence and
 testimony from the complainant and the accused. In the first
 10 months of 1989, CHR completed investigation of 874 cases,
 and provided financial assistance to 174 individual victims or
 their families and to 30,000 evacuees from one community. If
 CHR determines that a prima facie case has been made, it
 refers-the case to the appropriate agency for prosecution and
 monitor  the-.results. CHR lawyers would gain prosecutory
 powers under legislation now being considered in Congress.
 CHR referred 70 cases for prosecution and 28 for
 administrative action in the first 10 months of 1989. CHR
 representatives regularly participate in fact-finding missions
 and jail visits with nongovernmental organizations (NGO's) and
 other governmental agencies.
 Philippine NGO's are active in the human rights field. These
 groups are generally unhindered in conducting investigations
 
 
 964
 THE PHILIPPINES
 around the country and are routinely able to obtain
 safe-conduct letters from DND. Local military and civilian
 officials have reportedly been uncooperative in some
 instances. According to the Government, investigations by
 these NGO's frequently do not produce enough evidence to make
 the necessary prima facie case.
 The best known local human rights NGO is TFD, established by
 the Association of Major Religious Superiors in the
 Philippines in 1974. Headquartered in Manila with branch
 offices throughout the Philippines, TFD collects information
 on alleged human rights violations and publishes statistics on
 a quarterly basis of abuses it attributes to government
 forces. TFD is an outspoken critic of the Government's
 response to human rights violations, and some allege that it
 is strongly influenced by the CPP. There is little
 cooperation between TFD and CHR.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 Women enjoy most of the same legal rights as men. However,
 Philippine law and custom continue to discriminate against
 women. This includes a limitation on their right to buy and
 sell property. The House of Representatives approved
 legislation in September allowing a woman to enter into
 contracts without her husband's consent; the bill is now under
 consideration in the Senate.
 Women are prominent in Philippine society and well represented
 in Government, business and professions, such as law,
 medicine, education, and journalism. Women in the bottom 30
 percent of society suffer particular hardship. Many of the
 women have no opportunities except work as low-paid domestic
 employees or prostitutes. Violence against women such as wife
 beating is occasionally reported. There are no reliable
 statistics on the extent to which this occurs, but women are
 often reluctant to report and police to "interfere" in what
 many see as a domestic matter. Criminal law prohibits
 violence against women. To address the problems of women, the
 Government is implementing its 1989-92 Philippine Development
 Plan for Women. As part of this plan, President Aquino signed
 legislation in May to strengthen measures prohibiting
 discrimination against women workers with respect to
 promotion, training, study, and remuneration for work of equal
 value.
 Muslim Filipinos on the southern island of Mindanao and the
 adjacent Sulu archipelago constitute 5 percent of the Filipino
 population. They comprise several tribes such as the Tausugs,
 Maranao, and Maguindanao, each with its own language and
 customs. They hold public office at the local and national
 levels and are employed in government positions. Two of the
 23 senators and several Congressmen are Muslims, and several
 Muslims serve as ambassadors. However, informal discrimination
 against Filipino Muslims persists. Philippine culture--with
 its emphasis on tribal and regional loyalties-- creates
 informal barriers when-access to jobs or resources is provided
 first to those of one's own group. Another factor is that
 many Muslims prefer to educate their children in Muslim
 schools, which has deprived them of the skills required to
 advance in some occupations. One observer estimated that only
 10 Muslims graduate from the Philippine Military Academy
 annually, and noted that only 1 Muslim has reached general or
 flag officer rank.
 
 
 965
 THE PHILIPPINES
 President Aquino is committed to a peaceful resolution of the
 long-simmering Muslim rebellion and to redressing the
 historical neglect of the south. In August she signed
 legislation allowing 9 cities and 13 provinces in the south to
 join an autonomous region through a plebiscite. The law
 respects Muslim rights to ancestral lands, requires the
 establishmient of Muslim Shari'a laws and court system, and
 4 eceiitralizes-government authority in several different
 areas. A wing of the Moro National Liberation Front objects
 to the establishment of an-autonomous region on any basis
 other than the 1976 Tripoli Agreement. In the plebiscite held
 November 19, only 4 out of 13 provinces and none of the 9
 cities voted to become part of the autonomous region.
 Several million Filipinos belong to other non-Christian and
 non-Muslim groups. They are most numerous in the Cordillera
 of northern Luzon and in Mindanao. Modernization has reduced
 their traditional isolation. Logging and mining have damaged
 many of the ancestral lands of these tribal groups, and
 lowland farmers have expanded into their areas. The cultural
 minorities have not always been afforded equal legal
 protection. The Government's offices of Northern and Southern
 Cultural Communities are responsible for protecting the
 interests of these groups. Members of tribal groups have been
 elected to the Congress and local government offices.
 Congress passed legislation in 1989 authorizing the creation
 of an autonomous region in the Cordillera of northern Luzon.
 A plebiscite will be held in early 1990.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 The right of workers, including public employees, to join
 trade unions is assured by the Constitution and legislation,
 and is freely practiced without government interference.
 About 10 percent of the nation's employed work force of
 approximately 23 million workers is organized into-over 3,700
 trade unions, not including the 2.8 million workers who are
 members of the National Congress of Farmers Organization
 (NCFO). Most of the trade unions belong to relatively small
 federations which are members of two larger trade union
 groupings, the largest of which is the Trade Union Congress of
 the Philippines (TUCP), an affiliate of the International
 Confederation of Free Trade Unions (ICFTU).
 The second largest trade union grouping is the leftist KMU
 (Kilusang Mayo Uno, or May First Movement) which is heavily
 infiltrated and influenced by the CPP. Three much smaller
 trade union groupings are affiliates of the Communist-
 controlled World Federation of Trade Unions (WFTU). The
 Federation of Free Workers (FFW) is a member of the World
 Confederation of Labor (WCL).
 Strikes are legal, including in Export Processing Zones
 (EPZ's)', and they take place frequently. The rate of
 unionization, the number of collective bargaining agreements,
 and the legal minimum wage in the EPZ's is akin to that
 prevailing in the rest of the country. The Aquino
 administration pursues legal efforts to resolve disputes and
 has rejected calls for "no-strike laws" despite the
 disincentive that strikes pose to needed investment. On the.
 local level, there have been several cases of violence
 .provoked by unions or management. Sometimes the police or
 military have been called in to break up illegal strike
 
 
 966
 THE PHILIPPINES
 barricades, and on several occasions their attempts to enforce
 the law have resulted in violent clashes with strikers. (See
 Section.l.a. regarding reported killings of labor leaders.)
 The 1987 Constitution and E.O. 180 guarantee government
 employees the right to form unions and bargain collectively.
 E.O. 180 provides for a disputes settlement body. The right
 to strike and the status of employees in government-owned
 industries, however, have not yet been clarified. As of
 December 1989, there were 121 unions in the public sector with
 66,000 members. An extensive strike action carried out in
 July-August by public sector workers and teachers was not
 suppressed by the Government.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 Labor's right to organize and bargain collectively is provided
 for in law and strongly supported by the Government. These
 rights were expanded and strengthened by the passage of the
 Labor Law Reform Act of 1989, which balances the need for
 greater stability in labor relations with full respect for
 worker rights. Since President Aquino took office, the number
 of collective bargaining agreements in force has increased
 from 3,112 to 3,941. In the same period, the number of
 registered unions increased by 7.8 percent.
 It is an unfair labor practice to dismiss a union official or
 a worker who is trying to organize a union. Nevertheless,
 employers sometimes attempt to intimidate workers by threats
 of firing or closure. There is a history of industrial
 relations violence in the Philippines which has worsened as a
 consequence of the insurgency and counterinsurgency.
 Politicized unionists have been threatened, beaten, and
 killed. The CPP/NPA, rival unionists, and hired gunmen have
 all been implicated in such violence, as have civilian defense
 groups and elements of the military.
 In February and November 1989, the Committee on Freedom of
 Association of the International Labor Organization (ILO)
 considered "serious allegations" of military or paramilitary
 repression of members of the National Federation of Sugar
 Workers (a KMU-member union which is affiliated with the
 International Union of Food and Allied Workers' Association or
 IUF) in Negros Occidental province between 1986 and 1989. The
 allegations include violent murders (including those of a
 member of the KZ4U's national executive committee in Davao in
 1988 and of a Nestle plant union leader in 1989), woundings,
 disappearances, torture, arbitrary arrests, and detentions,
 general repression of the KMU, and also include charges that
 the 1989 Labor Law Reform Act was intended to "contain labor
 militancy." The allegations were contained in complaints
 presented in one case by the IUF, and, jointly by the KMU and
 the WFTU in another case. The Government responded that some
 of the allegations of human rights violations were still being
 investigated and described the machinery for accomplishing
 this, indicated that one arrest cited in the complaint was for
 seditious activity, and cited some cases where the killings
 are believed to be the result of interunion rivalry. The
 Committee deplored antiunion violence, urged the Philippine
 Government to do all in its power to curb criminality by
 members of the police and armed forces and to dismantle the
 vigilante groups, and asked the Government to respond to the
 allegations which it had not yet answered. It was left to the
 ILO's Committee of Experts to consider in 1990 whether the new
 Philippine labor law remedied previous defects.
 
 
 967
 THE PHILIPPINES
 CHR has also examined the alleged repression of NFSW workers
 and leaders, but there has been no prosecution due to
 insufficient evidence.
 The Government is actively encouraging dialogue among the
 military, labor, and community leaders on the worker
 rights/human rights situation. CHR, together with the
 Asian-American Free Labor Institute under a special grant from
 the U.S. Agency for International Development, is sponsoring a
 series of conferences/workshops on trade unions and human
 rights. The objective is to establish local human rights
 committees composed of unionists from every labor center plus
 the independents and representatives of government, military,.
 polige, and the community. The participants focus on methods
 of resolving problems and improving communications among
 themselves. Four such conferences were held in various
 regions of the country in 1989. A fifth conference planned
 for Manila was postponed until early 1990 as a result of the
 coup attempt. F14U has so far chosen not to participate in the
 workshops.
 The Department of Labor and Employment (DOLE), through the
 National Labor Relations"Commission, has a quasi-judicial
 system of hearing and adjudicating workers' claims. It is
 usually slow, but no slower than other elements of the courts
 and the bureaucracy. With DOLE's emphasis on mediation and
 conciliation, the National Conciliation and Mediation Board
 has helped reduce the high number of illegal work stoppages.
 Labor legislation is applied uniformly throughout the country,
 including in the export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Compulsory or Forced Labor
 The Philippines has ratified ILO Convention 105 which
 prohibits forced labor. This Convention has the full force of
 law in the Philippines. There are no reports of forced labor
 being practiced.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 The Constitution prohibits employment of children below age
 15, except under the responsibility of parents or guardians
 and then only if the work does not interfere with schooling.
 It allows employment for those between the ages of 15 and 18
 for such hours and periods of the day as are determined by the
 Secretary of Labor, but provides that in no case may persons
 under 18 years of age be employed in hazardous or deleterious
 work.
 The most serious violations of child labor laws occur in
 piecework or contracting out of embroidery and other
 garment-related production. Congressional and public
 attention has focused on the use of children in an ecologically
 damaging and dangerous form of fishing. The Aquino
 administration has made a serious effort to investigate and
 reduce violations of child labor laws outside of the
 agricultural sector, but these efforts are hampered by the
 limited resources of the Department of Labor and Employment.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 The minimum wage in nonagricultural enterprises is $4.22 per
 day. The agribusiness minimum is $3.75 per day. Despite the
 minimum wage laws, substantial numbers of workers (mostly
 
 
 968
 THE PHILIPPINES
 laborers, janitors, messengers, drivers, and clerk-typists)
 earn less than the law stipulates. The average wage of
 workers in large cities is close to the minimum wage, and in
 the industrial sector the average wage is considerably above
 it. .In rural areas, wages often fall below the minimum wage.
 The-minimum wage works out to a monthly equivalent that is
 below the poverty threshold figure established by the
 Government, which is based on the minimum income required by a
 family of six persons. By this measure, while there has been
 improvement since 1985 when 59 percent of families were below
 the poverty level, the situation remains serious. In 1988
 nearly one-half of all families were still below the poverty
 line.
 The standard workweek is 48 hours. The law mandates a full
 day of rest weekly. Employees with more than 1 year on the
 job are entitled to 5 days of paid leave.
 A comprehensive set of occupational safety and health
 standards is in effect, and the standards for protecting
 workers against hazards of the workplace and harmful
 substances are relatively advanced. However, enforcement of
 minimum wage and health and safety regulations is severely
 hampered by having too few professional labor inspectors.
 Nonetheless, compliance with health and safety rules is an
 official priority, and regular inspections take place.
 
 
 969
