 THE PHILIPPINES
 The Philippines has a republican form of government with a democratically elect-
 ed president, a bicameral legislature and independent judiciary. In open and gen-
 erally fair elections on May 11, Filipinos voted into office some 1,600 local, provin-
 cial, and national officials; Fidel V. Ramos, former Secretary of Defense, was elected
 President from a field of seven candidates. Outgoing President Corazon Aquino con-
 cluded her 6-year term in office, and on June 30 President Ramos was inaugurated
 as the new Head of Government-the first constitutional transition of power since
 1965.
 Two-thirds of the 109,000-person Armed Forces of the Philippines (AFP)-which
 shares responsibility for the counterinsurgency with the Philippine National Police
 (PNP), a civilian force numbering 100,000-were deployed in field operations
 against a declining but still active Communist insurgency. Elements of the security
 forces, including CAFGU's (local civilian militia), again committed human rights
 abuses in the course of counterinsurgency efforts, as did insurgent forces. The total
 number of such incidents continued to decline, however. Total military expenditures
 for 1989, the last year for which the U.S. Arms Control and Disarmament Agency
 conducted a detailed analysis, were $960 million. The Government is actively seek-
 ing to increase defense spending in light of the recent reduction of U.S. military as-
 sistance and the termination of the US-Philippine Military Bases Agreement.
 A large portion of the free market Philippine economy is agricultural, and most
 enterprises are family owned. Land ownership, however, has remained primarily in
 the hands of the traditional elite which has continued to block the Government's re-
 form efforts. Economic growth has been disappointing, and significant income dis-
 parities remain in this nation of 64 million people.
 Information from both government and nongovernment human rights groups
 showed a marked decrease in reports of individual violations and abuses for 1992,
 continuing the downward trend of recent years. The improvement is attributable in
 part to an overall reduction in the number of military encounters. The Government
 and human rights groups made a concerted effort to educate security forces about
 basic human rights and the rules of conduct for military encounters under inter-
 national humanitarian law, and the military announced it would link officers' field
 promotions to their human rights performance. It is difficult, however, to determine
 the practical effect of these efforts. There was little observable progress in trying,
 convicting, and appropriately punishing the perpetrators of human rights abuses,
 many of whom go unpunished.
 Principal human rights abuses by government forces against individuals included
 extrajudicial killings, disappearances, arbitrary arrest, torture, harassment of sus-
 pecded insurgents and their supporters. Such labels can be attached very casually
 and have been used as a justification for acting against critics of the Government,
 labor union activists, civil rights attorneys, and, sometimes, innocent bystanders. In-
 voluntary "mass relocations of some rural segments of the population, precipitated
 by military operations. As in the past, many violations occurred within the context
 of counterinsurgency operations. However, an increasing percentage of human
 rights abuses were attributable to the illegal activities of police and military person-
 nel, including protection rackets, political gangsterism, kidnap-for-ransom syn-
 dicates, and assistance to illegal loggers.
 The Communist Party of the Philippines (CPP) and its armed wing, the New Peo-
 ple's Army (NPA), were also responsible for significant abuses of human rights--al-
 though they, too, showed a declining pattern, reflecting a general decrease in guer-
 rilla activity during the year. Early in its tenure, the new administration initiated
 substantive steps to end the 23-year-old Communist insurgency. These included for-
 mealizing amnesty for some 4,000 insurgents and military rebels who h ad laid down
 their weapons during the previous administration, and approving guidelines for the
 temporary release or severl hundred political detainees, including national leaders
 of the    N      The Government later called for the expansion of the amnesty pro.
 gram to cover both current combatants and those detained for committing criminal
 acts in pursuit of their political beliefs. Followingthese confidence-building meas-
 ures, in August government officials met in the Netherlands with representatives
 of the National Democratic Front (NDF) for informal talks which resulted in a joint
 call for formal negotiations to end the 23-year-old conflict. President Ramos des-
 ignated the National Unification Commission (NUC), a presidential advisory body,
 
 
 638
 to negotiate a peace agreement with the NDF. The Government legalized the Com-
 munist Party on September 22, ending its mre than 35 years of illegal status.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-The Commission on Human Rights
 (CHR), a constitutionally mandated agency of the Government, reported 89 inci-
 dents of political or extrajudicial killing during the January-June period of 1992.
 This compares with 138 in the first half of 1991 and 386 for all of 1990. Task Force
 Detainees of the Philippines (TFDP), a prominent nongovernment human rights or-
 ganization (see Section 4), reported 52 people killed extrajudicially through August
 8, 1992. TFDP listed 85 such deaths through December 15, 1991 and 223 for all
 of 1990. The numbers given by CHR are higher because CHR includes violations by
 both the Government and insurgent groups, including the CPP/NPA. TFDP lists
 only offenses attributed to government authorities, except those it considers purely
 criminal in nature. Both sets of statistics exclude the mere than 60 elections-related
 deaths that took place in the first half of the year.
 Nonetheless, serious human rights abuses by members of the security forces con-
 tinued to take place and frequently went unpunished. The October 1991 assassina-
 tion of Father Nerelito Satur, a priest involved in enforcing the ban on illegal log-
 ging in Bukidnon province, is representative of these abuses. Satur was killed by
 armed men under the command of an Army staff sergeant of the 26th Infantry Bat-
 talion, against whom charges were filed by the provincial prosecutor. A year later
 Satur's alleged killers still had not been taken into custody despite arrest warrants
 issued in June by a regional trial court. On February 21, in Zamboanga del Sur
 Demetria Pedrano was shot in the face and her body mutilated by "unidentified
 armed men." She had been publicly identified as an NPA sympathizer by military
 officers in the field.
 Government counterinsurgency forces also include, the local civilian militia field
 units (AFGU's) trained, paid, and supervised by the AFP to secure areas cleared of
 insurgents by regular military and police units. Unarmed civilian voluntary organi-
 zations (CVO's) composed of village residents augment the security efforts of
 CAFGU's by serving as additional eyes and ears in their neighborhoods. Despite
 their limited authority, these nonprofessional troops were guilty of numerous
 abuses. The issuance of firearms to often inadequately supervised and poorly
 trained CAFGU personnel created an additional threat to the security of many com-
 munities. In June several newspapers reorted the extrajudicial murder of members
 of the Napalcruz family in Zamboanga City, Zamboanga, by three armed men, pos-
 sibly over a land dispute. Two survivors identified the killers as CAFGU personnel.
 In August an enraged, drunken militiaman shot to death two bystanders at a com-
 munity gathering.
 A major campaign issue in the 1992 national elections was corruption and abuse
 of authority by government officials. Wide-media coverage of crimes attributed to
 law enforcement officials reinforced public demands for action, leading President
 Ramos to appoint Vice President Estrada to head a new Presidential Anti-Crime
 Commission (PACC) and directed Interior Secretary Rafael Alunan to clean up pro-
 cedures and identify corrupt and cr.*ninal elements in the ranks of the PNP (an esti-
 mated 5 percent of the 100,000 man force). Nonetheless, during the year, PNP mem-
 bers killed several civilians killed extrajudicially.
 In March three law enforcement officers made headlines when, at the behest of
 a minister of the indigenous Church Iglesia Ni Kristo, they participated in the kid-
 naping, torture, and strangling of five teenage boys, who had allegedly bullied a
 church member. In June authorities shot and killed Fernando Menpin, a private cit-
 izen, at a roadway checkpoint outside Manila. Sixteen policemen were arrested
 shortly after the incident but they were acquitted by a regional trial court on Au-
 gust 24. The case was under appeal at year's end. In July murder charges were filed
 against five policemen in La Union province for the June 19 torture and killing of
 three women arrested for shoplifting. A fourth woman, tortured and left for dead,
 survived and identified the officers. Although the families of the victims initially
 pressed charges against the policemen, all eventually agreed to settlements out of
 court. The 16-year-old survivor remained under the protection of the Criminal In-
 vestigation Command pending a court date for her own case. In October the Na-
 tional Bureau of Investigation recommended the indictment of 133 PNP personnel
 on charges of murder and multiple murder, following the March rescue of a kid-
 naped American businessman in which 14 persons were killed in synchronized raids
 on a six sites believed to be "safehouses" of the kidnapers. Repeated reports of police
 
 
 639
 involvement in kidnap rings throubout the year prompted President Ramos to
 order a full-scale investigation into PNP actions in this case.
 The NPA committed grave abuses during the year. The most widely publicized in-
 cident occurred February 15 when, following the ambush of an AFP convoy in
 Suriga del Sur province, AFP survivors claimed NPA troops executed wounded sol-
 diers and mutilated corpses. The NPA continued to target former colleagues for as-
 sassination, both for vengeance and to discourage additional defections, including
 Francisco de Guzman, a rormer NPA rebel in Bulacan province, and Eddie Villegas,
 himself the prime suspect in the 1991 killing of Father Narciso Pico, a Philippine
 Independent Church priest.
 NPA forces killed a number of civilians. In one incident, 40 guerrillas killed 10
 civilians in their sleep in a campground of the Department of Environment and Nat-
 ural Resources in South Cotabato by strafing the area with automatic weapons. On
 Augat 27, NPA guerrillas kidnaped and tortured three barangay captains (village
 lealers) near Baggao, Cagayan province, executing two of them.
 NPA units were also implicated in the deaths of trade union activists who refused
 to go along with the CPP/NDF agenda. Noel Gonzaga, President of a Manila jeepney
 driver's association, was shot to death at his residence by four gunman in December,
 following his refusal to join a city-wide jeepney strike. The press reported that Con-
 zaga had received a letter from NPA operatives 'asking him to reconsider his deci-
 sion."
 More than 60 persons died violently in elections-related incidents in 1992, despite
 an unprecedented, highly publicized ban on firearms initially imposed during the
 campaign eeriod. The number of deaths reported was considerably lower than in
 previous erections, leading the PNP to extend indefinitely the gun ban following the
 conclusion of the official campaign period. Most of the incidents involved loca[ dis-
 putes, some of them political, others based on long-standing feuds. One of the more
 flagrant cases involved an incumbent mayoral can 'date in Cavite province who, to-
 gether with the town's chief of police, was gunned down in March by five policemen
 employed as the bodyguards of Jorge Nunez, a so-called "political warlord and con-
 gressman from the province. By late November, the Department of Justice had gath-
 ered sufficient evidence to issue a warrant for the arrest of Nunez for complicity in
 the murders. Congressional candidate Leonardo Mamba from Cagayan was kid-
 naped and killed April 25 by individuals later identified as NPA cadre hired by a
 political opponent. In late November, PNP officials in Iloilo province arrested Eliezer
 Idemne, a former Marcos regime Police Constable and prime suspect in the assas-
 sination of former Antique province Governor Evelio Javier during the 1986 Presi-
 dential 'snap" election campaign.
 b. Disappearznce.-The CHR cited 9 cases of disappearance in the first half of
 1992, down from 14 for the same period in 1991 and46 for all of 1990. TFDP re-
 ported a total of 15 disappearances through August 18, or less than half of the 37
 r1991. It reported 77 disappearanes for all of 1990. Of the 15 cases in 1992, 1
 victim subsequently was found dead, 1 was found in detention, 4 reportedly had
 been seen alive and out of detention, and 9 cases remained unresolved. In 6 of the
 15 cases, the victims were formall arrested before disappearing. Many disappear-
 ances from previous years remained unresolved in 1992.
 In the majority of cases reported by the TFDP, the perpetrators were believed to
 be hovernment military or paramilitary personnel. In May the press reported the
 killing of Babelonio Granada, a market inspector, and the disappearance of his com-
 panion, electrician Judy Congreso, after agents of the AFP intelligence service wit-
 nessed the men's involvement in the shooting of a third person. .though Congroe
 reportedly received treatment for his wounds ated   medical facility, his family re-
 ported that he had not been heard from since. In Angeles City, Pampang province,
 on June 18, Susan Pineda, a female disaster relief worker, and her fiance were ab-
 ducted by (our armed men claiming to be police offers. Although the fiance subse-
 quently escaped, the relief worker disappeared.
 The CPP/NPA also was responsible for disappearances; many of the victims were
 subeqently killed. For example, early in 1992, rebels who had surrendered led
 local PNP offiers to a mass grave in Camalig, Albay province, that contained the
 remains of six persons the former rebels claimed were past victims of NPA atroc-
 ities. In late June, NPA rebels in the Northern Cordilleras region of Luzon released
 Arvey Duane Drown, an American kidnaped in October 1990 while traveling in
 northern laizon.
 The public severely criticized the Government for its inability to stem a rash of
 kidnap-for-ransom incidents involving the offspring of wealthy families, mostly with-
 in the Filipino-Chinese community. Several victims were murdered after payoffs
 were made to the abductors. Despite some shake-ups within police ranks (see Sec-
 tion l.a.) and government investigative efforts, officials acknowledged that it ap-
 
 
 640
 peared some elements of the police were involved in protecting kidnapers, if not ac-
 tually participating in some of the kidnapings.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution prohibits torture and makes evidence obtained thereby inadmis-
 sible in court. Guidelines issued by the CHR in 1988 direct all law enforcement
 agencies and military elements to avoid unnecessary force during investigation, ar-
 rest, detention, interrogation, and other activities. Despite these prohibitions, tor-
 ture by government security personnel does occur. The CHR recorded 3 cases in the
 first half of 1992, 5 for the same period in 1991, and 79 in 1990. The TFDP reported
 6 cases, all posthumously, through August 18, 1992, compared with 135 cases of tor-
 ture for all of 1991, and 249 cases in 1990. The dramatic decrease in incidents of
 torture  recorded  by  the  CHR   and  the  TFDP    reflects the  decrease  in
 counterinsurgency conflicts and possibly the general efforts to elevate awareness of
 human rights among the military. However, the statistics generally exclude inci-
 dents of torture involving common criminals or others outside the context of the
 counterinsurgency, and many victims of torture by official personnel fear reprisal
 from the military or police if they approach CHR to seek redress. Unlike the TFDP,
 the CHR rarely investigates a case unless there is a formal complaint from the vic-
 tim.
 Mistreatment by military, police and CAFGU most often occurred during
 counterinsurgency operations in the field. In February, soldiers and paramilitary
 forces reportedly abducted and severely beat Marcelo Fakilang, a mayoral candidate
 and official of the Cordillera People's Alliance (CPA) suspected by the military of
 being on the payroll of the NDF. In late 1991, six murder suspects who confessed
 their complicity in the rape and massacre of a suburban Manila family later re-
 canted their confessions, claiming that they had been tortured and threatened by
 the police. Although relatives filed a complaint with the CHR, the accused refused
 to follow up and confirm their claims of torture in writing. They subsequently were
 released on bail pending trial.
 Although physical punishment is prohibited by law in the Philippine penal sys-
 tem, it occurs frequently in jails and prisons. A number of instances of prisoner
 abuse at the hands of prison guards or even higher ranking prison authorities have
 been documented. In many cases, prisoners are encouraged by uards to inflict cor-
 poral punishment on fellow inmates. Although most Filipinos fear reprisals if they
 speak out about such abuse, foreigners impnsoned in the Philippines have reported
 to their governments beatings and other maltreatment. In one instance, the Govern-
 ment failed to provide, on a timely basis, basic medical care and hospitalization to
 an elderly American. The prisoner died while in custody in October 1992.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The Constitution requires a judicial de-
 termination of probable cause before issuance of an arrest warrant and prohibits
 holding prisoners incommunicado or in secret places of detention. Detainees have
 the right to a judicial review of the legality of detention and, except for offenses
 punishable by a life sentence, to bail. An executive order requires authorities to file
 charges within 12 to 36 hours of arrest, depending on the seriousness of the crime.
 Nonetheless, government agents continued to violate the law in 1992. A typical ex-
 ample is the case of Andres y Bitong Friginal, a truck driver arrested on March 6
 in Metro Manila and held incommunicado for 8 months by military intelligence offi-
 cers. In a bizarre turn of events in late November, Friginal was suddenly found,
 alive, in a safehouse of the military intelligence group of the AFP. Although he was
 released when relativcs and human rights advocates presented a court order to the
 military officer in charge, Friginal later sought protection under the Government's
 witness protection program.
 The CHR listed 59 cases of illegal arrest and detention for the .January-June pe-
 riod of 1992, compared with 69 for the same period in 1991 and 195 in all of 1990.
 The TFDP found that more than 300 persons were arrested illegally through August
 18. TFDP reported 1,053 such arrests in the previous year, of which 884 subse-
 quently were released. In September the new Government rpealed the 1957
 Antisuversion Law which, by defining Communist Party membership as "a con-
 tinuing offense," had prvided the lea     d basis for warrantless arrests and searches.
 By mid-December, 240 detainees had been released from prison as a consequence
 of the repeal. President Ramos also approved "guidelines or grant of bail, release
 or pardon of persons detained or convicted of crimes against national security and
 public order, and violation of the Articles of War." A number of CPPINPA national
 leaders were released through the judicial process during the first 100 days of the
 Ramos Administration. Among these, Romulo Kintanar,jailed for over a year follow-
 ing his capture a                     and former NDF chairman Satur Ocamp
 who had been in government prisons an aggeate of more than 13 years, were freed
 bh iudicia order. Former CPP Secretary Rafael Baylosis, jailed since 1987 was re-
 
 
 641
 leased in July after posting bail set by a local trial court. Dozens of military men
 and officers detained for their role in various coup attempts against the Aquino Gov-
 ernment also were granted temporary freedom under the Ramos order.
 The TFDP repor{ed a total of 633 political prisoners in detention through most
 of the ir-st half of 1992. This count was derived primarily from the number of per-
 sons charged with subversion and rebellion, and included 305 prisoners from past
 years. The TFDPs published list of political prisoners excluded people such as mili-
 tary reform rebels and Muslim secessionists. According to the CHR 240 persons
 have been released from detention by virtue of the repeal of the antisubversion law
 outlawing the Communist Party of the Philippines. At the end of 1992 the NUC
 was in the process of reviewing more than 500 names of military rebels, 6ommunist
 insurgents, and Muslim separatists (many of whom are charged with criminal of-
 fenses) to ascertain who will be entitled to prvisional political amnesty or another
 form of executive clemency. Accu rate statistics on the numbers of political prisoners
 as defined in the report (See Appendix A.) are not available.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Tria.-The Constitution calls for an independent judici-
 ary and provides that those accused of crimes shall be informed of charges against
 them and have the right to counsel. Trials are public. Defendants are presumed in-
 nocent and have the right to confront witnesses against them, to present evidence,
 and to appeal their convictions. The right of defendants to a lawyer is generally re-
 spected. However, both the pace and quality of the legal system fall short of con-
 stitutional standards. An example is the July conviction of two policemen respon-
 sible for the 1988 shooting death of a military officer while in police custody. More-
 over, a number of particularly egregious cases from past years still remained unre-
 solved by year's end. Six policemen charged in the 1987 assassination attempt on
 former Poehnic University of the Philippines President Nemesio Prudente were
 still out on bail as their case slowly moved through the legal system. On December
 29, after more than a year of administrative delays a Manila Regional Trial Court
 found Claudio Teehankee, scion of a wealthy family and the son of a former Su-
 preme Court chief justice, guilty of the July 1991 murder of an American diplomat's
 son and his teenage companion.
 Despite the introduction of a "continuous trial system" in 1991, most trial courts
 remained backlogged, and only a few were in compliance with the 90-day limit for
 hearing a case. There continued to be an urgent need for more judges and court-
 rooms.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-Under
 the Constitution, search warrants may be issued by a judge on a finding of probable
 cause. Restrictions on search and seizure are generally observed, although raids on
 private homes without search warrants are occasionally reported. Judges have
 thrown out evidence obtained illegally, even in politically sensitive cases, such as
 that of former NDF chairman Satur Ocampo who was released in September (see
 Section 1.d). The repeal of the 1957 Antisubversion Law that outlawed the Com-
 munist Party rendered moot a Supreme Court interpretive ruling that sustained
 searches and arrests without warrants in certain cases. The Government does not
 interfere with the free personal use of the mails or other public communications sys-
 tems, except upon issuance of a court order in the course of an investigation.
 g. Use of Excessive Force and Violations of Humanitarian Law in Internal Con-
 flicts.-The effect on local civilian populations of fighting between the AFP and the
 NPA, particularly in the context of the AFP's strategy of penetrating more remote
 areas of the country contested by the guerillas, continued as a major source of
 human rights abuses. These incursions resulted in civilian casualties from aerial
 bombardment and indirect artillery fire, the mass destruction of housing and gra-
 naries, and the imposition of food and medicine blockades.
 According to figures provided by the Ecumenical Commission for Displaced Fami-
 lies and Communities (ECDFC) 3,900 families were displaced in the first half of
 1992, as compared with 10,400 families affected b  the ighting in the same period
 in 1991. The Department of Social Welfare and Development (DSWD) noted that
 3,400 families or 17,400 people qualified for DSWD assistance as internal refugees
 during the first half of 1992. In 1991 the DSWD assisted some 8,200 families or
 43,400 people.
 In August the CHR recommended the court martial of two military officers re-
 sponsible for the accidental bombing of a refugee camp in Surigao del Sur province
 during counterinsurgency operations. The bombing killed three villagers and wound-
 ed six others, including three children. The CHR investigative report noted that
 military authorities offered financial compensation to the victims' families and con-
 demned NPA guerillas for reportedly using the civilian population as a shield. None-
 theless, the regional CHR office refused to concur in granting the regional com-
 manding officer a clearance for promotion (see Section L.a.).
 
 
 642
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including
 a. Freedom of Speech and Pres.-There are virtually no legal restrictions on free-
 dor of expression or speech, though libel and slander are criminally actionable. In
 a highly publicized ruling in October, a regional trial judge convicted two prominent
 journalists for libel. Former President Aquino had sued them for writing that she
 "hid under her bed- during the 1987 coup attempt. The ruling was still under ap-
 peal at year's end.
 Freedom of the press is generally respected. There are some 25 privately owned
 newspapers in Manila and many more in the provinces that cover the political spec-
 trum and freely criticize the Government. Although paid political advertisements on
 television were banned during the campaign period the Commission on Elections
 sponsored a series of televised debates among presidential and vice presidential can-
 didtes.
 CPP publications became legal with the repeal of the Antisubversion Law. Jour-
 nalists have been able without legal penalty to meet and interview antigovernment
 rebels, including those of the CPP and the military rebels. Like the press, radio and
 television stations report views across a wide political spectrum. The Philippine
 courts have been consistent in their protection of the media.
 However, the press continues to face considerable hazards including threats and,
 in the past year, assaults and murder in carrying out its responsibilities. The dan-
 gers are greatest for those working outside the capital, where powerful vested inter-
 ests involved with gambling, illegal logging, governmental corruption, or the drug
 trade may use financial inucements or pressures as well as the threat of violence
 to control the media. In November four newsmen in Ioilo province reported that
 they received death threats after they began linking prominent regional PNP offi-
 cers to lucrative illegal gambling in Iloilo. Pubications from abroad, except those
 considered pornographic, are not censored. Foreign journalists are free to report and
 move about the country, even in areas of rebel influence. Major foreign newspapers
 and television networks have bureaus or representatives in Manila.
 Academic freedom is respected in theory and practice. The Government does not
 censor subject matter in classes, university publications, or conferences.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-Permits from local authorities
 are required for outdoor demonstrations in public places and are routinely issued.
 Nevertheless, rallies and marches are often held without permits. Under the Aquino
 government, Philippine law enforcers were instructed to follow a policy of "maxi-
 mum tolerance," i.e., not dispersing rallies held without permits as long as they did
 not disturb public order. To prevent conflicts on college campuses, government au-
 thorities and student leaders agreed in 1991 that soldiers and police would not dis-
 perse student rallies on campus, while students agreed to conduct their mass ac-
 tions peacefully and not disrupt classes. The agreement collapsed in April 1992
 when students and faculty members at the Polytechnic University of the Philippines
 (PUP) boycotted classes to protest the political appointment of a new university
 president and barricaded the main administrative building on campus to prevent
 the new president from taking office. PNP officers were caled in to assist campus
 security guards in restoring order on the campus. The matter was resolved in July
 when incoming Education Secretary Fabella named another candidate to the post.
 With rare exceptions, political rallies during the 1992 campaign period were or-
 derly. In the suspenseful postelection period, when more than 22 million ballots
 were being talliedmanualy, an unauthorized protest by a messianic religious sect
 in Manila was dispersed by police officers, resulting in the death by shooting of one
 protester.
 Private, professional, religious, social, charitable, and political organizations are
 permitted to affiliate with recognized international bodies in their fields. The Com-
 munist Party was legalized in September.
 c. Freedom of Reliion.-There is no state religion. Freedom of religion is fully re-
 spected, and no official discrimination is practiced against any religious rup or its
 members. In May Fidel Ramos, a Protestant, became the first non-Catholic Presi-
 dent to be elected in this 80 percent Catholic nation.
 The country's sizable Muslim minority, the Iglesia Ni Kristo and Aglipayan
 churches, Protestant congregations, and other denominations enjoy full religious
 freedom Foreign clergymen and missionaries of many faiths also practice their pro-
 fession freely.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-Filipinos enjoy unhampered freedom to change their place of residence
 and employment within the Philippines. Movement within the country is largely
 unimpeded, although the travels of former first lady and presidential candidate
 Imelda Marcos were closely monitored both during and after the campaign period.
 Government troops and rebel groups erected roadblocks in provincial areas where
 
 
 they conducted operations in 1992, and PNP checkpoints were used to enforce the
 firearms ban during the election campaign period. However, in July, following an
 incident in which two women were shotby overzealous police officials manning a
 roadblock on the main highway leading north of Manila, police authorities banned
 the practice of setting up *arbitrary" roadblocks without prior clearance from the
 central command.
 With rare exception most Filipinos are free to travel and work abroad. The Octo-
 ber 1991 murder of a *ilipina dancer in Japan led President Aquino to set age lim-
 its and other restrictions on Filipina "entertainers* who sought to work in Japan.
 The restrictions were lifted in March.
 However, the revocation on national security grounds of the passport of CPP
 founder Jose Maria Sison was still in effect at year-s end.
 Although the Government does not accept refugees for internal resettlement, it
 continued to provide first asylum to Indochinese boat people, allowing them to re-
 main in an open camp environment pending final resolution of their status. No new
 Indochinese refugees arrived in 1992, primarily due to the success of measures
 adopted under the United Nations-endorsed Comprehensive Plan of Action (CPA) to
 which the Government is a signatory. Ap art from its policy concerning first asylum
 seekers the Government permitted the United Nations to operate two refugee facili-
 ties in tataan province and a transit center at the Ninoy Aquino International Air-
 port in Manila. Approximately 23,000 refugees passed through these facilities in
 1992.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 The 1987 Constitution restored a presidential system of government similar to
 that in existence from 1946 to 1972. The new Constitution established a bicameral
 legislature and an independent judiciary as checks on executive power. Presidential
 authority to declare martial law was curtailed. Filipinos are free to organize politi-
 cal parties as long as they do not seek to overthrow the Government by force. Demo-
 cratic opposition to the Government is widely tolerated, and there are no restrictions
 in law or practice on participation by women and minorities in politics. The Phil-
 ippines has a constitutionally mandated multiparty political system with free elec-
 tions based on universal (18 years and older) suffrage.
 In May, 73 percent of the registered voters (slightly more than 22 million people)
 turned out to elect local, provincial, and national government officials, including
 President Ramos. The election results, monitored by the independent Media Citizens
 Quick Count and certified by the Commission on Elections (COMELEC) and the out-
 going Congress have been widely accepted by the electorate, although there were
 credible reports of vote-buying and tampering with electoral tallies.
 COELC, established by the Aquino Government, was given broad power to cre-
 ate a "level playing field" for the elections and enforce the stricter campaign stand-
 ards legislated by the Congress. Members of the PNP were seconded to COELC
 to enforce a ban on firearms during the campaign. The PNP dismantled dozens of
 so-called "private armies," a traditional source of poll violence and voter intimida-
 tion.
 The 24-member Senate is divided among four different parties and independents
 but dominated by an opposition majority. In the 200-seat House of Reprcsentatives,
 the progovernment party is not a majority party, but it leads a working majority
 oalition. Ninetee n      were elected to the House, and3 now serve in the Sen-
 ate. Legislation is initiated both by the administration and by members of Congress,
 and the debate is lively. Government-sponsored legislation is often criticized,
 amended, or defeated. The new Government continuedto pursue the decentraliza-
 tion efforts of the Aquino administration, aimed at devolving political power and re-
 sources to provincial and local governments.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 The best known domestic human rights nongovernmental organization is the
 TFDP, established in 1974. It collects information on alleged human rights viola-
 tions and publishes statistics on abuses attributed to government forces. The TFDP
 does not report on abuses by nongovernmental organizations such as the NPA, nor
 does it distinguish between persons imprisoned purely for their political beliefs and
 those legitimately incarcerated for crimnal acts such as murder, torture, or kidnap-
 ing. Other groups active in human rights include  tHe Free Legal Assistane Group
 (FLAG), the Philippine Alliance of Human Rights Advocates (PAHRA), the Ecumeni-
 cal Movement for Justice and Peace, and the Ecumenical Commission for Displaced
 Families and Communities.
 
 
 While these groups ogperate without government restriction, they have often been
 viewed with suspicion by the military and police. In some instances, local civilian
 officials also have been uncooperative, and employees of human rights groups in the
 field have faced harassment. In January a TFDP worker in Pangasinan province
 was prevented from visiting detainees at the provincial jail in Lingayen, Pangasinan
 on the grounds that he lacked a special permit from the CHR. In July Joe Pernia,
 the regional coordinator for a human rights group and a candidate for local office,
 reportedly was arrested without warrant by PNP officers while observing the re-
 count of ballots at the municipal hall in Ligao, Albay. Pernia's whereabouts were
 unknown for 2 days before he was located at the Albay provincial jail.
 With 16 field offices and a staff of over 600, the constitutionally mandated CHR
 is charged with investigating all alleged violations of human rights. It has come
 under criticism for its failure in many instances to conduct field investigations, its
 quasi-judicial proceedings that pose risks of reprisal and special burdens for poten.
 tial witnesses, its tendency to become involved in issues unrelated to fundamental
 human rights concerns, and its inability to monitor the progress of cases referred
 to the Department of Justice or the military courts. In the past, more serious allega-
 tions included overly close ties with the military and an antagonistic relationship
 with private human rights groups. The recent appointment of a respected diplomat
 and prominent anti-Marcos human rights activist as Chairman was well received.
 The new Chairman is attempting actively to renew the CHR's relevance as a mem-
 ber of the human rights community.
 The Presidential Human Rights Committee (PHRC), composed of both govern-
 ment and NGO representatives, was established by executive order in late 1988 pri-
 marily to address the problem of disappearances. In practice it has evolved as an
 all-purpose human rights investigative task force. Given CHR's sometimes strained
 relationships with private human rights groups under the Aquino administration,
 the PHRC has emerged as a forum   or public debate on human rights policy. For
 example, when the AFP alleged gross violations by NPA guerrillas during a major
 offensive in Surigao del Sur, the PHRC sent a special investigative team to follow
 up on the charges (see Section L.a.). Membership in the PHRC includes the Justice
 Secretary as Chairman, representatives from CHR, the Departments of National De-
 fense and Foreign Affairs, the Office of the President, the Congress, and two private
 human rights group, the PAHRA and the FLAG. TFDP and other groups attend as
 observers.
 Representatives of international human rights groups are free to travel in the
 Philippines and investigate alleged abuses. Government officials discuss human
 rights problems with outside governmental and nongovernmental organizations
 (NGO's) and the United Nations and routinely agree to meet with those who visit.
 Resident delegates of the International Committee of the Red Cross monitor prison
 conditions and assist persons displaced by internal conflict.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex; Religion, Language, or Social Status
 Women in the Philippines enjoy the same legal rights as men. With the signing
 into law of the "Women in Development" Act by President Aquino this year, limita-
 tions on women's rights to buy and sell property were terminated. Enforcement of
 laws against the abuse of women, however, remains inadequate.
 While criminal law prohibits violence against women, both women and girls in the
 lower economic strata are vulnerable to exploitation. Unethical operators may prom-
 ise legitimate employment in Manila or overseas, or arrange marriages with foreign
 men. Some of these women end up working as prostitutes or suffering abuse at the
 hands of their employers or husbands. Reports of abused Filipina maids in Kuwait
 and other Middle Eastern countries spurred a public outcry against the exploitation
 of female contract workers serving overseas. The Philippine Overseas Employment
 Administration urged law enforcers to pursue illegal "recruiters."
 Many of the women who enjoy professional prominence in the Philippines come
 from an elite that has access to education and other opportunities. Close to 80 per-
 cent of Filipino families live at or below the poverty line (see Section 6.e.) and do
 not have access to even a basic elementary school education. The women in this dis-
 poportionatly large group tend to be uninformed about women's rights and are
 particularly bound by cultural beliefs and attitudes that promote passive acceptance
 of their circumstances. As one informed observer put it, "incest, rape, prostitution,
 and demeaning treatment are facts of life for a distressingly large number of Fili-
 pino women." These women have little choice but to endure physical abuse and
 other torment in silence.
 Muslim Filipinos, living principally in Mindanao, together with non-Muslim and
 iion-Christian groups located mostly in the mountainous cordillera area of northern
 Luzon and in Mindanao. constitute avproximately 10 percent of the population.
 
 
 645
 These minorities hold public office at the local and national levels and are employed
 in government positions. In practice, however, some discrimination against Muslims
 and other minorities persists. Philippine culture-with its emphasis on familial,
 tribal, and regional loyalties-creates informal barriers whereby access to jobs or re-
 sources is provided first to those of one's own family or group. Another factor is that
 many Muslims prefer to educate their children in Muslim schools, which has de-
 prived them of the skills required to advance in some occuptions. Muslims and
 other cultural minorities are not always accorded equal legal proion. Minority
 groups, such as the T'olis in South Cotabato province, are sometimes pushed off
 their ancestral lands by logging and mining operations or by the arrival of farmers
 from other areas.
 The Autonomous Region of Muslim Mindanso (ARMM) was inaugurated in No-
 vember 1990 to deal with the demand of Muslims for local autonomy i areas where
 they hold a majority or are a substantial minority. However, in 1992 the ARMM
 continued to suffer from problems of identit and finance. imited to the four prov-
 inces which elected to join, the ARMM fairs short of representing the aspirations
 of all Muslims in the region. Additionally, the ARMM is hobbled by an inadequate
 tax base and a continued shortfall in promised subsidies from the Government.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The right of workers, including public employees, to
 form and join trade unions is assured by the Constitution and legislation and is
 freely practiced without formal government interference through~out the country.
 Trade unions and trade union federations are independent of the Government and
 of politicalparties. The labor organization Kilusang Mayo Uno (KMU) has com-
 plained to the International Labor Organization (ILO) about numerous violent at-
 tacks on picket lines and arrests of local trade union leaders, and the ILO has noted
 that these cases remain unsettled in the courts. Nonetheless, some 32 labor leaders,
 including Crispin Beltran and other KMU leaders, participated in organized labor's
 first dialog with President Ramos in 1992.
 Unions have and exercise freely the right to form or join federations and confed-
 erations and to affiiate with international trade union organizations. Suect to cer-
 tain restrictions in the Labor Code and emergency executive powers, strikes in the
 private sector are legal and take place frequently. A decline in the number of strikes
 was observed with only 98 in the frnst three quarters of the year as compared to
 182 for all of 1991.
 The Horrnrs Act, passed in 1989, set four conditions for a legal strike: notice must
 be given to the Department of Labor and Employment; a 30-day coolingoff period
 must be observed; all available means of conciliation must be exhausted; and the
 issue has to be relevant tote  in the cort he law. Nevertheless, the 32  de-
 clared in 1991 that some of the Philippine Labor Code provisions are not in conform-
 ity with ILO Convention 87 on freedom of association. A national tripartite con-
 ference in mid-December recommended the following items for discussion: industrial
 peace and security, labor relations, income and prices, and employment.
 The right to strike and the status of employees in statutory government agencies,
 such as the Philippine National Railways (PNR) and the Port Authority, have not
 been resolved. Labor and management representatives from the PNR meeting with
 civil service commission ofcers in April were advised to file a civil court case
 against the railroad company.
 Strikes by public sector employees occurred frequently during the year. In April
 a group of public school teachers initiated a hunger strike to prtest the Aquino gov-
 ernment's failure to comply with its promise to reinstate teachers dismissed in 1990
 for participating in wage strikes. Several strikers collapsed from hunger. The 143-
 day strike ended August 26 when the new Government reinstated 35 teachers and
 granted the remainder amnesty.
 Several trade union leaders and labor activists were killed during the year in con-
 nection with their activities. None of the cases had been resolved by year's end.
 Candid Basiico, a prominent former leader of the Trade Union Congress (TUCP)
 was shot dead in a restaurant in Cebu City on May 1.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-Labor's right to organize and
 bargain colmectively is provided for in law. Since 1986 the number of collective bar-
 fa   igiareements in force has increased. In the same period, the number of reg-
 sterec[unons increased by more than 10 percent. As of May over 5,000 unions were
 redstered.
 It is an unfair labor practice to dismiss a union official or a worker trying to orga-
 nize a union. Nevertheless, employer sometimes attempt to intimidate workers by
 threats of firing or closure. Allegations of intimidation and discrimination for union
 
 
 646
 activity are actionable as unfair labor practices before the National Labor Relations
 Commsion (NLRC).
 Through the NLRC and the National Conciliation and Mediation Board (NCMB),
 the Department of Labor and Employment has in place a quasi-judicial system for
 hearing and adjudicating workers' claims. The process has been slow, but no slower
 than other parts of the courts and the bureaucracy. Through the second week of Au-
 gust, a total of 98 work stoppages were recorded, as compared to 147 through Sep-
 tember 1991 and 183 in 1990. Through August 1992, 574,000 workdays were lost
 through strikes, compared with 750,000 in 1991. Labor law and practice are uniform
 throughout the country, including in the several export processing zones (EPZ's).
 The rate of unionization and the number of collective bargaining agreements con-
 cluded in the EPZ's has been similar to that in the rest of the country, but the pro-
 portion is much lower in the newer EPZ's.
 c. Prohibition of Compulsory or Forced Labor.-The Philippines has ratified ILO
 convention 105, which prohibits forced labor and has the force of law in the country.
 There were no reports of forced labor being practiced.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The Constitution prohibits the em-
 ployment of children below age 15, except under the responsibility of parents or
 guardians, and then only if the work does not interfere with schooling. t allows em-
 ployment for those between the ages of 15 and 18, for such hours and periods of
 the day as are determined by the Secretary of Labor, but forbids employment of per-
 sons under 18 years of age in hazardous or deleterious work. However, for socio-
 economic reasons, a significant number of children are employed in the informal sec-
 tor of the urban economy or as field laborers in the more rural areas.
 In June President Aquino signed into law Republic Act 7610, a controversial bill
 providing for the provisional employment of children under the age of 15. The
 Ramos Government announced that it is reviewing the law to seek administrative
 redress of its potentially negative effects on child labor practices, possibly by imple-
 mentin rules to be formulated by the Department of Labor or through subsequent
  fegiatrlteion.tin                                ade hv     as be
 he  tost serious violations of child labor laws occur in piecework or contracting
 out of embroidery and other grment-relatd production. Children have also been
 used in dangerous and ecologically damaging forms of fishing that use dynamite.
 Child prostitution is a problem in the larger cities. There are few available statistics
 and studies of the practice. Nonetheless, social workers and others who work among
 the poor attest to the g-avity of the problem. The Government has attempted to in-
 vestigate and reduce violations of child labor laws outside of the agricultural sector,
 but the Labor Department has too few inspectors and other resources to reduce sig-
 nificantly the number of violations.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The Minimum Wage Act of 1989 is the author-
 ity for minimum wage setting by regional wage boards. The rates were last set in
 December 1990, with the highest rate in the metropolitan Manila area and lower
 rates set by regional wage boards in rural areas. Labor Department surveys in the
 first quarter of 1992 showed that 17 percent of 6,500 establishments nationwide
 were paying the minimum wage. In the national capital region 15 percent of em-
 ployers surveyed were in noncompliance. The highest noncompliane rate was re-
 corded in Region 7 at 40.8 ?ercent. With the exception of Regions 2, 4, and 7, the
 remainder of the Philippines 14 Regions improved their compliance rates over 1991.
 Substantial numbers of workers (mostly domestics, laborers, janitors, messengers,
 drivers, and clerk-typists) are not covered by minimum wage requirements. How-
 ever, the average pay of workers in large cities hews closely to the regional mini-
 mum, and in the industrial sector salaries are considerably higher. In rural areas
 wages often fall substantially below the minimum. In 1991 the average real mini-
 mum wage (at 1988 prices) for all sectors in the national capital region provided
 monthly earnings of approximately $69, well below the Government's 1988 poverty
 threshold of approximately $110 established for a family of six persons. Although
 most families have more than one wage earner, labor experts estimate that in 1992
 close to 80 percent of the families in the Philippines lived below the national poverty
 linev reversing the progress seen in the early years of the Aquino administration.
 Thie standard legal workweek before overtime is 40 hours for most categories of
 industrial workers, who typically average 48 hours of work per week. The law man-
 dates a full d'a of rest weekly. The enforcement of workweek hours is managed
 through periodic Labor Department standards inspections. Employees with more
 than  year on the job are entitled to 5 days of paid leave annually.
 A comprehensive set of occupational safety and health standards exists in law.
 However, little information is available on industrial and occupational health haz-
 ,rls in the Philionines. The latest r9eort on industrial accidents prepared by the
 
 
 Labor Department, dated 1987, shows the number of persons killed or injured but
 provides no breakdown as to cause of accident or bsector.
 Large, successful multinational firms apply US., European, or Japanese stand-
 ards of worker safety and health because of the requirements of their home-based
 insurance carriers. Beyond the poorly enforced Philippine safety and health laws,
 there is no comparable standard for domestic firms.
