 THE PHILIPPINES
 The Philippines has a republican form of government with a democratically elect-
 ed president, a bicameral legislature and an independent judiciary. The current
 President, former Defense Secretary Fidel Ramos, won a closely contested but gen-
 erally fair election in May 1992.
 A large percentage of the approximately 109,000-strong Armed Forces of the Phil-
 ippines (AFP), which shares counterinsurgency responsibilities with the Philippine
 National Police (PNP), a civilian force numbering 96,000, were deployed in field op-
 erations against a declining but still active Communist insurgency and Muslim sep-
 aratist insurgents. Both the AFP and PNP are under the control of the Government
 which is publicly committed to respecting human rights. However, elements of the
 security forces, including local civilian militias, continued to commit significant
 human rights abuses in the course of counterinsurgency operations. The Communist
 Party of the Philippines (CPP) and its armed wing, the New People's Army (NPA),
 were also responsible for human rights violations, as were Muslim insurgent groups.
 Growth of the market-oriented economy has lagged behind that of its more dy-
 namic Asian neighbors in recent years, in part because of the political instability
 which plagued Ramos' predecessor. While there have been some signs of recovery,
 formidable obstacles remain, and gross domestic product (GDP) growth may fall
 short of the current 2.3 percent rate of population increase. Structural problems in-
 clude an entrenched oligarchical elite which dominates the economy and politics and
 is resistant to reforms which threaten its interests. The Philippines also continues
 to be characterized by glaring income disparities and widespreadpoverty.
 Information from both the Government and nongovernmental human rights orga-
 nizations (NGO's) indicate a decrease in reports of human rights violations for 1993,
 continuing the downward trend of recent years. Principal abuses by government
 forces against individuals included extrajudicial killings, disappearances, arbitrary
 arrests, torture, and harassment of suspected insurgents and their supporters. The
 decline in abuses on the part of both the Government and insurgent forces reflected
 a reduction in the number of military encounters. However, a wide range of human
 rights abuses continued to occur within the context of illegal activities of police and
 military personnel, including protection rackets, political gangsterism, kidnap-for-
 ransom syndicates, and assistance to illegal loggers. Although there were a few
 cases of successful prosecutions, there still was very little observable progress in try-
 ing, convicting, and appropriately punishing the perpetrators of human rights
 abuses, most of whom continue to go unpunished.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-The Commission on Human Rights
 (CHR), a constitutionally mandated agency of the Government, reported 93 inci-
 dents of political or extrajudicial killing during the first half of 1993. This compares
 with 353 such killings for all of 1992 reported by the CHR. Task Force Detainees
 of the Philippines (TFDP), a prominent NGO (see Section 4), reported 30 people
 killed extrajudicially in the first half of 1993 as compared to 139 for all of 1992.
 The numbers given by CHR are higher because the CHR includes violations by both
 the Government and insurgent groups, including the CPP/NPA. The TFDP, how-
 ever, lists only offenses attributed to government authorities.
 Both CHR and TFDP attribute the majority of human rights abuses, including
 extrejudicial killings, to military forces and the police. In an incident in Manila in
 June described as typical, a police officer shot to death an individual who he claimed
 was a car thief. However, witnesses and companions of the victim claimed that the
 police officer, who had been drinking with several other officers, shot the victim
 after the motorized tricycle he was driving almost collided with the car the police
 officer was in. In another case, William Rom, a researcher for Sildap-Sidlakan, an
 NGO serving tribal communities in Surigao Del Norte, was hacked to death in July
 by bolo-wielding CAFGU members, who accused him of being an NPA member.
 According to the Center for Trade Union and Human Rights (CTUHR), an NGO,
 three trade union leaders and labor activists were killed in connection with their
 activities during the first year of the Ramos presidency. There were also 15 at-
 tempted murders. The victims of the murders reported by the CTUHR were gn-
 erally union organizers, while the targets of the attempted murders were often
 strikers. The assailants were private security forces or local police, and most inci-
 dents occurred in the context of labor disputes. In one case cited by CTUHR,
 Rodrigo Gavino, a union vice-president actively involved with workers' issues at the
 
 
 General Milling Company in Cainta, Rizal province, was shot dead by company se-
 curity guards inside the factory premises on April 5.
 President Ramos and the PN leadership have expressed concern about police ex-
 cesses and have initiated various programs to cleanse the force of abusive and crimi-
 nal elements. Although progress as  en slow, some offenders have been brought
 to justice. For example, a court in Benguet province in July sentenced five of the
 six policemen accused in the June 1992 rap-murder of three women and the at-
 tempted murder of another in La Union province to thre consecutive life terms
 each. Nonetheless, these instances are the exception to the general nule of impunity
 that has prevailed for many years.
 Civilian militia units or "CAFGU's" (Citizens Armed Forces Geographical Units)
 also committed numerous extrajudicial killings. Organized by the police and AFP to
 secure areas cleared of insurgents, these nonprofessional units are often inad-
 equately trained, poorly supervised, and prone to violence. (TFDP attributes 19 per-
 cent of all human rights abuses in the first year of the Ramos Presidency to
 CAFGU's.) In a case that attracted wide attention, CAFGU personnel were charged
 with killing Chris Batan, a TFDP worker, in Mountain province in February. Batan
 and two coworkers were doing field research related to human rights abuses during
 the Marcos era when they encountered several CAFGU members, who allegedly
 opened fire on Batan without provocation. Two CAFGU members were charged in
 Bat an's death, but only one was arrested. The presiding judge in the case rejected
 the suspect's request Ior bail last October, but the suspect was reportedly on tem-
 porary release from jail at year's end. The judge has not yet ruled on a request by
 atan's family for a change of venue from Bon  in Mountain province, where they
 claim their personal safety is threatened. Inasmuch as Batan and his assailants
 were members of different hill tribes, this case also illustrates the role of intertribal
 hostility and other local feuds in some CAFGU-related human rights abuses.
 In January the International Labor Organization (ILO) added its voice to Phil-
 ippine human rights oranizations and other groups which have called on the Gov-
 ernment to disband ChGrs. The Government indicated that it would do so once
 the level of insurgent activity is brought down to the point where CAFGfs are no
 longer required. In October, President Ramos announced plans to demobilize 11,000
 CAFGU's (out of a force of 72,000) by the end of 1994, using part of the 1994
 CAFGU budget for separation allowances. Critics assert, however, that the Govern-
 ment is unlikely to carry out this plan because it fears resistance from militiamen
 and the sudden increase in local unemployment that would result from their dis-
 bandnment.
 The NPA also was responsible for extrajudicial killings throughout the country in
 1993. Several such killings were attributed to the Alex Boncayo Brigade (ABB), a
 notorious Communist hit squad controlled by the Manila-Rizal Regional Committee
 of the CPP, whose leader publicly threatened in June to use the ABB to assassinate
 up to one 1,000 drug dealers, corrupt officials, and other criminals unless the Gov-
 ernment takes action against them. Other politically motivated murders were car-
 ried out by Muslim extremists, including members of the Moro National Liberation
 Front (MNLF), the largest Muslim insurgent group. In April, for example, suspected
 MNLF members ambushed a passenger jeepney on the outskirts of the town of
 Baliguian in Davao Del Norte, killing five people and wounding eight others. Mus-
 lim extremists were also implicated in a series of terrorist bombings which injured
 or killed innocent bystanders. Most such bombings occurred in the south but several
 took place in Manila.
 Private security forces maintained by local landowners and other influential fig-
 urs were another source of extrajudicial killings. National attention was focused on
 this longstanding problem by the arrest of the mayor of a town near Manila and
 a number of his henchmen (some of whom were policemen) on charges of murdering
 a University of the Philippines coed and her boyfriend in June. The publicity gen-
 erated by the case inspired the Ramos Administration to undertake a nationwide
 campaign to dismantle "private armies." Although some arms have been confiscated,
 critics charge that most of thesre ereold and of little practical use, and that the
 campaign has not targeted private armies controlled by politically powerful individ-
 uals. In what was seen by most observers as a tacit admission of the pro gam's inef-
 fectiveness, in November the administration indefinitely extended the dadline for
 dismantling private armed groups.
 Another wave of extrajudicial killings occurred after Manila mayor Alfredo Lira
 vowed in November to rid the city of its drug problem in six months or resign. Dur-
 ing the next several weeks, about 20 alleged drug pushers were found murdered,
 many with signs beside their bodies reading, "Don't push drugs, you'll end up like
 me." While no suspects were charged, attention focused on drug gangs or police ele-
 ments acting without official sanction.
 
 
 718
 b. Disappearance.-The CHR cited five cases of disappearance in the first half of
 1993 compared with 32 cases for all of 1992. TFDP reported a total of three dis-
 appearances for the first half of 1993 compared with 19 cases for all of 1992. The
 decline is largely attributable to the continued decrease in insurgent activity. The
 most notable case of disappearance was that of Olongapo publisher-columnist Romeo
 Legaspi who vanished on January 11. The Philippine Movement for Press Freedom,
 an NGO, claims that members of the local police force were responsible, citing
 Legaspi's history of criticizing the Olongapo police.
 Legaspi's family filed a complaint but a regional trial court dismissed it for lack
 of evidence. Disappearance is linked with the problem of kidnapings for ransom. A
 spate of such kidnapings, mainly involving wealthy Philippine-Chinese as victims,
 attracted international attention in 1992. A concerted government crackdown, spear-
 headed by Vice President Joseph Estrada's Presidential Anticrime Commission,
 broke up several major kidnaping rings and sharply reduced the incidence of these
 crimes in early 1993. However, the problem of kidnaping persists, particularly in
 Mindanao where law and order problems are most severe. [n August Senator Anna
 Domini Coseteng claimed that about 100 people were abducted by bandits, Com-
 munists, and Muslim extremists. Many of the victims were wealthy Philippine-Chi-
 nese who did not report the cases because they believed that law enforcement per-
 sonnel were involved with the kidnapers. Kidnaping-for-ransom again emerge as
 a problem towards the end of the year, with wealthy Filipino-Chinese professionals
 as the primary targets, particularly those in Mindanao. Active service police and
 military are often implicated as leaders or members of kidnap gangs. For example,
 police general Dictador Alqueza and Col. Reynaldo Berroya were indicted in connec-
 tion with the May kidnaping of a Taiwanese businessman.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution prohibits torture and makes evidence obtained thereby inadmis-
 sible in court. Guidelines issued by the CHR in 1988 direct all law-enforcement
 agencies and military elements to avoid unnecessary force during investigation, ar-
 rest, detention, interrogation, and other activities. Public outrage over higly pub-
 licized crimes led to government-supported moves in Congress to reinstate the death
 penalty. On December 13, President Ramos signed legislation reimposing capital
 punishment for 13 crimes classified as heinous, among them rape, kidnaping, and
 several drug-related offenses.
 The CHR reports two cases of torture in the first half of 1993, compared with 11
 cases in 1992. The TFDP cites 14 cases in the first half of 1993, down from 33 dur-
 ing the second half of 1992. This decrease stems primarily from a decline in the
 number of government counterinsurgency operations. The CHR also cites an im-
 proved human rights awareness in the military, which it attributes to its practice
 of providing AFP promotion panels with "certificates of clearance" on officers'
 human rights performance. However, the statistics generally exclude incidents of
 torture  involving  common    criminals  or  others   outside  the  context  of
 counterinsurgency activities. In addition, many cases go unreported because the vic-
 tims fear reprisal if they seek redress. Although physical punishment is prohibited
 by law, it does occur in jails and prisons. Foreigners imprisoned in the Philippines
 have reported beatings and other maltreatment.
 Abuse of prisoners most commonly occurs in the arrest and interrogation stage,
 and police forces appear to be the chief offenders. In August a television crew
 videotaped police officers in Manila shooting and mauling suspects in a robbery case
 after they had been subdued. Allegations of such abuse are sometimes invoked in
 judicial proceedings, a notable example being the trial of six defendants charged
 with the 1991 rape-murder of Estrellita Vizconde and her daughters. In September,
 the judge in the case acquitted all six on the grounds that their confessions were
 obtained through intimidation and torture.
 CAFGU forces also frequently abused prisoners. Many CAFGU abuses of this type
 occur within the context of local political squabbles and tribal conflicts.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-Although the Constitution requires a ju-
 dicial determination of probable cause before issuance of an arrest warrant, and pro-
 hibits holding prisoners incommunicado or in secret places of detention, illegal ar-
 rest and detention continue to occur. Detainees have the right to a judicial review
 of the legality of their detention and, except for offenses punishable by a life sen-
 tence, to bail. An executive order requires authorities to file charges within 12 to
 36 hours of arrest, depending on the seriousness of the crime. The CHR listed 42
 cases of illegal arrest and detention for the first half of 1993 compared with 158
 for all of 1992. The TFDP found that 254 persons were arrested illegally in the first
 half of 1993 compared with 938 such arrests in the previous year. This decline is
 attributable in part to the Government's efforts to promote the domestic peace proc-
 ess. In September 1992, it repealed the 1957 Antisubversion Law which had pro-
 
 
 vided the legal basis for warrantless arrests and searches. President Ramos also ap-
 proved "guidelines for grant of bail, release or pardon of persons detained or con-
 victed of crimes against national security and public order, and violation of the Arti-
 cles of War."
 Notwithstanding these measures, the TFDP claims that there are still about 350
 political prisoners being held illegally. The Government disputes this charge, con-
 tending   a all of the prisoners in question are being held for common crimes. It
 is likely that some of the 350 prisoners in question may have committed common
 crimes in the pursuit of their political beliefs. It is also possible that a few are ac-
 tual or suspected Communists who were framed for common crimes. Proving this
 is difficult, however, and the burden of proof lies with the prisoner.
 The CTUHR reported an increase in the arrest and detention of workers during
 Ramos' first year (195 in the first half of 1993, compared to 54 in the second half
 of 1992). CTHR attributes this increase in arrests and detentions to the Ramos
 administration's emphasis on    economic development, which     it claims has
 emboldened employers and their security forces and/or local police with close ties
 to important local business interests.
 The NPA is responsible for some extrajudicial arrests and detentions, often in con-
 nection with "courts" set up to try civilians and local politicians for "crimes against
 the people." Many defendants in such trials are summarily executed.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The Constitution calls for an independent judici-
 ary and provides that those accused of crimes shall be informed of charges against
 them and have the right to counsel. Trials are public. Defendants are presumed in-
 nocent and have the right to confront witnesses against them, to present evidence,
 and to appeal their convictions. The right of defendants to a lawyer is generally re-
 spected.
 Despite these safeguards and guarantees, the slow pace of justice continued to be
 a major problem. An example is the 3 years it took to obtain the conviction in March
 of one of the suspects in the 1990 killing of a U.S. Marine outside of Subic Bay
 naval base.
 Most trial courts remained backlogged, and only a few were in compliance with
 the 90-day limit for hearing a case. There continued to be an urgent and widely rec-
 onized need for more judges and courtrooms. The case of the policemen charged
 with the 1987 assassination attempt on former Polytechnic University of the Phil-
 ippines president Nestor Prudente remained in the Philippine court system, and no
 information is available as to when the case may finally be settled. Bribery of judges
 and other court officials often results in indefinite postponement of trials and out-
 right dismissal of cases. Out of court settlements also preclude many offenders from
 being brought to justice.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.--Under
 the Constitution, search warrants may be issued by a judge on a finding of probable
 cause. Restrictions on search and seizure are generally observed, although raids on
 private homes without search warrants are occasionally reported. Judges have
 thrown out evidence obtained illegally, even in politically sensitive cases, such as
 that of former NDF Chairman Satur Ocampo who was released in September 1992.
 The Government does not interfere with the free personal use of the mails or
 other public communications systems except upon issuance of a court order in the
 course of an investigation. It also does not interfere with the right of citizens to
 ractice their personal beliefs in the privacy of their own home in matters such as
 mily planning and the teaching of religion to their children.
 g.Use of Excessive Force and Violattons of Humanitarian Law in Internal Con-
 /licts.-Although clashes between government and insurgent forces declined, they
 continued to inflict hardships on civilians, particularly in remote areas which were
 the scene of most fighting. One example is the Marag Valley in northern Luzon,
 where many homes and livestoc: f indigenous peoples were destoyed in the course
 of government counterinsurgency operations agaist NPA units. According to TFDP
 figures, in the first half of 1993 there were 15 forced evacuations, two food block.
 a   e our "violent dispersals (i.e., forced evacuations in which violence was used),
 and 79 houses demolished. Most of these categories showed sharp declines over
 1992. No information is available on the court martial recommended by the CHR
 in 1992 for two military officers responsible for bombing a refugee camp in Surigao
 Del Sur. According to the CHR, paretrial investigations of its recommendations for
 courts martial often result in no charges being filed.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-There are virtually no legal restrictions on free-
 dor of expression or speech, thuugh libel and slander are criminally actionable.
 Freedom of the press is generally respected and courts have been consistent in their
 
 
 protection of the media. There are some 25 privately owned newspapers in Manila
 and many more in the provinces that cover the political spectrum and freely criticize
 the Government. (Most are owned or controlled by politicians and prominent busi-
 nessmen.) Radio and television also enjoy considerable freedom. CPP publications
 became legal with the repeal of the Antisubversion Law in 1992. Journalists have
 been able without legal penalty to meet and interview both Communist insurgents
 and military rebels.
 The press, however, continues to face hazards in reporting on gambling, illegal
 logging, governmental corruption, or the drug trade. The dangers are greatest out-
 side Manila where powerful vested interests involved in such activities sometimes
 employ violence to discourage media exposes. The Philippine Movement for Press
 Freedom (PMPF), an NGO, reports that in the first half of 1993 two journalists were
 killed, not including Romeo Legaspi (see Section 1.b.), who is still classified as miss-
 ing, but presumed dead. The PMPF also reports several cases of reporters being as-
 saulted or harassed, usually by local police or employees of local politicians.
 Academic freedom is respected in theory and practice. The Government does not
 censor subject matter in classes, university publications, or conferences.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association. -Permits from local authorities
 are required for outdoor demonstrations in public places and are routinely issued.
 Nevertheless, rallies and marches are often held without permits. Private, profes-
 sional, religious, social, charitable, labor, and political organizations are permitted
 to affiliate with recognized international bodies in their fields.
 c. Freedom of Religon.-There is no state religion. Freedom of religion is fully re-
 spected, and no official discrimination is practiced against any religious group or its
 members.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-Filipinos enjoy unhampered freedom to change their place of residence
 and employment within the Philippines. Movement within the country is largely
 unimpeded. With rare exceptions, such as pending court cases, Filipinos are allowed
 to travel and work abroad. In December, President Ramos authorized the issuance
 of a passport valid for six months to CPP Chairman Jose Maria Sison to allow him
 to enter the country for peace talks with the Government.
 The Government continued to provide first asylum to Indo-Chinese boat people
 and to allow the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees immediate access.
 However, the historically tolerant official Philippine attitude toward refugees may
 be changing. In June the United States Government withdrew its year-long request
 to allow the temporary training of former Vietnamese political prisoners in the Phil-
 ippines, citing unacceptable conditions put forward b  the Phili pine Government.
 Nevertheless, the Philippine Government does allow the United Nations to continue
 to operate the first-asylum camp on Palawan, housing 3,700 asylum seekers, and
 the Philippine Refugee Processing Center in Bataan, from which approximately
 15,000 persons were resettled in third countries in 1993.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 The 1987 Constitution restored a presidential system of government similar to
 that in existence from 1946 to 1972. The new Constitution established a bicameral
 legislature, the Congress, and an independent judiciary as checks on executive
 power. Presidential authority to declare martial law was curtailed. Filipinos are free
 to organize political parties so long as they do not seek to overthrow the Govern-
 ment by force. Democratic opposition to the Government is widely tolerated, and
 there are no restrictions in law or practice on participation by women and minorities
 in politics. The Philippines has a multiparty political system with free elections
 based on universal (18 years and older) suffrage.
 In the Congress, the 24-member Senate is dominated by an opposition majority.
 While in the 200-seat House of Representatives, the Administration Party holds a
 majority and leads a coalition which includes several minor parties. Nineteen
 women now serve in the House, and three in the Senate.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 The best known domestic human rights NGO is the TFDP. Established in 1974,
 it collects information on alleged human rights violations and publishes statistics
 on abuses attributed to the Government.
 The TFDP does not report on abuses by antigovernment organizations such as the
 NPA, and it includes in its definition of political prisoners those who have been de-
 tained for committing criminal acts in pursuit of their political beliefs. Other groups
 active in the human rights field include the Free Legal Assistance Group (FLAG)
 
 
 721
 and the Philippine Alliance of Human Rights Advocates (PAHRA). The latter orga-
 nization represents numerous NGO's that monitor human rights conditions among
 various social and occupational groups.
 While these groups operate without government restriction, they are often viewed
 with suspicion by the military and police. Some local civilian officials also have been
 uncooperative. Employees of human rights groups in the field sometimes encounter
 harassment and a few have been killed. Chris Batan (see Section L.a.) was a TFDP
 member. With 16 field offices and a staff of over 600, the CHR is the largest human
 rights organization in the Philippines. Although it lacks prosecutory powers, it is
 constitutionally mandated to investigate all alleged violations of human rights. The
 CHR has come under criticism for its failure to conduct field investigations unless
 a complaint is filed with one of its offices; a lack of direction from the Manila office,
 resulting in great variation in the effectiveness of the regional offices; and its inabil-
 ity to monitor the progress of cases referred to the Department of Justice or the
 military courts. However, the CHR's standing in the human rights community has
 risen since the appointment in late 1992 of a respected diplomat and prominent
 human rights activist as its chairman.
 The Presidential Committee on Human Rights (PCHR), composed of both govern-
 ment and NGO representatives, was established by Executive Order in late 1988
 primarily to address the problem of disappearances. It subsequently evolved into an
 all-purpose human rights investigative task force and became the main forum for
 public debate on human rights issues during the final years of the Aquino adminis-
 tration. The PCHR is chaired by the Justice Secretary, and its members include rep-
 resentatives from the CHR; the Departments of National Defense and Foreign Af-
 fairs; the Office of the President; the Congress; and two private human rights
 groups, the PAHRA and the FLAG. TFDP and other groups are observers. InlOcto-
 ber, the PHRC met for the first time since President Ramos took office. Two subse-
 quent meetings were held in November and December.
 Representatives of international human rights groups are free to travel in the
 Philippines and investigate alleged abuses. Government officials routinely meet and
 discuss human rights problems with foreign governmental and nongovernmental or-
 ganizations and the United Nations.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 Women.-Women enjoy most, but not all of the legal rights and protections en-
 joyed by men. With the signing into law of the "Women in Development and Nation
 Building Act" in 1992, previous restrictions on women's rights to buy and sell prop-
 erty were terminated. It is uncertain, however, whether such legislation will be im-
 plemented fully. Past practice is not encouraging. For instance, a 1954 law allowing
 a woman to inherit the tenancy rights of her deceased husband is still often not en-
 forced, in part due to women's lack of awareness of their legal rights, but primarily
 due to failure on the part of the Government to ensure its enforcement.
 Women and girls in the lower economic strata are particularly vulnerable to ex-
 ploitation by unethical operators who promise employment overseas or arranged
 marriages with foreign men. Some of these women end up working as prostitutes
 or suffering abuse at the hands of their foreign employers or husbands. The plight
 of abused Philippine maids in Kuwait attracted widespread attention, but there
 were similar cases in other countries. Fillipino women were also extensively victim-
 ized by international sex trafficking syndicates, which recruited them through local
 placement firms to work abroad, ostensibly as maids, entertainer or models. Some
 women were duped by such offers, but others, facing bleak employment prospects
 at home, accepted them in the knowledge that they would be required to engage in
 prostitution. The Philippine Government has publicly warned Filipino women to be-
 ware of sex traffickers but it has not been notably successful in curbing their activi-
 ties. The Government deplores these abuses, but has not moved energetically to
 bring criminal charges against those who profit from it. Violence against women,
 particularly domestic violence, is a serious problem in the Philippines. Wife beating
 is a common but is rarely reported, in large part because it is considered a private
 or family affair. Rape is also a major problem. According to a 1989 report by the
 National Peace and Order Council, police receive one rape case every five hours. The
 Center for Women's resource data bank estimates, however, that only 5 percent of
 rape victims report such crimes. Women's groups charge that accused rapists are
 dealt with leniently by the male-dominated law enforcement and judicial systems.
 A report prepared for a 1990 meeting of the ASEAN women's programme suggests
 that marital rape, which is not a crime under Philippine law, accounts for up to 90
 percent of reported rape cases.
 
 
 Children.-A number of government agencies, including the Departments of
 Health, Social Welfare and Development, and Education, Culture, andSports have
 programs devoted to the welfare and development of children. The Philippines-
 UNICEF Fourth Country Programme of Cooperation for Children (1994 to 1998) has
 just been completed. This $60 million plan has a $22.5 million commitment from
 UNICEF, which is seeking supplementary funding for the balance.
 Many Philippine children face serious problems stemming from widespread pov-
 erty and government inability to intervene effectively. Street begging, child prostitu-
 tion, child labor, and truancy are all too common. Child prostitution is a particular
 problem in the larger cities. While there are few available statistics and studies on
 thisproblem, social workers and others who work among the poor attest to its grav-
 ity. There are no truancy laws in the Philippines, but free public education and cul-
 tural values act to keep about 60 percent of children in school through grade six
 (age 12). In 1993 the Government acted to strengthen laws to stem the practice of
 child labor (see Section 6.d.). Many children have been orphaned or otherwise ad-
 versely affected by the ongoing[ insurgencies. Some have been traumatized, often
 with lasting deleterious effects,%y witnessing warfare on a regular basis. This prob-
 lem is particularly acute in the mountainous areas of northern Luzon and Mindanao
 where fighting continues.
 Considerable public attention has focused on the plight of the between 5,000 and
 10,000 Amerasian children living in poverty near former U.S. military bases. Al-
 though Philippine culture is relatively tolerant toward the offspring of racially
 mixed marriages, some Amerasians do experience discrimination. A suit pending in
 U.S. courts alleges that the U.S. Navy encouraged the prostitution that contributed
 to this problem. Many groups in the Philippines, some of which receive USAID fund-
 ing, are working to provide improved health care, housing, and educational opportu-
 nities for disadvantaged children, including Amerasians.
 Indigenous People.-Indigenous peoples, found throughout the Philippines but ri-
 marily in mountainous areas, account for 2 to 3 percent of the total population. he
 two areas of greatest concentration are the Cordilleran region of northern Luzon
 and Mindanao. Although there are no specific laws that discriminate against indige-
 nous peoples, the remoteness of the areas they inhabit and a cultural bias against
 them by the majority population tend to prevent their full integration into Phil-
 ippine society. Their ability to participate meaningfully in decisions affecting their
 lands, cultures, traditions, and the allocation of natural resources is minimal. Al-
 though the 1987 Constitution calls for the protection of the ancestral lands and cul-
 ture of indigenous peoples, no enabling laws have been passed to give effect to these
 provisions.
 Because they inhabit mountainous areas favored by guerrillas, indigenous peoples
 suffer disproportionately from counterinsurgency operations. TABAK, an indigenous
 peoples' NGf, reports that the vast majority of the 7,568 families displaced by fight-
 ing   Mindanao during the first half of 1993 were indigenous peoples.
 Another major grievance of indigenous peoples is the loss of their ancestral lands
 to what they regard as "development aggression." The Government often does not
 recognize the legality of indigenous peoples' claim to such lands, which have been
 utilized extensively for hydroelectric dams, mining operations, and other large-scale
 development projects. The indigenous peoples affected by these projectO deeply re-
 sent their forced relocation and the destruction of farming and hunting lands they
 have used for centuries. In April, for example, members of the Bugkalot Tribe in
 Nueva Viscaya protested the construction of a 300-megawatt dam on the Cagayan
 River that will submerge 3,600 hectares of their land and displace 18,000 members
 of their tribe.
 National/Racial/Ethnic Minorities.-Although people of Chinese ancestry have
 extensively intermarried with other Philippines and are relatively well assimilated,
 there is a distinct Philippine-Chinese community numbering perhaps 1 to 2 percent
 of the population. Its wealthier members play a prominent role in the nation's eco-
 nomic life and are the object of some resentment. As noted in Section 1.b., they have
 been a primary target of kidnaping for ransom.
 Religious Minorities.-Muslims, who comprise about 5 percent of the population
 and live principally in Mindanao and adjacent islands, constitute the largest minor-
 ity group. Muslims historically have been alienated from the dominant Christian
 majority, and their disaffection increased with the influx of Philippine Christian set-
 tlers since the 1950's. Efforts to integrate Muslims into the political and economic
 fabric of the country have met with only limited success. Philippine culture, with
 its emphasis on familial, tribal, and regional loyalties, creates informal barriers
 whereby access to jobs or resources is provided first to those of one's own family
 or group. Anotheir a     is that many Muslims prefer to educate their children in
 
 
 723
 Muslim schools, which has deprived them of the skills required to advance in some
 occupations.
 The autonomous region of Muslim Mindanao (ARMM) was inaugurated in Novem-
 ber 1990 to meet the demand of Muslims for local autonomy in areas where they
 hold a majority or are a substantial minority. However, the ARMM continues to suf-
 fer from serious problems. Limited to the four provinces which elected to join, it falls
 short of representing the aspirations of all Muslims in the region. Additionally, the
 ARMM government is hobbled by an inadequate tax base and a continued shortfall
 in promsed central government assistance.
 People with Disabilities.-A 1983 law provides for equal physical access for the
 disabled to all public buildings and establishments and a law passed in 1992, pro-
 vides for "the rehabilitation self-development, and self-reliance of disabled persons
 and their integration into tle mainstream of society". It is intended to protect the
 disabled from discrimination and to provide them health and social services. Advo-
 cates of the handicapped maintain that these laws have not been enforced fully, cit-
 ing inadequate government funding, widespread evasion, and lingering prejudice
 against the handicap~ped among many Filipinos. Under the Aquino administration,
 one of the appointed sectoral seats in the House of Representatives was filled by
 a disabled person tasked to represent the concerns of the disabled. President Ramos
 has not appointed anyone to such a position.
 Advocates of the disabled welcome increased efforts by the Government to immu-
 nize children and improve their primary health care, which will help to decrease the
 number of disabled in the future. In early 1993, the government launched an immu-
 nization campaign which included a program to eliminate polio by the end of the
 decade.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Rig~ht of Association.-The right of workers, including public employees, to
 form and join trade unions is assured by the Constitution and legislation, and it is
 freely practiced without formal government interference throughout the country.
 Trade unions and trade union federations are largely independent of the Govern-
 ment and of political parties. Unions have, and exercise freely, the right to form or
 join federations and confederations and to affiliate with international trade union
 organizations. Subject to certain procedural restrictions in the 1989 Labor Code (the
 Herrera Act) and emerncy bxecutive powers, strikes in the private sector are
 legal. Restrictions include the obligation to provide notice, respect for mandatory
 cooling-off periods, and the need to obtain majority approval before calling a strike.
 The 1989 law also stipulates that all means of reconciliation must be exhausted and
 the strike issue has to be relevant to the labor contract or the law. Some labor orga-
 nizations maintain that these stipulations favor employers by giving them many
 avenues to declare a strike illegal and take action against the strikers.
 The ILO's Committee of Experts (COE) reiterated in 1993 its criticisms that some
 of the Philippine Labor Code provisions, including the Secretary of Labor's power
 to order compulsory arbitration to thwart strikes in industries deemed essential to
 the national interest, are not in conformity with ILO Convention 87 on Freedom of
 Association. Labor law also bans unfair practices strikes during the term of a collec-
 tive bargaining agreement, which has been the subject of international criticisms as
 well. Labor organizations have also expressed concern that the growing practice of
 subcontracting by employers adversely affects unions.
 Strikes in the transport and banking sectors were significant in 1993. However,
 the total number of participating workers and lost workdays declined compared to
 1992.
 According to the Center for Trade Union and Human Rights (CTUHR), an NGO,
 three trade union leaders and labor activists were killed in connection with their
 activities during the first year of the Ramos Presidency. There were also 15 at-
 tempted murders.
 The CTUHR reported an increase in the arrest and detention of workers during
 Ramos' first year (195 in the first half of 1993, compared to 54 in the second haif
 of 1992).
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-Except for government em-
 ployees, labor's right to organize and bargain collectively is guaranteed by law. The
 number of collective bargaining agreements in force has increased in recent years,
 as have the number of registered unions. There were 5715 such unions as of June.
 Dismissal of a union official or worker trying to organize a union is considered an
 unfair labor practice under Philippine law. Nevertheless, employers sometimes at-
 tempt to intimidate workers by threats of firing or closure. The CTUHR has docu-
 mented cases of worker dismissals which it claims were intended solely to get rid
 of union members. Allegations of intimidation and discrimination in connection with
 
 
 724
 union activities are grounds for review as possible unfair labor practices before the
 National Labor Relations Commission (NLRC). The NLRC and the National Concil-
 iation and Mediation Board (NCMB) provide the DOLE with quasi-judicial mecha-
 nisms for hearing and adjudicating workers' claims. The process has been slow but
 no slower than other parts of the courts and the bureaucracy.
 Through the first 9 months of the year, a total of 100 work stoppages were re-
 corded, resulting in some 515,000 workdays being lost. On an annualized basis, this
 suggests a lower total number of workdays lost in 1993 than in 1992 (724,000).
 Labor law and practice are uniform throughout the country, including export proc-
 essing zones (EPZ's). The rate of unionization and the number of collective bargain-
 ing agreements concluded in most EPZ's are similar to those in the rest of the coun-
 try, although the proportions are much lower in the new EPyZ's. However, some
 labor sources have complained that anti-union discrimination does exist in the
 EPZ's. The Kilusang Mayo Uno (KMU), one of the more militant labor organiza-
 tions, reported that 200 strikers were injured when they were fired on by police
 water cannons during a strike in the Bataan EPZ on August 9. According to the
 KMU, the plant was closed but later reopened under a different name and hired
 nonunion employees.
 c. Prohibition of Compulsory or Forced Labor.-The Philippines has ratified ILO
 Convention 105, which prohibits forced labor and has the force of law in the coun-
 try. The ILO has criticized provisions in the law that punish workers convicted for
 participation in illegal strikes with an obligation to perform prison labor.
 d. Minimum Age or Employment of Children.-The Constitution prohibits the em-
 ployment of children below age 15, except under the responsibility of parents or
 guardians, and then only if the work does not interfere with schooling. It allows em-
 ployment for those between the ages of 15 and 18 for such hours and periods of the
 day as are determined by the Secretary of Labor but forbids employment of persons
 under 18 years of age in hazardous or deleterious work. However, a significant -um-
 ber of children are employed in the informal sector of the urban economy or as field
 laborers in the more rural areas. Secretary of Labor Confesor has spoken publicly
 against the health hazards to children working with pesticides in agricultural areas.
 In June 1992, President Aquino signed into law the Child Protection Act, most
 provisions of which were applauded by advocates of children's rights, except for a
 controversial clause permitting the provisional employment of children under the
 age of 15. Legislation this year tightened this provision to allow employment under
 the age of 15 only under the direct and sole responsibility of a parent or legal guard-
 ian, or where the employment in cinema/theater/radio or television is essential. The
 parent/guardian or employer is in each case required to ensure the child's health,
 safety, and morals and to provide for the child's education or training and to procure
 a work permit from DOLE.
 The most serious violations of child labor laws occur in piecework or contracting
 out of embroidery and other garment-related production, much of which is exported.
 Children have also been used in dangerous and ecologically damaging forms of fish-
 ing that use dynamite. The Government has investigated and attempted to reduce
 violations of child labor laws outside the agricultural sector through well-publicized
 raids on reported violators. Government investigators have relied on tips provided
 by concerned NGOs.
 In July the National Bureau of Investigation (NBI) raided a sardine factory in
 Manila and found 27 children under 17 years of age working in sweatshop condi-
 tions. The NBI acted on a tip from the Kamalayan Development Center, an NGO,
 which found that some of the youths, who were brought in from the provinces by
 a recruitment agency, had been working in the factory for over a year without pay
 and had not been allowed to leave.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The Minimum Wage Act of 1989 is the author-
 ity for minimum wages set by regional wage boards. The rates were last set in )e-
 cember 1990, with the highest in the Manila area an, lower rates in rural areas.
 The minimum wage for workers in the nonagricultural sector in the national capital
 region was $4.21 (P118) per day, which was well below the National Economic De-
 velopment Administration's standard of a $5.57 (P156) per day minimum subsist-
 ence level for a family of six in that area. The lowest regional minimum wage was
 $3.18 (P69) per day in Mindanao. Despite labor's calls for an across-the-board in-
 crease in the minimum wage, the Ramos administration has favored leaving respon-
 sibility for adjustments to the minimum wage with the country's 15 tripaitiLe re-
 Fional wage boards. Boards that met in late 1993 set wage increases to take effect
 in December 1993 or early 1994.
 Judging from available data, compliance with existing minimum wage standards
 has improved. DOLE surveys show that in the first half of 1993 16 percent of 17,500
 establishments nationwide were in violation of minimum wage standards. This fig-
 
 
 725
 ure is about equal to the 1992 figure and represents a decrease from the 1991 rate
 of 26 percent. In the national capital region, 7 percent of employers surveyed were
 in noncompliance. The highest noncompliance rate in other regions was 36 percent.
 However, substantial numbers of workers, such as domestics, laborers, janitors,
 messengers, and drivers, are not covered by minimum wage requirements.
 The standard legal workweek before overtime is 48 hours for most categories of
 industrial workers and 40 hours for government workers, with an 8 hour per day
 limit. An overtime rate of 125 percent of one's hourly rate is mandated for any hours
 worked over the 8 per day limit. The law mandates a full day of rest weekly. The
 enforcement of workweek hours is managed through periodic Labor Department
 standards inspections by the DOLE. Employees with more than 1 year on the job
 are entitled to 5 days of paid leave annually.
 A comprehensive set of occupational safety and health standards exists in law.
 Little information is available on actual industrial and occupational health condi-
 tions beyond the undocumented, but well known, problems in such industries as py-
 rotechmcs, garment manufacturing, canning, andfishing with dynamite or poison.
 DOLE statistics show that in the first half of 1993, 17 percent of 5 000 establish-
 ments inspeted were in violation of "technical safety standards". This figure rep-
 resents a decrease from the 1992 rate of 20 percent.
 Multinational firms apply U.S., European, or Japanese standards of worker safety
 and health to meet the requirements of their home-based insurance carriers.
