PHILIPPINES
This year's report shows marked improvement over past State Department reports on the Philippines. It provides detailed information on issues and cases, yet avoids language used previously that intended to undercut claims of human rights abuses. The report's failings are more of omission than commission, but they are significant nonetheless. The most important is the absence of any discussion of armed civilian "vigilante" groups and "private armies" of politicians, whose unlawful activities have a profound impact on the human rights situation in many urban and rural areas.
The 1991 report is effective in providing detailed and carefully written examples to elucidate general points. This contrasts with earlier reports in which examples of abuse were often cited in a such a manner as to create skepticism about the abuses and those who reported them. This is particularly true with respect to the sections on torture and on violations of humanitarian law.
Similarly, instead of merely pointing out that the governmental Commission on Human Rights (CHR) and local nongovernmental organizations such as the Task Force Detainees of the Philippines reached widely divergent figures for the number of human rights violations, the report seeks to explain why these discrepancies occurred. For instance, it notes that discrepancies in the number of disappearances reported might reflect the fact that "victims of torture fear reprisal from the military or police if they approach CHR to seek redress."
Except as discussed below, the report does a good job describing the context in which human rights violations occur in the Philippines. For instance, it notes the wide range of abuses committed by government forces against suspected insurgents and their supporters and emphasizes that "[s]uch labels can be attached very casually and have been used as a justification for acting against critics of the government, labor union activists, civil rights attorneys, and, sometimes, innocent bystanders."
277
Philippines
The introduction to the report emphasizes that "[e]lements of the security forces again committed human rights abuses in the course of counterinsurgency efforts" (emphasis added). No one ever has suggested that "all" members of the security forces commit abuses; instead the State Department's wording seeks to pin responsibility on certain offenders while implicitly discounting involvement of the military command. As the report makes clear, the military leadership in the Philippines has not taken strong steps to stop abuses or prosecute human rights violators, thereby maintaining a climate where abuses are inevitable. Moreover, not all human rights violations result from counterinsurgency operations, a claim long maintained by the Philippine government. Many abuses by the military can be traced to issues involving organized labor, land ownership, the environment and local politics.
The introduction states, correctly, that despite the government's commitment to human rights, "it has not been effective in curbing and punishing abuses." The report adds that "[g]overnment supporters make the point that false claims by insurgents of official abuse weakened the credibility of all reports of human rights abuses and undermined administration efforts to enforce strict standards of accountability among the military and police." It is not clear what "false claims" the report is referring to; accusations of abuse made by the insurgents should certainly not be taken at face value, but they also cannot be dismissed without being investigated. And it is not false claims of violations that make the military and police wary of human rights reports, but the belief, encouraged by the authorities, that human rights organizations both in the Philippines and abroad are acting as fronts for the insurgents. It is doubtful that "false claims by insurgents" are among the more important factors undermining administration efforts to enforce accountability among the security forces. But if they are, the government then bears responsibility for sustaining the atmosphere of distrust that brings the work of human rights groups into question.
The most serious problem with the report is its failure, except for brief references, to discuss the human rights violations by armed vigilante groups and "private armies." Although the mass mobilization
278
Philippines
of armed civilian groups in the late 1980s has subsided, many vigilante groups continue to function in urban and rural areas throughout the country. Many of these groups get support and military assistance from local military commanders. Violent, anti-communist quasi-religious groups, such as the Tadtad and Pulahan, still thrive in Mindanao, Negros and elsewhere. These groups often carry out operations alongside militia units called the Citizen Armed Forces Geographical Units, whose members may serve as militiamen by day and vigilantes at night.
So-called "private armies," the armed guards of politicians and business interests, are also prevalent in much of the Philippines. As with vigilante and quasi-religious groups, private armies have been implicated in numerous acts of political violence. They also often coordinate their activities with local police and military personnel. In Palawan, for instance, the private armies of politicians have engaged in violence in support of illegal logging with the backing of local police and military personnel.
The report contains a good discussion of assassinations by hit teams of the insurgent New People's Army (NPA) and the government response to them. The State Department needs to explain how it reached the conclusion that the decline in urban killings in 1991 was "due less to NPA restraint than to effective police work." More problematic is the report's assertion that "[i]n general, the [anti-terrorism] operation achieved great success within the limits of the law." The State Department is effectively giving its imprimatur to the actions of the Philippine security forces without providing a basis for reaching such a conclusion.
The section on disappearances is very good and includes several helpful examples. The connection between Special Operation Team (SOT) "seminars" and resulting disappearances is also well explained. Here or elsewhere, the report should have stated that SOT activities also include faked surrenders, in which the residents of towns placed under military control are forced en masse to admit to being NPA "surrenderees." Those who refuse are subject to arrest or violence.
279
Philippines
The section on arbitrary arrest is strong in raising the complexities of the issue as they exist both in law and in practice. It is a bit of an understatement to say that suspected insurgents are "sometimes" held and interrogated for days or months without serious charges being filed. In fact, this is a fairly common practice and allows the security forces to detain and harass alleged insurgents while avoiding bringing the case to trial.
The discussion on obstacles to successful prosecutions of human rights violators is unnecessarily truncated in the section on fair trials. Information scattered throughout the report notes, for instance, that witnesses are frequently fearful of reprisals or that government investigations are not pursued vigorously. The section also blurs in one paragraph the issues of civilian prosecutions of military offenders, ineffectual police investigations and government harassment of lawyers engaged in defense work on behalf of alleged insurgents. A fuller and better organized analysis of the criminal justice system in political cases should be high on the agenda of next year's report.
The section on freedom of religion ignores the profound, albeit informal, role of the Catholic Church hierarchy in formulating government policy. The Church position on such issues as birth control and the qualifications for the presidency (suggesting that only a Catholic should be elected president) take on the air of state religion rather than political opinion.
The report contains some strong criticism of the Commission on Human Rights, but still falls short of addressing the pervasive problems of this government body. The report states that the CHR is "generally" more efficient in responding to human rights inquiries. This conclusion is unwarranted; more accurately, the CHR responds more efficiently when there is a dedicated and aggressive investigator at a local office, a not altogether common situation.
The specific example cited in the report of the CHR being "tenacious in following up" a particularly egregious case ~ that of the 1988 murder of attorney Alfonso Surigao - is simply wrong. The
280
Philippines
prosecution of Surigao's alleged murderers has been the work of private human rights lawyers and several Justice Department prosecutors; the Lawyers Committee knows of no significant involvement by the CHR in this important case. Other key prosecutions in human rights cases now underway occurred because of tenacious efforts from die Justice Department prosecutors, not the CHR.
The report states that problems at the CHR are the result of resource constraints and the uneven quality of personnel "below senior levels." More debilitating is the uneven quality of personnel at the senior level. As the Lawyers Committee stated in its 1991 report Impunity: Prosecutions of Human Rights Abuses in the Philippines:
The national Commission ... is widely viewed as ineffectual. Several CHR officials blamed lethargic investigations by the regional offices in part on the failure of the national office to give adequate support. . . . The Commissioners have earned a reputation as apologists for the military, more often defending it against charges of abuses than asserting the importance of strict regard for human rights.
While the CHR has some genuine financial constraints in regional offices, existing resources are grossly misused by the national office. For instance, half of the CHR staff of 679 is based in Manila, where they appear to do little work of substance. These employees could be better utilized in the provinces.
In general, the section of the report on worker rights is considerably improved over last year's report. The report acknowledges, as it failed to do last year, the attempt by government and military spokesmen to outlaw the Kilusang Mayo Uno (KMU), one of the largest Philippine labor federations, after the October 1991 general strike. The report also notes that these efforts were "strongly resisted by all unions," which saw the proposed banning as a threat against the entire labor movement. No longer does the report label the KMU as "CPP-dominated"; the more accurate label "leftist" is now used.
281
Philippines
However, the report continues to suggest that the rights of workers are "freely practiced without formal government interference." There is significant government interference nonetheless, as spelled out in the June 1991 Amnesty International (AI) report entitled "Human Rights Violations and the Labour Movement." AI reports that within the labor movement, the primary victims of human rights violations have been members of the KMU and its affiliates. AI cites the practice of government and military authorities publicly accusing various social and trade unions of being fronts for the outlawed Communist Party of the Philippines (CPP). This practice of "red-labelling," as it is known, has resulted in the targeting of legitimate and legal labor organizations and their members for harassment and violence. The Center for Trade Union and Human Rights estimated that 399 trade unionists had been subjected to harassment between January and October 1991, ranging from killings (8) and arrests (104) to assaults (233).
The report states that only two union members were killed in labor-related violence in 1991. KMU's complaint filed with the International Labor Organization (ILO) reports eight documented killings through October. For instance, labor organizer Jose Lascano, Jr. disappeared in Manila on January 3 and was found dead a day later. Although the military reported on January 5 that Lascano was killed in a military encounter with insurgents, six labor activists arrested on January 3 said that they were with Lascaiio when he was taken into custody and brought blindfolded to a police station. Two rank-and-file workers attempting to organize a union at San Pablo Trading in San Pablo City were killed on November 9 at close range, leading their fellow workers to conclude that the management was involved. Also in November two family members of a unionist from National Steel Corporation were killed and he himself was arrested when armed men invaded his house without showing warrants. Amnesty International cites the case of an active union member at Davao Light and Power Company, killed on his way home on January 8 from a union protest vigil. His killing had been preceded by publication of a press release in several local dailies which warned that radical union leaders and activists would be targeted by a self-styled vigilante group.
282
Philippines
The report states that there was "no repetition of the 1990 Goldilocks bakeshop incident," in which several picketing unionists were killed. Yet on November 16, a picket line at Trans Cigarette Manufacturing Corporation in Parang, Marikina, was attacked by a group of thugs while Marikina police watched on the sidelines: one worker was killed, two seriously wounded, 10 suffered minor injuries and three are still missing. The KMU documented several other killings and assaults on a number of picket lines in its complaints to the ILO.
The report states that the right to strike by public employees has "not been clarified." It mentions that the Supreme Court upheld the termination and suspension orders against some 2,000 striking teachers, but does not cite the ruling that "employees in the public [civil] service ... do not have the right to strike." This ruling suggests that the right to strike has been clarified - negatively. The report points out that the ILO has criticized the government's stance on these firings, as well as provisions of the Herrera Act which limit the right to strike. However, it ignores again that unfair labor practices, which used to be strikable offenses, are no longer legal grounds for a strike during the term of a collective bargaining agreement.
As in prior years, the report again ignores the strictures on the right of government employees to bargain collectively. While they may form labor organizations, they are not permitted to bargain for wages, health plans, or anything else that "require appropriation of funds" (Rule VIII, Rule and Regulations to Govern the Exercise of the Right of Government Employees to Self-Organization, pursuant to the provisions of Section 15 of Executive Order 180, June 1, 1987).
The section on child labor is inadequate although it acknowledges that the government "has employed too few inspectors and other resources to reduce significantly the number of violations." For example, a 1991 study by researchers Eva K. Tan and Norma T. Gomez indicates that children as young as five years are at work in Central Mindanao, and that illegal work by children is especially common in Muslim areas in Mindanao. In addition, many of these working children quit school after grade two to supplement family income. This section
283
Philippines
also mentions child prostitution but fails to indicate how widespread it is: a staffer at End Child Prostitution in Asian Tourism (ECPAT) estimates that some 30,000 of the 250,000 registered and unregistered prostitutes in the Philippines are children.
The section on the minimum wage acknowledges the wide variation in compliance with the law, although it tends to understate the figures. For example, the Bureau of Labor Employment Statistics surveyed businesses after the December 1990 increase, and found that the national average of noncompliance was 30%, witha28.4% violation rate in Metro Manila and a 73.8% violation rate in Southern Mindanao. Because of this widespread noncompliance, labor has focused more attention on rollbacks in oil and other commodity prices rather than additional increases in the minimum wage.
The section on workplace safety suggests that "little or no information is available" in this area, without commenting on why that should be. The Bureau of Working Conditions of the Department of Labor and Employment (DOLE) reported that in 1988 less than one percent of registered business establishments complied with a government requirement to report work-related accidents and illnesses; of those reporting, there was a rough average of one accident per week for every establishment, with nearly 60% resulting in disabling injuries. Only 60 of the dole's inspectors monitor health and safety compliance. TTiere is no evidence to suggest a significant increase in reporting or monitoring since this report was issued.
One of the most disastrous workplace accidents in the Philippines occurred in March, when 19 woman factory workers were suffocated and burned to death, all of them quartered in the Edral Garments factory basement in Mandaluyong, Metro Manila. The factory had only one exit, which was blocked by rolls of foam when the fire struck at midnight. In July, another fire at the Red Corral Enterprises, a chemical factory in Valenzuela, resulted in eight workers suffering third-degree burns when they were trapped inside.
284
Philippines
Poor workplace conditions in the Philippines were epitomized by an industrial accident at Giobe Keng Hua Paper City in Metro Manila on November 21, where two workers were electrocuted within an hour while attempting to clean the same machine. The first worker died; the second was critically injured when the supervisor ordered him to clean the machine after the first worker failed to finish the job.
A few minor points. The section on extrajudicial executions provides government and nongovernmental organization statistics, but refers to them as "murders" and "killings," diluting the fact that they are politically motivated killings. The report also refers to the National Democratic Front as the "political wing" of the Communist Party of the Philippines. More accurately, the NDF is a CPP-dominated body that consists of a dozen organizations, including the CPP and the NPA. Not all NDF activists are CPP members. The section on press freedom should have noted that local newspapers, of which there are many in the Philippines, are often closely tied to politicians, including persons holding office.
285
