 THE PHILIPPINES
 The Philippines has a republican form of government with a
 denogratically elepted president and a bicameral legislature.
 President -CorAzonC..PAquino was !worn into office in 1986
 after a popular uprising ended the autocratic rule of
 Ferdinand Marcos. A new Constitution was ratified in 1987.
 Congressional elections were held in that year, and  -
 provincial and local elections in 1988 and 1989. The
 Government. again fAcpdthe twin threats of a Communist
 insurgency active in many of the country's 73 provinces and
 coup attempts, mounted by rightist rebels in December 1989 and
 October 1990, that threatened further destabilization.
 The Armed Forces of the Philippines (AFP) number some 166,000
 personnel. The largest services within the AFP are the army
 with a strength-of 68,000, and the Philippine Constabulary
 (PC) with 42,000:. The-PC has certain law enforcement and
 internal security functions. -The-AFP has established local
 militia.called Citizens Armed Forces Geographical Units
 (CAFGU's) with, 67,000 men, a 30-percent increase over 1989.
 Thej-ntegrated.9ationa Police number'40,000. Philippine
 security.forces,-often acting independently of government
 control, committed humancights abuses in the course of
 counterinsirgency efforts.
 The Communist Party of the Philippines (.CPP) and its armed
 wing-, .the. New People's Ar:my (NPA),_.continued to commit
 widespread-.human rights abuses in :he course of their avowed
 destabilization campaign against the Government.
 A significant portion of the Philippine economy remains
 agricultural, a in most enterprises are family owned. Land
 reform, a key element of the-Government's economic strategy,
 has bogged down  n the face of resistance from powerful
 landholding interests. The economy was struck by a number of
 shocks 4urlng 1990, mQst notably a major earthquake and higher
 world oil prices. The country also suffered droughts, floods
 and typhoons, power-shortagesi inflation, and high interest
 rates. These factors slowed the 4-year economic recovery and
 reduced the l990 economic growth rate to approximately 3.1
 percent, a drop fppm the 5.7 percent growth in 1989. Nearly
 half the population, which is growing by 2.3 percent each
 year, remained below the poverty level.
 Partial-year statistics from human-rights groups indicate that
 human rights abuses again declined in 1990. The majority of
 human rights abuses in 1990 were committed in connection with
 the continuing CPP/NPA insurgency, with its campaign of terror
 and assassination, and counterinsurgency efforts against
 suspected NPA members and supporters by elements of the
 security forces. The principal human rights abuses by
 government forces were extrajudicial killings, disappearances,
 arbitrary.arrests, torture and mistreatment of detainees,
 harassment of suspected NPA members and supporters, and
 ineffective government efforts in punishing those responsible
 for violatiQns. The principal human rights abuses committed
 by insurgents included extrajudicial killings, disappearances,
 torture, mistreatment, ambushes, extortion,, and harassment of
 government officials and civilians. The Government undertooe
 various efforts to promote and protect human rights, including
 instituting training programs, promoting greater discipline in
 the security forces, and making human rights records a factor
 in military promotions. However, there continues to be a wide
 gap between government intentions and actual results. The
 
 
 1000
 THE PHILIPPINES
 Aquino Government has maintained freedom of speech and press,
 assembly and association, the right of citizens to change
 their government by democratic means, and worker rights in the
 face of serious threats to overthrow the Government from the
 left and right.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing
 Political and other extrajudicial killings took place in the
 Philippines in 1990, although such killings continued to
 decline in number, according to data from both government and
 private sources. The official human rights organization is
 the constitutionally mandated Commission on Human Rights
 (CHR). Charged with investigating all alleged violations of
 human rights, CHR has been criticized by local human rights
 advocates for being an apologist for the Aquino administration.
 Several private groups, of which the Task Force Detainees of
 the Philippines (TFDP) is the best known, also record
 complaints of human rights abuses. The Government alleges
 that TFDP is associated with the CPP and therefore overstates
 the case against the Government. Nevertheless, incomplete
 statistics from both groups clearly indicated that the number
 of political killings again decreased in 1990. CHR logged 297
 cases of extrajudicial killing through September compared with
 492 in all of 1989. TFDP reported 59 summary executions by
 government forces and an additional 18 people killed in
 massacres (politically motivated killing of groups) for a
 total of 77 people killed through September 6, compared with
 368 victims in all of 1989 and 445 victims in 1988.
 The identity and motivation of the perpetrators of many of the
 killings outside of combat were unclear. In many instances,
 Communist insurgents assassinated government officials and
 civilians and interrogated and executed suspected government
 infiltrators from within their own ranks. In other cases,
 AFP, police, and CAFGU personnel killed civilians during
 counterinsurgency or law enforcement operations, or in
 unauthorized or individual criminal activities. In yet other
 instances, evidence suggests that private vendettas and
 criminal activities were behind some murders attributed to
 political assassins of the left or right.
 Credible reports of killings by the military and police, as
 well as a few by CAFGU's and private anti-Communist groups,
 continued. In one case, soldiers killed 19 members of a
 family in the province of Sultan Kudarat in August in revenge
 for the deaths of 2 soldiers. A prompt CHR investigation
 concluded that the incident appeared to be a "massacre." The
 military charged 17 men with multiple murder and arson. Trial
 is awaiting a presidential determination of whether the case
 should be tried in a civilian court. Although the Government
 has made a commitment to identify and punish those
 responsible, trials in such cases are still the exception
 rather than the rule.
 In many of the cases of killings attributed to the military,
 it is difficult to determind whether the dead were combatants
 or divilians. An example is an August incident in Bataan,
 when the PC surrounded a suspected NPA safehouse; three people
 died and four were wounded in the firefight that followed.
 
 
</pre>
<pre>
 1001
 THE PHILIPPINES
 TFDP claimed the occupants were innocent civilians; military
 sources alleged they were. NPA members. Bataan was also the
 site of-several other killings that private human rights
 groups attributed to the military, such as that of a
 fishermen's organization leader, Eliodoro Dela Rosa. He was
 shot dead in January by unidentified men in civilian clothes
 while-riding in a passenger jeepney. A CHR investigation into
 the case has. stalled due to difficulty in locating witnesses
 willing to t.stify. Witnesses frequently do not,-come forward
 out of fear .of reprisals. Conclusive identification of the
 perpetrat6rslin other incidents attributed to the military is
 nearly impossible-to obtain.          -
 There -is evidence- that military units sometimes executed
 suspected'subversives after interrogation. Others have died
 in militnry custody under;suspicious circumstances,- including
 Felipe Leonidas; a 'suspected. NPA- hit man, who. was abducted in
 late February' and found dead in military custody, & week
 later. The-dilitaryi,-which briginally denied holding
 Leonidas, claimed that he bommitted suicide. An autopsy was
 inconclusive.
 The CAFGU mit-_ate_.ere responsible for about 1Q percent of
 extrajudicial kil1-lings, accboding .to, information from bothCHR
 and TFDP. The'CAFGU's',,established in 1987 in order to
 inciease the Government's control over the local militia, are
 screened by localofficials :and led by military officers,
 However, variable:standards for recruitment, inadequate
 training, lax discipline, and assignment to remote. locations
 where .supervisibi is ilscking-have contributed to CAFGU
 abuses. .= Private anti-Communist groups, -which apparently work
 in'some cases 'witr'-the acquiescence of,. or in cooperation
 with,' local-'military commanders and which operate in many
 areas despite government efforts to disband them, ere  -
 resp5nsible fdr less -than 2 percent of the violations reported
 to TFDP.        '-                 .
 Police and civilian investigators were responsible for several
 extrajudicial killings. In June masked gunmen, later
 identified as-policemen, opened fire and killed two people in
 a Quezon city funeral procession for a slain Communist hit,
 man.-The accused claimed that they fired because a pallbearer
 was about to throw a grenade; witnesses said they saw no
 grenade.and police fired the first shot. In other cases,
 National Bureau of Investigation (NBI) agents and police
 killed suspected narcotics trafficker Jose Oyson and several
 other suspected traffickers. The officials reported that they
 were forced to fire when the suspects resisted arrest or tried
 to escape, but the frequency of such deaths calls operational
 guidelines into question. CHR is investigating Oyson's death.
 While some killings and other offenses were committed by
 soldiers and policemen who violated operational guidelines in
 pursuing suspected-.insurgents or criminals, others were linked
 to personal vendettas or criminal activity. For example,
 kidnaping charges were filed-against .three Quezon City
 policemen in-connection with the abduction and killing of two
 university students. The students were allegedly abducted to
 prevent one of them from testifying in a murder case involving
 the policemen. President Aquino has agreed to waive military
 jurisdiction so that the policemen can be tried in civilian-
 courts. Pour civilians also face charges.
 The Government has repeatedly affirmed its commitment to the
 rule of law, instructed its security-personnel to respect the
 
 
 1002
 THE'PHILIPPINES
 rights of all Filipinos, and instituted regular military
 training on human rights. To support the military's human
 rights training, CHR provided trainers' courses, orientation
 -seminars, or lectures to almost 10,000 military personnel
 during the first 9 months of the year.
 However, abuses continued. Offenses are sometimes committed
 by individual soldiers or policemen acting outside military
 controls. In other, cases, a commander of a unit may lead his
 men in committing abuses. More senior military officials are
 likely aware that these abuses take place, but there is little
 evidence that they have taken effective actions to halt them.
 Human rights complaints, some of murder and the rest of
 lesser offenses, were filed against 172 military personnel and
 173 police from January 1989 to September 1990, according to
 the Department of National Defense (DND). A number of the
 cases are still under investigation, some are being tried by
 general courts-martial, and the President has granted waivers
 for other cases to be tried in civilian courts. (See Section
 l.e. for further discussion of the military justice system.)
 The NPA engaged in a pattern of terrorist activity in 1990 and
 was responsible for numerous political and extrajudicial
 killings, targeting military and police officers, local
 Government officials, and private citizens. NPA hit teams
 often killed innocent bystanders. For example, in May an NPA
 team assassinated Col. Reynaldo Dino, his daughter, and 2
 companions in a bloody attack at a busy intersection in
 metropolitan Manila; 11 passersby were also killed or
 wounded. The NPA also claimed responsibility for the deaths
 of a police chief and three of his children in Panay Province
 in August, Poli-ce Brigadier General Tony Teves and his aide in
 Davao City that same month, and military intelligence officer
 Col. Saturnino Dumlao in Paranaque, Metropolitan Manila in
 June, among others. From January to November, NPA units were
 believed responsible for assassinating at least 59 people in
 Metropolitan Manila.
 One analysis of NPA assassinations in 1990 showed that the
 number of civilians killed approximately equaled the number of
 security personnel killed. Among private citizens
 assassinated by the NPA in 1990 were a university president, a
 college dean and a prominent planter. The NPA also killed
 local officials such as a vice mayor leading a relief team
 after the devastating July earthquake, Mayor Javier Hizon, and
 a number of other mayors and village councilmen. Five
 Americans were victims of NPA assassinations in 1990. One
 American civilian was ambushed in his vehicle with his family;
 the other civilian was killed, as many Filipinos have been,
 for refusing to pay "revolutionary taxes" to the NPA. The
 other victims included two Air Force enlisted men and a Marine
 Corps noncommissioned officer.
 Authorities in 1990 unearthed more mass graves believed to
 contain bodies of people killed by the NPA in the provinces of
 Agusan del Sur, Leyte, Sorsogon, Bataan, Masbate, and Quezon.
 Most of the bodies in these graves, popularly referred to as
 "killing fields," remain unidentified. However, former
 rebels, media accounts, and other sources indicate that a
 number of the victims were arbitrarily detained, tortured,
 tried in kangaroo courts, and killed during internal
 CPP/NPA/NDF purges. (The NDF or National Democratic Front is
 the political arm of the CPP.) The arrests of ranking
 Communists in 1990, such as Antonio Cabardo, Antonio Tujan,
 and Randal Echanis, caused Communist leaders to renew their
 
 
 1003
 
 THE PHILIPPINES
 internal purge of luslected government informers, according to
 information from a variety of sources.
 Muslim~oppositbir.groups engaged in some violent -activities
 eari  n ii the year in an'attempt to disrupt the February �
 electionifor officials of the Muslim autonomous region. For
 example, the Mord bational Libdration Front (MNLF) apparently
 killed f2 te6ple in January in Cotabato City when it ambushed
 vehicles crtying peace negotiators. The 74NLF denied
 responsibility for another January ambush when a Swiss
 official of the International Committee of the Red Cross
 (ICRC) and his driver- were killed in Maguindanao; the motive
 was apparently robbery.
 In m~ny eytrajudiciaI killings in-1990, it was difficult to
 determine whether the motive was political, personal, or
 criminal. Notable c~.ses with unclear motives--and perpetrators
 were the Jiniary'k'flling of a cbngressmani's son and his two
 companions in Kalinga Apayao, the May assassination of four
 Manobo'tribal leaders-in Bukidnon, the August massacre of 14
 people in Sulu,- and the deaths of the Mayors of Malilig,
 Isabeh, and Bareri, Maguindanao. Seven journalistg were
 reported killed in 1990. - Several of them were apparently
 targeted to avenge their exposes of local corruption. Robbery
 or revenge. for squatfrs'-evictions were apparently the
 motivesin 'ther case  -HR -is -investigating the deaths.
 Charges hive'been filed ataindt a policeman and two civilians
 in one case and against -"acivilian"in another. Law
 enforcement'peisonnel are suspect in two other cases.
 Labor strife resulted in at least 16 deaths in -1990, 6 of
 which occurred during the latter half of September. Credible
 reports indicated that management, rival unionists, the NPA,
 and elbments of the military or paramilitary groups were
 involved in the various cases. The Government has apprehended
 and tred'i spects in-several labor cases, but none of. these
 trials-whs'complbted by year's end. 'In one incident, Southern
 Philippines 7ed~ration of Labof',-(SPFL) leader David Borla was
 gunnfed down bj xnidentified assassins in Iligan, Lanao del
 Norte in April. SPFL believes the military killed Borja, but-
 the allegation'has not been substantiated In another
 incident, ihe NPA is believed responsible for the killings of
 labor leaders Eduardo Federico and Ernesto Gonzales in Quezon
 City, Ketrpblitan"Manila, in December. The two men had  -
 broken away from the Nati6nal Federation of Sugar Workers and'-
 refused to Join secent protest actions by radical groups.
 Civilian c6urts handed-down convictions during 1990 in two-
 prominent'.cates of politically-motivated killings. The
 principals in-the 1987 assassination of Local Government
 Secretary Jaime Ferrer were convicted of homicide in June; the
 judge sentenced 6ne to 17 years in prison and committed the
 second, a'innor, to a rehabilitation center. In another case,
 former Qii ino Governor nd'Marcos supporter Orlando Dulay was
 sentenced in January to life imprisonment'for kidnaping and
 murdering three Aquino campaign workers shortly before the
 1986 election. Also in 1990, the trial of two suspected
 killers of labor leader Rolando Olalia ended in acquittal when
 a judge decided in'August that the evidence was insufficient,
 for conviction.
 b. Disappearance
 CHR reported little change in the number of disappearances
 from 1989 to 1990, while TFDP documented-a substantial
 
 
 1004
 THE PHILIPPINES
 decline. CHR received complaints concerning 44 missing
 persons in the first 6 months of 1990. According to TFDP, 36
 persons were reported missing from January 1 to September 6,
 1990, compared with 83 complaints in the full year of 1989 and
 141 in 1988. TFDP believes that military personnel or private
 anti-Communist groups were responsible for the 36 missing.
 Credible reports from other sources substantiate this
 conclusion in at least some of the cases. Other abductions
 were attributed to the CAFGU's, NPA, Muslim separatists, or
 armed criminal groups.
 In a few cases, military, police, or CAFGU personnel
 apparently seized individuals and either detained them
 incommunicado without charges (see Section l.d.) or killed
 them. The military sometimes denied holding individuals who
 had last been seen in the company of armed men believed to be
 members of the armed forces. In many of the cases of
 disappearances, the persons seized were suspected subversives
 who belonged to groups that military authorities believe are
 CPP front organizations. In one case of disappearance, Maximo
 Mesina Jr. and Felix Dimitui, staff members of a peasant
 alliance, were abducted in January. A PC sergeant has been
 charged and is to be tried in civilian court. In another
 incident, Allan Gitanes was abducted in April by personnel of
 the army's 28th Infantry Battalion; CHR investigated the case
 and recommended that charges of unlawful arrest and murder be
 filed against an army officer and a CAFGU member. By year's
 end, no formal arraignment had taken place. Some
 disappearances of suspected subversives were apparently the
 result of a renewed CPP/NPA investigation of its own personnel
 as suspected government infiltrators.
 The NPA was responsible for abducting a number of civilians.
 In the most publicized incident, the NPA seized U.S. Peace
 Corps Volunteer Timothy Swanson on the island of Negros in
 June. Swanson was released in August along with Japanese aid
 worker Fumio Mizuno, who had been held since May. The NPA
 claimed responsibility for kidnaping the two foreigners.
 Earlier in the year, hundreds of Subanon tribespeople who had
 fled to freedom told a reporter that they were held hostage
 for almost 4 years by the NPA in Zamboanga del Norte and
 forced to work on farms under harsh conditions without
 sufficient food. Documents seized from Communist safehouses
 indicate that the CPP/NPA has a policy of forced abductions of
 government officials and military personnel. NPA raids on
 provincial towns during the year often resulted in the
 kidnaping of local officials, soldiers, and CAFGU personnel,
 generally followed by ransom demands. For example, three
 CAFGU personnel and a policeman were seized in September
 during an NPA raid of Marabut, Western Samar, and two Benguet
 mining executives were kidnaped in an NPA raid on a mining
 operation in July. Muslim separatists are thought to have
 carried out several hostage takings, such as the seizure of
 government health workers in the province of Lanao del Sur in
 August. Numerous other incidents were attributed to armed
 bandits, particularly in Mindanao. The persons abducted were
 generally released upon payment of a ransom.
 The Government has strongly condemned politically motivated
 disappearances. The President's Human Rights Committee
 (PHRC), which includes governmental and nongovernmental
 representatives, has developed new action plans to aid in the
 identification and the location of missing persons. CHR and
 military officials are actively investigating various
 
 
 1005
 
 THE PHILIPPINES
 disappearances, but to date none of these investigations has
 resulted in convictions.
 c. torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 The Constitution prohibits torture and makes evidence obtained
 thereby inadmissible in court. Guidelines issued by CHR in
 1988 direct all law enforcement agencies and military elements
 to avoid unnecessary force in investigation, arrest, detention,
 interrogation, and other activities.
 Despite constitutional and legal prohibitions, reports persist
 that torture is employed by both government forces and the
 NPA, although reports of torture and mistreatment appear to
 have declined in 1990. CHR received 20 complaints of torture
 in the first 9 months of 1990. TFDP received complaints
 involving 149 people from January 1 to September 6, 1990, down
 from 386 in the full year 1989 and 784 in 1988. According to
 credible reports, government forces used violent methods, such
 as beatings and water torture during initial interrogation.
 Among those who complained of torture or mistreatment during
 1990 were journalist Vilma Manzo, who was arrested in June,
 and CPP/NPA leaders Vicente Ladlad and Alfred Simbulan who
 were arrested in August.
 The NPA also reportedly employs torture and harsh treatment,
 including during interrogation of suspected government
 infiltrators. Methods reportedly include beatings, food
 deprivation, suspension by the wrists, and suffocation.
 Physical punishment is prohibited by law in the Philippine
 penal system, although it occurs frequently in jails and
 prisons. Much of the brutality in jails and prisons is
 attributed to other inmates rather than prison guards. Three
 female inmates early in the year accused the Bureau of Prisons
 Director of raping them; CHR is conducting an investigation.
 CHR visits prisons to respond to complaints of mistreatment of
 prisoners and to monitor prison conditions.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 The Constitution requires a judicial determination of probable
 cause before issuance of an arrest-warrant and prohibits
 holding prisoners incommunicado or in secret places of
 detention. Detainees have the right to a judicial review of
 the legality of detention and, except for offenses punishable
 by a life sentence, to bail. An executive order requires
 authorities to file charges within 12 to 36 hours of arrest,
 depending on the seriousness of the crime.
 Nonetheless, abuses continued. The number of arbitrary
 detentions reported was up slightly from 1989, though still
 down from 1988. CHR received complaints that 154 people were
 improperly arrested or detained in the first 9 months of
 1990. CHR assisted in the release of 73 persons during that
 time period. TFDP claims 1,989 people were illegally arrested
 from January 1 to September 6, 1990, many of whom were picked
 up in mass arrests at disorderly demonstrations. Most were
 released within the limits prescribed by law.
 Security forces frequently disregard the law when handling
 suspected Communist insurgents. Suspects are sometimes held
 and interrogated for periods ranging from several days to
 
 
 1006
 THE PHILIPPINES
 several months without legal proceedings. The AFP often holds
 NPA suspects for several months on charges of rebellion,
 releasing them only if no evidence is found. In order better
 to abide by constitutional and legal requirements, the AFP has
 sought to file charges against rebel leaders in advance, so
 that they may be held legally if caught. These charges include
 murder, kidnaping, physical injury, robbery, extortion, and
 arson.
 In July the Supreme Court in the case of Umil versus Ramos
 affirmed the legality of arresting subversives without
 warrant. The decision provides for arrest of suspected rebels
 without warrant under certain defined circumstances on the
 basis that subversion is a "continuing offense." It allows
 charges to be filed without a preliminary investigation in the
 case of a lawful warrantless arrest, and rejects writ of
 habeas corpus petitions after charges have been filed. It is
 too early to determine whether this decision will have an
 effect on the number of arbitrary arrests reported. The AFP
 Chief of Staff told a public forum in August that the AFP was
 preparing new guidelines to prevent military abuses of
 warrantless arrest.
 In some cases people were taken in for questioning without a
 warrant; in other cases warrants were produced after the
 fact. In one such incident, authorities detained journalist
 Vilma Manzo for questioning in June on suspicion of being an
 NPA member. She was released after 1 day. In another case,
 peasant leader Jaime Tadeo was invited for questioning in May
 because authorities feared he would go underground once the
 Supreme Court announced that it had upheld his conviction for
 misappropriation of funds. Authorities produced an arrest
 warrant against Tadeo a few hours later and filed a sedition
 charge against him the next day for his leadership of a
 demonstration a week earlier at the Department of Agrarian
 Reform. Tadeo is now serving his sentence for misappropriation
 of funds.
 The criteria for release from detention by posting bail were a
 subject of contention during 1990. This issue is closely tied
 to what charges are filed. Those charged with rebellion or
 subversion are entitled to bail because the maximum sentence
 is 12 years, not life. Authorities generally charge suspected
 insurgents with firearms possession, murder, or other crimes
 instead of rebellion or subversion because the former charges
 carry a possible life sentence. Captured Communists often
 claim that authorities plant weapons on them to ensure their
 continued detention. The Secretary of Justice in June
 recognized that this may occur in some cases.
 The Supreme Court in June threw out a charge of "rebellion
 complexed with murder" against opposition Senator Juan Ponce
 Enrile, on the grounds that rebellion cannot be combined with
 any other crime. Enrile was accused of conspiring in the 1989
 coup attempt. The Supreme Court had earlier decided to
 release Enrile on bail. No leftist detained on rebellion
 charges, including some of the so-called Leyte refugees, has
 yet been released on bail under this decision. The contrast
 between Enrile's treatment in detention and quick judicial
 action on his case compared to the treatment of similar
 detainees raised questions about judicial fairness. The
 Government does not recommend bail for senior CPP/NPA members,
 on the grounds that their release would be a clear and present
 danger to the community and that bail would not ensure their
 appearance at trial. For example, authorities appealed the
 
 
 1007
 THE PHILIPPINES
 grant of bail to.Communist leader Rodolfo Salas, and his case
 has been pending for 3 years before the Supreme Court.
 Bail has traditionally been denied to military and police
 personnel, who are under the jur-isdiction of military courts.
 Several hundred military personnel suspected of involvement in
 the December 1989 coup attempt have been in custody since that
 time. Only 21 of them have been formally arraigned. A
 civilian trial court ruled in August that soldiers are
 entitled to bail; the question is now pending before a higher
 court.
 Philippine authorities rarely use internal or foreign exile
 for political purposes. However, President Marcos' immediate.
 family. and sbme of his former associates are barred'from
 returning to the country, and his body may not be returned.
 The Government suspects these persons of conspiring with
 political and military opposition elements within the
 Philippines to destabilize the country. In a 1989 decision,
 the Supreme Court upheld the Marcoses' exile, citing the duty
 of the President to balance the general welfare against the
 exercise of individual rights. The Government also cited
 national security grounds when it revoked the passport of Jbse
 Maria Sison, the founder of the outlawed CPP, while he was
 living in Europe raising funds for the Communist movement.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The Constitution calls for an-independent judiciary and
 provides that those accused of crimes shall be informed of
 charges against them and have the right to counsel. Trials
 are public. Defendants are presumed innocent and have the
 right to cofront witnesses against them, to present evidence,
 and to appeal their convictions. The right of defendants to a
 lawyer is generally respected in the larger metropolitan
 areas, but less strictly honored in the provinces, where
 lawyers are often unavailable.
 The weakest link in the prevention of human rights abuses is
 the failure to prosecute and convict those accused of
 violations. This applies to both civilian and military cases,
 although the problem is more severe in the latter, where
 impartial verdicts are hindered by the strong military
 imperative to protect their own. Under a Marcos-era
 presidential decree, the military continues to have
 responsibility for the trial of military and police personnel
 for all ciiminal offenses. The pretrial investigation is
 carried out by the military or, in many human rights cases, by
 CHR. President Aquino, in the wake of the 1989 coup attempt,
 has vetoed legislation that would have repealed Decree 1850,
 which grants military courts jurisdiction in criminal cases
 involving military and police personnel. At the same time,
 she endorsed a substitute bill which specified that offenses
 that are not service-connected be.tried in civilian courts.
 However, the bill does not define "service-connected."
 President Aquino has waived military jurisdiction over more
 than-200 soldiers and policemen since 1986, including
 defendants in a number of prominent human rights cases.
 According to the DND, the President granted 40 requests for
 waiver of military jurisdiction from Januaryto September
 1990, while denying one request because the offense was
 service-connected.
 In human rights cases before both civilian.and military
 courts, prosecution is often stymied by witnesses who are
 unwilling to testify because they fear reprisals. Cases have
 
 
 1008
 THE PHILIPPINES
 been dropped because witnesses have been intimidated and
 prosecutors are not able to obtain sufficient evidence from
 other sources to make a case in court. To address the
 problem, CHR has a limited witness protection program in
 place. Both the House and Senate approved legislation in 1990
 to establish a more comprehensive witness protection program.
 Ethical and legal lapses in the administration of justice are
 common, ranging from attorneys' use of dilatory tactics to
 corruption among some judges and prosecutors. Defendants
 routinely bribe police and court officials or use political
 influence. The conviction rate for criminal offenses is very
 low; for example, only 3 to 5 percent of drug cases in
 civilian courts result in convictions. Those charged with
 crimes who cannot afford bail remain in jail until their
 trials are completed.
 President Aquino has criticized the slow delivery of justice
 and unequal treatment of rich and poor, and the Government is
 making vigorous efforts at judicial reform. To speed trials,
 the Supreme Court Chief Justice ordered in February that the
 .continuous trial" system, which succeeded in drastically
 reducing litigation time in a pilot program, be extended to
 all of the nation's nearly 2,000 regional trial courts. Under
 the continuous trial system, the judge is required to complete
 a trial within 90 days of its inception, and has 90 more days
 to render his verdict. Until this change, trials in the
 Philippines were generally scheduled at monthly intervals and
 often lasted for years. In the case of the 1987 Lupao
 massacre, the military investigation of additional suspects
 continued without result after acquittal of some suspects in
 1989. Thirteen military men were convicted of human rights
 violations from January 1989 to September 1990, according to
 DND. Almost all of these convictions were for murder. Six of
 the men were sentenced to imprisonment at hard labor for 8 or
 more years, while the rest received other penalties. Cases
 investigated by CHR that resulted in conviction include those
 of Galma Arcilla for the murder of Catalino Belen, Severino
 Dela Torre for the massacre of the Hilardez family, and Sagin
 Monday for the murder of U.S. citizen Father Carl Schmitz,
 among others.
 A Supreme Court regulation also made the pretrial conference
 mandatory in all courts in order to resolve more cases before
 trial. Early indications are that implementation of these
 regulations is uneven. In other efforts to improve the
 judicial system, the Government has disciplined a number of
 corrupt or incompetent judges and prosecutors. The Government
 has been filling judicial vacancies promptly, with the
 exception of lower level trial courts in the outlying regions
 where it is difficult to find the requisite three candidates
 for nomination. New judicial appointees receive orientation
 training, and alljudges are to attend continuing legal
 education programs at least triennially. At the pretrial
 stage, prosecutors are now required to complete investigation
 of crimes within 120 days. Prosecutors who do not meet these
 time standards have had their pay withheld. The latest
 statistics available are for 1989, when national prosecutors
 received 190,000 new complaints and disposed of 202,000 cases,
 reducing their backlog from 24,000 cases at the start of the
 year to 12,000 at year's end.
 TFDP asserts that 602 political prisoners are detained in the
 Philippines. Included in TFDP's list of political prisoners
 
 
 1009
 THE PHILIPPINES
 are some senior CPP/NPA leaders implicated in planning the
 assassinations of Americans and other terrorist activities.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Under the Constitution, search warrants may be issued by a
 judge on a finding of probable cause. Restrictions on search
 and seizure are generally observed, although raids of private
 homes without search warrants are occasionally reported. The
 Supreme Court clarified protection against arbitrary search
 and seizure in two recent decisions. One reiterated the
 strict requirements for determination of probable cause before
 issuance of a search warrant. The second decision involved
 "saturation drives" which occurred in 1987 when law
 enforcement authorities searched an area without warrant and
 questioned suspects. The decision prompted the executive
 branch to release new guidelines regulating such operations.
 The Government does not interfere with the free personal use
 of the mails or other public communication systems, except
 upon issuance of a court order during the course of an
 investigation.
 g. Use of Excessive Force and Violations of Humanitarian
 Law in Internal Conflicts
 Armed combat between the AFP and the NPA, rightist rebels, and
 Muslim separatists continued to have a major impact on the
 civilian population. Civilians left or were forced from their
 homes to escape fighting in a number of locations,
 particularly on the southern island of Mindanao. The
 Government's Department of Social Welfare and Development
 (DSWD)-reported 34,000 affected families during 1990. The
 private Ecumenical Commission for Displaced Families and
 Communities states that it confirmed 48 cases of displacement
 affecting some. 19,000 families during the first 9 months of
 the year. Some reports of displacements appear to be
 exaggerated. The number of people displaced declined from
 1989 to 1990, in part because the AFP, preoccupied with
 dissident military threats following the December 1989 coup
 attempt, scaled back operations against the NPA.
 When civilian displacements occurred, the Government made
 efforts to provide shelter, food, and medical care to the
 evacuees. The ICRC and various private groups also gave
 -assistance. 'However, the assistance provided was in most
 cases not sufficient to prevent severe hardships among the
 affected populationr moreover, sanitation conditions in
 evacuation areas were often poor, and the dislocations
 compounded already severe health problems among
 poverty-stricken civilians.
 One notable displacement during 1990 took place near Pikit in
 the Province of North Cotabato in Mindanao. Some 25,000
 people fled their villages after the Moro Islamic Liberation
 Front (MILF) attacked in January. Reports of massive
 evacuations in two other locations--in Agusan del Sur where
 Government forces pursued rightist renegade Colonel Alexander
 Noble, and in southern Negros where the military began a new
 offensive against the NPA in March--could not be confirmed by
 credible outside observers who visited the areas.
 Evacuees have reportedly been prevented by the NPA from
 returning to their homes in some areas because publicity over
 their plight is effective propaganda to slow counterinsurgency
 
 
 1010
 
 THE PHILIPPINES
 operations. In other places, civilians have apparently stayed
 in the area of impending military operations rather than
 evacuate, out of fear of NPA reprisals. This reportedly was
 the situation in Misamis Oriental early in the year, where
 civilians remained despite military warnings of an upcoming
 operation. Furthermore, the NPA has frequently carried out
 attacks against not only military targets but civilian
 vehicles and properties, such as the Alimodian Central School
 in Iloilo which the NPA burned in April. Government forces,
 for their part, have not always given civilians sufficient
 warning of impending operations or ensured adequate care of
 evacuees, although they have made increasing efforts to do
 so. There have been some reports of AFP shooting, bombing, or
 burning of buildings without adequate verification that the
 objectives to be attacked were not civilian. Local commanders
 in a few rebel areas have imposed strict controls on the
 movement of people and food supplies in order to prevent the
 civilian population from supporting the rebels. This was
 done, for example, in Lianga, Surigao del Sur in Mindanao.
 Some civilians in rebel areas have complained that they were
 forced to sign documents stating they were surrendering
 rebels; the CHR chairman in January cautioned the military
 about this.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 There are virtually no legal restrictions on freedom of
 expression. However, two incidents raised concerns about
 limitations on freedom of speech. In April union leader
 Medardo Roda was convicted of inciting to sedition and
 sentenced to 6 years' imprisonment in connection with his role
 in a 1988 antigovernment strike, and for antigovernment
 comments to the effect that things are "worse now" than under
 Marcos and "this rotten Government should be ousted."
 Government oppositionists also cited the May arrest of Jaime
 Tadeo in connection with an antigovernment rally (see Section
 l.d.) as inhibiting free speech.
 Freedom of the press is generally respected. There are some
 30 privately owned daily newspapers in Manila and many-more in
 the provinces that cover the political spectrum and do not
 hesitate to criticize the Government. CPP publications are
 illegal but circulate clandestinely, and Communist views are
 expressed in other media. Journalists have been able without
 legal penalty to meet and interview antigovernment rebels,
 including military mutineers and Communists. Like the press,
 radio and television stations report views across a wide
 political spectrum.
 The NPA has reportedly made efforts to intimidate radio
 station owners and managers into broadcasting Communist
 propaganda. Several radio facilities and transmitters have
 been damaged by insurgents. Stations that have broadcast
 material provided by the NPA have been warned informally by
 local military authorities that they risk being closed down if
 they continue, but none was during 1990.
 Security forces were also responsible for several incidents of
 harassment or physical assaults against journalists. In one
 such incident, Philippine soldiers and policemen violently
 dispersed demonstrators at Clark Air Base in May, attacking
 and injuring many demonstrators, including those who were
 obviously members of the press. The AFP officer in charge of
 
 
 1011
 THE PHILIPPINES
 base security was removed from duty, and law suits were filed
 against the soldiers involved in the fracas. Another
 well-publicized incident was the detention of journalist Vilma
 Manzo (see Section 1.d.).
 Following these incidents, the Secretary of Defense, the
 acting Armed Forces Chief, and the President of the National
 Press Club signed in September a memorandum of agreement which
 stipulates that journalists will not be arrested for
 committing alleged offenses or violations while in pursuit of
 a story, that a journalist may not be brought in for
 questioning without his consent, and that reporters may not be
 arrested within the press club's premises. It is too early to
 evaluate the agreement's effectiveness. Libel suits against
 journalists are common in the Philippines. Such suits may
 discourage some journalists from commenting on sensitive
 topics, but the judiciary generally favors the press in such
 cases, and the number of critical columns attacking officials
 and other persons remains high.
 Publications from abroad, except those considered
 pornographic, are not censored. Foreign journalists are able
 to report freely and generally move about the country, even in
 areas under rebel influence. Major foreign newspapers and
 television networks have bureaus or representatives in
 Manila. Critics have charged that the Movie and Television
 Review and Classification Board (MTRCB), whose mandate is to
 monitor films and television programs for pornographic
 content, has occasionally censored films in a manner that
 suggests attempts to stifle political expression. For
 example, the MTRCB halted the showing of a documentary
 opposing the presence of U.S. military facilities, but the
 President's office approved the film for public viewing after
 deletion of libelous and obscene scenes. The MTRCB also
 disapproved a television segment on renegade ex-Colonel
 Gregorio "Gringo" Honasan. The mandate of the MTRCB is
 questioned by many as a violation of free speech and freedom
 of artistic expression, hut it is likely to remain unchanged
 because of strong public support for its role in controlling
 the distribution of pornography.
 Academic freedom is respected in theory and practice. The
 Government does not censor subject matter in classes,
 university publications, or conferences.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Permits from local authorities are required for outdoor
 demonstrations in public places and are routinely issued.
 Nevertheless, rallies and marches are often held without
 permits. Philippine law enforcers have been instructed to
 follow a policy of "maximum tolerance," not dispersing rallies
 held without permits as long as they do not disturb public
 order. To prevent conflicts on college campuses, government
 authorities and student leaders signed an agreement in
 February that police and soldiers would not disperse rallies
 on campuses while students would conduct their mass actions
 peacefully and not disrupt classes.
 On a few occasions, police used tear gas and other riot
 control measures to disperse crowds that had become violent
 and arrested demonstrators for illegal assembly or public
 disturbance. Many of these demonstrations protested the
 presence of U.S. military facilities in the Philippines.
 Policemen and demonstrators were injured, and arrests made
 
 
 1012
 THE PHILIPPINES
 during labor rallies in October and November and during
 various demonstrations protesting the presence of U.S.
 military facilities. Typically, those arrested were quickly
 released and not brought to trial.
 Private, professional, religious, social, charitable, and
 political organizations are permitted to affiliate with
 recognized international bodies in their fields. The CPP,
 which advocates the violent overthrow of the Government, is
 outlawed, but nonviolent Marxist parties are legal.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 There is no state religion. Freedom of religion is fully
 respected, and no official discrimination is practiced against
 any religious group or its members. Although over 80 percent
 of the population is Roman Catholic, the country's sizable
 Muslim minority, the indigenous Iglesia ni Kristo and
 Aglipayan Church, Protestant congregations, and other sects
 enjoy full religious freedom. Foreign clergymen and
 missionaries of many faiths practice their profession freely.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Filipinos enjoy unhampered freedom to change their place of
 residence and employment within the Philippines. Movement
 within the country is largely unimpeded; during 1990, both
 military and rebel groups erected roadblocks in provincial
 areas where they were conducting operations. Authorities also
 established checkpoints in Metropolitan Manila during much of
 the year in reaction to killings, bombing, and coup rumors.
 The Supreme Court in June affirmed that checkpoints are legal
 under "exceptional circumstances" when the survival of the
 Government and lives of citizens are in grave danger. Some
 law enforcement personnel use checkpoints to extract money
 from travelers. Filipinos freely travel and work abroad. The
 right to emigrate from and return to the Philippines is
 generally unrestricted. Prohibitions on departure apply only
 to those facing serious criminal charges in the Philippines
 who might thereby escape prosecution. In a few exceptional
 cases, the Government has revoked passports of Filipinos
 outside the country on national security grounds (see Section
 l.d.). The family of former Maycos associate Eduardo
 Coujangco returned to the Philippines in December after a
 court decision upheld their right to passports.
 Although the Government does not accept refugees for internal
 resettlement, it has provided first asylum for 7,000
 Indochinese boat people in Palawan and permitted the United
 Nations to operate a major processing center for 16,000
 refugees in Bataan province. Approximately 25,000 refugees
 passed through these facilities in 1990. The Government has
 given first asylum to over 53,000 Vietnamese boat people under
 the Comprehensive Plan of Action since April 1975.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Citizens have the right to change their government through
 genuine, periodic elections. The Constitution ratified in
 1987 returned the Philippines to a presidential system of
 government similar to that in existence from 1946 to 1972. It
 established a bicameral legislature and an independent
 
 
 1013
 THE PHILIPPINES
 judiciary as checks on executive power. Presidential
 authority to declare martial law was curtailed.
 The Philippines has a multiparty'political system with free
 elections based on universal (18 years and older) suffrage.
 Filipinos are free to organize political parties as long as
 they do not seek to overthrow the Government by force.
 Political parties have traditionally been weak, nonideological
 alliances of convenience; President Aquino refused to join a
 political-party. Democratic opposition to the Government is
 widely tolerated.
 Under the new Constitution, congressional elections were held-
 in 1987, provincial and city elections in 1988, and "barangay"
 (village or ward) elections in 1989. The 23-member Senate is
 divided among four different parties and independents. In the
 House of Representatives, a progovernment party enjoys a 75-
 percent majority. Most legislation is initiated by members of
 Congress themselves, and debate is lively. Government-
 sponsored legislation is often criticized, amended, or
 defeated. The next presidential, congressional, provincial,
 and city elections are scheduled for 1992, and the next
 barangay elections for 1994.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 - Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 Representatives of international human rights groups are free
 to travel in the Philippines and investigate alleged abuses.
 Government officials discuss human rights problems with
 outside governmental and nongovernmental organizations
 (including the United Nations), and routinely agree to meet.
 with those who visit. Amnesty International visited the
 Philippines in April, the International Commission of Jurists,
 did so in Sept amber, and the Lawyers Committee for Human
 Rights in Oct-,ter. Asia Watch issued reports during the year
 on disappearances and on violations of the laws of war, while
 the Lawyers Committee for Human Rights released a study on
 militia abuses. Resident delegates of the ICRC monitored
 prison conditions and assisted persons displaced by conflict.
 The ICRC also joined with CHR and the AFP to hold courses for
 military trainers on human rights and international
 humanitarian law.
 The constitutionally mandated CHR is charged with
 investigating all alleged violations of human rights. CHR
 considers human rights violations based on international
 inquiries and referrals from nongovernmental organizations
 (NGO's) as well as complaints filed locally by or on behalf of
 victims. CHR has a total staff of 600 at 18 offices in every
 region of the country. When a complaint is filed, CHR gathers
 evidence and testimony from the complainant and the accused.
 If CHR is able to make a prima facie case, it refers the case
 to the appropriate agency for prosecution and monitors the
 results. Victims and other witnesses sometimes refuse to
 cooperate with CHR out of fear of further abuses if their
 identity is known. In the first 9 months of 1990, CHR
 completed investigation of 1,620 cases and referred 522 of
 them for prosecution or administrative action; the remaining
 cases are closed, archived or awaiting a final CHR
 resolution. During the same period, CHR provided financial
 assistance to 312 individual victims or their families and to
 1,920 victims of forced evacuation.
 
 
 1014
 THE PHILIPPINES
 Philippine NGO's are also active in the human rights field.
 These groups are generally unhindered in conducting
 investigations and are routinely able to obtain safe conduct
 letters from the Department of National Defense. Local
 military and civilian officials have been uncooperative in
 some instances, and the groups have occasionally reported
 harassment, including death threats.
 The best known local human rights NGO is TFDP, established in
 1974. TFDP collects information on alleged human rights
 violations through its local offices and publishes statistics
 only on abuses it attributes to government forces. TFDP is an
 outspoken leftist critic of the Government's response to human
 rights violations. The only serious abuse reported against
 TFDP workers in 1990 was the arrest and overnight detention of
 a TFDP staffer and his wife. There is little cooperation
 between TFDP and CHR. The Philippine Alliance of Human Rights
 Advocates (PAHRA) and the Free Legal Assistance Group (FLAG)
 are among other NGO's active in the human rights field.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 Women enjoy most of the same legal rights as men, but
 Philippine law and custom continue to discriminate against
 women in some respects, including a limitation on their right
 to buy and sell property. Laws against abuse of women are
 also inadequately enforced.
 While criminal law prohibits violence against women, both
 women and girls in the lower economic strata are vulnerable to
 exploitation. Unethical operators may promise legitimate
 employment in Manila or overseas, or arrange marriages with
 foreign men. Some of these women end up working as
 prostitutes or suffering abuse at the hands of their employers
 or husbands. A measure signed into law by President Aquino in
 June prohibits matching Filipino women for marriage to foreign
 nationals by mail order.
 Muslim Filipinos living principally in Mindanao, together with
 non-Muslim and non-Christian groups located mostly in the
 mountainous area (Cordillera) of Northern Luzon and in
 Mindanao, constitute approximately 10 percent of the Filipino
 population. These minorities hold public office at the local
 and national levels and are employed in government positions.
 However, some discrimination against Muslims and other
 minorities persists. Philippine culture--with its emphasis on
 tribal and regional loyalties--creates informal barriers
 whereby access to jobs or resources is provided first to those
 of one's own group. Another factor is that many Muslims
 prefer to educate their children in Muslim schools, which has
 deprived them of the skills required to advance in some
 occupations. Muslims and other cultural minorities have not
 always been afforded equal legal protection. The minority
 groups have sometimes been deprived of their ancestral lands
 by logging and.mining operations and the arrival of farmers
 from other areas.
 In 1989 President Aquino signed separate laws for autonomous
 regions in Mindanao and the Cordillera. The four provinces
 which joined the Mindanao autonomous region elected officials
 in February. In a January plebiscite on the Cordillera
 autonomous region, only one of five provinces in the area
 elected to become part of it, apparently due to ethnic
 
 
 1015
 THE PHILIPPINES
 rivalries. The Supreme Court ruled in December that one
 province alone could not constitute an autonomous region.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 The right of workers, including public employees, to join
 trade unions is assured by the Constitution and legislation,
 and is freely practiced without government interference
 throughout the country. About 10 percent of the nation's
 employed work force of approximately 23 million workers is
 organized into over 3,700 trade unions, not including the 2.8.
 million workers who are members of the National Congress of
 Farmers Organization (NCFO). Although the NCFO is not a trade
 union, it is informally allied with the Trade Union Congress
 of the Philippines (TUCP). Agricultural workers do have the
 right to organize and strike.
 Unions have the right to form or-join federations and
 confederations and to affiliate with international trade union
 organizations. Most of the trade unions belong to relatively
 small' federations which are members of two broader trade union
 groupings, the largest of which is the politically independent
 TUCP, an affiliate of the International Confederation of Free
 Trade Ynions (ICFTU). The second largest is the CPP-dominated
 May First Movement or Kilusang Mayo Uno (KMU). Three much
 smaller trade union groupings are affiliates of the Communist-
 controlled World Federation of Trade Unions (WFTU). The
 Federation of Free Workers (FFW) is a member of the World
 Confederation of Labor (WCL).
 Subject to restrictions in the labor code and emergency
 executive powers, strikes in the private sector are legal, and
 they take place frequently. The right to strike and the
 status of employees in government-owned industries, however,
 have not yet been clarified. Numerous strikes by public
 sector workers occurred. Striking employees of government
 agencies were threatened with suspension and dismissal, but it
 appears that these threats were not carried. out. Workers in
 state-owned enterprises carried out strikes during 1990
 without sanctions. However, the Secretary of Education,
 Culture and Sports issued suspension and dismissal orders
 against about 1,000 striking public schoolteachers and the
 orders were carried out. The Committee of Experts (COE) of
 the International Labor Organization (ILO) in 1990 questioned
 the penalties imposed by the.Labor Code on trade union
 officers who have participated in illegal strikes as well as
 other aspects of the Code. The Aquino administration pursues
 legal efforts to resolve disputes and has rejected calls for
 "no-strike laws," despite the disincentive that strikes pose
 to needed investment. However, several measures enacted in
 December 1989 and January 1990 expand the Government's
 emergency powers to prevent strikes in "industries affecting
 the national interest." The Government prevented a December
 1989 strike at a major poultry producer by using these
 measures. There were two prominent cases of dismissal of
 labor leaders and participants in illegal strikes during
 1990. In the case of the Philippine National Oil Company
 (PNOC), most of the 550 workers who were terminated were
 reinstated by the PNOC. In the other case, the Supreme Court
 upheld the dismissal of 17 union leaders who carried out an
 illegal strike at the Continental Cement Corporation. On the
 local level, there were a number of cases of violence provoked
 by unions or management. In some cases, the police or
 
 
 1016
 
 THE PHILIPPINES
 military were called in to break down illegal strike
 barricades, and on several occasions their attempts to enforce
 the law resulted in violent clashes with strikers.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 Labor's right to organize and bargain collectively is provided
 for in law, particularly in the Labor Law Reform Act of 1989.
 Since 1986 the number of collective bargaining agreements in
 force has increased from 3,112 to 4,098. In the same period,
 the number of registered unions increased by over 10 percent.
 It is an unfair labor practice to dismiss a union official or
 a worker who is trying to organize a union. Nevertheless,
 employers sometimes attempt to intimidate workers by threats
 of firing or closure. Allegations of intimidation and
 discrimination for union activity are actionable as unfair
 labor practices before the National Labor Relations
 Committee. There is a history of industrial relations
 violence in the Philippines which worsened as a consequence of
 the insurgency and counterinsurgency.
 Unionists continue to be threatened, beaten, and even killed.
 The CPP/NPA, rival unionists, and hired gunmen, as well as
 civilian defense groups and elements of the military, have all
 been implicated in such violence (see Section l.a. regarding
 reported killings of labor leaders). In 1989 and 1990, the
 Committee on Freedom of Association (CFA) of the ILO
 considered allegations of military or paramilitary repression
 of members of the National Federation of Sugar Workers (a
 KNU-member union affiliated with the International Union of
 Food and Allied Workers' Association or IUF) in Negros
 Occidental Province between 1986 and 1989. The allegations
 include violent murders, woundings, disappearances, torture,
 arbitrary arrests, and detentions. The allegations were
 contained in complaints presented in one case by the IUF, and
 jointly by the KMU and the WFTU in another case. The
 Government replied that some of the allegations of human
 rights violations were still being investigated, described the
 machinery for accomplishing this, indicated that one arrest
 cited in the complaint was for seditious activity, and cited
 some cases in which the killings are believed to be the result
 of interunion rivalry.
 The CFA responded to the Government's reply in July 1990. It
 rejected the Government's contention that the paramilitary
 CAFGU units were only a spontaneous civilian response to
 criminality and violent activities of the insurgents and urged
 the Government to disband the CAFGU's and abolish the Special
 CAFGU Active Auxiliary (SCAA), which is made up of workers
 recruited from private companies and plantations to assist in
 civil disturbance operations.
 The Government encouraged dialog among the military, labor,
 and community leaders on the worker rights and human rights
 situation. The constitutionally mandated Commission on Human
 Rights (CHR), in cooperation with the Asian-American Free
 Labor Institute, sponsored workshops on trade unions and human
 rights and sought to establish local human rights committees
 composed of unionists from every labor center plus the
 independents and representatives of Government (including the
 military and police) and the community.
 The Department of Labor and Employment (DOLE), through the
 National Labor Relations Commission, has a quasi-judicial
 
 
 1017
 THE PHILIPPINES
 system for hearing and adjudicating workers' claims. It is
 usually slow, but no slower than other elements of the courts
 and the bureaucracy. With the DOLE's emphasis on mediation
 and conciliation, the'National Conciliation and Mediation
 Board has helped reduce the high number of illegal work
 stoppages.
 Labbr laws and regulations are uniform throughout the country,
 including in the several Export Processing Zones (EPZ's). The
 rate of unionization and the number of collective bargaining
 agreqments concluded in the EPZ's is similar to that in the
 rest of the country.
 c% 'Prohibition of Compulsory or Forced Labor
 The Philippines has ratified ILO Convention 105 which
 prohibits forced labor, and it has the full force of law in
 the country. There were no reports of forced labor being
 practiced.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 The Constitution prohibits employment of children below age
 15, except under the responsibility of parents or guardians,
 and then only if the work does not interfere with schooling.
 It allows employment for those between the ages of 15 and 18
 for such hours and periods of the day as are determined by the
 Secretary of Labor, but forbids employment of persons under 18
 years of age in hazardous or deleterious work.
 The most serious violations of child labor laws occur in
 piecework or contracting out of embroidery and other
 garment-related production. Children have also been used in a
 dangerous and ecologically damaging form of fishing that uses
 dynamite. Child prostitution is another serious problem. The
 Government has attempted to investigate and reduce violations
 of child labor laws outside of the agricultural sector, but
 the DOLE has deployed too few inspectors and other resources
 to reduce significantly the number of violations.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 The official minimum wage in the Manila region at the
 prevailing exchange rate at the end of the year was $4.23 per
 day. Outside Manila, the minimum varies in each of the 12
 regions, ranging from $2.69 to $3.8& per day. For
 agricultural workers on plantations, the minimum wage ranges
 from $2.52 to $2-.88, depending on the size of the agricultural
 establishment; $2.57- is the minimum for non-plantation
 agricultural workers. Despite the minimum wage laws,
 substantial numbers of workers (mostly laborers, janitors,
 messengers, drivers, and clerk-typists) earn less than the law
 stipulates. The average wage of workers in large cities is
 close to the minimum wage, and in the industrial sector the
 average wage is considerably above it. In rural areas, wages
 often fall below the minimum wage. The minimumt wage works out
 to a monthly equivalent that is below the poverty threshold
 figure established by the Government, which is based on the
 minimum income required by a family of six persons. By this
 measure, while there has been improvement since 1985 when 59
 percent of families were below the poverty level, the
 situation remains serious. In 1990 nearly one-half of all
 families were still below the poverty line..
 
 
 1018
 THE PHILIPPINES
 The 48-hour workweek is the average number of hours worked.
 The legal maximum before overtime is 40 hours for most
 industrial workers who work 48 hours per week. The law
 mandates a full day of rest weekly. Employees with more than
 1 year on the job are entitled to 5 days of paid leave. A
 comprehensive set of occupational safety and health standards
 is in effect, and the standards for protecting workers against
 hazards of the workplace and harmful substances are relatively
 advanced. Enforcement of minimum wage and health and safety
 regulations is severely hampered by the fact that there are
 too few professional labor inspectors, although during the
 first quarter of 1990 inspections by the Department of Labor
 increased by 14.6 percent over the same period in 1989. The
 number of inspections carried out in 1989 was 60 percent
 higher than in 1988, and inspections through September 1990
 were conducted at about the same rate as in 1989.
 
 
 1019
