 THE PHILIPPINES
 The new Philippine Constitution provides for a democratic
 parliamentary form of government. However, governmental
 powers are concentrated in the hands of the Executive
 headed by President Ferdinand E. Marcos, who has ruled
 under martial law since 1972. Martial law was described
 initially as a temporary measure to restore order. More
 recently the Government has claimed that it is an
 efficient means of bringing about needed economic and
 social reforms and a necessary means of combatting
 continuing Muslim and Communist insurgencies. Martial
 law has resulted in the suspension of democratic forms
 of government and in the serious curtailment of the
 human rights of many citizens. The Government has
 publicly acknowledged the need for better control over
 the military following reports of abuses of civilians,
 some of which received wide publicity in the Manila
 press.
 The Philippine Government states that it wishes to pro-
 mote policies of respect for human rights, and in the
 past year there have been releases of political
 prisoners, although several hundred remain under
 military detention. The Government also has eased some
 civil restrictions, but only very limited steps have
 yet been taken toward the restoration of democratic
 government and the full exercise of constitutional
 rights. As part of this process, elections, the first
 since martial law was declared in 1972, were held in
 April 1978 for seats in a new Interim Legislative
 Assembly (which has little substantive authority).
 There were unconfirmed but credible reports of wide-
 spread vote fraud, improper Government influence and
 some restrictions on the opposition during the
 elections.
 Government programs in the areas of food, health,
 shelter and education have had favorable results
 in some areas, but the widespread poverty generally
 has not been reduced. The Government has given
 priority to the agricultural sector, and has achieved
 
 (395)
 
 
 396
 self-sufficiency in rice production since 1976-77.
 Corruption remains a pervasive factor in the Philippine
 econbmy.
 Active insurrections continue in outlying areas of
 the Philippines. A Maoist-oriented insurgency has
 been under way for many years in several areas including
 rural Luzon. A more serious problem is posed by the
 Muslim insurgency in Western Mindanao and the Sulu
 Archipelago. The Government has attempted to deal with
 this insurgency through a variety of measures including
 military action, negotiation, amnesty offers, regional
 economic development programs and the grant of a
 limited degree of autonomy. The Government recently
 announced that regional elections in the Muslim
 areas will be held in May or June of 1979. On occasion
 pitched battles have occurred between Government troops
 and rebels, with serious losses and charges of abuse on
 both sides. In addition, many civilians have been
 killed and, on occasion, homes have been destroyed.
 1.   Respect of the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a.   Torture
 The Philippine Government has declared that it is
 "unconditionally against maltreatment of detainees"
 and claims that it takes appropriate steps to prevent
 such maltreatment. In 1976 and 1977 Amnesty Inter-
 national, the Association of Major Religious
 Superiors of the Philippines and the International
 Commission of Jurists published reports which stated
 that investigations had shown evidence of torture of
 political detainees, largely by special internal
 security units during the initial interrogation
 period. There have continued to be credible reports-
 of torture in 1978 as well as of the involvement of
 military units in abductions and murders of dissi-
 dents as an alternative to their arrest and
 imprisonment. However, there has been a marked
 reduction in such reports in Manila during this past
 year.
 In late 1977 and early 1978 the frequency of torture in
 the Manila area apparently declined, except during the
 period shortly after the April elections. During this
 
 
 397
 period Jesuit sources reported the death of one young
 man in detention, allegedly from physical abuse. A
 joint military-civilian investigation of the death
 ruled it was due to natural causes, a conclusion
 that was publicly challenged. The Association of
 Major Religious Superiors of the Philippines cited
 six specific cases of alleged torture in May. Three
 military personnel, one of whom had been identified
 as the torturer in earlier instances, were named as
 the perpetrators in these cases. The Defense Minister
 ordered an investigation of the charges made in the
 Association's report, and in late autumn a military
 court was created to try the three. The Association
 has not reported any further cases of torture in the
 Manila area since that time, but has stated that abuse
 of political detainees in other parts of the country
 continues. Examples cited in its periodic reports
 include the alleged manhandling and torture of
 eight farmers in a detention camp in Leyte in July
 and the claimed torture of a political detainee in
 Caraycayon in August.
 b.   Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 Physical conditions in many jails have been described
 by observers as poor, although political prisoners
 are not assigned to worse than average facilities and
 are often assigned to better. The Subcommittee on
 International*Organizations of the House Inter-
 national Relations Committee reported in July 1977
 its conclusion after "extensive testimony" that some
 political prisoners have been subject to "cruel,
 inhuman, and degrading treatment." Some claim they
 have been confined for as long as eight months in
 small isolation cells used for punishment of recal-
 citrant prisoners. In general., however, detention
 facilities for accused subversives have been improved
 considerabiy since 1974-75.
 Beginning in the latter part of 1978 there was a sig-
 nificant increase in media coverage of alleged abuses
 of civilians by the military and of Government
 countermeasures. In December 1978 Defense Minister
 Enrile ordered the relief of the entire 60th Battalion
 of the Constabulary because of numerous reported
 
 
 398
 abuses against civilian populations in northern Luzon.
 The Government has claimed that m6re than 3,000
 officers and men have been disciplined since 1974 for
 crimes ranging from murder to indiscriminate firing of
 arms and that over 2,000 cases against military per-
 sonnel are still pending resolution. In early 1978 the
 Government reported that of 136 military personnel
 accused of violating the rights of detainees, 62 had
 been punished and fourteen acquitted, while the
 remainder were still under investigation.
 c.   Arbitrary Arrest or Imprisonment
 By law, detained persons must be informed of the cause
 of their detention and are guaranteed access to
 counsel and their immediate family. These rights
 have sometimes been abridged for political detainees
 during the period immediately after arrest. Allega-
 tions of arbitrary arrest continued during the year.
 Since the institution of martial law, many prisoners
 have been detained for long periods without formal
 charges or trial. Persons held have few ways of
 obtaining impartial judicial consideration of the
 grounds and conditions of their detention. In some
 cases appeals for habeas corpus have been heard by
 the Supreme Court, but in no case has the Court ordered
 the release of a suspected subversive.
 This year the Government announced a policy of foster-
 ing "national unity and reconciliation," which has
 included large-scale releases and amnesties of de-
 tainees, the most recent in September 1978. Although
 more than 3,000 persons -- most of whom were under
 military jurisdiction -- were named, a substantial
 but still unknown number of these had already been
 released from detention pending trial. The Government
 counted 461 "public order violators" held in military
 custody at the end of 1978 as compared with its
 figure of 620 held one year earlier. Church sources
 for the past two years have consistently estimated
 political prisoners at 500 to 1,000.
 d.   Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Most persons accused of crimes continue to be tried in
 regular civilian courts and to receive public trials.
 
 
 399
 Military tribunals, in addition to their jurisdiction
 over military law cases, still have jurisdiction over
 pending cases involving alleged subversion, rebellion,
 espionage, arson, use of firearms and explosives in the
 commission of a murder or robbery or crimes which
 undermine the security of the state. These trials are
 open to the public but are generally conducted inside
 military reservations, and observers are photographed
 by the military. In a Letter of Instruction dated
 November 27, 1978, President Marcos directed that all
 future criminal (including subversion) cases be tried
 by civilian rather than military courts.
 Most prisoners held under military jurisdiction for
 security or political offenses have been permitted
 access to their families and lawyers early in their
 detention. Once a prisoner has been charged by a
 military commission, a judge advocate is. appointed as
 defense counsel unless the prisoner retains his own
 attorney. Attorneys who represent such clients are not
 subjected to harassment.
 In January 1978 the Philippine Government announced
 that the 22 part-time military tribunals then function-
 ing would complete the cases before them and then
 disband. Defense Minister Enrile gave these tribunals
 three months to complete their work; by mid-July,
 however, only seven of them had actually been phased
 out. Enrile also established ten new full-time military
 tribunals to hear some 1,500 remaining cases not yet
 assigned for trial. The recent releases and amnesties
 have helped reduce this considerable backlog of
 cases, which had all but engulfed the military court
 system.
 In 1972 the President required all lower court judges to
 submit undated letters of resignation. Although he may
 remove any of these judges at any time by accepting the
 letter of resignation, he has made very little use of
 these letters to date. Under the provisions of the
 new Constitution, administrative supervision over
 lower courts evidently passed from the Executive
 Branch to the Supreme Court in May 1973. The Prime
 Minister has the constitutional authority to remove
 Supreme Court Justices by appointing their successors,
 but he has not done so.
 
 
 400
 
 e.   Invasion of the Home
 The Philippine Constitution of 1973 provides that
 the rights of the people to be secure in their persons,
 houses, papers and effects from unreasonable searches
 and seizures shall not be violated and that search
 warrants shall be issued only upon probable cause as
 determined by a judge or such other responsible officer
 as may be authorized by law. Under martial law powers
 the President may issue an arrest, search and seizure
 order on the basis of probable cause. In the past some
 arrests have reportedly been made without presentation
 of a legal warrant.
 2.   Governmental Policies Relating to the Fulfillment
 of Such Vital Needs as Food, Shelter, Health Care
 and Education
 The Philippine economy is still basically agricul-
 tural, but has a growing industrial capability and a
 developing services sector. Governmental development
 programs have concentrated on improving agricultural
 production, population control and land reform,
 leaving industry, mining and large-scale agriculture
 in the hands of a small number of corporate interests,
 many with close ties to the political leadership. The
 pattern of private sector ownership continues along
 traditional lines. The Government has encouraged
 private foreign and domestic investment in priority
 manufacturing fields and in labor-intensive and
 export-oriented industries.
 Inequitable distribution of the social and economic
 product and traditional patterns of corruption remain
 problems. The primary factors limiting access to food,
 shelter, health care and education in the Philippines,
 however, are the economy's inability to provide fully
 the necessary goods and services, severe distribution
 problems within the archipelago and the substantial
 growth rate in the population. In December 1978
 President Marcos announced the activation of a special
 tribunal having jurisdiction over cases of graft and
 corrupt practices involving public officials and
 employees and the creation of an ombudsman/prosecution
 body with powers to investigate complaints involving
 public officials.
 
 
 401
 Education is widely available up to and including the
 university level, and educational opportunity is a
 major factor in a remarkably unrestrained upward
 mobility within the society.-
 Efforts to provide the rural infrastructure needed
 to support increased agricultural production and to
 improve the quality of life in rural areas have made
 gains over the past five years. Assistance to agricul-
 tural production has been reasonably effective.
 Agricultural land is becoming scarce, however, and
 excess agricultural labor has migrated to the cities.
 A major contributor to this poverty and landlessness is
 the birth rate in rural areas, which is substantially
 higher than the overall national rate of 2.8 percent.
 The land reform program applies to land devoted to rice
 and corn production and made commendable progress
 in its early years when it dealt primarily with large
 holdings. Attention is now focused on small and medium
 size holdings, and this area of reform is proving a
 more difficult task. The land reform law does not apply to
 land used for plantation export crops such as sugar and
 coconut.
 World Bank data show per capita Gross National Product
 as having increased, before discounting for inflation,
 from $260 in 1972 to $460 in 1977. After adjusting for
 inflation and population growth, the real per capita
 growth rate for the period 1973-77 was 3.8 percent
 annually, compared with 2.6 percent annually from
 1965-73. Despite the fact that the Government has
 steadily increased the budget share devoted to infra-
 structure from 11.0 percent of the total budget in 1975
 to 13.9 percent in 1978, low commodity prices and the
 global economic recession have severely limited real
 economic growth. A 1977 World Bank report states
 tentatively that from 1971-75 there may have been a
 "small reduction in the extent of poverty." Philip-
 pine opposition spokesmen claim that per capita income,
 adjusted for inflation, is lower today than prior to
 martial law. Philippine income distribution is far
 from equitable, although some information indicates
 that the situation may be improving slightly. With
 respect to rural-urban distribution, the 1977 World
 Bank report concluded that real incomes in rural
 areas have probably increased somewhat, while real
 
 
 402
 urban incomes have remained roughly constant. Other
 studies have shown the rural poor may now be poorer,
 however, and rural landlessness appears to be increasing
 at a steady rate. The high rural birth rate, as noted
 above, is an exacerbating factor.
 Measurable improvements in the health of the population
 are reflected in increases in life expectancies and
 declines in infant mortality rates between 1970 and
 1976. Life expectancy at birth advanced from 56 years
 in 1970 to the current 58 years, while the infant
 mortality rate declined from 80 deaths per thousand
 live births in 1970 to 74 per thousand in 1976.
 Population pressure is a serious constraint on both
 present and future per capita productivity. 'Government
 achievement in the family planning field can be seen
 from the reduction in the birth rate from approximately
 3.1 percent in 1970 to 2.8 percent today.
 3.   Respect for Civil and Political Liberties, Including:
 a.   Freedom of Thought, Speech, Press, Religion
 and Assembly
 The Government's encouragement of study abroad and
 the wide availability of education throughout the
 country result in substantial access to a broad range
 of ideas and publications. A good selection of books
 and periodicals available in the United States is
 similarly available at local bookstores and newsstands
 in the Philippines. Government media censorship
 organizations were abolished in 1974 and there is open
 access by foreign media. The local mass media, however,
 are controlled almost entirely by persons sympathetic
 to the Government, although small opposition-oriented
 publications have been circulated. Speeches critical
 of Government policies occur with relative frequency in
 various public forums and have of late been reported
 increasingly in the media. The Government's official
 position is that it welcomes dissent but will not
 tolerate subversion.
 Churches and mosques are open for worship and religious
 freedom is fully respected. Members of religious
 organizations have never been harassed or imprisoned for
 either doctrinal belief or ceremonial observance. The
 
 
 403
 Government has taken action against some members of the
 clergy for their alleged involvement in what the Govern-
 ment considers subversive activities.
 Twenty-four Filipino and foreign priests, nuns and
 lay workers were accused of incitement to sedition and
 scurrilous libel against the Philippine Government
 through two publications (The Communicator and Signs
 of the Times). The publicatolons were closed down in
 1-77,although none of the persons accused was detained
 or prosecuted. In July 1978 the military was ordered
 to drop the charges against all 24 of them but did not
 return their printing equipment. Successor publica-
 tions have appeared and have been tolerated by the
 Government. Two church-owned radio stations in Mindanao
 were also closed in 1976. Although charges against the
 operators have been dropped, the stations have not been
 allowed to re-open.
 There is substantial abridgment of freedom of assembly,
 particularly in the case of oppositionist political
 activity. A "free debate" period was declared preceding
 referenda and the April election for the new Assembly,
 during which oppositionists organized well-attended
 rallies and distributed campaign literature critical of
 the Government. Outside such "free debate" periods, the
 Government has tightly controlled oppositionist
 rallies and demonstrations. Unauthorized demonstra-
 tions are broken up by police. On April 9 an unauthor-
 ized march protesting the conduct of the just-held
 elections resulted in the arrest of over 600 persons,
 although charges against all of them were dropped by
 June.
 b.   Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel and Emigration
 Domestic freedom of movement is-basically unimpaired.
 Restrictions apply to certain areas of Mindanao and the
 Sulu Archipelago, where the Muslim insurgency has been
 most active. In August 1977 the martial law curfew
 (midnight to 4:00 a.m.) was lifted throughout the nation
 except for certain areas of insurgent activities. In
 the same month the general restrictions on temporary
 travel abroad by Philippine citizens were lifted.
 Travel restrictions are sometimes placed on former
 
 
 404
 political prisoners released on a temporary basis. Some
 degree of restriction on travel abroad still is apparently
 in effect for critics of the Government. Occasionally,
 prominent persons critical of the Government have had
 difficulty obtaining exit documents. There have been a
 few incidents in which Filipino travelers, whose names
 are found on lists maintained by the military, have
 been delayed at the airport. In most cases oppositionists
 and their families have been allowed to travel abroad.
 There is no general restriction on emigration.
 c.   Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 When martial law was imposed in 1972, the democratic
 government under which the Philippines had been
 governed since independence was suspended, and most
 restraints on executive power were removed. At the
 same time public order has improved. The Supreme Court
 has upheld the Government position in all cases challeng-
 ing the exercise of martial law powers, although its
 decisions have not been unanimous. The Congress was
 replaced this year by an Interim Legislative Assembly
 -- lacking substantial powers -- which is Government-
 dominated. During the election campaign, opposition
 candidates were allowed to organize and speak out
 relatively freely, although the pro-Government media
 restricted their access to the general public. President
 Marcos, who automatically became Prime Minister when
 the Assembly convened, announced that he was voluntarily
 relinquishing his right to issue executive decrees in
 place of legislation, although he and the Solicitor
 General have stressed that as President, he still
 retains the authority to "legislate." It is still not
 clear how long the Assembly will sit before it organizes
 elections for the permanent legislative body, as
 envisaged in the new Constitution.
 Popular election of local government officials has been
 supplanted by Presidential appointment in recent years.
 These officials have become, in effect, extensions of
 central authority. Local elections, promised for late
 1978, have been postponed with no date set.
 Since the imposition of martial law, the Government
 has established a new basic precinct level of citi-
 zens' assembly, the barangay, designed to be a forum
 for community discussion and action. Barangay officials,
 
 
 the lowest level of public officialdom, participate
 with (formerly elected) city and provincial councils in
 local government.
 There is universal suffrage in the Philippines. Since
 the imposition of martial law, the Government has on
 five occasions held referenda or plebiscites on issues
 of public policy, including amendment of the Consti-
 tution, with the population voting either in public
 meetings or by secret ballot. During the "free debate"
 periods immediately preceding these referenda, author-
 ized opposition groups were allowed to hold public
 rallies, given limited time on radio and television to
 debate referendum issues, and allowed to distribute
 propaganda materials. All referenda, including
 one on December 17, 1977, to affirm President Marcos
 in office, resulted in overwhelming (90 percent)
 affirmative votes. The lack of .alternatives in
 balloting and the degree of Government control over the
 process have raised questions as to the validity of the
 referenda, the conduct of all of which were criticised
 by the opposition.
 Political parties, while not outlawed (except for the
 Maoist Communist Party), effectively disappeared
 until this year's Assembly campaigns when three principal
 parties were formed: the pro-Government nationwide
 Kilusang Bagong Lipunan (KBL) party; the Lakas ng Bayan
 (LABAN, led by imprisoned former Senator Benigno
 Aquino) party in Manila; and the Pusyon Visaya (anti-KBL
 but not clearly anti-Government) party in the Cebu
 region. The non-KBL parties were accorded a sub-
 stantial degree of freedom to campaign. Aquino, while
 not released from detention, was permitted an uncensored
 television interview and a press conference to answer
 public charges against him.
 There were widespread reports -that the conduct of the
 actual election was marred by substantial vote fraud and
 by the full use of the Government machinery in support
 of KBL candidates. The announced results were
 a sweep for the KBL, with Mrs. Imelda Romualdez Marcos,
 the President's wife, leading the ticket in Manila. The
 Pusyon Visaya party won all 13 seats in Cebu, and, with
 two exceptions in Mindanao, the KBL won all other seats
 nationwide.
 
 
 406
 The Government encourages trade unionism and collective
 bargaining, although the dominant trade union confedera-
 tion rarely takes positions different from those of the
 Government. There are nearly 2,000 registered collective
 bargaining agreements freely negotiated between the
 parties. Although there is a Government ban on strikes
 in "vital industries," this ban is often ignored.
 Legally registered trade unions have in the past two
 years filed 453 notices of intent to strike and have
 conducted 121 actual strikes without suffering penalties.
 The Government becomes involved as a conciliator or
 compulsory arbitrator only when a strike or the
 threat of a strike occurs. Many rural plantation
 workers are not represented by any labor organization.
 Although legislation, such as minimum wage laws, exists
 to protect these workers, enforcement is very limited.
 4.   Government Attitude and Record Regarding Inter-
 national and Non-Governmental Investigation of
 Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 The Philippine Government has cooperated with outside
 observers interested in the status of human
 rights in the Philippines and has facilitated their
 contacts with detainees. Teams from the International
 Committee of the Red Cross inspected Philippine detention
 centers in March 1973, November and December 1974, July
 1976 and September 1978. An Amnesty International
 mission visited the Philippines in November-December
 1975 and issued a critical report in September 1976.
 Representatives of the International Commission of Jurists
 visited the Philippines in 1975 and 1977 and issued a
 report on August 3, 1977, strongly critical of the
 treatment of civil and political rights. The Philippine
 Government has been willing to discuss human rights
 questions with representatives of the U.S. Government.
 U.S. Congressional and Executive Branch visitors
 interested in human rights matters have been received,
 but the Government has publicly inveighed against what
 it considers interference in internal affairs. It has
 also complained about biased foreign press coverage of
 the human rights situation, although allowing foreign
 media virtually free access. The Government does not
 interfere with the activities of the Association of
 Major Religious Superiors of the Philippines, a task
 
 
 407
 force of which prepares studies on detainees and issues
 periodic lists of persons arrested, released, allegedly
 harmed by Government authorities or missing and believed
 to have been arrested.
 
 
