 THE PHILIPPINES
 The Philippines is a democratic republic with an elected President, a fully func-
 tioning political party system, a bicameral legislature, a free press, and an inde-
 pendent   diciay. National elections were held in May for the House of Representa-
 tives and half the Senate. The elections and campaign period were generally fair,
 although they were marred by incidents of violence in a few areas and allegations
 of fraud. Peace talks that the Government began with three insurgent groups in
 1993 continued with varying degrees of success.
 The Department of National Defense controls the Armed Forces of the Philippines
 (AFP), and the Department of Interior and Local Government supervises the ci-ilian
 Philippine National Police (PNP). The two forces share responsibility for fighting a
 dclining Communist insuncy and radical Muslim separatists. According to the
 Commission on Human Rights (CHR), an independent government agency, the po-
 lie continue to be the leaeag abusers of human rights. Military forces, including
 local civilian militias, the Communist New People's Army (NPA), and Muslim insur-
 gent groups also committed human rights abuses.
 The Government is implementing a far-reaching reform program (Philippines
 2000") to convert its agrarian-based, paternalistic economy into an industrial, mar-
 ket-driven one. Although "nationalist blocs and vested interests continue to pose
 obstacles, the Government has implemented reforms in foreign investment, trade,
 foreign exchange, privatization, banking, insurance, and telecommunications. Ex-
 ports and investments spurred 1994's 5.1 percent real gross national product expan-
 sion, a trend which continued in 1995. Garments and electronics make up more
 than half of merchandise export receipts and are significantly complemented by
 overseas worker remittances. While the Government has accelerated market re-
 forms, poverty and inequitable income distribution remain. Between 40 and 45 pe
 cent of the 70 million population are unable to meet basic nutritional and non-ood
 needs, while the richest 10 percent of all families account for nearly 40 percent of
 national income.
 The Government's human rights record improved, although serious problems re-
 main in certain areas. Declining numbers of abuses in most categories reflected a
 
 
 698
 reduction in the number of military encounters between government and insurgent
 forces. Incidents in the first part of the year included several instances of
 extrajudicial killing, as well as cases of disappearance, arbitrary arrest and torture.
 Some of these abuses are perpetrated within the context of police ana military in-
 volvement in illegal activities such as protection rackets, political gangsterism, kid-
 nap for ransom syndicates, and assistance to illegal loggers. Others are rationalized
 as necessary shortcuts to fighting crime in a criminal justice system said to be slow,
 cumbersome, and disposed to freeing criminals or treating them leniently. Unlike
 previous years, however, public attitudes and institutional responses were less ac-
 commodating to instances of abuse, as concern for concepts of due process and equal
 justice increased. While the courts remained hobbled by backlogs, limited resources,
 and venality, several landmark decisions constituted at least symbolic progress in
 trying, convicting, and punishing human rights abusers. The 3 to 4 million Filipinos
 living abroad were not able to vote in 1995 elections because Congress has yet to
 enact absentee voting legislation as required by the Constitution. Violence and dis-
 crimination against women and children continued to be serious problems. To com-
 bat them, the Government devoted limited resources which were complemented by
 significant assistance from nongovernmental organizations (NGO's).
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-The CHR reported 56 incidents of
 political or extrajudicial killing during the first half of 1995. It reported 200 such
 killings for 1994. Task Force Detainees of the Philippines (TFDP), a prominent
 NGO, reported 27 people killed extrajudicially in the frst 10 months of 1995 as
 compared to 30 for all of 1994. The numbers given by CUR are higher, in part be-
 cause the CUR includes violations by both the Government and insurent groups,
 including the Communist Party of the Philippines and its armed wing, the New Peo-
 ple's Army (CPP/NPA), while the TFDP lists only offenses attributed to government
 authorities. In addition, the TFDP's ability to gather human rights violation statis-
 tics for 1995 was affected by an internal organizational dispute that limited report-
 ing from many of its provincial affiliates.
 Both CHR and TFDP attribute the majority of human rights abuses, including
 extrajudicial killings, to the police and military forces, including civilian militia
 units. The CHR reported that in the first half of 1995 the PNP was the target of
 complaints in just under half of 464 cases filed. This statistic conformed with a pat-
 tern dating from 1989, when the PNP overtook Communist rebels as the Phil-
 ippines' main institutional violator of human rights. The CHR noted, however, that
 plice officials filed criminal and administrative charges against PNP members sus-
 pected of rights violations. In August the Government announced that 251 PNP field
 officers had been relieved, and 975 others reassigned, as part of the second phase
 of a PNP reform program.
 These statistics, however, provide only a partial record of the year's most signifi-
 cant human rights developments as a series of seemingly unrelated events combined
 to form a pattern of rising public concern for, and disapproval of, extrajudicial
 killings and other forms of rights violations. Changing public attitudes were re-
 flected in the actions of judges, the press, government institutions, and the police
 themselves.
 A key event in this process occurred on March 14, when a judge concluded a 16-
 month trial by finding Calauan Mayor Antonio Sanchez and several henchmen
 (some of whom were policemen) guilty of raping and murdering a University of the
 Philippines coed and killing her boyriend. The conviction and sentence to life im-
 prisonment contradicted the popular impression of a criminal justice system that
 punished the poor but protected those rich or influential enough to buy public offi-
 cials and court verdicts. Mayor Sanchez personified the traditional local landowner
 or political leader who, controlling a "private army," was above the law-literally
 able to get away with murder.
 The Sanchez verdict was announced at a time when public opinion was focused
 on the case of Flor Contemplacion, a Filipino domestic helper found guilty of murder
 and hanged in Singapore on March 17. Millions of Filipinos believed that she was
 an innocent victim who had been denied due process of law. These two cases served
 as background to public reaction when, on May 18, police reported the killing of 11
 suspected "Kuratong Baleleng" bank robbers in a nighttime shootout" on a Manila
 street. Within days first one, then a second policeman came forward to contradict
 the official version and affirm that police had executed the bank robbers. Following
 a Senate hearing, four senior police officials resigned, a special police investigating
 committee recommended the filing of multiple murder charges against those in-
 
 
 volved, and newspaper columnists wrote of the link between democracy and respect
 for due process of law. In late October, the Ombudsman indicted all 4 of the impli-
 cated top officers, along with 23 other policemen.
 In addition to Kuratong Baleleng, public attention in May focused on yet another
 instance of extrajudicial killings, known as the Vizconde Massacre," committed in
 1991 by suspected "untouchable" members of society. The case was reopened in
 1995. The nine suspects indicted in August included an ex-policeman (accused of de-
 liberately destroying evidence at the scene of the crime) and the sons of several
 prominent families including that of a sitting senator (see also Section i.e.).
 In the wake of the uproar created by the Kuratong Baleleng and Vizconde cases,
 other charges emerged of extrajudicial killings and police coverups. On July 31, the
 Department of Justice dismissed charges of illegal possession of firearms filed
 against the companions of a businessman slain in his car by police operatives in
 January. The state prosecutor held that the charges were a coverup to justify the
 victim's killing. In August a Senate committee rejected a PNP claim that a Muslim
 computer engineering student from Mindanao had been killed while resisting arrest
 in a July 13 "shootut." Murder charges were subsequently filed against nine Que-
 zon City policemen. On August 3, the National Bureau of Investigation arrested a
 former police officer, the prime suspect in the brutal November 1986 slaying of trade
 union leader Roland Olalia and his driver.
 As a result of these and other instances of misbehavior, calls for a restructuring
 of the police mounted. Saying that it was a "rotten command," House of Representa-
 tives Speaker Jose de Venecia called in July for a nationwide reorganization of the
 PNP. At that point, the first phase of a shakeu ordered by President Ramos had
 already resulted in the replacement of 13 top P0P officials. By midyear, there ap-
 peared to be broad consensus among the President, the Congress, and the press on
 the urgency of reform of the country's police and judicial systems (see also Section
 L.e.).
 Civilian militia units or Citizens Armed Forces Geographical Units (CAFGU's)
 also committed extrajudicial killings. Organized by the police and the AFP to secure
 areas cleared of insurgents, these nonprofessional units are often inadequately
 trained, poorly supervised, and prone to violence. As part of its continuing effort to
 disband CAFGU's, the military brought force levels down to 50,000 men in mid-
 1995. While this reduction was made easier by lessened NPA activity, incidents in-
 volving Muslim insurgent groups affected plans for reducing CAFGU units in the
 south.
 Reflecting the reduction in counterinsurgency activity, the TFDP attributes only
 17 human rights violations in the first 10 months of 1995 to CAFGULs, of which 3
 were extrajudicial killings. In a prior case that attracted wide attention, two
 CAFGU personnel were charged with the February 1993 killing of TFDP worker
 Chris Batan in Mountain province. The authorities arrested one suspect, who was
 convicted of murder in July and sentenced to life imprisonment. The second suspect
 remains at large.
 Reduced counterinsurgency activity also resulted in fewer reported human rights
 violations by the AFP. The TFDP counted 27 AFP incidents in the first half of 1995
 (compared with 196 in 1994), none of which involved extrajudicial killing.
 Although the NPA was responsible for a large number of extrajudicial killings at
 the height of the insurgency in the 1980's, the number has since declined. Several
 1995 killings were attributed either to followers of the CPP faction led by party
 founder Jose Maria Sison or to members of the rival "rejectionist" wing's hit squad,
 the Alex Boncayao Brigade (ABB). Those killed included police officials, breakaway
 ("traitor") party members, and persons believed to be responsible for the deaths of
 members of the CPP and ABB. On December 11, the ABB claimed responsibility for
 killing one of three trageted prominent Chinese-Filipino businessmen who allegedly
 abused his workers.
 Muslim extremists such as the Abu Sayyaf Group (ASG), also known as al-
 Harakat al-Islamiya, carried out other politically motivated murders. The most noto-
 rious incident involved an April 4 raid on the Mindanao city of Ipil, in which some
 50_people died (see Section 1.g.).
 Private security forces maintained by local landowners, political figures, and
 overtly criminal gangs also committed extrajudicial killings. The Government's cam-
 paign to dismantle private armies" achieved limited success, capturing significant
 quantities of assault rifles, machine guns, hand grenades, bazookas, and mortars.
 As of midyear, however, police estimated that more than 100 private armies re-
 mained. In August some 119 persons including a former city mayor were arrested
 in the election violence-plagued province of Nueva Ecija. In the same month, police
 prepared illegal possession of weapons charges against the governor of Bataan prov-
 
 
 700
 
 ince and seven of his bodyguards, who were arrested while maintaining an unau-
 thorized checkpoint.
 Rival political candidates and their followers, many of whom were employed in
 private armies, were responsible for poll violence in the lead-up to May national and
 local elections. Over 80 deaths were reported-a tally higher than in either 1992 or
 1994 polls (also see Section 3).
 b. Disappearance.-The CHR cited six cases of disappearance in the first half of
 1995 compared with nine cases for all of 1994. The TFDP reported one disappear-
 ance for the first 10 months of 1995 compared with three cases for all of 1994. Be-
 cause disappearances most commonly involve alleged insurgents or informants, the
 decline is largely attributable to the continued decrease in insurgent activity.
 Kidnapings of weaty individuals for ransom continued toebe a problem. Many
 of the victims were members of the Chinese-Fillpino community, vhich numbers
 perhaps 1 to 2 percent of the total population and is ommonly perceived as better
 off financially. Fearing retribution, victims typically refused to identify their captors
 (when known); their families often denied a kidnaping had occurred. On August 10,
 armed assailants tried to kidnap a young Manila banker. The intended victim re-
 sisted and was shot and killed on a public street. While criminal elements accounted
 for some incidents, evidence (including court convictions) supported public percep-
 tions that conspirators included persons with previous police and military service,
 as well as some active duty personnel. Although cloaking their criminal activity
 under ideological cover, breakaway remnants of the CPP and Muslim extremists
 also engaged in kidnaping for profit.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishme,t.-
 The Constitution prohibits torture, and evidence obtained through its use is inad-
 missible in court. Guidelines issued by the CHR in 1988 direct all law enforcement
 agencies and military elements to avoid unnecessary force during investigation, ar-
 rest, detention, interrogation, and other activities. Nonetheless, abuses continue.
 The CHR reported no cases of torture in the first half of 1995, compared with
 seven cases in 1994. The TFDP cited 14 cases in the first 10 months of 1995, com-
 pared to 42 for all of 1994. The CHR also cites improved human rights awareness
 in the military, which it attributes to its human rights training programs for mili-
 tary officers and its practice of providing AFP promotion panels with "certificates
 of clearance" on officers' human rights performance. However, the statistics gen-
 erally exclude incidents of torture involving common criminals or others outside the
 context of counterinsurgency activities. In addition, many cases go unreported be-
 cause the victims fear reprisal if they seek redress.
 Physical punishment is commonplace in jails and prisons. Police forces commit
 most such offenses, especially during arrest and interrogation of prisoners. Accord-
 ing to a study commissioned by the NGO, LawAsia, the most common forms of
 abuse include mauling, slaps, strangulation, hitting with rifle butts or wooden clubs,
 poking with a gun, enclosing a victim's head in cellophane, and applying electrical
 current to the genitals. A CHR report on jail facilities throughout the country indi-
 cated that of 613 jails visited, only 64 had adequate facilities and were in good con-
 dition. Prisoners generally were kept in substandard conditions, fed limited rations,
 and subjected to abuses. Women were at particular risk for sexual assault.
 However, societal tolerance for such police misbehavior appears to be decreasing.
 On March 17, an 18-year-old University of the Philippines student intervened to as-
 sist a Jeepney driver being mauled on a Manila street. The assailant, an NBI agent,
 turned on the student and, joined by several companion agents, beat him severely.
 The student was handcuffed, blindfolded, and locked in a small cell for over 24
 hours. University authorities offered the services of their legal department to the
 student's family ("to stop the NBI from perpetrating this on other people"). The
 press turned the case into a highly controversial matter, the Senate opened an in-
 quiry and on June 27 the CHR recommended the filing of administrative and crimi-
 nal charges against NBI officials. In July the Philippine Center for Investigative
 Journalism (PCIJ) revisited the case of three 12-year-old boys arrested in February
 as suspects in a kidnaping. The PCIJ report charged that Presidential Anti-Crime
 Commission agents had interrogated the boys without their parents or a lawyer
 present, detained them contrary to law, and inflicted physical and mental torture.
 The report prompted the CHR to reopen an earlier investigation. On July 13, the
 CHR announced that the boys had not been tortured but were victims of "police bru-
 tality." The PCIJ emphasized that "children suspected of crimes have rights and,
 in this. . - case, these rights were violated."
 International monitoring groups, the International Committee of the Red Cross,
 and foreign embassy officials are allowed free access to jails and prisons.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-Although the Constitution requires a ju-
 dicial determination of probable cause before issuance of an arrest warrant and pro-
 
 
</pre>
<pre>
 701
 hibits holding prisoners incommunicado or in secret places of detention, the authori-
 ties continue to make illegal arrests and hold people in detention. Detainees have
 the right to a udicial review of the legalit of their detention and, except for of-
 fenses punishable by a life sentence or eat (when evidence of guilt is strong), the
 right to bail. Authorities are required to file charges within 12 to 36 hours of a
 warrantless arrest, depending on the seriousness of the crime. The CHR listed 49
 cases of illegal arrest and detention for the first half of 1995, compared with 130
 for all of 1994. The TFDP found that 204 persons were arrested illegally in the first
 10 months of 1995, compared with 593 such arrests in the previous year. The Phil-
 ippine Alliance of Human Rights Advocates (PAHRA) a leading NGO network,
 noted that no human rights workers were arrested in the first 10 months of 1995.
 This decline is attributable in part to the Government's effort to promote the do-
 mestic peace process involving talks with Communist, Muslim, and military rebels.
 The Government offered amnesty to former rebels and members of government secu-
 rity forces up to a deadline of June 1, 1995. In the case of rebels crimes covered
 by the amnesty had to have been committed in pursuit of politica beliefs; in that
 of members of government forces, crimes covered were those committed in the per-
 formance of duty. Members of government security forces who committed serious
 human rights violations (arson, torture, extrajudicial killings, massacres, rape, and
 robbery) were excluded from the program. A quasi-judicial National Amnesty Com-
 mission (NAC), whose decisions are subject to review only by the Court of Appeals,
 was established to process amnesty applications. Communist groups rejected the
 amnesty offer, noting that it should have stemmed from peace negotiations and not
 arbitrary action of the Government.
 On October 13, the Government signed an agreement with the three military
 rebel groups, Rebolusyonarong Alyansang Makabansa, the Soldiers of the Filipino
 People, and the Young Officers' Union, formally ending their rebellion. The three
 groups undertook to cease hostilties, disarm, and be reintegrated in the AFP in re-
 turn for an amnesty for offenses committed in pursuit of their political beliefs and
 a promise by the Government to pursue social and political reforms.
 A LawAsia Human Rights Committee study on administrative detention deter-
 mined that a majority of interviewed detainees had been arrested without warrant;
 they were merely "invited" in for questioning and subsequently held. The study
 nited numerous violations of constitutional and human rights, such as lack of access
 to counsel during investigation and interrogation and physical maltreatment during
 detention.
 The TFDP claims that about 200 political prisoners are still being held illegaly,
 two-thirds of whom have yet to be convicted of any offense. The Government dis-
 putes this charge, contending that it has released all political prisoners and that
 those held for allegedy political reasons are being detained for common crimes. It
 is likely that some of the 200 prisoners in question have committed common crimes,
 e.g., illegal possession of firearms, in the pursuit of their political beliefs. It also is
 possible that some are actual or suspected Communists who were framed for com-
 mon crimes. Proving this is difficult, however, and the burden of proof of unjust
 punishment or imprisonment is placed on the prisoner.
 The NPA is responsible for some extrajudicial arrests and detentions, often in con-
 nection with "courts" set up to try civilians and local politicians for "crimes against
 the people." Many defendants in such trials are tortured or summarily executed.
 Breakaway leaders of the CPP have been at particular risk for "people's court"
 trials.
 Forced exile is illegal and is not practiced.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The Constitution calls for an independent judici-
 ary, but the judicial system suffers from corruption and inefficiency. The national
 court system consists of four levels: local and regional trial courts, a national Court
 of Appeals divided into 15 divisions, and a 15-member Supreme Court.
 The Constitution provides that those accused of crimes shall be informed of
 charges against them, have the right to counsel, and be provided a speedy and pub-
 lic trial. Defendants are presumed innocent and have the right to confront witnesses
 against them, to present evidence, and to appeal their convictions. The authorities
 generally respect the right of defendants to be represented by a lawyer. There is
 no jury system under Philippine law; all cases are heard by judges. The pace of jus-
 tice is slow, and the judiciary has been perceived to be biased in favor of the rich
 and influential. Corruption reaches into the jails and prisons, allowing suspects to
 escape.
 According to the NGO Alterlaw, whose staff comes from the University of the
 Philippines and Ateneo Law Schools, personal connections, patronage, influence ped-
 dling, and bribery are some of the most common "unorthodox" methods used in the
 practice of law in the Philippines. Legal experts in and outside the justice system
 
 
 702
 also criticize personal and professional relationships between judges and the individ-
 uals and corporations whose cases they are assigned. Many leading law firms,
 known in the trade as case fixers, gain the favor of judges and other court officials.
 Witnesses have easily been paid off. While it is technically illegal to settle criminal
 cases out of court, the practice of reaching an "amicable settlement" is routine; with-
 out key victims or witnesses to testify, the authorities are forced to abandon their
 case. The Government has been unable, for the most part, to take effective action
 to intervene in these situations.
 There is a widely recognized need for more prosecutors, judges, and courtrooms.
 The limit for hearing a trial is 90 days and that for deciding cases is 45. However,
 the period only begins after a case is brought to trial. Because of numerous tech-
 nical delays and frequent failures of judges and prosecutors to appear, even the 90-
 day limit is often not met. Police who short circuit the investigative process by ex-
 tracting forced confessions contribute to clogged court dockets, as judges reject such
 denials of due process and send affected cases back for reinvestigation.
 Despite longstanding problems in the criminal justice system, events during the
 year stimulated significant shifts in public attitudes toward it. As noted (see Section
 L.a. and above), the system has been perceived as biased-imposing stern justice on
 the poor, but allowing the rich and powerful to escape with impunity. In March,
 however, a judge convicted and imposed the maximum allowable penalty on
 Calauan Mayor Sanchez, the type of influential and entrenched local official who,
 in the past, had been able to get away with murder. In July another judge sen-
 tenced a top-ranking police colonel to life imprisonment after finding him guilty of
 kidnaping a Taiwanese businessman in 1993. Also in July, the Court of Appeals
 upheld the decision of a regional trial court convicting popular fim star Robin
 Padilla (notorious for outrageous conduct in public as well as on-screen) for illegal
 possession of high-powered firearms. After 4 weeks in hiding to evade arrest, Pailla
 surrendered and was jailed in late August, condemned by unrelenting press atten-
 tion to receive treatment there on equal terms and under equal conditions with
 other prisoners. The sons of several prominent upper middle class families who in
 August were indicted and (pending trial) promptly jailed for the non-bailable offense
 of rape-murder (the 1991 "Vizconde massacre") also were incarcerated under stand-
 ard prison conditions.
 Tie newfound willingess of ordinary citizens to report crimes, despite inconven-
 ience and risk, apparently reflects a heightened public confidence in the criminal
 justice system. First one police investigator, then a second broke ranks in May to
 reveal the extralegal killings ("Kuratong Baleleng" executions) organized by their
 superiors. Their testimony, in nationally televised Senate hearings,_ prom pted a
 third witness (an investigative reporter) to provide corroborating evidence. In this
 same period, a 31-year-old woman cam forward to provide firsthand information on
 the Vizconde massacre, which she claimed to have witnessed 5 years eariier. The
 Government included her and others in its witness protection program, increasing
 the public's awareness of this mechanism to encourage testimony.
 Aside from these specific developments, human rights groups acknowledged their
 ability to operate in a more open climate. As the press and the public became less
 tolerant of injustice and restrictions on due process, human rights advocates became
 less vulnerab~le to charges of being leftist sympathizers and more willing to act as
 legal counsel for unpopular persons or causes.
 1. Arbitray Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-aThe
 Constitution provides that search warrants may be issued by a judge on a finding
 of probable cause. Restrictions on search and seizure are generally observed, al-
 though raids without search warrants on private homes do occur. Judges have
 thrown out evidence obtained illegally.
 The Government does not interfere with the free personal use of the mails or
 other public communications except upon issuance of a court order in the course of
 an investigation.
 Since 1992 the forced eviction of squatters has been illegal, unless adequate notice
 and resettlement sites are provided. Human rights NGOs have criticized govern-
 ment efforts to resettle tenant farmers and urban squatters to make way for infra-
 structure, commercial, and housing developments. The U.N. Committee on Eco-
 nomic, Social, and Cultural Rights expressed concern over reports of forced evic-
 tions. Government efforts to resettle squatters have been complicated by extensive
 poverty, the lmited avalaillity of affordable housing for the urban poor, and squat-
 ter syndicates that exploit human miseiy and legal safeguards for pecuniary or po-
 litical ends. In some instances, government authorities have resorted to forced evic-
 tions when faced with repeated, organized squatter occupations of previously cleared
 land. During a November 27 forced eviction near Manila's "Smokey Mountain" (a
 dump site), police fired on unarmed squatters, killing one protester and wounding
 
 
 703
 scores of others. Land rights issues are made more difficult by the slow process of
 the Government's exercise of eminent domain and complex zoning regulations.
 g. Use of Excessive Force and Violations of Humanitarian Law in Internal Con-
 flicts.-Occasional clashes between government and insurgent forces continued to
 inflict hardships on civilians particularly in remote areas which were the scene of
 most fighting. According to the Ecumenical Commission for Displaced Families and
 Communities, internal conflicts forced some 14,000 families to flee their homes in
 the first 10 months of 1995. While several communities in Mindanao were caught
 up in this violence, the 43,000 residents of the city of Ipil suffered the most. On
 April 4, some 200 masked men arrived in boats, buses, jeeps, and other vehicles.
 They set afire and looted buildings in the town center, robbed 4 banks, killed some
 50 people and wounded a dozen others in indiscriminate firing and fled with 40 hos-
 tages. Military authorities, who were criticized for failing to anticipate the attack
 or come to the city's aid, believe that the assailants were renegade members of the
 Moro National Liberation Front (MNLF) and the ASG.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of speech
 and of the press, and the Government respects these rights in practice. While sup-
 portive of press freedom, the Supreme Court in April warned the media to exercise
 caution in imputing corruption or ill motives to court decisions or face contempt
 charges. The Court's warning extended beyond sub judice matters to include
 postlitigation decisions. In the same month, the Court cited and fined a prominent
 journalist for contempt, basing its action on that individual's status as a member
 of the bar (who, as an "officer of the ourt," was obliged to protect thejudiciarys
 reputation). The Court cited and fmed the same individual on a second occasion,
 this time in his role as a journalist. Moving in a different direction, on November
 14 the Court of Appeals strengthened press protection against the danger yf libel
 charges. The Court overturned a lower court verdict that had awarded forme Presi-
 dent Corazon Aquino dama ainst a journalist and publisher who, after a 1987
 coup attempt, charged she had  id under a bed." The Court held that critical com-
 ment did not of itself constitute defamation or malice in law or fact.
 A ~government-appointed Movie and Television Review and Classification Board
 (MRB) stirred controversy with decisions requiring cuts in internationally ac-
 claimed films on grounds that certain sexually related scenes were contrary to Phil-
 ippine cultural values, customs, and morals. (A Presidential appeals committee sub-
 sequently reversed several such MTRCB decisions, and the MTRCB head was re-
 placed.)
 The press continues to face hazards in reporting on corruption or exposing the il-
 legal activities (gambling, logging, prostitution, the drug trade) of powerful individ-
 uals or vested interests. The dangers are greatest outside Manila, where several
 journalists were exposed to threats and violence. One provincial reporter was killed
 during the election period, while several others were harassed. Radio broadcasters,
 whose public affairs programs reach a much wider audience than either newspapers
 or television, are at greatest risk. However, even Manila journalists face dangers.
 On November 25, prominent columnist Teodoro Benigno returned home to find five
 intruders holding hi family hostage. Although the intruders stole cash and jewelry,
 their motive appeared to be intimidation, not robbery-one of Benigno's colleagues
 described it as an assault on the press."
 The Government respects academic freedom in practice. It does not censr subject
 matter in classes, university publications, or conferences.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution provides for
 these rights, and the Government respects them in practice.
 c. Freedom of Religions-The Constitution provides for freedom of religion, and the
 Government respects this right in practice.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-Filipinos enjoy the freedom to change their place of residence and em-
 ployment within the Philippines. Travel abroad is limited only in rare   cir-
 cumstances, such as pending court cases or when government authorities try to dis-
 courage travel by vulnerable categories of workers (such as young women) to areas
 where they face personal risk.
 The Government for years provided first asylum to Indochinese boat people, al-
 lowed the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) immediate access, and
 managed the refugee status determination process (screening) in accordance with
 the Comprehensive Plan of Action (CPA) agreed on in Geneva in 1989. As a result
 of completion of the screening process and the June 1994 CPA Steering Committee
 meeting held in Bangkok, the Government closed all refugee and asylum seeker
 
 
 704
 camps in the Philippines, with the exception of the Philippine First Asylum Camp
 on Palawan.
 By December 1 there were approximately 2,700 Vietnamese asylum seekers re-
 maining in the Philippines. Fewer than 200 had been determined to be "refugees"
 eligible for resettlement in third countries. As Philippine authorities do not practice
 forcible repatriation, they encouraged voluntary repatriation in accordance with the
 provisions of the CPA.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens have the right to change their government; however, Congress has not
 yet enacted a system for absentee voting, as required by the Constitution. This left
 disenfranchised some 3 to 4 million persons (approximately 10 percent of otherwise
 eligible voters) who resided abroad during 1995.
 An estimated 70 to 75 percent of registered voters participated in national and
 local elections in May. Both the House of Representatives and the Senate are con-
 trolled by a loose progovernment coalition whose members do not always vote as a
 bloc. The counting by hand of millions of paper ballots delayed the official announce-
 ment of election results and contributed, according to the National Movement for
 Free Elections, to cheating that distorted the tallies in certain Senate races.
 Violence and voting irregularities (including multiple registration of voters, non-
 existent or dead voters, intimidation, and vote buying) marred the electoral process.
 More than 80 persons were killed in some 250 election-related incidents. The more
 prominent victims included a sitting congressman from Masbate province and a gu-
 bernatorial challenger in Nueva Ecija.
 There are no restrictions in law or practice on participation by women and minori-
 ties in politics. One woman heads a Cabinet department, 4 of 24 Senators are
 women, 23 of 204 elected members of the House are women, and 2 other women
 serve as appointed "sectoral" members of the House.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 A wide variety of human rights groups operate without government restriction,
 investigating and publishing their findings on human rights cases. Government offi-
 cials are generally cooperative and responsive to their views.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution prohibits discrimination against women, children, and minority
 groups. Implementation of all constitutional guarantees is at times hindered by lack
 of implementing legislation and by budgetary constraints.
 Women.-Violence against women, particularly domestic violence, is a serious
 problem. The Womens Crisis Center, an NGO assisting abused and battered
 women, reported that it receives over 100 calls a week from battered women in the
 metropolitan Manila area. Women's advocates point to poverty, double standards of
 morality, lack of laws on domestic violence, and a traditional societal reluctance to
 discuss private family affairs, as some of the reasons for the prevalence of domestic
 violence. No divorce rights and the lack of job opportunities combine to limit the
 ability of women to escape destructive relationships.
 Rape continues to be a major problem. Police said that reported rape cases in
 1995 showed an alarming increase over 1994. Women's groups charge that accused
 rapists are dealt with leniently by the male-dominated law enforcement and judicial
 systems. For example, journalist Rina Jimenez-David criticized a Manila judge who
 spared a convicted rapist from execution because, when he raped his two victims,
 he was drunk and high on drugs. These two circumstances she said, should have
 been considered "aggravating," not "mitigating" ones. According to women's groups,
 many women reconcile themselves to abuse by male relatives to preserve family
 honor. This is particularly true when victims, mostly minors, are forced into incestu-
 ous relationships.
 In response to these problems, the PNP started a Women's Desk rogram to pro-
 tect women and encourage the reporting of crimes against them. PrP stations in-
 clude female officers trained in dealing with victims of sexual crimes and domestic
 violence. The Department of Social Welfare and Development also established a
 Women's Help Desk to act on the emergency needs of battered or sexually abused
 women, victims of illegal recruitment and armed conflict, and women in detention.
 Legislation was proposed in 1994 to change the definition of rape, classifying it
 as a crime against a person (i.e., a public offense) rather than a crime against chas-
 tity (a private offense), and to expand the circumstances and conditions in which
 rape is considered to have been committed. The proposed law also would have made
 
 
 marital rape a crime and allowed a rape victim's family or the state to file a com-
 plaint on her behalf. The measure failed to pass. Although the refiled bill drew con-
 tinued attention in 1995, it had still not passed Congra by ear's end.
 In law but not in practice, women have most o the rigts and protections ac-
 corded men. The Women in Development and Nation Euilding Act in 1992 termi-
 nated previous restrictions on women's rights to buy and sell property. However,
 lack of public awareness and limited governmental implementing machinery limit
 the effectiveness of this reform.
 The Filipino people are overwhelmingly Roman Catholic. The law does not allow
 divorce, and women's rights advocates view this as a major barrier to achieving the
 empowerment of women. Annulment of mariages is now fairly easy to achieve due
 to changes in the Legal Code, and the practice has become more common. However,
 the cost of hiring a lawyer familiar with the new Code precludes this option for
 many women. The practie of 'tunofficial divorce" (permanent searation) is common
 among the lower classes; in these cases the wife is usually left with the children,
 but the husband provides little or no support for them.
 Women and girls in the lower economic strata are particularly vulnerable to ex-
 ploitation by unethical operators who promise employment overseas or arranged
 marriages with foreign men. Some of these women end up working as prostitutes
 or suffering abuse at the hands of their foreign employers or husbands. Either
 through international trafficking syndicates or individual employers, Filipino women
 were often recruited to work abroad as maids, entertainers, or models and required
 to participate in public shows or dances where nudity and the prospect of sex was
 the principal attraction. Others, facing bleak employment prospects at home, accept-
 ed questionable jobs in the knowledge that they would be required to engage in
 prostitution. In order to curb such abuses, the Government campaigned to en ille-
 gal recruiting and, by raising age, educational, and professional standards for young
 women seeking jobs abroad, tried to discourage employment migration. Public out-
 rage over the March 17 execution in Singapore of a Philippine domestic helper (and
 perceived Philip pine Government inadequacy in defending the rights of overseas
 workers, particularly vulnerable women) spurred Philippine authorities to sensitize
 their diplomatic and consular personnel to these problems.
 Prostitution remains illegal, but widespread, and a fact of life for many poorer
 Filipinos with limited economic and job opportunities. While penalties for prostitu-
 tion are light, detained women are subjected to administrative indignities that drew
 increasing public rebuke in 1995 and a call for legal action to be directed against
 those employing and seeking the services of prostitutes.
 Except for government service and jobs m government-owned or controlled cor-
 porations, women face discrimination in employment. Among administrative, execu-
 tive, and managerial workers, the average woman's salary is only one-third that of
 her male counterparts. Sexual harassment is also a problem. A 1993 survey by the
 Institute of Labor Studies found workplace sexual harassment to be widespread, yet
 underreported due to victims' reticence and fear of losing their jobs.
 Chidren .-Several government agencies have programs devoted to the education,
 welfare, and development of children. The CHR's Chld Rights Center, which opened
 in 1994, is designed to monitor and investigate violations of children's rights. Lack
 of funding, incomplete interagency coordination, and failure to institutionalize sen-
 sitivity to cildren's needs among the agencies tasked to carry out enforcement limit
 the Government's ability to achieve its protection objectives.
 Legislation enacted in 1992 and 1993 to protect children's rights was expanded
 ythe Intercountd Adopin  A   ce of 1995, which strent
 xe sale and    ingo        n a           ly the Philippines signed the Hague
 Convention  on the Protection of Children    and   Cooperation  in Respect of
 Intercuntry Adoption.
 Societal values that define children as extensions and property of the parents are
 a key factor in limiting children's rights. In the absence of special courts to hear
 children's cases (children as victims, witnesses, offenders), designated courts tend to
 favor parental authority over the rights of a child.
 Many children face serious problems stemming from widespread poverty and the
 Government's inability to eradicate organized abuses involving child labor and child
 prostitution. Widespread media attention to child prostitution and the Philippines'
 reported notoriety among sex-touring foreign pedophlea spurred intensified govern-
 ment efforts to combat this prblem. Local authorities carried out well-publicized
 raids on brothels, bars, and massage parlors in Manila and other tourist centers.
 Nonetheless the problem persits (an estimated60,000 children are victims of pros-
 titution and pedophiles), and the press reported instances of raided establishments
 which were raided later reopening for "business as usual.w
 
 
 706
 News reports during the year disclosed numerous cases of family child abuse,
 beatings, and rape, reflecting the growing public awareness and the authorities' in-
 creased willingness to investigate such abuse. As in 1994, several men were sen-
 tenced to death for having forced incestuous relationships with their minor daugh-
 ters. (By year's end, of 100 men sentenced to die, 58 had been found guilt of rape.
 Most of the rapists had abused children under 14 years of age; in several of these
 cases, the attackers were family members or relatives of the victims.)
 Street begging and truancy are common in large cities. The CHR estimates the
 number of street orphans in metropolitan Manila at fewer than 1,000, but up to
 100,000 destitute children spend most of their waking hours on the streets. Al-
 though diminished, the Muslim insurgency in Mindanao and other southern islands
 continues to generate new orphans.
 People With Disabilities.-A 1983 law provides for equal physical access for the
 disabled to all public buildings and establishments, and a law passed in 1992 pro-
 vides for "the rehabilitation, self-development, and self-reliance of disabled persons
 and their integration into the mainstream of society." Advocates of the disabled
 maintain that these laws have been ineffective, as implementing regulations have
 not been published, and the Government continues to focus on welfare instead of
 reinte$ration.
 Indigenous People.-Indigenous people live throughout the Philippines but pri-
 marily in the mountainous areas of Northern Luzon and Mindanao. They account
 for 10 to 15 percent of the population. Although no specific laws discriminate
 against indigenous people, the remoteness of the areas they inhabit and a cultural
 bias against them tend to prevent their full integration into society. Their ability
 to artici ate meaningfully in decisions affecting their lands, cultures, traditions,
 andthe allocation of natural resources is minimal. Because they inhabit mountain-
 ous areas favored by guerrillas, indigenous people suffer disproportionately from
 counterinsurgency operations. Indigenous children suffer disproportionately from
 lack of basic services, such as health and education facilities.
 Although the 1987 Constitution calls for the protection of the ancestral lands and
 culture of indigenous people, the Government has not pushed for legislation to en-
 force these rights. In the absence of such legislation, the Government has issued
 "certificates of ancestral land claims." Other measures affect ancestral lands in less
 benign ways. Legislation promoting hydroelectric dams, mining operations, and
 other large-scale projects have forced indigenous communities to relocate and de-
 stroyed farming and hunting lands used for generations. A notable example of re-
 cent developmental conflict involves Mindanao's Manobo tribe, some of whose di-
 vided members opposed the logging/tree farming plans of a major wood processing
 company.
 Religious Minorities.-Muslims, who comprise about 5 percent of the population
 and reside principally in Mindanao and adjacent islands, constitute the largest mi-
 nority'rup in the country. They historically have been alienated from the domi-
 nant Christian majority, and efforts to integrate Muslims into the political and eco-
 nomic fabric of the country have met with only limited success.
 Philippine culture, with its emphasis on familial, tribal, and regional loyalties,
 creates informal barriers whereby access to jobs or resources is provided first to
 those of one's own family or group. Many Muslims claim that they continue to be
 underrepresented in senior civilian and military positions.
 The Government inaugurated the Autonomous Region of Muslim Mindanao
 (ARMM) in 1990 to meet the demands of Muslims for local autonomy in areas where
 they are a majority or a substantial minority. However, it is limited to the four
 provinces which elected to join and hobbled by an inadequate tax base, poor per-
 formance, and a continued shortfall in promised central government assistance. The
 MNLF, which has respected a cease-fire negotiated with the Government in 1993,
 regards the ARMM as an arbitrary creation that falls short of representing the aspi-
 rations of all Muslims in the region. Despite differences, ongoing Government-
 MNLF peace talks made significant progss. In a climate of growing mutual con-
 fidence, MNLF Chairman Nur Misuari toured Christian-majority parts of Mindanao
 to promote a broader autonomous region.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The Constitution and legislation provide for the
 right of workers, including public employees, to form and join trade unions, and this
 right is exercised in practice. Trade unions are independent of the Government and
 generally free of political party control. Unions have the right to form or join federa-
 tions or other labor groupings, and several have affiliated with international trade
 union confederations and trade secretariats. Two of the largest trade union centrals,
 the Trade Union Congress of the Philippines and the Federation of Free Workers,
 
 
 707
 are affiliated with the International Confederation of Free Trade Unions and the
 World Confederation of Labor respectively.
 Subject to certain procedural restrictions, strikes in the private sector are legal
 However, a 1989 law stipulates that all means of reconciliation must be exhausted
 and that the strike issue has to be relevant to the labor contract or the law.
 The Committee of Experts of the International Labor Organization (ILO) noted in
 February that certain amendments have been proposed to legislation that the Com-
 mittee had previously criticized for placing undue restrictions on the right to strike
 in nonessential services. The Committee remains concerned by the imposition of
 penalties in cases where strikes have been deemed illegal, at restrictions on the
 right of government workers to   s           some restrictions on the right to orga-
 nize and form a bargaining unit, which are in conflict with IW Convention 87 on
 freedom of association.
 According to the Center for Trade Union and Human Rights (CTUHR), which
 publicizes allegations of worker rights violations, attacks on striking workers con-
 tinue to be a problem. The CTUHR counted some 93 incidents in the first 10 months
 of 1995, involving over 7,400 workers, 5 of whom were killed. The CTUHR said that
 police were involved in nearly half of these cases.
 b. The Right To Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The Constitution provides for
 the right to organize and bargain collectively. The Labor Code provides for this right
 for private sector employees and for employees of government-owned or controlled
 corporations, but current law limits the rights of government workers. Althouh
 unions claim to have organized some 12 percent of the total work force of 29.2 mil-
 lion, fewer than 600,000 workers (2 percent) are covered by collective barga ning
 agreements. Unions oppose government efforts to loosen prohibitions against "labor
 only" subcontracting. They claim such subcontracting allows employers to evade ob-
 ligations to their employees and to break unions.
 Employers sometimes attempt to intimidate workers trying to form a union with
 threats of firing or factory closure. Allegations of intimidation and discrimination in
 connection with union activities are grounds for review as possible unfair labor prac-
 tices before the National Labor Relations Commission (NLRC). Before disputes
 reach the time-consuming, quasi-judicial NLRC, the Department of Labor andEm-
 ployment (DOLE) encourages workers and employers to use the services of the Na-
 tional Conciliation and Mediation Board (NCMB), which resolves most unfair labor
 practice disputes in under a month.
 Work stoppages numbered 93 as of November 30, a 3 percent increase above the
 figure for the same period in 1994. Man-days lost to work stoppages totaled 579,000,
 compared to 478,000 for the first 11 months of 1994.
 Labor law is uniform throughout the country, including in export processing zones
 (EPZ's), although in practice local officials attempting to maintain "union free/strike
 free" policies frustrate organizing efforts in most of the EPZ's. In February the Phil-
 ippine Secretary of Labor was quoted in the press as criticizing the management
 of the EPZ at Subic Bay for trying to ban strikes and unions. In another instance,
 however, the election defeat of a ocal governor (in Cavite) opened the way for sig-
 nificant union organizing gains in 1995, with over two dozen new unions organizing
 in the EPZ and province in the 6 months that followed the election.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-Forced labor is prohibited, and the
 Government effectively enforces this prohibition.
 The Government's efforts to protect workers from abuse also extends to the large
 number of Philippine workers overseas. By raising the issue in bilateral contacts
 and international forums, it attempts to secure firmer guarantees of basic rights for
 guest workers and otherwise provides assistance through its diplomatic missions.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The law prohibits the employment
 of children below age 15, except under the direct and sole responsibility of parents
 or guardians or where employment in cinema, theater, radio, or television is essen-
 tial. The Labor Code allows employment for those between the ages of 15 and 18
 for such hours and periods of the ay as are determined by the Secretary of Labor
 but forbids employment of persons under 18 years of age in hazardous or deleterious
 work. However, a significant number of children are employed in the informal sector
 of the urban economy or as unpaid family workers in rural areas. The most serious,
 industrywide violations of child labor law occur in clothing related production. Chil-
 dren continue to be employed in a dangerous form of coral reef fishing, which ex-
 poses them to shark and needlefish attacks and increases their vulnerability to dis-
 ease.
 In addition to projects undertaken with the U.N. Children's Fund (UNICEF) and
 the ILO's International Program for the Elimination of Child Labor (IPEC), the Gov-
 ernment has investigated and attempted to reduce violations of child labor laws out-
 side the agriclturalsector through well-publicized raids on reported violators. Rely-
 
 
 708
 
 ing on tips provided by concerned NGO's (especially the Kamalayan Development
 Foundation), officials of the DOLE and the National Bureau of Investigation contin-
 ued to carry out raids on factories and commercial chicken and pig farms suspected
 of employing children. However, Kamalayan complained about the absence of follow-
 through action to punish lawbreakng empioyers and recruiters, or to ensure that
 raided entepses subsequently comply with legally required labor standards.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Wor.-Tripartite regional wage boards set minimum
 wages. The last general rate revision occurred inlate 1993, with the highest rate
 set mn Manila and the lowest in rural regions. The minimum wage in the national
 capital region (NCR) is approximately $5.70 (P145) per day. This amount is insuffi-
 cient to provide a worker and his family in the NCR with a decent standard of liv-
 ins. Unless at least two family members are working, this minimum wage will not
 raise a family's income above the Government's poverty threshhold." Wage boards
 outside the NCR exempted home employers because of establishment size, industry
 sector involvement with exports, and level of capitalization. These exemptions ex-
 cluded substantial numbers of workers (especially agricultural, domestic, and casual
 - workers) from coverage under the law. A temporary shortage, and consequent rise
 in price, of rice and sugar in August revived union calls for a legislated nationwide
 increase in the minimum wage. However, the Government adhered to its policy of
 leaving responsibility for minimum wage adjustments with the regional wage
 boards. DOLE surveys showed that in the first half of 1995, 22 percent of the in-
 spected establishments violated the minimum wage law. Given the difficulty of pros-
 ecuting cases through the courts, the DOLE relies on administrative procedures and
 moral suasion to encourage voluntary employer correction of violations.
 The standard legal workweek before overtime is 48 hours for most categories of
 industrial workers and 40 hours for government workers, with an 8 hour per day
 limit. An overtime rate of 125 percent of the hourly rate is mandated. The law man-
 dates a full day of rest weekly. The enforcement of workweek hours is managed
 through periodic inspections by the DOLE.
 A comprehensive set of occupational safety and health standards exists in law. Al-
 though poicy formulation anK review of these standards is the responsibility of the
 DOE, actual enforcement is carried out by an inspectorate corps of some 260 labor
 and employment officers in 14 regional offices. Statistics on actual work-related acci-
 dents and illnesses are incomplete, as incidents (especially in regard to agriculture)
 are underreprted. Workers do not have a legally protected right to remove them-
 selves from dangerous work situations without jeopardy to continued employment.
