 PHILIPPINES
 Since declaring martial law in 1972, President Ferdinand
 E. Marcos has exercised virtually complete executive
 authority. He is both president and prime minister under
 the 1973 constitution, which calls for a transition to a
 parliamentary form of government. The Interim Legislative
 Assembly, elected in 1978, provides a forum for public
 debate on national issues. Its role, however, has been
 very limited, and major laws usually are enacted by
 presidential decree. In December, the assembly proposed
 constitutional amendments setting 1984 as the date for
 national parliamentary elections. As the year ended, the
 government was preparing to lift martial law during
 January 1981. It was not clear how this would affect the
 exercise of civil and political liberties.
 Civil and political rights are curtailed under martial
 law, although some restrictions have eased. In 1980,
 opposition activity increased among politicians, labor
 and students. Opposition candidates won a few posts in
 January provincial and municipal elections, the first
 held since 1971. Stimulated by the campaign and later by
 complaints of extensive vote fraud, opposition groups
 stepped up their public criticism, organized rallies
 and, in August, joined forces to issue a joint anti-
 martial-law statement. Labor and students held periodic
 demonstrations on economic and other issues as the year
 progressed. While these activities usually proceeded
 without interference, the government also sought to curb
 the momentum of unrest by selective arrests and detentions.
 Its concern intensified following a series of terrorist
 bombings between August and October, which killed one
 person (an American resident) and injured 70. The govern-
 ment tightened security measures in the capital, a step
 the public generally supported as necessary for public
 safety. Opposition politicians condemned the bombings as
 the work of a fringe group.
 Military abuses of civilians, including torture and
 summary execution, are a continuing problem, especially
 in insurgency areas. Government hearings, publicity, and
 disciplinary actions have had some success in curbing
 these abuses. Muslims in Mindanao, Tawi-Tawi and the
 Sulu Archipelago have waged a guerrilla struggle for
 autonomy since 1968. The conflict, which has roots going
 back over 400 years, stems from competition with Christians
 for traditional lands and the Muslims' desire to preserve
 their cultural identity. The latter objective later
 acquired secessionist overtones. Fighting continued
 sporadically in 1980. The government attempted to
 negotiate with rebel leaders and succeeded in winning
 over several, who were then given seats in the regional
 assemblies. Fighting also is continuing against Maoist
 guerrillas who operate in remote areas of northern Luzon,
 Samar, Davao and other provinces. While small, the
 communist insurgency continues to grow slowly.
 The Philippines is in the lower-middle range of developing
 countries, with a per capita gross domestic product of
 
 
 678
 $738. Over 60 percent of the national budget is committed
 to economic or social development programs. Efforts to
 fulfill basic human needs and foster economic growth have
 been hampered severely by recurring oil price increases,
 fluctuating prices for Philippine export commodities,
 inflation, population pressure, and high interest rates
 on foreign borrowing. The government concentrates on
 programs to improve agricultural productivity, roads,
 power generation, education, population planning, nutri-
 tion and land reform. Low rural incomes are a key factor
 in the pervasive incidence of undernutrition and the
 existence of malnutrition. Housing and health care for
 the poor remain inadequate. Land reform in rice and corn
 holdings has affected one million tenants, although its
 ambitious original goals have not been reached. Popula-
 tion growth is in a downward trend but remains perhaps
 the single greatest obstacle to improved living standards
 for the poor.
 1.   Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a.   Torture
 Section 20, Article IV of the Philippines' 1973 constitution
 prohibits torture of prisoners. There are many reports
 of torture in insurgency areas. Occasionally, there are
 accounts of the torture of alleged communist activists or
 subversives by.security forces in Manila. A major source
 of information on torture and other human rights abuses
 is the Association of Major Religious Superiors of the
 Philippines (AMRSP), which collects and publishes reports
 from Catholic clergy around the country. Its coverage of
 rural conditions and Muslim areas has increased steadily
 in recent years.
 The great majority of torture incidents reported to the
 AMRSP in 1980, as in 1979, took place in provinces where
 troops are engaged in counter-insurgency operations.
 Victims were usually farmers or laborers who were reported
 beaten and sometimes murdered after interrogation about
 alleged connections with Muslim or communist guerrillas.
 Central Mindanao, Samar, and Luzon's Cagayan Valley were
 most often cited, but the AMRSP also described torture
 cases in the Davao provinces, Kalinga-Apayao (Luzon),
 Albay, and Camarines Norte.
 The government is addressing the problem through a variety
 of steps to improve military discipline. The Barbero
 Committee, a high-level government panel created in 1979
 to investigate military abuses, conducted several inquiries
 in 1980. The results of its first hearings in 1979 into
 the torture-murder of two Davao City church workers were
 announced in June 1980. Thirteen military men were either
 dismissed, demoted and transferred, or reassigned. Human
 rights groups have criticized the lenient penalty, although
 some of the men still face charges in civilian courts.
 AMRSP reported two torture incidents in Manila in January
 
 
 679
 and two others in August. In the latter case, two men
 reportedly were beaten, kicked, blindfolded and drenched
 with water. According to information obtained from a
 legal aid organization, eight men were tortured in a
 detention center in Zambales province in August. One was
 subjected to repeated and extended dousing with water;
 the others were roughed up and forced to hold heavy
 objects for long periods of time.
 b.   Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 Jail conditions in the Philippines are almost uniformly
 poor, although Manila city jails improved somewhat in
 1980 because of increased appropriations. Political
 detainees in Manila enjoy better facilities than those in
 the rest of the country. In Manila and Cebu, brief
 prisoner strikes occurred in 1980 over food budgets and
 living conditions, among other grievances. Almost all
 prisoners have access to their families and lawyers early
 in the detention period, if not during initial interroga-
 tion. Allegedly for security reasons, several suspected
 communist party leaders have been held incommunicado, or
 with restricted access by relatives, for periods ranging
 from months to years. The death sentence has been
 carried out only once since the imposition of martial
 law, for narcotics trafficking.
 The government is giving attention to the issue of
 military abuses, a widespread problem in most insurgent
 areas. Complaints range from public drunkenness to
 assault and murder. Abuses increased in 1980 in Negros
 Occidental and continued at about the same level as 1979
 in parts of Samar and the Davao provinces. Government
 efforts, however, are contributing to a decline in the
 most serious offenses in the city of Davao and many places
 in the Visayas and Mindanao. The government states that
 it took disciplinary action against 1004 soldiers for
 various offenses between January and August. It has also
 given extensive publicity to individual cases and to
 official statements condemning abuses. In response to
 appeals from local bishops, the Barbero Committee ordered
 accused soldiers held for trial after investigating a
 massacre in Tawi-Tawi and the murder of a tribal chief in
 Kalinga-Apayao. In the latter case, the entire battalion
 was transferred. The Barbero Committee investigated
 complaints in Iligan (Mindanao) from March until June;
 eleven cases were concluded and judgments in five are
 pending. The government encourages the formation of
 community relations action centers (CRACs) staffed by
 volunteer bar association lawyers to receive and act on
 complaints. The Davao City CRAC is exceptionally effective.
 Officials have also sought assistance from church leaders
 in some investigations.
 c.   Disappearances
 In 1980 the AMRSP recorded 21 instances of disappearances.
 It also reported the names of 106 persons alleged to have
 been "salvaged," that is, seized illegally by the security
 
 
 680
 forces and killed after interrogation. Given the diffi-
 culty of maintaining current statistics on human rights
 abuses nationwide, these figures must be considered
 estimates. Most salvaging cases occur in remote insurgency
 areas, particularly in Mindanao. Some cases have been
 publicized by the bishops and have resulted in inquiries
 by the Barbero Committee or local authorities, with
 compensation paid to the survivors and disciplinary
 action taken against accused military. The government,
 however, maintains that these represent "isolated cases"
 of military abuses. Little reported information was
 received in 1980 to substantiate frequent allegations
 that the security forces have engaged in clandestine
 detention.
 In 1980 one well-known case of disappearance and salvaging
 occurred in Negros Occidental, where 12 people were reported
 missing in April. Seven bodies have been discovered and
 the rest are still missing. Under steady pressure from
 the area bishop, local civil, military and church authori-
 ties investigated the case. Several military personnel
 and civilian officials are under arrest for the crime.
 d.   Arbitrary Arrest and Imprisonment
 Human rights groups generally consider political detainees
 to be those arrested for opposition to the government.
 Such persons are sometimes charged with crimes against
 the public order, such as subversion, rebellion, illegal
 assembly, possession of firearms, and possession of
 subversive materials. The government denies holding
 persons for political belief. As of September, government
 figures showed 553 public order violators in custody.
 The AMRSP set the figure at 960 politicaldetainees. Its
 sources have consistently maintained that many prisoners
 are held in the provinces without charges and are not
 included in central government statistics.
 Under his martial law powers, the president may issue an
 Arrest, Search and Seizure Order (ASSO) for persons
 suspected of security or public order crimes or, (under a
 general order issued in November), of a wide variety of
 common crimes. Detainees arrested under ASSO and whose
 cases are directed to a military tribunal are ineligible
 for bail. Under the new general order, those who are
 arrested under ASSO for non-capital, common crimes and
 who are prosecuted in civilian courts may be released on
 bail in accordance with the established laws governing
 civilian trial procedure.
 Many detainees who are placed in the military system obtain
 temporary or permanent release on a case-by-case basis.
 Processing of requests for release slowed during 1980 as
 a result of new regulations requiring presidential approval
 for each case. Detainees in Manila staged a brief hunger
 strike in protest in November. The government released
 95 of the 134 protesters by the end of the year.
 Reports of arbitrary arrest persisted in 1980, especially
 in rural areas. Defense lawyers and human rights groups
 
 
 681
 claim that some arrests are made without presenting a
 warrant or ASSO or that blank forms are issued to arresting
 officers. By law, each prisoner must be informed of the
 charges against him and arraigned within 72 hours. Some
 persons, however, have been held for long periods without
 formal charges. According to lawyers who deal with
 political detainees, during the first days of detention
 suspected subversives undergo "tactical interrogation"
 without the presence of counsel or family, and their
 statements are presented as evidence in military trials.
 When public demonstrations are expected, authorities some-
 times place activists in preventive detention for up to
 three months. Nineteen students, six labor leaders, and
 some urban community leaders were detained during a period
 of frequent demonstrations between June and September. In
 October, the president announced that persons implicated in
 a series of bombing incidents, which left one dead and over
 70 injured between August and late October, would be subject
 to indefinite preventive detention. About 20 alleged
 terrorists were held for several weeks until charges were
 filed. Also detained was a well-known opposition leader
 who was released to house arrest after 36 days.
 In 1980 the government granted 1093 temporary or perma-
 nent releases for political detainees, among them some
 prisoners held on subversion charges for several years.
 The president granted amnesty during the year to 3,351
 persons, including some charged with public order viola-
 tions. Persons granted permanent release or amnesty
 generally already had been released on a temporary basis.
 The most prominent opposition politician under detention,
 ex-senator Benigno S. Aquino, Jr., was released after
 seven years to undergo heart surgery in the United States
 in May. He was still abroad in November when the govern-
 ment filed new charges against him for alleged support of
 terrorist activities in Manila.
 Habeas corpus was suspended with the imposition of martial
 law. Detainees nevertheless may petition the Supreme
 Court for a writ of habeas corpus, but under martial law
 the court can only review whether the arrest conformed to
 the law and emergency decrees. For example, the nature
 of the evidence against the accused, who may or may not
 have been charged formally, cannot be examined. While it
 .regularly receives petitions, the Supreme Court has
 not ordered the release of an accused subversive or of
 anyone detained under an ASSO. The court has upheld the
 right of a detainee to confer with counsel.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Criminal defendants and, on a selective basis, a small
 number of persons accused of public order crimes, receive
 public trials in civilian courts. The courts are subject
 to the administration of the Supreme Court. The president
 can replace lower court judges by accepting the resigna-
 tions that all were required to submit at the outset of
 martial law; he did this in a small number of cases in
 the 1972-75 period. The constitution gives him the
 
 
 682
 authority to name successors for current Supreme Court
 justices; so far he has not appointed any successors for
 incumbent justices.
 Most public order violators are subject to military trials,
 despite a 1978 announcement that future cases involving
 civilians would be submitted to civilian courts. As of
 September, 5,572 civilians, many of them already free on
 temporary release status, still awaited resolution of
 pending charges in the military court system. A small
 number of pending military cases was transferred to
 civilian jurisdiction in 1980, bringing to 2,174 the
 number of transfers. Progress has been slow in achieving
 the government's stated goal of phasing out military
 trials of civilians. In 1980, 11 regional military
 tribunals were created to help deal with the backlog of
 pending cases, joining five part-time and ten full-time
 tribunals.
 Military trials are public. Once a prisoner is charged,
 which sometimes does not take place for weeks or months,
 a judge advocate is appointed defense counsel unless the
 prisoner retains private counsel. Charges, once brought,
 generally are stated clearly. According to lawyers who
 represent political detainees, military tribunals do not
 always recognize certain basic rights guaranteed in civil
 courts, such as the handling of evidence obtained through
 search and seizure. Defendants in military tribunal
 cases may appeal through boards of appeal to the defense
 minister and in. some circumstances to the president. The
 Supreme Court must review any military court verdict
 imposing the death penalty on a civilian.
 f. Invasion of the Home
 Under the constitution, a search warrant may be issued on
 the basis of probable cause as determined by a judge or
 another responsible officer under the law. Arrest, Search,
 and Seizure Orders issued under the president's martial
 law authority also are also used to carry out searches.
 There have been reports of searches conducted without
 properly executed warrants.
 2.   Government Policies Relating to the Fulfillment of Such
 Vital Needs as Food, Shelter, Health Care, and Education
 Philippine development strategy emphasizes rural develop-
 ment, especially agricultural productivity, rural roads,
 power generation, nutrition, population planning, and
 health. In 1980, however, the government and foreign
 donors recognized that discrete, short-term projects
 alone cannot provide the broad economic growth and,
 importantly, the new jobs which are needed to improve
 living standards. Half a million workers enter the labor
 force annually, and agriculture cannot provide sufficient
 new employment. The government has agreed with the
 World Bank to attempt to restructure its industrial and
 trade sectors in favor of labor-intensive, export-oriented
 production. The World Bank-sponsored program is expected
 
 
 683
 
 to add one million jobs by 1990. The government has
 begun promulgating changes in tax codes and industrial
 incentives which will remove protection for inefficient
 industry. In the early years, the restructuring program
 must affect adversely some of the urban population, which
 previously had benefited from protectionist policies.
 Rural development projects nevertheless will continue to
 receive the majority of development funds.
 The Philippines, a predominantly agricultural country,
 ranks in the lower-middle range of developing countries
 with an estimated per capita gross domestic product of
 $738. Economic growth averaged about 6.5 percent in the
 1970s but is expected to decline to about 5.5 percent in
 1980, largely because of oil price increases. Other
 factors which affect Philippine ability to finance growth
 and development are volatile prices for its major products
 (coconut, copper) and a large foreign debt, which requires
 almost $2 billion in service payments annually. Popula-
 tion pressure is a continuing problem. Government
 commitment to population planning is high, however, and
 present growth rates of 2.3 percent represent a signi-
 ficant decline from the over 3 percent level of the
 1960s. Inflation, which rose abruptly in 1979 due to
 high energy costs, continues high, with most observers
 anticipating a year-end figure of about 20 percent.
 Government ceilings on prices of rice, fuel, transpor-
 tation, school fees, and utilities have softened the
 impact of inflation on low-income families. The Consumer
 Price Index, which reflects costs for the low income
 market basket, in August was up 14 percent on an annual
 basis over the same period in 1979.
 Government agricultural programs stress increased produc-
 tion of basic grains and pilot projects for dairy, beef,
 and poultry. The continued success of the government's
 rice production program, which led to self-sufficiency in
 1977, has permitted modest but increasing export sales.
 Output of major food crops continues to increase at about
 five percent per year. Since 1972, agrarian reform in
 rice and corn holdings has increased agricultural support
 services and security of tenure and lowered rents for one
 million tenants who are now either amortizing owners or
 leaseholders. About 21 percent of the land originally
 included in the land reform decree has been affected.
 The program will probably not be pushed much farther
 because the government is reluctant to redistribute
 holdings below seven hectares, which largely constitute a
 lower middle class form of savings and financial security.
 Land devoted to plantation crops was exempt from land
 reform and, given the importance of these products for
 the country's balance of payments, is unlikely to be
 redistributed in the foreseeable future.
 The Philippines historically has had a highly skewed income
 distribution, with nearly 80 percent of the poor living
 in rural areas. Beneficiaries of development projects
 and land reform are raising their living standards.
 Landless laborers and farmers in the unirrigated highlands
 are the most disadvantaged groups. In recent years,
 
 
 684
 inflation has eroded the purchasing power of low-income
 and middle-class families throughout the country. Largely
 because of low incomes, undernutrition is a common problem.
 In addition, there is a hardcore of first- and second-degree
 malnutrition. The percentages of children shown to have
 first- or second-degree malnutrition, while disturbing, may
 be overstated due to high growth standards chosen by the
 government. Since 1970, the government has carried out
 extensive studies of the problem, and conducted school
 feeding and outreach programs for mothers and children.
 Recently, the government, working with the World Bank,
 actively has been c6nsidering the adoption of a national
 food and nutrition program designed to further alleviate
 the problems.
 Education traditionally has been the key to social and
 economic advancement for Filipinos. The adult literacy
 rate is high at 87 percent. Elementary school enrollments
 exceed 100 percent, indicating attendance by children
 above normal primary school age. University enrollments
 also are relatively high. School attendance in rural
 areas is much lower than in towns and cities, however.
 Education continues to receive the same absolute budget
 expenditures as in the 1960s, while new resources are
 being channeled into other development priorities.
 Health care remains inadequate, particularly in rural
 areas. Infant mortality is about 70 per thousand.
 Government budget levels for health in fiscal year 1981
 are 3.8 percent. Official efforts to require medical and
 nursing graduates to devote one year to rural service
 have met with limited success. Despite the shortfall in
 medical services, however, health standards are improving
 slowly, as evidenced by the rise in life expectancy from
 56 years in 1970 to 60 years in 1978.
 The supply and quality of low-income housing is poor.
 Significant percentages of existing housing lack sanitary
 toilets or electricity. A 1975 study, the most recent
 available, found that only 39 percent of the population
 had access to safe water. Government efforts to upgrade
 housing, provide sites and services, and design model
 communities have been at times innovative but also
 inadequately funded and administered. Three major World
 Bank loans have funded improvements in low-income housing
 in Manila and provincial cities. The burgeoning population
 and concentration of industry near Manila has made
 generation of labor-intensive jobs nationwide a priority
 area for the government. Significant numbers of Filipinos
 are unemployed or underemployed. To foster more job
 opportunities, the government has set up export processing
 zones around the country and prohibited new industries
 from locating in metropolitan Manila.
 Development efforts have been hampered to some degree by
 the government's reliance on central planning and control,
 the vagaries of the budget, and sometimes by abrupt
 changes in priorities assigned to individual programs
 which may pull resources away from worthwhile ongoing
 projects. While some improvements have been made in
 
 
 685
 recent years, more bureaucratic talent is needed at the
 provincial and local levels. Corruption traditionally
 has been widespread, although its adverse effects on
 development are difficult to determine. In 1980 there
 were reports of increasing concentration of wealth and
 economic power, allegedly owing to government favoritism
 to individuals in key industries. Opposition groups have
 made official corruption a major point of criticism of
 the government.
 3.   Respect for Civil and Political Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech, Press, Religion and Assembly
 Martial law abridges freedom of speech, press and assembly,
 although restrictions tend to be unevenly enforced.
 Freedom of religion is respected.
 Public debate and media coverage of national issues,
 including human rights abuses, continued to expand in
 1980, along with organized opposition activities, in
 general. Opposition politicians regularly addressed
 private organizations and gave statements to foreign
 correspondents and two opposition newspapers. They had
 little access to the most important local media, however.
 While there is no formal censorship, the media exercise
 restraint in criticism of official policies. Government
 information officers sometimes advise editors on coverage
 of various topics. Major newspapers and broadcast
 facilities are all owned by persons sympathetic to the
 government. Nevertheless, the media have moved cautiously
 but steadily toward more candid coverage and commentary,
 especially in the provinces. A weekly Manila opposition
 newspaper with a limited press run circulates in main
 towns. In Cebu, radio and one daily newspaper have
 carried material strongly critical of the government in
 1980. Following a protest march in Cebu in September,
 authorities closed one radio station for allegedly
 broadcasting directions to demonstrators. Another Cebu
 station fired five commentators, who often spoke critic-
 ally of the government, because of a new interpretation
 of broadcast regulations by the media council. Church
 publications continue to appear for limited audiences,
 including the AMRSP's regular reports on political
 detainees and human rights abuses.
 Censorship of foreign periodicals that contain reports
 offensive to the government virtually has disappeared.
 There was no evidence in 1980 of the censorship of any
 foreign books, although a few books critical of the
 government are not allowed to be sold. At the same time,
 persons regularly are arrested for possession or distribu-
 tion of unspecified "subversive" literature, often tracts
 and flyers.
 The government strictly limits permits for public gather-
 ings outside of "free debate" periods preceding elections
 (January 1980) and referenda. Permits were issued for
 
 
 686
 large opposition rallies in some provincial cities in
 June; other opposition gatherings have been authorized in
 the form of public issues symposia or non-political
 prayer rallies. Large student protests in Manila from
 June to September took place, largely without incident.
 Unauthorized gatherings are sometimes broken up by police,
 however. Some student demonstrators were arrested in
 Manila in August and September. Organizers of unauthor-
 ized opposition marches in Cebu in July and September
 were arrested for illegal assembly and held for several
 weeks for a military trial. The government later dropped
 the charges as a gesture of "unification."
 The right to practice one's religion is fully respected.
 There is constitutional separation of church and state.
 Clergy have been arrested for alleged illegal political
 activities. Two Catholic priests, one closely involved
 with programs to help tribal minorities, were arrested
 for alleged subversive activities in 1980. A priest of
 the Philippine Independent Church was arrested in 1979
 on similar charges. The three were released at the end
 of 1980. In April, the government released a priest
 detained for over five years on rebellion charges. In
 November, the government charged two Catholic priests
 with alleged involvement in a series of bombing incidents.
 b. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration and Repatriation
 Freedom of travel generally is respected. Within the
 country, restrictions apply only to foreign tourists in
 areas of Mindanao and the Sulu Archipelago, where Muslim
 insurgents are very active. There is free emigration,
 and travel taxes and fees are not prohibitive. For
 several years, political oppositionists sometimes have
 experienced delays before obtaining clearances for pass-
 ports. Former detainees in temporary release status
 need government permission to leave the country, but in
 most cases have obtained it without difficulty. In
 September the government began tightening exit restric-
 tions in its effort to apprehend persons involved in a
 series of terrorist bombings. While several oppositionists
 encountered no problems, others have experienced delays
 in obtaining travel documents. At least one politician
 was denied an exit permit, and several travelers were
 turned away from the international airport.
 The government neither encourages nor inhibits emigration
 or repatriation. Workers or other groups are not subject
 to different travel rules of any kind. The government
 makes special provisions to facilitate travel by Muslim
 Filipinos to the Middle East for religious holidays.
 The Philippines continues to offer asylum to Indochinese
 reaching the country by boat and has cooperated effectively
 with international organization and voluntary agency
 personnel in the adminstration of refugee issues. At the
 end of October, 4,012 refugees were in first asylum
 camps. Under the sponsorship and with financial support
 of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the
 
 
 687
 government supervised the design and construction of
 a major Refugee Processing Center which can facilitate as
 many as 17,500 Indochinese awaiting resettlement abroad.
 The government seconded administrative personnel to the
 project, absorbed some local costs, and gave priority
 to establishing a successful center.
 c. Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 The state of martial law and "transitory provisions" in
 the 1973 constitution give President Marcos control of
 all effective political power. He is both president and
 prime minister for an indefinite period and governs
 largely by decree. The Interim Legislative Assembly
 elected in 1978 includes some appointed and sectoral
 members, 150 elected government party representatives,
 and 15 oppositionists. Assembly debates in 1980 featured
 some criticism of the government and national policies.
 Its views have had an effect on presidential decisions on
 secondary matters. In December, the Interim Legislative
 Assembly proposed a constitutional amendment calling for
 elections for a permanent parliament in May 1984. As the
 year ended, the government was preparing to lift martial
 law during January 1981. It was not clear how this would
 affect the exercise of civil and political liberties.
 Elections for provincial and local officials, the first
 since 1971, were held on January 30, 1980. The government
 party won overwhelmingly, including all positions contested
 in Metro Manila. As with the assembly elections of 1978,
 there were widespread, credible reports of vote fraud.
 Some opposition parties boycotted the election; neverthe-
 less, opposition candidates succeeded in winning four out
 of 72 governorships, a few mayoral posts and some council
 positions.
 Opposition politicians intensified their efforts in 1980
 to unite against continued martial law. National figures
 and regional opposition leaders organized rallies,
 stepped up their organizational efforts and public
 criticism and, in August, called a press conference to
 announce their joint statement of principles called "The
 National Covenant for Freedom." During the year, two
 prominent politicians were charged with subversion in
 connection with an alleged 1979 plot against the govern-
 ment. Several Cebu leaders were arrested for organizing
 demonstrations. Another leading politician spent 36 days
 in "preventive detention," was released to house arrest,
 and finally charged (but not re-arrested) for alleged
 links to terrorists. Oppositionists maintain that these
 actions were taken by the government primarily as a
 warning to moderate their activities. In August, an
 underground group began a series of terrorist bombings
 to destabilize the government. One person was killed
 and 70 were injured by late October. About 20 have been
 arrested for alleged involvement in the bombings.
 Regional assemblies in Muslim areas of Mindanao were
 elected in 1979 (polls in which a majority of Muslims did
 not vote) as part of the government's effort to fulfill
 
 
 688
 the autonomy provisions of the Tripoli Agreement negotiated
 with representatives of the Muslims in 1976. So far the
 assemblies have played a marginal role in governing their
 areas. In 1980 some Muslim field commanders surrendered
 to the government and were appointed to the assemblies.
 Philippine women participate widely in the political,
 economic and social life of the country. Women are well
 represented in the legal, medical, and academic professions.
 They outnumber men in graduate schools. A significant
 number of women occupy governor and vice-governor positions,
 and serve as mayors, provincial board members and local
 officials. There are two female cabinet members (one is
 the president's wife), one Minister of State, two Supreme
 Court justices and several members of Courts of Appeal.
 Social and cultural forces continue to emphasize "tradi-
 tional" roles for women, particularly among Muslims and
 tribal Filipinos. These patterns, however, are slowly
 breaking down. Women make up a third of the work force,
 mostly in the lower-paying occupations. Married women,
 half of those in the work force, still generally consider
 housekeeping to be their primary responsibility. Women
 in the lower economic groups suffer greater disadvantages
 vis-a-vis men. For example, a study of poor familes has
 shown that the mother is often the least well-nourished
 family member.
 Strikes are banned in "vital industries," which include
 the majority of industries. Strikes do occur over bona
 fide labor-related issues, however, and no punitive
 actions generally are taken by the government. The
 government has removed restrictions on the right of
 workers in private, non-profit institutions to form
 unions for collective bargaining. Legislation passed
 in 1980 strengthened the protection of the right of
 workers in the private sector to organize unions and to
 bargain collectively with employers. Under the new law,
 employers convicted of certain unfair labor practices are
 liable for criminal penalties. Implementing rules for
 the new law have not yet been completed.
 The prohibition on collective bargaining rights for
 government employees continues. Unions have strongly
 urged collective bargaining rights in the public sector,
 particularly in government-owned corporations in which
 collective bargaining existed prior to martial law.
 The government supports and encourages the unification of
 the highly fragmented labor movement. It recognizes the
 Trade Union Congress of the Philippines (TUCP), established
 in 1975 with the encouragement of the government, as the
 representative body for organized labor. The TUCP
 generally supports the government but opposes it on many
 labor issues. In early 1980, however, three new indepen-
 dent labor confederations were organized. The government
 permitted them to participate in national government-labor-
 management conferences on wages and other consultations
 on labor matters.
 
 
 689
 The government permits foreign assistance to unions from
 both communist and democratic sources. It requests that
 all assistance be reported to the Ministry of Labor and
 Employment. Affiliations to the three major international
 trade union organizations are maintained by various labor
 groups.
 About a dozen officials of independent labor organizations
 were detained by military authorities in 1980 for alleged
 subversion. Some of the arrests occurred during a period
 of active labor and student demonstrations over inflation
 and wage issues. The Ministries of Defense and Labor
 have a consultative channel which is intended to avert
 arrests for legitimate trade union activities. Some
 trade union leaders, however, believe that the detentions
 during the year were designed to deter militant labor
 activists from escalating their protests, rather than to
 curtail alleged subversive activities.
 Trade unions are permitted to engage in political activities
 within the framework of martial law. The TUCP formally
 supported the government party in local elections in
 January 1980. Some TUCP and independent federation
 officials privately supported the opposition or ran as
 opposition candidates. The TUCP lobbied publicly against
 certain provisions of pending legislation on income
 taxes. Labor groups during 1979 and 1980 waged a public
 campaign against alleged malpractices in the Ministry of
 Labor and Employment and called for reform and replacement
 of senior officials.
 4.   Government Attitude and Record Regarding International
 and Non-Governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights.
 The Philippines is signatory to all United Nations inter-
 regional human rights and refugee conventions. The
 Philippine government has cooperated with outside observers
 interested in the status of human rights and has facilita-
 ted their contacts with detainees. The AMRSP and its
 Task Force on Detainees, the latter of which prepares
 lists of political detainees and reports alleged abuses,
 operate with relative freedom. Teams from the International
 Committee of the Red Cross inspected Philippine detention
 centers in 1973, 1974 (twice), 1976, 1978, and 1980.
 Amnesty International issued a critical report in 1976
 based on the findings of a mission to the Philippines a
 year earlier, but subsequent missions have not been under-
 taken. Representatives of the International Commission
 of Jurists visited the country in 1975 and again in 1977,
 when they issued a strongly critical report on the status
 of civil and political rights. The Philippine Government
 has criticized what it considers to be interference in
 its internal affairs. It also has objected foreign press
 coverage of abuses, although it has continued to allow
 foreign media to report on developments within the
 country.
 
 
 690
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: PHILIPPINES
 1978     1979      1980
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL ..         83.9      72.0     83.3
 LOANS..............         54.3      44.6     31.1
 GPANTS.............         29.6      27.4     52.2
 A.AID .................         52.8      43.7     59.7
 LOANS..............         42.3      35.6     31.1
 GRANTS.............         10.5       8.1     28.6
 (SEC.SUPPASSIST.)e..          0.0      0.0      20.0
 B.FOOD FOR PEACE......          27.1      23.8     18.8
 LOANS..............         12.0       9.0      0.0
 bPANTS...............       15.1      14.8     18.8
 TITLE I-TOTAL ..........        12.0       9.0      0.0
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS....          12.0       9.0      0.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR ....          0.0       0.0      0.0
 TITLE I-TOTAL .........        15.1      14.8     18.8
 E.RELIEF.EC.DEV & WFP.          0.0       2.4      3.9
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY ....         15.1      12.4     14.9
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST ..          4.0       4.5      4.8
 LOANS..............          0.0       0.0      0.0
 GRANTS.............4.0                4.5      4.8
 CONTR. TO IFI..o           0.0       0.0      0.0
 PEACE CORPSe.....          4.0      4.4       4.8
 OTHER............          0.0       0.1      0.0
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL,..         37.3      31.7     75.5
 LOANS................-      16.5      15.6     50.0
 GRANTS .............  ...188          16.1     25.5
 A.VAP GRANTS...........      l.h1       15.5     25.o
 B.CREDIT SALES-FMS....         18.5      15.6     50.0
 C.INTL MILED.TRNG....          0.7       0.6      0.5
 D.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK...          0.0       0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS ...   .         0.0       0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. & MIL ..        121.2     103.7    1580.8
 LOANS...........          72.8      60.2     81.1
 GRANTS...............48.4            43.5      77.7
 ---------------------------------        -------
 OTHER US LOANS..........       5.3        0.6     25.2
 EX-IN RANK LOANS......           4.7       0.6     25.2
 ALL OTHER..............         49.6       0.0      0.0
 SIS     C------------ ;------------------------------
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAt. AGENCIES
 1978     1979      1980     1946-80
 -----      ------------------------------------------------
 TOTAL........ .  668.5    441.1     928.5   4n26.2
 IBRD              498.1    245.5    695.0    2665.9
 IFC                 2.1      5.3      9.9     103.1
 IDA                28.0     62.0       0.0    122.2
 IDB                 0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 ADOB              136.5    123.7    208.5    1052.0
 AFDB                0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 UNDP                3.8      2.4       3.1     4A.3
 OTHER-UN            0.0      2.2      12.0     34.7
 EEC                 0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 
 
 691
