 PHILIPPINES
 The Philippines is a democratic republic with an elected president, a fully func-
 tioning political party system, a bicameral legislature, and an indepndent judiciary
 Politica corruption remains endemic however particularly in the electoral and judi-
 cial systems. The Government achieved significant gains in peace talks with insur-
 gent groups.
 The Department of National Defense controls the Armed Forces of the Philippines
 (AEP), and the Department of Interior and Local Government supervises the civilian
 Philippine National Police (PNP). The two forces share responsiy  r fighting a
 declimng Communist insurgency, terrorists, and Muslim separatists. Military forces,
 including local civilian militias and the police, committed human rights abuses.
 The Government is implementing a far-reaching reform program, "Philippines
 2000," to convert its agrarian-based, paternalistic economy into an industrial, mar-
 ket-driven one. Although "nationalist" blocs and vested interests continue to pose
 obstacles, the Government has succeeded in liberalizing the investment, trade, and
 foreign exchange regimes. This program has opened formerly restricted sectors,
 which had included banking, insurance, aviation, telecommunications, and oil;
 "reprivatized" state-controlled firms; and addressed infrastructure complaints. Long-
 term fiscal stability is a major concern. The Government has proposed for Congres-
 sional approval a comprehensive tax reform program. Exports and investment
 spurred a 5.5 percent real gross national product expansion in 1995 and 7.1 percent
 in 1996. Garments and electronics make up more than half of merchandise export
 receipts and are significantly complemented by overseas worker remittances. While
 the Government has accelerated market reforms, poverty and inequitable income
 distribution remain. More than 40 percent of the population of 70 million are unable
 to meet basic nutritional and other needs, while the richest 10 percent of families
 receive 36 percent of aggregate personal income. Annual per capita national income
 is estimated at $1,184.
 The Government generally respected the human rights of its citizens; however,
 there were problems in some areas. A general decline m the number of abuses was
 partiall offset by encounters between government and insurgent forces in
 mdanao that resulted in an increase in the number of civilign casualties. Members
 of the security forces were responsible for extrajudicial killings, disappearances, tor-
 ture, and arbitrary arrest and detention. According to the Com ssion on Human
 Rights (CHR), an independent government agency, the police continued to be the
 leading abusers of human rights. Some abuses were committed by personnel of the
 olice and military forces involved in illegal activities such as coerced protection, po-
 ltical gangsterism, kidnap-for-ransom syndicates, and assistance to illegal loggers.
 The authorities rationalized other abuses as necessary shortcuts to fighting crime
 in a criminal justice system that is slow, cumbersome, and disposed to freeing crimi-
 nals or treating them leniently. There continued to be increased public concern for
 due process and equal justice, however, as personal ties undermined the commit-
 ment of some government institutions to ensuring fairness and justice.
 The courts remained hobbled by backlogs, limited resources, and venality. Long
 delays in trials are common, and prison conditions remained poor. An estimated 4
 million citizens living abroad remained disenfranchised because Congress has not
 yet enacted absentee voting, as required by the Constitution. Violence and discrimi-
 nation against women and abuse of children continued to be serious problems. Dis-
 crimination against indigenous people and Muslims persists. Child lab or is a prob-
 lem. The Government often relies on the more than 5,000 local nongovernmental or-
 ganizations (NGO's) to help change public attitudes and pressurelocal authorities
 to address abuses.
 Communist and Muslim insurgent groups also committed human rights abuses,
 including extrajudicial killings, kidnapings, torture, arbitrary arrests and deten-
 tions, and the use of summary justice insin formal ourts.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudiol Ki in.-The CHR reported 64 incidents of
 extrajudicial killing during the first quarter. lt reported 172 such killings for all of
 1995. Task Force Detainees of the Philippines (TFDP), a prominent NGO, reported
 14 people killed extrajudicially in the first 6 months of 1996, compared with 38 in
 1995. The numbers given bythe CH   are greater, in part because the CHR includes
 violations by both government and insurgent groups, including the Communist
 Party of the Philippines and its armed wing, the New People's Army (CPP/NPA),
 while the TFDP lists only offenses attributed to government authorities. In addition,
 
 
 the TFDP's ability to gather human rights violation statistics was adversely affected
 in 1995 (and to a lesser extent in 1996) by an internal organizational dispute that
 limited reporting from some of its provincial affiliates.
 Both the CR and the TFDP attribute the majority of human rights abuses, in-
 cluding extrajudicial killings, to the police and military forces, including civilian mi-
 litia units. The CHR reported that in 1995, the PNP accounted for nearly half the
 complaints filed. According to the TFDP, the rate of PNP involvement increased
 during the year. This statistic conformed to a pattern dating from 1989, when the
 PNP overtook Communist rebels as the Philippines' main institutional violator of
 human rights.
 As in 1995, extra udicial killings and other securit force abuses increased press
 and public onern for due process. However, personal ties undermined the commit-
 ment of some governmnent institutions to ensuring due process and equal justice, re-
 suitingminimpumity that absolved the entrenched and powerful.
 Civilian miltia units or Citizens Armed Forces Geographical Units (CAFG~s)
 also committed extrajudicial killings. Organized by the police and the AFP to secure
 areas cleared of insurgents, these nonprofessional units have inadequate training,
 poor supervision, and a propensity for violent behavior. Improved training and su-
 pervision have corrected some of these flaws, but continued fighting in fMindanao
 and resistance from some governors, particularly in northern Luzon, who feared a
 renewed Communist threat, substantially frustrated efforts to lower force levels.
 The TFDP attributes eight human rights violations in the first 6 months of the year
 to CAFGU involvement, of which two were extrajudicial killings.
 With the upsurge in counterinsurgency fighting in Mindanao (see also Section
 1.g.), the TFDP attributed 14 deaths from the first half of 1996 to AFP personnel.
 The TFDP did not include in this count the April 12 killing of three members of
 the League of Filipino Students in Camarines Norte who, according to military re-
 ports, were also members of the New Peoples' Army (NPA).
 Problems of corruption and impunity hindered the prosecution of cases of killings
 from previous years (see Section 1.e.).
 Private security forces maintained by local landowners, political figures, and
 criminal gangs also committed many killings. Despite a continuing government ef-
 fort to dismantle 'private armies, House of Representatives Speaker Jose de
 Venecia stated in June that 562 such groups remained. PNP officials estimated that
 approximately 24,000 persons took part in these groups; the PNP confiscated and
 disposed of more than 11,000 firearms.
 Although the NPA insurgency was greatly reduced from its height in the 1980's,
 NPA insurgents committed numerous illings, including civilians in mountainous or
 jungle areas far from Manila, including Mindanao, Negros Island, and the
 Cordelleria region in northern Luzon. The CHi charged 12 NPA members with
 human rights violations during the year, the total numer of deaths from NPA vio-
 lence is not known. The NPA also extorted funds and supplies from businessmen,
 government officials, uncooperative nongovernmental organizations, and families in
 communities where it operated. Both the NPA and the breakaway Communist Alex
 Boncayao Brigade (AEB) targeted and killed police officials and former ("traitor")
 party members. The ABB claimed credit for the June 13 daytime ambush and kill-
 ing of former Ilocos Norte Vice Governor Rolando Abadilia on a busy Manila street.
 Abadilla was the former leader of a martial law security group.
 Members of the Muslim extremist Abu Sayyaf Group (ASG) were the suspected
 killers of two Christian clergymen in Negros  an andNorthern Luzon areas. Au-
 thorities also suspected that the ASG was responsible for a series of attacks directed
 against teachers and schools in Basilan.
 b. Disappearance.-The CHR cited five cases of disappearance in the first nine
 months of the year, compared with 15 cases for all of 1995. The courts and police
 have failed to address complaints of families covering disappearances over the past
 decade. An advocacy group, Families of Victims of Involuntary Disappearance, has
 presented to the Government records of more than 1,500 such missing individuals.
 According to Citizens Action Against Crime, an NGO that closely monitors
 kidnapings, there was an increase in kidnapings-for-ransom to 147 incidents during
 the year, involving more than 241 victims, of whom more than 30 were killed. Vic-
 tims came from the middle to upper-midde class (the wealthiest members of society,
 being protected by hired bodyguards, were targeted less frequently). Many of the
 victims were members of the Chines-Filipino community, which numbers perhaps
 1 to 2 percent oft he total population and is commonly perceived as wealthy. Fearing
 retribution, victims and their families typically refused to cooperate with the au-
 thorities or to identify their captors, when known. The most prominent victims in-
 cluded renowned architect Gilbert Yu and Leo Ongpin, the nephew of two former
 Cabinet Secretaries. Ongpin's kidnapers killed him even though they demanded a
 
 
 754
 ransom. Random kidnapings also took place in some Manila neighborhoods, as
 criminals intercepted cars bearing one or two passengers and held them there while
 negotiating with their families.
 While criminal elements were responsible for some kidnaping incidents, evidence
 (including the precision with which victims were abducted, and the high powered
 firearms and sophisticated communication equipment used) along with several court
 convictions, supported public perceptions that kidnapers often included persons with
 previous police and military service, as well as active duty personnel.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution prohibits torture, and evidence obtained through its use is legally
 inadmissible. However, members of the security forces continued to use torture and
 otherwise abused suspects and detainees. In July the Department of Interior and
 Local Government (DILG) distributed a 10-page primer to police on the rights of
 suspects, from the time of arrest through investigation, detention, and trial. The
 primer, which the DILG prepared in coordination with the CHR, reiterated standing
 directives to law enforcement agencies to avoid unnecessary force in all these
 phases. Nonetheless, abuses continued.
 Four cases of torture were reported to the CUR in the first 8 months of 1996, com-
 pared with two in 1995. The TFDP cited 3 cases in the first 6 months of 1996, com-
 pared with 17 for all of 1995. The CUR maintained its program of human rights
 awareness training in the military and provided AFP promotion panels with "certifi-
 cates of clearance on officers' human rights performance. No comparable program
 exists for police and custodial officials in charge of the country's jails and prisons,
 where physical punishment is common. A study commissioned by the NGO LawAsia
 identified the most common forms of abuse during arrest and interrogation as maul-
 ing, slaps, strangulation, hitting with rifle butts or wooden clubs, poking with a gun,
 enclosing a victim's head in cellophane, and applying electrical current to the geni-
 tals. Police also reportedly burn or drag suspects behind cars to coerce confessions.
 Newspaper editorials and the CHR questioned the March appointment to an elite
 National Bureau of Investigation (NBI) unit of an officer implicated in a well-pub-
 licized 1995 incident in which NBI agents "interrogated" an 18-year-old university
 student who had intervened to help a jeepney driver being mauled on a Manila
 street. The assailant was an NBI agent who, along with several companion agents
 beat the student severely, then handcuffed, blindfolded, and locked him in a small
 cell for more than 24 hours. The matter provoked a Senate inquiry and led to the
 NBI commanding officer's reassignment in a provincial post. Notwithstanding the
 public record, the Ombudsman dismissed charges of misbehavior for lack of evi-
 dence, paving the way for NBI superiors to restore the questioned officer to his posi-
 tion.
 Prison conditions are poor. Jails and prisons are overcrowded, have limited exer-
 cise and sanitary facilities, and provide prisoners with unhygienic and unpalatable
 food rations. Guards routinely abuse prisoners; female prisoners are at particular
 risk of sexual assault. A CUR report on jail facilities throughout the country indi-
 cated that of 613 jails visited, only 64 had adequate facilities and were in good con-
 dition. Some prominent prisoners and celebrities, however, are treated far better. In
 June newspapers reported that a detained "drug lord" received not only food but
 drugs inside his Manila jail cell. Popular movie star Robin Padilla, jailed in 1995
 for illegal possession of high-powered firearms, acted in a fim and was married in
 a celebrity wedding ceremony conducted on prison grounds. The May recapture of
 Rolit Go, a convicted murderer who escaped from jail 3 years earlier, highlighted
 the fact that prisoners with wealth and connections not only are able to get special
 privileges but on occasion can bribe their way out of detention.
 International monitoring groups, the International Committee of the Rod Cross,
 and foreign embassy officials are allowed free access to jails and prisons.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-Although the Constitution requires a ju-
 dicial determination of probable cause before issuance of an arrest warrant and pro-
 hibits holding prisoners incommunicado or in secret places of detention, authorities
 continue to arrest arbitrarily and detain citizens.
 Detainees have the right to a judicial review of the legality of their detention and,
 except for offenses punishable by a life sentence or death (when evidence of guilt
 is strong), the right to bail. Authorities are required to file charges within 12 to 36
 hours of a warrantless arrest, depending upon the seriousness of the alleged crime.
 The CHR listed 54 cases of illegal arrest and detention for the first quarter of 1996,
 compared with 129 for all of 1995. The TFDP found that 60 persons were arrested
 illegally in the first 6 months of 1996, compared with 272 such arrests in the pre-
 vious year.
 The decline in arbitrary arrests and detentions is attributable in part to the Gov-
 ernment's domestic peace process, involving talks with Communist, Muslim, and
 
 
 755
 military rebels. The Government in 1995 offered amnesty to former rebels and mem-
 bers of government security forces up to a June 1, 1995, deadline. In the case of
 rebels, crimes covered by the amnesty must have been committed in pursuit of p olit-
 ical beliefs; for members of government forces, the crimes covered had to be those
 committed in the performance of duty. Members of government security forces who
 committed serious human rights violations (arson, torture, extrajudicial killings,
 massacres, rape torture, and robbery) were excluded from the program. A quasi-
 judicial National Amnesty Commission (NAC), whose decisions are subject to review
 only by the Court of Appeals, was established to process amnesty applications. The
 TFDP reported that the NAC processed and oversaw the release of 14 political pris-
 oners during the year. Communist groups rejected the amnesty offer, arguing that
 it should have stemmed from peace negotiations and not arbitrary action of the Gov-
 ernment.
 A 1995 LawAsia Human Rights Committee study on administrative detention de-
 termined that a majority of interviewed detainees had been arrested without war-
 rant; they were merely "invited" in for police questioning, but subsequently held.
 The law provides, however, that anyone under custodial investigation, whether or
 not "invited," is entitled to counsel. The LawAsia study cited numerous violations
 of constitutional and human rights, such as lack of access to counsel during inves-
 tigation and interrogation, as well as physical mistreatment during detention.
 Several well-publicized incidents illustrated the frequency with which police ig-
 nored proper arrest procedure and the complications this posed for other parts of
 the criminal justice system. In February police responding to a Manila bank robbery
 arrested a sloppily dressed suspect who, in reality, was a photojournalist who had
 arrived at the crime scene before the police. Manilabs ress and the National Union
 of Journalists provided detailed reporting of police violation of detention laws in ar-
 resting and manhandling the "suspect," leading senior police authorities to dis-
 cipline the officers involved. The June murder offormer Ilocos Norte Vice Governor
 Rolando Abadilla (see Section 1.a.) led  the arrest of several suspects who, the
 CHR subsequently determined, had been denied counsel and visitorial rights. The
 CHR was unable to determine if the evidence was sufficient to sustain claims of tor-
 ture and warrantless arrests, leaving these issues for courts to decide. Police mis-
 handling of the Abadilla case also led the authorities to discipline the officers in-
 vlved. In August a regional trial court judge acquitted for lack of sufficient evi-
 dence five suspects in a murder and rape trial; prosecutors had relied on
 extrajudicial confessions made without the presence of counsel, which were not ad-
 missible in court. DILG Secretary Robert Barbers publicly acknowledged that the
 trial court judge was observingprvisions of the Constitution and advised police to
 follow authorized procedures when making arrests.
 According to the TFDP, the Government continued to detain more than 100 per-
 sons who have not been convicted of any offense (see Section i.e.).
 The NPA is responsible for some  ar  y arrests and detentions, often in connec-
 tion with informal courts set up to try civilians and local politicians for "crimes
 against the people." Many defendants in such trials are tortured or summarily exe-
 cuted. Breakaway leaders of the CPP have been at particular risk for such "people's
 court" trials.
 Forced exile is iliegal and is not practiced.
 e. Denial of Fcair Public Triai-The Constitution provides for an independent judi-
 ciary, but the judicial system suffers from corruption and inefficiency.
 The national court system consists of four levels: local and regional trial courts,
 a national Court of A ppeals divided into 15 divisions, a 15-member Supreme Court,
 and an informal local system for arbitrating or mediating certain problems, and
 which operates outside the formal court system.
 The Constitution provides that those accused of crimes be informed of charges
 against them, have the right to counsel, and be provided with a speedy and public
 trial. Defendants are presumed innocent and have the right to confront witnesses
 against them, to present evidence, and to appeal convictions. The authorities sen-
 erally respect the right of defendants to be represented by a lawyer. There is no jury
 system under the law; all cases are heard by judges. The judiciary is perceived as
 biased in favor of the rich and influential. Corruption extends to jails and prisons.
 According to the NGO Alterlaw, personal connections, patronage, influence ped-
 dling, and bribery are some of the most common "unorthodox" methods used in the
 practice of law. Legal experts in and outside the justice system also criticize per-
 sonal and professional relationships between judges and the individuals and cor-
 porations whose cases they are assigled. Some law firms, known in that profession
 as case faxers, gain the favor of judges and other court officials, and bribe some wit-
 nesses. While it is technically illegal to settle criminal cases out of court, the prac-
 tice of reaching an "amicable settlement" is routine; without key victims or wit-
 
 
 756
 nesses to testify, the authorities are forced to abandon their case. The Government
 has been unable, for the most part, to take effective action to intervene in these sit-
 uations.
 The pace of justice is slow. The court system is unable to assure detained persons
 expeditious trials. In July a Manila newspaper published the appeal of a man who
 had been wrongfully imprisoned for 20 years. He had been imprisoned from 1974
 to 1991 on an illegal sentence imposed by a military court. He was released follow-
 ing intervention by the U.N. Human Rights Commission and the CHR.
 There is a widely recognized need for more prosecutors, judges, and courtrooms.
 According to the Constitution, cases are to be resolved within set time limits once
 submitted for decision: 24 months for the Supreme Court; 12 for the Court of Ap-
 peals, and 3 months for lower courts. There are no time limits for trials. Because
 of numerous technical delays and frequent failures of judges and prosecutors to ap-
 ear, trials can last many months    ice who cut short the investigative process
 yextracting forced confessions contribute to lengthy court dockets, asjudges reject
 such breaches of dueprocss. In July a regional trial court acquitted six P-akistanis
 who had been accused of terrorism; the evidence suggested that the police may have
 planted evidence against the defendants.
 In May President Ramos appointed a new DILG Secretary, Robert Barbers, to
 counter growing criticism of failures in law enforcement. In a high profile case, Bar-
 bers personally arrested a town mayor suspected of murdering political rival and
 human rights activist Clarence Agarao in an attempt to show that an official was
 not above the law.
 In July the NBI filed rape charges against a provincial police chief, the type of
 powerful local official who in earlier years might have been immune to prosecution.
 The "Vizconde Massacre" murder trial, whose defendants included an ex-policeman
 accused of destroying evidence and the sons of several prominent persons, including
 a sitting Senator, proceeded routinely-with all defendants remainin  incarcerated
 for the duration. Babers announced late in the year that he had dismissed more
 than 2,300 members of the police force for dereliction of duty.
 Other developments, however, provided further examples of continued corruption
 in the police and judicial system and of impunity for the rich and powerful. The
 CHR indicated that 250 members of the PNP were involved in human rights viola-
 tions in the first 6 months of the year. In October DILG Secretary Barbers and Jus-
 tice Secretary Guingona quarreled over their respective agencies' failings. Barbers
 pointed to widespread inaction by prosecutors who fail tobring cases to court, de-
 spite clear evidence of criminality. Guingona in turn accused the Manila police of
 having failed to serve 3,500 warrants issued by judicial authorities. Guingona esti-
 mated that there were 30,000 unserved warrants nationwide and more than 50
 cases of police refusal to testify in court.
 After the May recapture of escaped murderer Rolito Go, it became clear that his
 ability to elude capture for years was due to help provided by many influential per-
 sons, including business associates, law enforcers, mayors, governors, journalists,
 entertainers, and government officials who could have helped return him to prison.
 A July Supreme Court decision criticized the performance of a provincial governor,
 police director, regional trial court judge, and jail warden, whose "connivance or in-
 excusable negligence" allowed three policemen convicted of murder to escape punish-
 ment. Also in July, a large police force assigned to arrest fugitive policemen who
 had killed four alleged car thieves who came from poor families failed to capture
 the fugitives; the hunted men reportedly slipped out of their hideaway 2 hours be-
 fore the poie force arrived. In July a 63-year-old woman complained that she had
 been violently assaulted and robbed at home by her daughter's 28-year-old friend.
 The alleged assailant was the youngest sn of Vice Presideat Joseph Estrada, head
 of the Presidential Anti-Crime Commission (PACO). Subsequently, the press re-
 ported the authorities' inability or unwillingness to prosecute the case. One month
 after the incident, the victim withdrew her complaint.
 Corruption and impunity also tarnished the proceedings in older cases. For exam-
 ple, a case that began with the killing of 11 suspected bank robbers in May 1995
 to a Senate investigation and a conclusion that the police had deliberately and
 summarily executed the victims. After charges of procrastination, in November 1995
 the Ombudsman's office finally indicted 27 policemen, including all four implicated
 senior officers. Despite this progress, the case had not come to trial by year's end.
 In February a Kuratong prosecutor reported receiving death threats, then withdrew
 from the case. A police witness placed under the Government's witness protection
 program said that a lawyer for the defense had offered him a bribe to clear the top
 officers. After newspaper criticism, prosecution witnesses charged that some inves-
 tigators, including the Ombudsman, had links to the accused or their associates. In
 March the Ombudsman filed a revised indictment, reducing the charges against sen-
 
 
 757
 ior officers from the status of principals in the crime to that of accessories. The
 downgrading removed the case from the Sandiganbayan, a court for combating cor-
 ruption, whose jurisdiction is limited to high ranking officials. The Ombudsman's
 decision sparked protests by key congressmen and human rights groups, calls for
 his impeachment, and efforts to restore the prior charges and status of the case. In
 October the U.N. Special Rapporteur on Summary and Arbitrary Execution criti-
 cized the Government's slow progress in the case. The Government claimed that it
 could not respond to the U.N.'s question because the case was still in the judicial
 process; at year's end, the case is unresolved.
 The TFDP claims that the slow pace of justice resulted in about 175 political pris-
 oners still being held illegally, of whom more than 100 have yet to be convicted of
 any offense. The Government disputes this charge, contending that it has released
 all political prisoners and that those held for allegedly political reasons are being
 detained for common crimes. It is likely that some of the prisoners in question have
 committed common crimes such as illegal possession of firearms, in the pursuit of
 their political beliefs. It also is possible that some are actual or suspected Com-
 munists who were wrongfully convicted of common crimes. Proving this is difficult,
 however, and the burden of proof of unjust punishment or imprisonment is placed
 on the prisoner.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Constitution provides that search warrants may be issued by a judge on a finding
 of probable cause. Restrictions on search and seizure within private homes are gen-
 erally observed, although searches without warrants do occur. Judges have declared
 evidence obtained illegally to be inadmissable.
 The Government does not interfere with the free personal use of the mail or other
 public communications except upon issuance of a court order in the course of an in-
 vestigation.
 Contradictions remain in the law regarding squatters. Since 1992 forced eviction
 of squatters has been illegal, unless adequate notice and resettlement sites are pro-
 vided. However, another law still in force makes squatting a criminal offense.
 Squatters' rights organizations call for this law's repeal on the grounds that
 classifying squatters as criminals is unfair, and that the law encourages the police
 to use violence when responding to a challenge to their authority. Although Presi-
 dent Ramos has joined calls for repeal, others argued that repeal would make the
 practice legitimate.
 Human rights NGO's have criticized government efforts to resettle tenant farmers
 and urban squatters to make way for infrastructure projects, and commercial and
 housing developments. The U.N. Committee on Economic, Social, and Cultural
 Rights expressed concern over reports of forced evictions. Government efforts to re-
 settle squatters have been complicated by extensive poverty, the limited availability
 of affordable housing for the urban poor, and squatter syndicates that exploit
 human misery and legal safeguards for pecuniary or political ends. In some in-
 stances, government authorities have resorted to forced evictions when faced with
 repeated, organized squatter occupations of previously cleared land. Critics charged
 that accelerated government efforts to clear squatters out of areas in Manila, along
 key highways and railroad rights-of-way, were designed to improve the city's ap-
 pearance before Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC Summit) leaders met in
 Manila in November. Land rights problems are made more difficult by the slow
 process of the Government's exercise of eminent domain and complex zoning regula-
 tions.
 g. Use of Excessive Force and Violations of Humanitarian Law in Internal Con-
 flicts.-Despite an historic September peace agreement between the Government
 and the Moro National Liberation Front, a major Islamic insurgent group, occa-
 sional clashes between government and insurgent forces continued to inflict hard-
 ship on civilians. Most of the fighting took place in the Mindanao provinces, particu-
 larly North Cotabato, Magindanao, Sultan Kudarat, and Basilan. According to the
 Ecumenical Commission for Displaed Families and Communities, 10 incidents of
 armed clashes in the first half of the year displaced some 7,400 families, or nearly
 45,000 persons. Civilian casualties reportedly resulted from cannon and rocket fire,
 despite AFP efforts to limit the use of artillery in civilian areas.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of speech
 and of the press, and the Government generally respects these rights in practice.
 A number of government officials and private persons either filed or threatened to
 file libel suits after being embarrassed by press reports. In August leaders in the
 House of Representatives threatened a libel suit against a newspaper critical of ap-
 parent bias by prominent members in favor of their own constituencies. They
 
 
 dropped the threat. Court decisions consistently rejected these suits. Columnist Her-
 man Laurel was arrested in March, based on a complaint filed by the chairman of
 the autonomous Commission on Elections (Comelec) that he had falsified his citizen-
 ship when seeking public office in 1995. The complaint came in the wake of columns
 written by Laurel in which he criticized actions taken by Comelec and its chairman.
 The hazards of reporting on corruption or exposing illegal activities such as gam-
 bling, logging, prostitution, and the drug trade among powerful individuals or vest-
 ed interests are greatest outside Manila. Provincial editor and publisher Ferdinand
 Reyes against whom some 30 libel cases had been filed, was killed on February 12
 and, despite multiple police claims to have solved the case, his murderer remained
 at large. No arrest was made. Other provincial journalists and radio broadcasters,
 whose public affairs programs reach a much wider audience than either newspapers
 or television, were threatened by local police and government officials. In March two
 correspondents for national dailies were wounded by shots fired by an unidentified
 assailant.
 In December a television reporter was killed at his home in Cavite after inves-
 tigating drug trafficking;, there were no arrests by year's end.
 Despite a 1995 change in leadership, the government-appointed Movie and Tele-
 vision Review and Classification Board continued to censor films on the grounds
 that certain sexually related scenes were contrary to Philippine cultural values, cus-
 toms, and morals. Electronic media access is unhindered.
 The Government respects academic freedom.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution provides for
 these rights, and the Government respects them in practice.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for freedom of religion, and the
 Government respects this right in practice.
 d. Freedom o Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-Citizens enjoy the freedom to change their places of residence and em-
 ployment. Travel abroad is limited only in rare circumstances, such as pending
 court cases or when government authorities try to discourage travel by vulnerable
 workers such as young women traveling to areas where they face personal risk (see
 Section 5).
 The Government continued to allow approximately 1,910 asylum seekers from
 Vietnam to remain in the Philippines after the termination of the Comprehensive
 Plan of Action (CPA) on June 30. All these asylum seekers have been "screened out"
 from refugee status in accordance with CPA provisions. Approximately 1,020 of
 these remain in a first asylum camp in Palawan, while approximately 890 have fled
 into the population.
 The Government continued to encourage voluntary repatriation of the screened
 out asylum seekers and has ruled out forcible repatriation. There is significant gov-
 ernment and nongovernmental support (particularly from the Catholic Church) for
 allowing the screened out asylum seekers who do not wish to repatriate and who
 are ineligible for resettlement in third countries to remain in the Philippines perma-
 nently.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 The Constitution provides citizens with the right to change their government
 peacefully, and citizens exercise this right through periodic elections. Congress has
 yet to enact, however, a system for absentee voting, as required by the Constitution.
 This provision affects an estimated 4 million potential voters or about 10 percent
 of the electorate, most of whom are expatriates. In June Congress passed a measure
 easing domestic registration requirements.
 An estimated 70 to 75 percent of registered voters participated in 1995 national
 and local elections that confirmed the control of a loose progovernment coalition in
 both the House of Representatives and the Senate. The hand-counting of millions
 of paper ballots delayed the official announcement of election results and contrib-
 uted, according to the National Movement for Free Elections, to cheating that dis-
 torted the tallies in certain Senate races.
 Additional details of 1995 election fraud became public in 1996 as a result of an
 election protest filed by former Senator Aquilino Pimentel with the Senate Electoral
 TribunaL Pimentel alleged that he was victimized by a systematic campaign of vote
 tampering, "Operation Dagdag-Bawas" (literally "Addition-Subtraction), which
 boosted the votes of rivals at his expense. While several Senators warned that delay
 in resolving the matter would adversely affect the Senate's credibility, and news-
 paper editorials criticized Comelec for errors in its slow operation, the most effective
 protest emerged from within Comelec itself. In June senior Commission staffers pro-
 tested the Chairman's indecision and delay in resolving major issues and the Coin-
 
 
 759
 
 mission's failure to prosecute those responsible for the Dagdag-Bawas operation and
 other irregularities.
 In 1996 the Government achieved significant gains in peace talks with insurgent
 groups, which had begun in 1995. In September government negotiators reached a
 peace agreement with the largest Muslim insurgent group, the Moro National Lib-
 eration Front (MNLF), which settled several basic disputes. These included the es-
 tablishment of a transitional regional council for peace and development in
 Mindanao, headed by the MNLF, and MNLF participation in elections for the gov-
 ernment of the Autonomous Region of Muslim Mindanao (ARMM). After 3 years, a
 new regional government is to be created and a plebiscite held to determine which
 provinces will form part of the reconstituted autonomous zone.
 In July the Government resumed negotiations with the Joma Sison-led faction of
 the CPP. These talks had stalled in 1995 over the release of a captured NPA leader.
 Progress remained slow, however, with Communist negotiators insisting on receiv-
 ing "belligerency" status.
 There are no restrictions in law or practice on participation by women and minori-
 ties in politics. Three women head cabinet departments, 4 of the 24 Senators are
 women, 23 of the 204 elected members of the House are women, and 2 additional
 women serve as appointed "sectoral" members of the House.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 A wide variety of human rights groups operate without government restriction,
 investigating and publishing their findings on human rights cases. Government offi-
 cials are generally cooperative and responsive to their views. The Philippine Alli-
 ance of Human Rights Advocates (PAHRA), a leading NGO network, reported that
 official harassment of human rights workers continued, but on a reduced scale. They
 cited the initiative of local military or police commanders.
 The Manila office of Amnesty International hosted a September conference on
 Human Rights in China. A major coalition of human rights and labor groups hosted
 the Asia Pacific regional conferences during the November APEC meetings.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 The Constitution prohibits discrimination against women, children, and members
 of minorities. Implementation of constitutional protections is at times hindered by
 lack of implementing legislation and by budgeta constraints.
 Women.:--Violence against women, particulary domestic violence, is a serious
 problem. The Womenfs Crisis Center, an NGO assisting abused and battered
 women, reported that it receives over 100 calls per waek from battered women in
 the metropolitan Manila area. Women's advocates cite the lack of laws on domestic
 violence, double standards of morality, and a traditional societal reluctance to dis-
 cuss private family affairs as some of the reasons for domestic violence. The absence
 of divorce under the law and the lack of job opportunities combine to limit the abil-
 ity of bth por and wealthy women to escape destructive relationships.
 Nonetheless, women's rights advocates describe the greater willingness of women
 to speak out, despite a sense of shame, fear, and a desire to preserve "family honor,"
 as a positive movement toward gender equality. Working in conjunction with NGO's,
 the Government's Bureau of Women's Welfare supports temporary shelters to pro-
 tect female victims from further harm and high risk situations. Bureau officials be-
 lieve that these programs, along with changing attitudes, accounted for the increase
 in batterings reported to authorities, which more than doubled between 1994 and
 1995 and continued to increase in 1996. Both the Bureau and the PNP maintain
 a Women's Help Desk to protect women and encourage the reporting of crimes. PNP
 stations include female as well as male officers who, with hep from NGO's, receive
 gendr-sensitivity training in dealing with victims of sexual crimes and domestic vi-
 Rape continues to be a major problem, and reports of rape continued to increase.
 ebh pressure on Congress to enact reform legislation mounted. Both houses
 passed a measure introduced in 1994 to change the deinition of rape, classifying
 it as a crime against a person instead of a crime against chastity, which is punish-
 able only under the civi code. Controversial provisions in the bill would make mari-
 tal rape a crime, expand the definition of rape, rule out sexual history as an issue
 in rape prosecution, and allow a rape victim's family or the State to file a complaint
 on the victim's behalf. It awaited conference committee agreement at year's end.
 As with battering, government officials attributed the increase in reported rape
 to changing attitudes. Women's groups charge that the male-dominated aw enforce-
 ment and udicial systems treat accused rapists leniently. For example, they cited
 
 
 760
 the August dismissal of a rape complaint brought by the 42-year-old executive direc-
 tor of the Davao Chamber of Commerce against a 61-year-old local businessman and
 past president of that organization. Judicial authorities held that the alleged vic-
 im's complaint was not credible because, as a highly educated career woman, it was
 not possible for her to have been cowed into submission. Such paralysis and refusal
 to fight back, they asserted, could be an expected response only of a young, imma-
 ture, and unlettered female.
 While rape trials entailed the risk of the victim's own behavior, the restored death
 penalty emerged as a further factor inhibiting victims from pressing charges. Con-
 victions for rape could and often did result in imposition of a death sentence (ap-
 proximately half of all capital punishment convictions involved rape).
 Women and girls in the lower economic stratums seek economic improvement
 through employment overseas. They are particularly vulnerable to exploitation by
 unethical recruiters who promise jobs abroad or, in some cases, arrange marriages
 with foreign men. Some find work only as prostitutes or suffer abuse at the hands
 of their foreign employers or husbands. Those recruited to work as maids, entertain-
 ers, or models may, while overseas, be forced to participate in public shows or
 dances where nudity and the prospect of sex is the principal attraction. Others
 knowingly accept questionable jobs to support parents, children, or siblings with
 their remittances. To curb such abuses, the Government campaigned to end illegal
 recruiting and, by raising age, educational, and professional standards for young
 women seeking jobs abroad, tried to discourage employment migration. The Migrant
 Workers and Overseas Filipinos Act of 1995 sought to provide the Government with
 greater financial resources and improved authority to combat these problems.
 NGO's agreed unanimously that these measures were not adequate.
 Prostitution remains illegal, but widespread, and a fact of life for many poorer
 Filipinos with otherwise limited economic and job opportunities. While penalties for
 prostitution are light, detained prostitutes are subjected to administrative indig-
 nities. Public pressure mounted for legal action to be directed not only against pros-
 titutes but also against their employers and clients seeking their services.
 In law but not in practice, women have most of the rights and protections ac-
 corded men. The Women in Development and Nation Building Act of 1992 termi-
 nated previous restrictions on women's rights to buy and sell property. Lack of pub-
 lic awareness and limited governmental implementing machinery limit the effective-
 ness of this reform.
 Church opposition to divorce in this overwhelmingly Catholic nation is strong.
 Changes in the Legal Code have made marriage annulment fairly easy, and the
 practice has become more frequent. The legal cost, however, precludes this option
 for many women. The practice of "unofficial divorce" (permanent separation) is com-
 mon among lower income families; in these cases the wife is usailly left with the
 children, and the husband provides little or no financial support.
 Except for government service and jobs in Government-owned or controlled cor-
 porations, women face discrimination in employment. Among administrative, execu-
 tive, and managerial workers, the average woman's salary is only one-third that of
 her male counterparts.
 Sexual harassment is also a roblem. A recent survey by the Institute of Labor
 Studies found workplace sexul harassment to be widespread, yet underreported
 due to victims' reticence and fear of losing their jobs. In February a city health offi-
 cer in Cagayan de Oro was forced to take a leave of absence after nine women com-
 plained that he had harassed them. In July the Supreme Court dismissed a regional
 trial court judge after a series of accusations of harassment.
 Children.-Several government agencies have programs devoted to the education,
 welfare, and development of children. The CHR's Child Rights Center (CRC), which
 opened in 1994, is designed to monitor and investigate violations of children's rights.
 Reflecting generally increased societal awareness of abuse against women and chil-
 dren, the CRC's case load rose more than 50 percent above its 1995 level. Lack of
 funding inomplete interagency coordination, and failure to institutionalize sensitiv-
 ity to children's needs among the agencies tasked to carry out enforcement limit the
 Government's ability to achieve its protection objectives.
 The Intercountry Adoption Act of 1995, which strengthened safegards against
 the sale and trafficking of children abroad, expanded on children's rights legislation
 enacted in 1992 and 1993. In June the Philippines ratified the Hagne Convention
 on the Protection of Children and Coloration in Respect of Intercountry Adoption.
 Children's rights advocates criticized  Con s s' failure to pass previously intro-
 duced legislation that would have created children's and family courts to handle ju-
 venile and domestic relations cases. As traditional societal values define children as
 extensions and property of the parents, ordinary courts favor parental authority
 overthe rights   o            of a child
 
 
 A conference on children's rights and the media was held in Manila in July. Mem-
 bers of the media, the academic community, government officials, and NGO's dis-
 cussed the often adverse media effect on children, prostitution of children, and sex
 tourism. Subsequently, two foreigners accused of pedophilia were tried, convicted,
 and jailed.
 Widespread poverty hindered government efforts to eradicate organized abuses in-
 volving the commercial sexual exploitation of children. A disastrous fire in March
 in a fashionable Manila discotheque, which resulted in the death of oyer 150 people,
 highlighted the appeal that illegal employment holds for some minors. The victims
 included "guest relations officers" who, as with other teenagers working in brothels,
 bars, and massage parlors, were lured to commercial sex jobs by the prospect of high
 incomes. Manila municipal officials shut down some sexually oriented establish-
 ments employing minors. Notwithstanding such efforts, 60,000 children according to
 UNICEF estimates, remained as prostitutes and victims of pedophilia.
 As with women's issues, greater public awareness eroded traditi     cence to
 report abuses against children. Reports of rape, incest, and other forms of abuse
 mounted, with trials leading to conviction and harsh sentences, usually life impris-
 onment or death. As in 1995, of some 200 men sentenced to die by year's end, over
 half had been found guilty of rape and, of these, most had abused children under
 15 years of age.
 Rape fured in another area of child abuse highlighted during the year. Fifeen-
 y ear-old Sarah Balabagan, sent in 1994 to work as a domestic in Abu Dhabi, killed
 er 58-year-old employer as he sexually assaulted her. The Philippine press and
 public strongly criticized the decision of a Muslim court in Abu Dhabi, which tried
 and sentened her to death. With her release from prison and return home in Au-
 gust, government authorities had to face other distressing aspects of her experience:
 the connivance between parents, recruiters, and corrupt government officials that
 produced falsified documents giving her age as 27. There were also similar cases in
 which parents knowingly conspired to exploit theli- children by snding them abroad
 to work.
 Street begging and truancy are common in large cities. The CUR estimates the
 number of street orphans in metropolitan Manila at fewer than 1,000, but up to
 100,000 destitute children spend most of their waking hours on the streets. The in-
 surgency in Mindanao and other southern islands added to Manila's street children
 problem
 People With Disabilities.-A 1983 law provides for equal physical access for the
 disabled to all public buildings and establishments, and a law passed in 1992 pro-
 vides for "the rehabilitation, self-development, and self-reliance of disabled persons
 and their integration into the mainstream of society." Advocates for the rights of the
 disabled contend that these laws have been ineffective, as implementing regulations
 have not been published, and government programs are palliative rater than fo-
 cused on reintegration.
 Indigenous People.-Indigenous people live throughout the Philippines but pri-
 marily in the mountainous areas of northern Luzon and Mindanso. They account
 for 10 to 15 percent of the population. Although no specific laws discriminate
 against indigenous people, the remoteness of the areas many inhabit and cultural
 bias prevent their full integtion into soiety. Their ability to participate meaning-
 fuly in decisions affecting their lands, cultures, traditions, and the allocation of nat-
 ural resoures is minimal. Because they inhabit mountainous areas also favored by
 guerrillas, indigenous people suffer disproportionately from counterinsurgency oper-
 ations. In particular, indigenous children suffer disproportionately from a lack of
 basic services, health, and education.
 Although the 1987 Constitution provides for the protection of the ancestral lands
 and cultures of indigenous people, the Government had not actively supported legis-
 lation to enforce these rights until late in theyear. In the absence of such legisla-
 tion, the Government has issued "certificates of ancestral land claims." Other meas-
 ures affect ancestral lands in less benign ways. For example, development projects
 infringed on indigenous lands and rights. The Philippine Mining Act of 1995 contin-
 ued a legislative trend promoting mining operations, hydroelectric dams, and other
 large-scale projects that force i~ndigenous communities to relocate and abandon
 farming and hunting lands used for generations. In an August meeting with north-
 ern and southern Philippine indigenous group representatives, President Ramos
 stressed that "if development is to be for all Filipinos and not just for a privileged
 and powerful few, then we must assume the burdens of our ethnic people as a spe-
 cial and urgent concern." The Government's inability to strike an acceptable balance
 between protection of ancestral lands and economic development again hindered ef-
 forts to pass an Autonomy Act for northern Luzon's Cordillera region. The 1991
 
 
 762
 eruption of Mount Pinatubo displaced several thousand indigenous Aeta families as
 well as other residents of central Luzon.
 Religious Minorities.-Muslims, who comprise about 5 percent of the population
 and reside principally in Mindanao and nearby islands, constitute the largest minor-
 i ty g.up in the ountry. They historically have been alienated from the dominant
 Christian majority, and government efforts to integrate Muslims into the political
 and economic fabric of the country have met with only limited success. Distrust of
 Muslim loyalty has occasionally led to police raids, such as that which occurred on
 March 18 in Tagig (suburban Manila), when able-bodied men were rounded up as
 suspected members of the ASG, MILF, or MNLF.
 Philippine culture, with its emphasis on familial, tribal, and regional loyalties,
 creates informal barriers whereby access to jobs or resources is provided first to
 those of one's own family or group. Many Muslims claim that they continue to be
 underrepresented in senior civilian and military positions.
 In June government neigotiations with the MNLF dramnatically improved prospects
 for better Christian-Muslim relations. In accordance with their agreement, a South-
 ern Philippines Council on Peace and Development (SPCPD) was established to co-
 ordinate economic growth in 14 provinces in Mindanao. MNLF leaders were granted
 key leadership positions in the SPCPD, with provision for a Muslim religious council
 to advise it. Thie accord also provided for integrating M'iNLF fighters into the armed
 forces and police. The two sides expect this initiative to ease Christian and Muslim
 suspicions of each other and, by improving ethnic harmony and promoting economic
 grwth, to bring the region political stab iity. Demonstrating his acceptance of the
 Philippine political system, MNLF Chairman Nur Misuari agreed to chair the
 SPCPD a    n    or overnor of the ARMM, which was established in 1990 to meet
 the demand of Muslims for local autonomy in areas where they are a majority or
 a substantial minority. While portions of Mindans's Christian population expressed
 fear of Muslim domination, both the Government and MNLF sought to allay these
 concerns.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The Constitution and laws provide for the right of
 workers, including public employees, to form and join trade unions. Although this
 right is exercised in practice, aspects of the public sector organization law restrict
 and discourage organizing. Trade unions are independent of the Goyernment and
 generally free of political party control. Unions have the right to form or join fedra-
 tions or other labor groups.
 Subject to certain procedural restrictions, strikes in the private sector are legal.
 However, a 1989 law stipulates that all means of reconciliation must be exhausted
 and that the strike issue~nas to be relevant to the labor contract or the law.
 In February 1995, the Committee of Experts of the International Labor Organiza-
 tion (ILO) noted that certain amendments have been proposed to legislation that the
 Committee had previously criticized for placing undue restrictions on the right to
 strike in nonessential services. The Committee remains concerned by the imposition
 of penalties in cases where strikes have been deemed illegal, by restrictions on the
 right of government workers to strike, by some restrictions on the right to organize
 and form  a bargaining unit which are in conflict with ILO Conventin 87 on free-
 dom of association, and by limitations on the right to elect workers' erersentatives
 freely.
 The number of strikes declined in the first 6 months of 1996, with 44 cases re-
 ported (as compared with 63 during the same period in 1995). Workdays lost to
 work stoppages decined even  rther, from 266,000 to 131,000. Workers involved
 in industrial disputes decreased from 38,670 to 8,564.
 _In March the ILO's Committee on Freedom of Association issued a finding that
 substantiated Trade Union Congress of the Philippines (TUCP) and International
 Confederation of Free Trade Umuon (ICFTU) charges of worker rights violations at
 the Danao (Cebu province) plant of Japnan   s maufacturer Mitsumi. The case,
 which began with a February 1994    tition by local union officials to the Depart-
 ment of Labor and Employment (DOLE) to hold a certification election, included the
 arrest of top union officials on spurious criminal (drug) charges, the repeated setting
 and postponing of elections, and management efforts to prevent workers from par-
 ticipating, or voting freely, in such elections.
 According to the Center for Trade Union and Human Rights (CTUHR), which
 publicizes allegations of worker rights violations, attacks on striking workers de-
 clined from earlier years. The Cu       docmented 39 incidents in the frn st 6
 months of 1996, involving 779 worker-victims. This contrasts with 107 incidents and
 7,673 victims in 1995. Although the police continued to be involved in many of these
 cases, the CTUR noted an upsurge of incidents initiated by management.
 
 
 Unions have the right to affiliate with international trade union confederations
 and trade secretariats. Two of the largest trade union centrals, the TUCP and the
 FFW, are affiliated with the ICFTU and the World Confederation of Labor (WCL)
 respectively.
 b. The Right To Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The Constitution provides for
 the right to organize and bargain collectively. The Labor Code provides for this right
 for private sector employees and for employees of government-owned or controlled
 corporations, but current law limits the rights of government workers. Although
 unions claim to have organized some 12 percent of the total work force of 29.1 mil-
 lion, fewer than 600,000 workers (2 percent) are covered by collective bargaining
 agreements. Unions oppose government efforts to loosen prohibitions against "labor
 only" subcontracting. Unions prefer to criminalize this practice, which they claim al-
 lows unscrupulous employers to use subcontractors to evade obligations to their em-
 ployees and to break unions.
 Some employers intimidated workers tying to form a union with threats of firing,
 factory closure or, as happened at Mitsumi, the filing of criminal charges against
 labor leaders. Allegations of intimidation and discrimination in connection with
 union activities are grounds for review as possible unfair labor practices before the
 National Labor Relations Commission (NLRC). Before disputes reach the time-con-
 suming, quasi-judicial NLRC, the DOLE provides the services of the National Con-
 ciliation and Mediation Board (NCMB). The NCMB settles most of the unfair labor
 practice disputes raised as grounds for strikes before such strikes can be declared.
 Labor law is uniform throughout the country, including export processing zones
 (EPZ's). However, local officials in most of the EPZ's and the Special Economic
 Zones have tried to frustrate organizing efforts by maintaining "union free/strike
 free" policies. The 1995 election defeat of one such official, the Governor of Cavite,
 opened the way for significant union organizing gains both in the EPZ and Cavite
 province itself.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-Forced labor is prohibited, and the
 Government effectively enforces this prohibition.
 The Government's efforts to protect workers from abuse also extends to the large
 number of Philippine workers overseas. By raising the issue in bilateral contacts
 and international forums, it attempts to secure firmer guarantees of basic rights for
 guest workers and otherwise provides assistance through its diplomatic missions.
 d. Minimum Age or Employment of Children.-The law prohibits the employment
 of children below the age of 15, except under the direct and sole responsibility of
 parents or guardians or where employment in cinema, theater, radio, or television
 is essential. The Labor Code allows employment for those between the ages of 15
 and 18 for such hours and periods of the day as are determined by the Secretary
 of Labor, but it forbids employment of persons under 18 years of age in hazardous
 or dangerous work. However, a significant number of children under the legal are
 are employed      iinformal sector of the urban economy or as unpaid family work-
 ers in rural areas. In the formal sector, instances of child labor are few. Some chil-
 dren continued to be employed in a dangerous form of coral reef fishing, which ex-
 poses them to shark and needefish attacks and increases their vulnerability to dis-
 ease.
 In addition to projects undertaken with the U.N. Children's Fund and the ILO's
 International Program for the Elimination of Child Labor (IPEC), the DOLE inves-
 tigate  nd attempted to reduce violations of child labor laws outside the agricul-
 tural sector through publicized raids on reported violators. The DOLE's raids were
 coordinated with poicea     at times, with personnel from concerned NGO's, espe-
 cially the Kamalayan Development Foundation. Heightened public awareness led to
 greater cooperation by local authorities, increased involvement by government agen-
 cies, and prosecution of violators. By year's end, however, none of theeprostions
 had led to a conviction and sentencing. Kamalayan also omplained of shortcomings
 in government efforts to rehabilitate and reintegrate rescued children into society.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-Tripartite regional wage boards set minimum
 wages. The latest round of wage increases occurred in late 1995 and early 1996,
 with the highest rates set in the National Capital region (NCR) and the lowest in
 rural regions. The minimum wage for NCR nonagricultural workerss approxi-
 mately $6.30 (P165) per day. This wage represents a 13.8 percent nominal increase
 over the previous minimum for the region. With this amount, at least two family
 members would have to work (one full-time, onep art-time) to support a family of
 six abovepthe Government's "poverty threshold" regional board wage orders cover
 all private sector workers except domestic helpers and those employed in the per-
 sonal service of another. Boards outside the NCR exempted some employers because
 of factors such as establishment size, industry sector, involvement with exports, fi-
 nancial distress, and level of capitalization. These exemptions excluded substantial
 
 
 additional numbers of workers from coverage under the law. DOLE surveys in the
 first several months of 1996 showed that some 22 percent of inspected establish-
 ments violated the minimum wage law. Given the difficulty of prosecuting cases
 through the courts, the DOLE relies on administrative procedures and moral sua-
 sion to encourage voluntary employer correction of violations.
 The standard legal workweek is 48 hours for most categories of industrial workers
 and 40 hours for government workers, with an 8 hour per day limit. An overtime
 rate of 125 percent of the hourly rate is mandated on ordinary days and 130 percent
 on rest days and holidays. The law mandates a full day of rest weekly. Enforcement
 of workweek hours is managed through periodic inspections by the DOLE.
 A comprehensive set of occupational safety and health standards exists in law. Al-
 though policy formulation and review of these standards is the responsibility of the
 DOLE, actual enforcement is carried out by an inspectorate corps of some 260 labor
 and employment officers in 14 regional offices. Statistics on actual work-related acci-
 dents and illnesses are incomplete, as incidents (especially in regard to agriculture)
 are underreported. Workers do not have a legally protected right to remove them-
 selves from dangerous work situations without jeopardy to continued employment.
