PHILIPPINES
This year's report on the Philippines is very disappointing. It seeks to portray human rights abuses by government forces only as responses to acts of terrorism by insurgents or as spontaneous acts of violence by uncontrollable military personnel. Government programs to promote human rights are praised without any examination as to whether they have actually been implemented. There is more factual detail in the report than in past years, but this detail is presented in a manner so as to obscure the seriousness of the human rights situation in the Philippines, rather than to elucidate it. With respect to some issues, such as detention without charge or trial, the facts presented are simply wrong. In sum, the State Department strains to present the human rights policies of the Philippine government in their best light at the expense of objective reporting.
The most troubling aspect of the report is its tone, which consistently downplays government abuses. This is most clearly evident in the introductory section. While the report asserts forcefully that the Communist Party of the Philippines (CPP) and its armed wing, the New People's Army (NPA) "escalated campaigns of urban terrorism, political assassination, kidnapping, and extortion, resulting in widespread human rights abuses," the same paragraph meekly notes that "[e]lements of the Army and the PC [Philippine Constabulary] have also been involved in human rights violations." The introduction continues in this manner, stating that the "dominant factors" in the current human rights situation are the CPP/NPA insurgency "with its campaign of terrorism" and "the reaction to it by elements of the security forces and CAFGUs [local militia units] that the Government has rarely been able to control or effectively try and punish." The report then interjects, without even discussing the serious problem of "disappearances," that "[n]ew evidence indicates, however, that some disappearances attributed to the security forces were in fact murders carried out by Communist guerrillas."
The report provides instances where the Aquino administration has spoken out on human rights issues or has begun programs in response to criticisms of its human rights record, and the State Department equates apparent government concern with genuine improvements in the human rights situation. But official statements and new programs have rarely translated into effective government action. In the introduction, the report states that the Aquino government "continued to express firm opposition to human rights abuses" and noted government efforts. In the next sentence the report
173
Philippines
daims that the number of reported human rights abuses declined from 1988, strongly implying that the government's "firm opposition" to abuses and other efforts were directly responsible for the change. In light of the State Department's willingness to accept government claims without further investigation, this inference is unwarranted. For instance, the report states that in 1988 President Aquino designated certain government prosecutors as "human rights coordinators" to assist families searching for missing relatives. The report does not mention that this program has largely gone unimplemented. The Lawyers Committee found that prosecutors generally resented taking part in the program, and those who did usually kept themselves inaccessible to those in search of assistance. In interviews with prosecutors in several provinces with human rights problems, the Lawyers Committee learned only of one who said he actually served as a "human rights coordinator."
Similar criticisms can be made of the report's discussion of government efforts to prevent abuses. The report states that the government has "repeatedly affirmed its commitment to the rule of law and issued instructions that the human rights of all Filipinos be respected." The same paragraph also notes, correctly, that "[t]here is little evidence . . . that more senior military officials act to halt the abuses" committed by military personnel under their command and that few violators are disciplined or face judicial proceedings. However, the State Department makes no attempt to explain this wide divergence between the government's policy and the military's practice. Throughout the report the State Department places all blame for governmental abuses on low-ranking individuals acting without authority ("personal vendettas or criminal activity," "a commander of a small unit," "rightwing groups, possibly with collusion by some niilitary personnel") -- largely discounting the responsibility of higher-level officers for the actions of their subordinates, particularly when such abuses continue to occur and little effort is made to prosecute those implicated.
The reporting of the extent of serious abuses, such as extrajudicial executions, "disappearances" and torture, similarly reflects the State Department's tendency to downplay government involvement. In discussing extrajudicial executions, the report does not state clearly that members of the armed forces and government-backed "vigilante groups" have been responsible for several hundred extrajudicial executions. Instead, the report cites statistics, which elsewhere are called unreliable, to support its conclusion that political killings have dropped substantially from the previous year.
174
Philippines
Comparing government statistics in 1988 and 1989 makes little sense when nearly one-third of the 1988 cases were not reported until 1989: the 1989 figures are likely to increase significantly when further 1989 cases are reported in 1990.
A few specific cases are described, but they are presented in a manner that seems intended to raise doubts about government responsibility. For instance, Wenefredo Oton, a Davao del Sur religious worker, is said to have been killed either by an anti-Communist group or by the communist insurgents -- despite strong evidence that government-backed militiamen were responsible. Pastor Visminda Gran and her husband are said to have been killed "by unidentified gunmen who stole numerous valuable articles," implying that the murder was part of a robbery. Philippine human rights monitors found evidence strongly suggesting that the murders of the activist minister and her husband were politically motivated; in November, the police traced the murder weapon to a government militiaman. The broader effect of this approach is to call into question all accounts of extrajudicial executions and weaken the impact of the numerous cases that have been reported and documented.
The section on "disappearances" barely addresses the issue. It instead focuses on refuting the claims of Philippine human rights monitors that "disappearances" are increasing. It does not point out that military personnel continue to target for abduction members of legal leftist groups that the military has tagged as front organizations for the CPP. The report cites the role in "disappearances" of "rogue military or police personnel," thus seeking to deflect allegations of involvement by higher-ranking military officers. The large number of cases reported, the failure of the government to prosecute individuals responsible for "disappearances" and the fact that individuals first thought to have "disappeared" often turn up in military custody, strongly suggest the complicity, if not the actual participation, of higher-level officials in the abduction of suspected NPA supporters.
With respect to reports of an internal purge in the NPA that resulted in the torture and killing of several hundred people, the State Department states that "preliminary evidence indicates that the graves contain some persons whose "disappearances" had earlier been attributed by TFD [Task Force Detainees of the Philippines] and others to government forces or rightwing vigilante groups." To our knowledge, there has not been a single instance where a body found
175
Philippines
in one of the graves has been identified and found to be a person whose "disappearance" had previously been attributed to government forces.
The section on torture begins with the understatement that "reports that torture is employed persist." As reports by Amnesty International and others have documented, torture of individuals in police and military custody is a serious and widespread problem in the Philippines. Here, too, cases are presented in a manner such as to suggest that all claims of torture are doubtful. The section also gives the impression that the government has carefully investigated claims of torture. To our knowledge, few reported cases of torture have been the subject of a serious government inquiry by impartial investigators.
The section on arbitrary arrest states that "suspected Communist insurgents sometimes are held and interrogated for several days without legal proceedings." In fact, individuals have been held for weeks or even months without charge. Since April 1989, Luisito Uy and his wife Erlinda Escudero have been held in military custody in Samar without charge. In August, an attempt to visit the two detainees by an official of the governmental Commission on Human Rights (CHR) and a Lawyers Committee representative was turned away by the military at gunpoint. Moreover, NPA suspects are often held for several months on charges of rebellion, then released if no incriminating evidence is found.
The paragraph discussing the CAFGU militia seriously downplays the human rights problems associated with these units. Responsibility for screening volunteers lies not with "local officials," as the report states, but specifically with local military personnel. As a result, members of vigilante groups and the disbanded Civilian Home Defense Forces with abusive pasts or criminal records have been inducted into the CAFGUs. In addition to abuses committed by CAFGU units under the command of regular military personnel, CAFGU members operating alone or alongside vigilante groups have committed serious abuses, including extrajudicial execution and torture. The report notes that some CAFGU units have received private funding from landowners and businessmen, but does not indicate that this form of funding is permitted by an executive order. The private funding of the militia not only "raise[s] concern about the Government's ability to control the units" but raises serious questions about the purpose of these units. For instance, the Philippine Constabulary Forward Command, a privately funded vigilante group
176
Philippines
absorbed into the CAFGUs, has been implicated in numerous abuses against sugar workers and labor organizers in Negros.
The report makes occasional references to abuses by right-wing vigilante groups, but does not make clear that vigilante groups continue to operate in much of the country, despite President Aquino's 1988 public statement to dismantle the groups. The report refers to "private" vigilante groups, a characterization that obscures the fact that these groups often receive support, including weapons and financial assistance, from local military and government officials. Efforts made to disarm the vigilante groups have been haphazard and new groups continue to be organized. As with military and militia personnel, vigilante group members implicated in human rights abuses are rarely prosecuted.
The failure of the government to prosecute and convict human rights offenders is given more attention in this year's report than in the past. The report correctly states that a "major element" for this failure "is the strong imperative of the military to protect its own members" but does not explain how the military does this. The report adds that prosecutions are "often stymied by witnesses who are unwilling to testify because they fear reprisals"; again an explanation is lacking. The report should have stated clearly that victims and witnesses are often afraid to press charges or testify because of threats or harassment from military personnel or their agents. Because neither civilian nor military prosecutors will institute proceedings unless the victim takes an active role in fact-gathering, many serious cases are dropped because the victim has been intimidated. A further obstacle to prosecution are out-of-court financial settlements, which in practice are condoned by the courts. While such settlements may be beneficial to the victims of abuses, the public deterrence effect of criminal prosecution is lost.
There is a good account of the "Lupao Massacre" trial, where a military tribunal acquitted all 21 military defendants for the murder of 17 civilians in February 1987, despite the detailed testimony of six witnesses. However, the report should have noted that only enlisted men were ever charged in the killings. The officers implicated were never charged, a further indication of the government's failure to hold human rights violators responsible for their actions.
A minor point concerning recruitment of judges: the report states that the government is having difficulty filling lower level judgeships in outlying areas because of a failure to attract "qualified
177
Philippines
candidates." Actually, the problem relates specifically to Article VIII, Section 9 of the Constitution, which requires three nominees for each open judicial position — a hiring criteria that is difficult to meet in many parts of the country.
The report's discussion of the governmental CHR overstates its effectiveness in combatting human rights violations and monitoring abuses. It describes the CHR as the official "fact-gathering" human rights institution in the country, and later states that "when a complaint is filed, CHR conducts an investigation, gathering evidence and testimony from the complainant and the accused." In practice, the CHR does very little "fact-gathering," and instead generally relies on the evidence provided by complainants and respondents. Thus when the report states that the CHR completed investigation of 874 cases for the first 10 months of 1989, it should have made clear that a completed investigation is simply one where a decision has been made whether to recommend or not recommend that prosecutors investigate the case, or whether to file away the case indefinitely. (The figure of 874 is wrong; the CHR's 1989 Summary Report states that 545 cases had undergone "complete investigation" in 1989.) Moreover, the claim that the CHR monitors the cases it recommends for possible prosecution is incorrect; the Lawyers Committee has found very little active monitoring of cases.
The report describes cases of harassment and killings of church people, but gets key facts wrong. It notes that Catholic priest Dionisio Malalay was shot and killed by a "former" member of the Philippine Constabulary. Actually, Father Malalay's assailant, Corporal Sabino Colipano, was an active duty PC soldier. The report states that the "military reportedly questioned [Catholic priest Benjamin] Alforque about his visit to a CPP safehouse." In fact. Father Alforque went to see his sister who works at BALAY, a legal organization that provides assistance to former prisoners. When no one answered at BALAY, Father Alforque attempted to drive home. Along the way, military personnel fired several times at the priest's car and arrested him. He was released without charge. The report should also have mentioned the highly-publicized fatal shooting of Pastor Zenaido Ruelo in Zamboanga del Sur in April by Eladio Labostro, a CAFGU militiaman. Murder charges against Labostro were dropped after he reached an "amicable settlement" with Pastor Ruelo's widow. Shortly afterward, Labostro was killed and there are concerns that he died while in military custody.
178
Philippines
As in past years, the State Department makes dangerous assertions about the Task Force Detainees of the Philippines (TFD), a human rights monitoring group, without supporting its allegations. The report criticizes TFD, stating that "[i]ts acceptance of sometimes poorly substantiated reports and its close association with the CPP have led to charges that it overstates the case against the Government." Neither claim is backed by evidence, nor does the report make clear that it is the Philippine government that has made these charges.
Unlike the CHR, which relies on victims and witnesses who come to the CHR offices, TFD routinely sends its members to the scene of alleged violations to interview complainants and witnesses. While TFD does lack the technical investigatory tools normally associated with governmental fact-finding bodies, individual TFD case reports generally provide detailed personal accounts. The State Department insists on repeating the assertion made in the 1988 report and attributed to the government that investigations by NGOs "frequently do not produce enough evidence to make the necessary prima facie case." The State Department statement reflects the view that the complainant, not the government, should be primarily responsible for amassing evidence in a criminal case.
More serious is the charge, for which no source is provided nor any evidence presented, that TFD has a "close association with the CPP." As we have stated in past Critiques, repeating the allegations of communist links is precisely the kind of unsubstantiated labeling that has made human rights activists the targets of right-wing violence. That is a wholly inappropriate use of the State Department's human rights report. As in previous years, the State Department criticizes TFD for only reporting on abuses committed by government forces. TFD's practices are not exceptional: many human rights organizations worldwide report only on state violations of international human rights.
Similarly, the report states that the Medical Action Group "is alleged to be closely associated with the CPP," yet here too no evidence is provided to support this assertion. The report discusses Executive Order No. 212, which requires that the treatment of rebels be reported to the government's Department of Health, and cites without comment an incident where a doctor was arrested and health workers were detained because the military suspected them of treating NPA insurgents. The report fails to point out that Protocol II to the Geneva Conventions, which concerns non-international armed
179
Philippines
conflicts, provides that all wounded shall receive the medical care and attention required by their condition.
In the section on government attitudes towards investigations of human rights violations, the report states that "[l]ocal military and civilian officials have reportedly been uncooperative in some instances." It would have been more accurate to note that members of human rights organizations are routinely harassed by military and paramilitary personnel when they attempt to undertake investigations of alleged human rights abuses. Investigations by NGOs of reported mass grave sites have been obstructed by military personnel who have interfered with the investigations, such as by tampering with bodies before autopsies could be conducted.
The paragraphs discussing the displacement of large numbers of civilians during counter-insurgency operations seriously underestimates the hardships endured. The Armed Forces of the Philippines conducts major military operations against the NPA without notifying civilian authorities or adequately providing for food, shelter and medicine for civilian evacuees.
The report states that in Southern Negros "more than 90 children, already weakened by malnutrition and the process of evacuation, reportedly died of measles, pneumonia, and other causes while at the refugee shelters." In fact, relief organizations have estimated that more than 315 children died in Negros evacuation shelters. Another 72 children of evacuees reportedly died in Zamboanga del Norte. In neither instance did the government provide adequate medical supplies and treatment facilities.
More than in past reports, the section on labor rights acknowledges some of the criticism of the Philippine government's labor rights record. However, it still contains significant errors and misleading statements.
It is technically correct that strikes are legal and that the effort to pass "no-strike" laws has been resisted. However, over the past year there has been a serious whittling away at the legal right to strike. For instance, the Secretary of Labor retains the power of injunction against a strike and can refer strikes to compulsory arbitration in "industries that affect the national interest." This provision has been sharply criticized by the International Labor Organization (ILO), among others, as being overly broad. The report does not mention President Aquino's National State of Emergency
180
Philippines
proclamation of December 6 or the Emergency Powers Act, enacted December 20, which expand the definition of businesses in which the Secretary of Labor may intervene to prevent strikes. The State of Emergency proclamation was the basis for the government's prevention of a strike in December at a major poultry producer. Magnolia Poultry Products, as occurring in an industry "indispensable to the national interest." (The National Emergency Memorandum Order No. 5 of January 3, 1990, further empowers the government at the expense of labor regarding strikes and other issues.)
In addition, major amendments to the labor code passed in March 1989 restrict the legal right to strike during the term of an agreement to cases where the union can prove "gross and malicious violations" of the economic provisions of an agreement, such as failure to pay agreed wages or overtime rates. Thus workers no longer have the legal right to strike over such issues as the recognition of their union, illegal dismissal of union officers or economic provisions that cannot be shown to be "gross and malicious violations" — all practices that occur frequently in the Philippines.
The discussion of violence resulting from strikes is misleading. The report states that "there have been several cases of violence provoked by unions or management. Sometimes the police or military have been called in to break up illegal strike barricades, and on several occasions their attempts to enforce the law have resulted in violent clashes with strikers." Because government enforcement of labor agreements and protective labor legislation is poor, workers commonly go on illegal strikes to compel enforcement, often forming blockades to halt the flow of materials and workers to an enterprise. The police and military are often quick to regard this as a "provocation" and break up the picket line with teargas, firehoses, truncheons and sometimes firearms. The report states that the government did not "suppress" a July/August strike by public sector workers and teachers, but should have noted that President Aquino threatened sanctions against them.
The labor rights section should have noted the formation of special CAFGUs, which are militia units funded by businesses and which operate on the premises of companies and plantations, and the private sponsorship of military-backed vigilante groups. The CAFGUs and vigilantes have been implicated in serious abuses in a number of instances, including against Atlas Mine organizers in Cebu and sugar worker representatives in Negros. The report's assertion without factual support that the Kilusang Mayo Uno "is heavily
181
Philippines
infiltrated and influenced by the CPP" implicitly downplays the seriousness of continuing attacks against its organizers and members.
The report notes that the CHR has "examined the alleged repression" of sugar worker organizers and concludes that there has been "no prosecution due to insufficient evidence." To our knowledge, the CHR has not made a serious effort to investigate the charges of trade union repression. According to the ILO, the CHR said it would only investigate cases submitted by the victims of abuses or their families, not those submitted by labor organizations; this is contrary to the CHR's constitutional mandate under Article XIII, Section 18, to investigate human rights abuses "on complaint by any party." The State Department does a disservice by accepting at face value the CHR's explanation for why there have been no prosecutions.
The report's claim that labor legislation is "applied uniformly throughout the country" is simply wrong. Workers in non-urban areas often do not enjoy those provisions of the labor law designed to protect them, such as minimum wage laws, health and safety laws and prohibitions on child labor. As noted in the report, the government admits to a shortage of enforcement staff. By law, the official minimum wage varies for work performed in Manila or in the provinces and whether it is agricultural or non-agricultural. Although minimum wages were increased by an unprecedented 30% in June, many companies have refused to abide by the law and enforcement has been inadequate. Also, many new enterprises are exempt from the new minimum wages. The U.S. Embassy's own annual labor report for the Philippines, published in June 1989, admits that "[ojnly unionized workers in larger establishments are likely to benefit principally from legislated wage hikes." For instance, a government survey found that in 1989 more than 50% of sugar plantations inspected violated the minimum wage laws.
Finally, the section on child employment asserts that the Aquino administration "has made a serious effort to investigate and reduce violations of child labor laws." While there has been some rhetoric, there is little evidence to suggest that genuine efforts have been undertaken. The large number of children hawking newspapers and other items on Manila's main thoroughfares is only the most visible evidence of this widespread problem. Child prostitution is also serious and in at least one town is condoned by local authorities for its economic benefits. To our knowledge, there have been no prosecutions of child labor law violators.
182
