 THE PHILIPPINES
 The Philippines is a democratic republic with an elected president, a functioning
 political party system, a bicameral legislature, and an independent judiciary. How-
 ever, political corruption remains endemic in many areas of government, including
 the electoral and law enforcement systems. The Government made progress in talks
 with insurgent groups. The judicial system suffers from both corruption and ineffi-
 ciency.
 The Department of National Defense directs the Armed Forces of the Philippines
 (AFP), and the Department of Interior and Local Government has authority over the
 civilian Philippine National Police (PNP), whose role involves anti-insurgency efforts
 as well as normal police work. Despite its official external mission, the AFP became
 increasingly involved in local law enforcement. Security forces, including police, sol-
 diers, and local civilian militias, committed human rights abuses.
 The Government is implementing a far-reaching economic reform program, "Phil-
 ippines 2000," to convert its agrarian-based economy into an industrial, market-
 driven one and attract foreign investment. The Government has succeeded in liber-
 alizing the investment, trade, and foreign exchange regimes. Garments and elec-
 tronics make up more than half of merchandise export receipts and are significantly
 complemented by overseas worker remittances totaling over $4 billion in 1997.
 Gross domestic product grew at approximately 5 percent. While the Government has
 accelerated market reforms, poverty and inequitable income distribution remain,
 and the Government's "social reform agenda' has made little progress. About 36 per-
 cent of the population of 70 million have difficulty meeting basic nutritional and
 other needs, while the richest 20 percent of families received incomes over 10 times
 that of the lowest 20 percent. Annual per capita national income was estimated at
 $1,142 for the first 9 months of 1997.
 The Government generally respected the human rights of its citizens; however,
 there were problems in some areas. Members of the security forces were responsible
 for extrajudicial killings, disappearances, torture and other physical abuse of sus-
 pects, and arbitrary arrest and detention. Prison conditions are harsh and in some
 cases life threatening. According to the Government's Commission on Human Rights
 (CHR), the police continued to be the leading abusers of human rights. Some abuses
 were committed by police or military personnel involved in illegal activities, includ-
 ing coerced protection, kidnaping gangs, drug syndicates, and illegal logging. In
 some cases, police authorities appear to tacitly sanction police brutality and even
 collusion with killings as an expedient means to fight crime. The Government has
 taken few effective steps to reform the police, the military forces, or a court system
 that appears susceptible to the influence of the wealthy and powerful while not pro-
 viding equal justice for others. There is a failure to prosecute many who break the
 law. The judiciary is inefficient, lacks sufficient staff, does not ensure expeditious
 trials, and suffers from corruption. The courts remain hobbled by backlogs and lim-
 ited resources, and long delays in trials are common. There was a marked increase
 in the displacement of citizens, accompanied by physical assaults on communities
 (indigenous peoples, farm cooperatives or squatter groups).
 An estimated 4 million citizens living abroad remained disenfranchised because
 Congress has not yet enacted absentee voting, as required by the Constitution. Vio-
 lence and discrimination against women and abuse of children continued to be seri-
 ous problems. Discrimination against indigenous people and Muslims persists, al-
 though the Mindanao peace process is addressing the latter problems in many com-
 munities. Legislation passed in October is expected to provide improved protection
 for indigenous people. Rural poverty and family displacement worsened a persistent
 child labor problem, which the Government took steps to address.
 To promote respect for human rights, the Commission on Human Rights, a gov-
 ernmental body, organized a system of over 6,000 locality ("barangay") human
 rights officers to monitor local authorities and report complaints.
 Communist    and  Muslim   insurgent groups committed      abuses, including
 extrajudicial killings, kidnapings, torture, and detentions.
 
 
 877
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-Police, prison guards, and military
 forces committed extrajudicial killings. The nongovernmental organization (NGO)
 Task Force Detainees of the Philippines (TFDP) reported five extrajudicial kill
 by authorities in the first 6 months of 1997, compared with 14 in 1996. The CUR
 which includes killings by insurgents in its totals, investigated 49 extrajudicial
 killings in the first 6 months of the year.
 The TFDP reported that police personnel killed three persons and wounded three
 others during the demolition and removal of an indigenous people's community in
 Bukidnon province, Mindanao, in July. According to both the TFDP and the
 Church's Ecumenical Commission for Displaced Families and Communities, ele-
 ments of the PNP shot two members of the Higaonon people and a Filipino visitor'
 in the course of forcibly removing them from land that they claimed as ancestral
 domain but to which a powerful local family also laid claim. Three other Higaonon,
 including an 8-year-old girl, were wounded in the gunfire as local security forces,
 demolition teams and the PNP worked together to expel more than a hundred fami-
 lies (an estimated 600 people).
 Although several thousand PNP officers have taken part in CHR human rights
 training, killings and the mistreating of criminal suspects continued. In May De-
 partment of Interior and Local Government (DILG) Secretary Robert Barbers issued
 a "shoot to kill" directive to police in situations where they believed they faced an
 armed criminal. Barbers sought to respond to allegations of a police killing in the
 death of suspected jewelry store robber whose escape from jail was widely reported
 by the press (see Section i.e.).
 There were numerous deaths in custody due to beatings by prison guards, mal-
 nutrition, and disease (see Section 1.c.).
 The AFP continued its counterinsurgency campaign in Mindanao (see Section 1.g.),
 and the TFDP reported that the AFP was respons'le for 14 civilian deaths during
 the first half of 1997.
 Extrajudicial killings also resulted from increased AFP involvement in civilian
 law enforcement following the declaration by President Ramos in August that the
 drug trade was a national security threat. Members of the AFP mistakenly killed
 an 8-year-old girl in August during a raid on the home of a suspected drug lord.
 The CHR filed a negligence complaint against the AFP unit's commanders. The sol-
 diers involved were arraigned on charges of manslaughter.
 Many civilian deaths resulted from clashes between the APP and the Muslim sep-
 aratist group, the Moro Islamic Liberation Front (MILF). A cease fire was put into
 effect in November, and the Government and MILF have engaged in exploratory
 talks. In March in Buldon in Mindanao, 10 Muslim students and a teacher were
 killed by artillery fire that destroyed the building where they were holding classes.
 A CHR investigation and report indicated that only the AFP used the kind of
 105mm howitzer capable of firing the projectiles that struck the community center
 holding the classes. However, the AFP claimed that there was evidence that a dif-
 ferent kind of munition was used in the shelling.
 Civilian militia units or Citizens Armed Forces Geographical Units (CAFGU's)
 also committed extrajudicial killings. Organized by the police and the AFP to secure
 areas cleared of insurgents, these nonprofessional units have inadequate training,
 poor supervision, and a propensity for violent behavior. There was a gradual reduc-
 tion of CAFGU numbers, however, continued fighting in Mindanao and resistance
 from some governors, who feared a renewed Communist threat, particularly in
 northern Luzon, hindered efforts to reduce such forces.
 The Catholic Bishops Conference of the Philippines (CBCP) reported that in Au-
 gust a CAFGU member killed a church worker assigned to pastoral care of prisoners
 in the Davao area penal colony at Dapecol. The CBCP indicated that the church vol-
 unteer, Rodrigo Guillen, was shot by the CAFGU bodyguard of the superintendent
 of the penal colony, retired police colonel Jose Poblacion. Guillen was reportedly a
 target for retribution after recently signing a complaint against Poblacion about
 abuses in the prison (see Section 1.c.).
 In February unidentified gunmen killed the head of the Catholic diocese of Sulu,
 Bishop Benjamin De Jesus. The gunmen also killed a young girl and wounded four
 boys. Prosecutors announced the arrest of two suspects without apparent political
 motives. At year's end, the trial had not begun.
 Police suspects in the 1995 Kuratong Baleleng robbery case have not yet been
 tried in the Sandiganbayan , the ombudsman court. The United Nations Special
 Rapporteur on Summary and Arbitrary Execution still awaits a final response from
 the Government to its inquiry about the case. The Sandiganbayan appeared pre-
 
 
 878
 pared to issue indictments and open trial early in the year, however, both a
 andiganbayan justice and Senator Raul Roco, who pushed for the case's resolution,
 reported receiving death threats in February. The attorneys assisting prosecution
 witnesses in the case complained to the U.N. Special Rapporteur that they also re-
 ceived death threats. In Februa  the Rapporteur, Bacre Ndaje, asked the Phil-
 ippine Department of Foreign Affairs to enforce the fundamental principles of the
 universal Declaration on Human Rights. In June some of the key high-ranking po-
 lice officials, who were about to be charged, were informally "rehabilitated" after the
 PNP reinstated them. As the process dragged on, key state witnesses either left the
 country due to fear of reprisal, or remained in a witness protection program, due
 to fear of retribution against their families.
 Corruption and continued impunity hindered the prosecution of cases of killings
 from previous years. The Integrated Bar of the Philippines (IBP) urged its 40,000
 members in August to protest the lack of government prosecution in eight cases in-
 volving the death or disappearance of judges and lawyers since 1994.
 Vigilante groups or employees of contract security firms working with the authori-
 ties were also responsible for extrajudicial killings. In Davao city there is reportedly
 widespread vigilante justice practiced against suspected drug dealers. Senator
 Ernesto Herrera, a leader in the Government's antidrug efforts, reported that a
 Davao vigilante group calling itself "Servants of the People" killed 39 suspected
 drug dealers in the first 8 months of 1997.
 Although the Communist insurgency, with its military wing the New People's
 Army (NPA), is greatly reduced from its height in the 1980's, NPA insurgents killed
 many persons, including civilians. In Zambales province in March rebels ambushed
 a police patrol and killed a local police chief, four officers, and two civilians. In Que-
 zon province in January NPA forces ambushed a car occupied by employees of a
 power station construction site and killed two persons. In Mindoro province in April
 NPA forces attacked the town hall in Bansud and killed two unarmed security men.
 Members of a faction of the NPA killed two civilians in San Carlos city in Negros
 Occidental in February. The NPA faction reportedly killed the two men for their al-
 leged involvement in drug trafficking and land extortion (see Section 1.4. In "Peo-
 ple's Court" trials, the NPA tortured and summarily executed some defendants (see
 Section i.e.).
 Urban leftist guerrillas reportedly killed two former NPA members in the Manila
 area in June. Members of the terrorist Alex Boncayao Brigade claimed responsibility
 for the "execution" of a landowner in Negros Occidental in July.
 MILF rebels hijacked a vehicle in the Maguindanao province of Mindanao in June
 and killed two passengers.
 In late October, NPA units raided a police municipal headquarters in Rizal prov-
 ince near Manila. They killed one policeman and abducted the police chief, whom
 they held for over a month. In November three policemen and a photographer were
 killed in a Bicol province ambush. An NPA attack in Mindoro Occidental in Decem-
 ber resulted in the deaths of five policemen and the abduction of a police com-
 mander. The NPA released their police captives in both Rizal and Mindoro Occiden-
 tal provinces after subjecting them to a "trial" (see Section 1.f.).
 b. Disappearance.-The C11 reported eight disappearance in the first 6 months
 of the year, compared with five in 1996. The Integrated Bar of the Philippines ex-
 pressed concern over the August disappearance of a defense attorney retained by
 the suspect in a highly publicized drug case. The missing attorney was last seen
 in the company of a National Bureau of Investigation officer before he was ab-
 ducted. According to government sources, there were links between the attorney's
 client, a suspected drug smuggler, and the police.
 The courts and police have failed to address complaints by victims' families con-
 cerning numerous disappearances in the late 1980's. According to Amnesty Inter-
 national, disappearances occurred when people were taken into custody by agents
 of the Government, but the Government denied knowledge of their whereabouts and
 concealed their custody. An advocacy group, Families of Victims of Involuntary Dis-
 appearance (FIND), presented to the Government records of 1,635 documented cases
 o missing individuals since the Marcos era. (According to Amnesty International,
 there were 759 disappearances under former President Ferdinand Marcos, 830 dis-
 appearances during the Corazon Aquino presidency, and 46 since President Ramos
 assumed office in 1992.) Although President Fidel Ramos appointed a committee to
 investigate such disappearances in 1992, the committee never functioned. FIND
 called for its disbanding to dispel any illusion that the problem is being addressed.
 Instead FIND appealed for a return visit by the U.N. Working Group on Enforced
 and Involuntary Disappearances, which last visited the country in 1990. The ap-
 pearance of deliberate government inaction on cases that involve officials who re-
 
 
 879
 main influential helps create a climate of impunity that undermines confidence in
 the justice system.
 Kidnaping of members of ethnic communities remained a problem. Criminal syn-
 dicatesand nsurgent groups targeted primarily Chinese-Filipino businessmen, al-
 though their victims also included ethnic Filipino business people and some foreign
 managers. According to the group Citizens Action Against Crime (CAAC), which
 monitors incidents that victims' families have chosen not to report, there were 105
 kidnapings for ransom in the first 8 months of 1997, involving 172 victims.
 Members of the Chinese-Filipino community, which is about 1 to 2percent of the
 population, wield significant commercial influence, normally refusedt cooperate
 with the authorities or to identify their captors, if known. In a typical case, kidnap-
 ers seized real estate developer Kok Go and his sn in a downtown Manila neighbor-
 hood in February. Within hours his family paid about $170,000 (5 million pesos) for
 their release without contacting the police. The Chinese community deeply distrusts
 the authorities, whom they believe collude with the kidnap gangs. Observers believe
 that police involvement is indicated by the kidnapers' frequent use of sophisticated
 communications equipment and high-powered weapons. In December shops in
 Manila's Chinese business district closed for 1 day, and there were marches to pro-
 test the deaths of two young kidnap victims.
 According to the Government's kidnaping task force report in March there was
 evidence that 87 police officers and 27 members of the military were involved with
 kidnaping operations. Nevertheless, despite press criticism, there were few indict-
 ments of police and military personnel on kidnaping charges.
 Along with Manila, the city of Cotabato in Mindanao was a frequent site of
 kidnapings. Its proximity to areas controlled by an insurgent Muslim force, the
 MILF, makes it especially vulnerable. To respond to a rash of 14 kidnapings in a
 month and shop closure protests by the resident Chinese-Filipino business commu-
 nity, President Ramos ordered soldiers to replace the police as the law enforcement
 authority there in May. Although AFP leaders charged the MILF with seeking ran-
 som funds and using the kidnapings as a "show of force," observers believed that
 many kidnapings were by gangs, many of which were composed of former insurgents
 or police and army veterans. In some cases MILF forces also took part or colluded
 with the kidnapers. In one such incident, a German businessman was kidnaped by
 the MILF in Zamboanga del Norte in September, at year's end, although his release
 seemed imminent, he was still being held. Several bandit groups or fraudulent
 intermediaries have emerged to seek ransom money.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution prohibits torture, and evidence obtained through its use is legally
 inadmissible. However, members of the security forces and police continued to use
 torture and otherwise abuse suspects and detainees. The CHR and the Department
 of Interior and Local Government (DILG) provide the police with human rights
 training, includingprimers on the rights of suspects. However, such training is vol-
 untary and dependent on the DILG's uncertain budget. Police awareness of the
 rights of persons in custody remains poor.
 The CHR reported one case of torture through June, compared with four in all
 of 1996. The TFDP reported eight cases in the first 10 months of 1997, compared
 with nine during 1996. A study commissioned by the NGO LawAsia identified the
 most common forms of abuse during arrest and interrogation as mauling, slaps,
 strangulation, hitting with rifle butts or wooden clubs, poking with a gun, enclosing
 a victim's head in cellophane, and applying electrical current to the genitals. Police
 also reportedly burn or drag suspects behind cars to force confessions. In February
 a CHR medical officer found evidence that police tortured and beat suspects in a
 robbery case in which police were allegedly involved. According to the CR, the po-
 lice used electric shocks, blows with rifle stocks, and beatings to force confessions
 from the two suspects.
 Police used tear gas and force in battling squatters who were being displaced (see
 Section 1.f.).
 The NPA sometimes tortures defendants tried in its informal courts (see Section
 1.e.).
 Prison conditions are harsh and often life threatening. Jails and prisons are over-
 crowded, have limited exercise and sanitary facilities, and provide prisoners with an
 inadequate diet. Administrators reportedly budget a subsistence allowance of about
 80 cents (25 pesos) a day. In January there were prisoner riots in the Manila city
 jail, reportedly caused by gang rivalries. In July, during another riot there, two pris-
 oners and the infant child of an inmate were shot and killed by prison guards at-
 tempting to quell the disturbance. Conditions reached crisis proportions when an
 outbreak of typhoid fever in the jail led to the death of eight prisoners in February.
 Over 2,000 prisoners are housed in the century old jail, where overcrowding and a
 
 
 contaminated water supply caused numerous typhoid cases. Following a 1990-96
 CUR study on 6 939 jail facilities, the CHR criticized the imprisonment of women
 and children in f'acilities not fully segregated from male inmates. A September CHR
 report notes that budget shortfalls have prevented many local authorities from pro-
 viding better jail conditions.
 Official corruption is a serious problem in the prison system. Jail administrators
 reportedly delegate much authority to maintain order to senior inmates. Favored in-
 mates reportedly enjoy access to outside contacts, enabllng them to trade in pros-
 titution and drugs from within the jail. The CUR investigated the death of an in-
 mate in February after his family charged that his body showed marks of beatings.
 Jail authorities claimed that he fell to his death in an apparent suicide.
 Guards often abuse prisoners. Female prisoners are at particular risk of sexual
 assault. A CUR report on jail facilities throughout the country indicated that of 613
 jails visited, only 64 had adequate facilities and were in good condition. Some promi-
 nent prisoners and celebrities, however, are treated far better. A congressman de-
 tained in a Makati city jail for several months soon upgraded his cell quarters with
 air conditioning, food service facilities, and video equipment. He was allowed passes
 to visit his dentist and others outside the jail.
 Conditions in the provincial jails were often as Spartan and overcrowded as in
 Manila. Inmates depended on their families for food because of the insufficient sub-
 sistence allowance. According to the penal authorities, there were over 21,000 pris-
 oners held in regional jails. Many were there at the discretion of local law enforce-
 ment authorities without benefit of a trial. In one incident the CAFGU bodyguard
 of a penal colony superintendent killed a church volunteer worker (see Section L.a.).
 Through the efforts of the CHR between 1988 and 1996, 627 prisoners and detain-
 ees were released because they had been imprisoned beyond the term of the sen-
 tences imposed, or because the CHR helped obtain their paroles or pardon. The
 CHR study found that a major contributor to overcrowding in the prisons was the
 courts' failure to hear the cases of detainees who were unable to post bail.
 International monitoring groups, the International Committee of the Red Cross,
 and foreign embassy officials are allowed free access to jails and prisons.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-Although the Constitution requires a ju-
 dicial determination of probable cause before issuance of an arrest warrant and pro-
 hibits holding prisoners incommunicado or in secret places of detention, police con-
 tinue to arbitrarily arrest and detain citizens.
 Detainees have the right to a judicial review of the legality of their detention and,
 except for offenses punishable by a life sentence or death (when evidence of guilt
 is strong), the right to bail. Authorities are required to file charges within 12 to 36
 hours of a warrantless arrest, depending on the seriousness of the crime for which
 the arrest was made. The CHR listed 34 cases of illegal arrest and detention in the
 first 6 months of 1997. The TFDP reported that 81 persons were arrested illegally
 in the first 10 months of 1997, compared with 84 such arrests during the previous
 year. In late 1996, the politically motivated arrest and detention of a member of the
 Communist National Democratic Front (NDF), Danilo Boijal, in Naga city received
 extensive publicity. Borjal was an advisr for the Government-NPA peace talks, and
 despite his right to certain immunities under the Government's peaceprocess agree-
 ment with the NDF and related NPA insurgents, he was arrested and held for over
 3 months on a charge of illegal possession of an weapon.
 The NPA is responsible for some arbitrary arrests and detentions, often in connec-
 tion with informal courts set up to try civilians and local politicians for "crimes
 against the people."
 Forced exile is illegal and is not practiced.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The Constitution provides for an independent judi-
 ciary, but the judicial system suffers from corruption and inefficiency. Personal ties
 undermine the commitment of some government institutions to ensuring due proc-
 ess and equal justice, resulting in impunity for those who commit offenses but are
 rich and influential.
 The national court system consists of four levels: Local and regional trial courts,
 a national Court of Appeals divided into 15 divisions, a 15-member Supreme Court,
 and an informal local system for arbitrating or mediating certain problems outside
 the formal court system.
 The Constitution provides that those accused of crimes be informed of the charges
 against them, have the right to counsel, and be provided a speedy and public trial.
 Defendants are presumed innocent and have the right to confront witnesses against
 them, to present evidence, and to appeal convictions. The authorities generally re-
 spect the right of defendants to be represented by a lawyer, although poverty often
 inhibits a defendant's access to attorneys. There is no jury system under the law;
 all cases are heard by judges.
 
 
 881
 According to the NGO Alterlaw, abuse of personal connections, patronage, influ-
 ence peddling, and bribery are common. The judicial process is perceived as biased
 in favor of the rich and influential, and there are few instances of the police inves-
 tigating and the courts trying white collar criminals. Legal experts in and outside
 the justice system also criticize personal and professional relationships between
 judges and the individuals and corporations whose cases they are assigned. Some
 law firms, known in that profession as "case fixers," gain the favor of judges and
 other court officials and bribe some witnesses. While it is technically illegal to settle
 criminal cases out of court, the practice of reaching an 'amicable settlement" is rou-
 tine; without key victims or witnesses to testify, the authorities are forced to aban-
 don their case. The Government has been unable, for the most part, to take effective
 action to intervene in these situations.
 The pace of justice is slow. The court system is unable to assure detained persons
 expeditious trials. There is a widely recognized need for more prosecutors, judges,
 and courtrooms. A leading court administrator indicated that 549 unfilled positions
 for judges remained vacant in 1997 for lack of qualified applicants. Many vacancies
 were in provincial capitals unattractive to jurists. In other cases, salaries for judges
 were considered too low compared with other opportunities. Further impeding jus-
 tice was a shortage of prosecutors. A Justice Department official acknowledged in
 June that he lacked sufficient resources to hire the prosecutors needed for the na-
 tionwide case load. He also acknowledged that prosecutors are susceptible to corrup-
 tion because of their low salaries.
 Accordin to the Constitution, cases are to be resolved within set time limits once
 submitted for decision: 24 months for the Supreme Court; 12 for the Court of Ap-
 peals, and 3 months for lower courts. There are no time limits for trials. Because
 of numerous technical delays and frequent failures of judges and prosecutors to ap-
 pear, trials can last many months. Prosecutors often declined to prosecute certain
 types of cases. Officials in the Labor and Social Welfare Departments complain that
 prosecutors fail to follow up on cases involving child labor violations (see Section
 6.d.). Police who cut short the investigative process by extracting forced confessions
 contribute to lengthy court dockets, as judges reject such denials of due process.
 The CHR reported that only 18 percent of the human rights cases that it referred
 to courts and other government agencies were resolved, and that the courts dis-
 missed 76 percent of the few cases received for judicial review. Commission officials
 blamed the low percentage on the problems inherent in the justice system. To ad-
 dress the problem, the CHR arranged to have three Justice Department prosecutors
 permanently assigned to its staff to expedite prosecutions.
 Although the -andiganbayan's handling of the Kuratong Baleleng case (see Sec-
 tion 1.a.) was not transparent, the court, as an instrument for reform, served well
 in some cases involving regional political figures who might otherwise have swayed
 the verdicts of regional courts. However, in other cases involving major political fig-
 ures and sensitive issues, the court appeared unable to begin proceedings.
 An NGO representing over 400 families of crime victims (Crusade Against Vio-
 lence-CAV) reported some success in providing families with legal advice, monitor-
 ing court processes, and spurring prosecutors to address cases despite the efforts of
 local crime lords or officials to hinder proceedings. However, CAV president Dante
 Jimenez resigned in May in a protest gesture after his brother's murderer was ac-
 quitted in a Manila area court. Jimenez charged that local protectors of the drug
 trade had succeeded in corrupting the court process.
 More than 10,000 victims claiming indemnification for alleged Marcos-era human
 rights abuses await the outcome of a Makati city court case begun in May. Attor-
 neys defending Mrs. Imelda Marcos sought to block any court finding by obtaining
 a certificate that there were no human rights cases officially on file against the
 former president. CHR officials stated that they would support the efforts of the
 human rights victims to obtain relief and filed a motion on their behalf in the
 Makati court. Former President Corazon Aquino made a public appeal for speedy
 court justice for the Marcos-era human rights victims.
 In October the TFDP questioned the apparent unfairness in many of court pro-
 ceedings that result in death penalty sentences, since the judicial system did not
 ensure the rights of defendants to due process and legal representation. At times,
 defendants in such cases had no lawyers to assist them when they were arrested,
 indicted, and brought to trial.
 The NPA "tries" civilians and local politicians for "crimes against the people in
 informal courts. Defendants in such trials are sometimes tortured or summarily exe-
 cuted. Former leaders of the Communist Party have been at particular risk in "peo-
 ple's court" trials.
 In 1995 the Government offered amnesty to former rebels and members of govern-
 ment security forces up to a June 1,1995 deadline. In the case of rebels, crimes cov-
 
 
 ered by the amnesty had to have been committed in pursuit of political beliefs; in
 that of members of government forces, crimes covered were those committed in the
 performance of duty. Members of government security forces who committed serious
 human rights violations (arson, torture, extrajudicial killings, massacres, rape, tor-
 ture and robbery) were excluded from the program. A quasi-judicial National Am-
 nesty Commission (NAC), whose decisions are subject to review only by the Court
 of Appeals, was established to process amnesty applications. The AC processed
 and oversaw the release of 41 political prisoners in 1995 and 1996. None were re-
 leased in 1997.
 The TFDP reported that there were 190 political prisoners held as of December
 1. The Government disputes this charge, contending that those held for allegedly
 political reasons were really imprisoned for common crimes. Frequently those politi-
 cal prisoners counted ,by the TFDP were charged with illegal possession of firearms.
 The TFDP claims that the authorities deliberately "criminalized" the political of-
 fender cases in order to strip political prisoners of public sympathy. In the first half
 of 1997, TFDP investigations indicated that there were 87 new illegal arrests for
 political reasons (compared with 60 during the same period in 1996). According to
 the TFDP the authorities released 24 political prisoners. They were released
 through various means, including outright case dismissal (6) and conditional pardon
 (11).
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Constitution provides that search warrants may be issued by a judge on a finding
 of probable cause. Restrictions on search and seizure within private homes are gen-
 erally observed, although searches without warrants do occur. Judges have declared
 evidence obtained illegally to be inadmissible.
 Although the Government does not interfere with the free personal use of the
 mail, there were credible reports in August that military surveillance teams oper-
 ated within telephone company exchanges to monitor calls in antinarcotics law en-
 forcement operations.
 There was a marked increase in displacements of families from their homes to
 make way for infrastructure and commercial developments. In January the United
 Nations Committee on Economic, Social, and Cultural Rights declared the Phil-
 ippines to be "one of the top violators" in allowing families to be displaced without
 adequate substitute housing. The U.N. Committee filed a formal inquiry with the
 Government concerning widespread demolitions in 1996. A member of the CHR,
 Mercedes Contreras, complained that in implementing massive infrastructure
 projects in Manila, the Government has dislocated thousands of squatter families
 (estimated as affecting about 180,000 people during the year). The Government has
 had difficulty in implementing its 1992 housing law, which provides for consulta-
 tion, compensation, and substitute housing for the squatter families affected by re-
 moval plans. Instead there were numerous arbitrary demolitions of squatter areas,
 which often resulted in physical confrontations and even deaths to squatter family
 members.
 A police detachment carried out a demolition of homes belonging to an indigenous
 people's community, the Higaonons, which resulted in three deaths in July (see Sec-
 tion 1.a.). About 100 families were left homeless following the demolition, which was
 carried out based on a court order secured by a local landowning family.
 In Manila there were repeated incidents of violence associated with the forced dis-
 placement of squatter communities. In January 50 police officers using tear gas bat-
 tled about 600 squatters to take over a lot in the central Binondo district; dozens
 of persons were injured in the melee. In July police and demolition teams helped
 clear the Sitio Mendez neighborhood in Quezon City of Metro Manila, leaving about
 12,000 people temporarily homeless; three infants died during the confrontation
 with residents. Subsequently a community leader among the squatters was shot and
 killed by hired security guards. Although the landowner belatedly made arrange-
 ments for substitute housing following public criticism, the TFDP described the kill-
 ing of the community leader as a 'move to terrorize slum dwellers opposed to
 demolitions."
 In a similar case raised with the U.N. Commission on Human Rights in 1997 by
 the leading human rights NGO coalition, the Philippine Association of Human
 Rights Advocates, a president of a community farmers association in Cavite province
 was abducted in September 1996, following a series of strong protests against the
 displacement of the community by a resort developer. The association appealed its
 claim to land ownership to the Government's Department of Agrarian Reform,
 which has restrained the developer with a court order. But confrontations between
 the farmers and developers' agents and local police occurred periodically throughout
 the year.
 
 
 g. Use of Excessive Force and Violations of Humanitarian Law In Internal Con-
 flicts.-Despite a 1996 peace agreement between the Government and the Moro Na-
 tional Liberation Front, a major Islamic insurgent group, occasional clashes between
 government and insurgent forces loyal to the militant Moro Islamic Liberation Front
 continued to inflict hardship on civilians. Most of the fighting took place in western
 Mindanao provinces, particularly North Cotabato, Maguindanao, Zamboanga del
 Norte, and Basilan.
 The AFP assumed police duties in the Mindanao area after President Ramos ex-
 pressed heightened concern over a series of abductions that was allegedly undermin-
 in the Mindanao peace process. In June despite a negotiated cease-fire with the
 M   F, the army attacked a large MILF base area in Maguindanao province to res-
 cue alleged kidnap victims, displacing more than 18,000 families.
 Displaced families fear careless use of artillery and bombing in areas otherwise
 untouched by the conflict. According to the Ecumenical Commission for Displaced
 Families and Communities, 14 armed clashes in the first half of the year displaced
 some 27,147 families, an estimated 162,800 persons. The TFDP reported that one
 civilian was killed and nine wounded as the result of small arms crossfire or from
 cannon and rocket fire (see Section L.a.).
 Although neither side appeared to have targeted civilian populations or restricted
 relief supplies, there were periodic grave food shortages associated with the large
 number of displaced families during the army's June clashes with the MILF.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of speech
 and of the press, and the Government generally respects these rights in practice.
 Drug syndicates have frequently retaliated agalnst journalists investigating their
 crimes. In December 1996, a television reporter was killed at his home in Cavite
 after investigating drug trafficking. There have been no arrests in the case. In June
 drug traffickers were implicated in the death of Manila journalist Danny Hernan-
 dez, who reported on the scale of Manila area drug operations. The Philippine Press
 Institute (PPI) sought a reopening of the police investigation   in th a   the belief
 that the prior police investigation-whichhad resulted in the arrest of an alleged
 robber-had failed to identify the real perpetrators.
 The PPI favors the repeal of legislation that bans political advertising in the
 media. The PPI believes that the total ban, enacted in the interest of fairness, fa-
 vors incumbents and deprives new candidates of the opportunity to make their
 views known.
 There appears to be no invasive use of censorship, although there is a govern-
 ment-appinted Movie and Television Review and Classification Board which largely
 monitors the sexual rather than the political content of productions. The Govern-
 ment succeeded in delaying the release of a film depicting the hardships and alleged
 rape of an overseas 14-year-old Filipino girl working illegally in a household in the
 Middle East. Officials persuaded the film company to withhold the film on the
 ground that its content could affect sensitive bilateral relations.
 The Government respects academic freedom.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution provides for
 these rights, and the Government respects them in practice.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for freedom of religion, and the
 Government respects this right in practice.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-Citizens enjoy the freedom to change their place of residence and em-
 ployment. Travel abroad is limited only in rare circumstances, such as pending
 court cases or when government authorities try to discourage travel by vulnerable
 workers, such as young women to areas where they face personal risk. The Phil-
 ippine Overseas Employment Administration (POEA) seeks to limit departures for
 work abroad to those whom the POEA certifies as qualified for the jobs. An esti-
 mated 4 million citizens work overseas and remit money home, which amounts to
 5 percent of the gross national product.
 The Philippines is a signatory to the 1951 Geneva Convention Relating to the Sta-
 tus of Refugees and its 1967 Protocol. There is no comprehensive legislation, how-
 ever, to implement the Convention. The Government recognized approximately 140
 refugees who were under the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees protection. The
 Government continued to allow 1,583 asylum seekers from Vietnam to remain after
 the termination of the Comprehensive Plan of Action (CPA) on June 30. All these
 asylum seekers were denied refugee status in accordance with CPA provisions. Ap-
 proximately 385 of these persons reside in a village in Palawan composed largely
 of Vietnamese, while the remainder live in major urban areas.
 
 
 884
 
 The Government continued to encourage voluntary repatriation of these asylum
 seekers and has ruled out forcible repatriation. There is significant nongovernment
 support (particularly from the Catholic Church) for allowing those asylum seekers
 who do not wish to repatriate and are ineligible for resettlement in third countries
 to remain in the country permanently.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 The Constitution provides citizens with the right to change their government
 peacefully, and citizens exercise this right through periodic elections. Congress has
 yet to enact, however, a system for absentee voting, as required by the Constitution.
 This provision affects an estimated 4 million potential voters or about 10 percent
 of the electorate, most of whom are expatriates.
 An estimated 70 to 75 percent of registered voters participated in 1995 national
 and local elections that confirmed the control of a loose progoverment coalition over
 both the House of Representatives and the Senate.
 However, the 1995 elections disclosed a flaw in the election system, which impairs
 the democratic process and the transition of power in government. Election irreg-
 ularities invalidated the Senate race results for some candidates. The hand-counting
 of millions of paper ballots delayed the election results and contributed to cheating.
 Former Senator Aquilino Pimentel filed a complaint with the Senate Electoral Tri-
 bunal, alleging he was victimized by vote tampering, known as "Dagdag-Bawas" (lit-
 erally "Addition-Subtraction "), which boosted the votes of his rivals. A Senate Elec-
 toral Tribunal confirmed the validity of the charges in August, following a recount
 of votes in 17 percent of the nation's precincts. Based on these partial results, the
 Tribunal concluded that at least 243,700 nonexistent votes were credited to a rival
 candidate who had defeated Pimentel. The incumbent remained in office despite the
 evidence of vote tampering. The initial public reaction to the Tribunal's findings re-
 flected widespread pessimism that there could be an effective reform of the election
 system. The Government did not begin prosecution of election officials who, accord-
 ing to the recount, had a hand in massive cheating. A top official of the Commission
 on Elections, Commissioner Regalado Maambong, said that the Commission was
 powerless to prevent such cheating. He indicated that the system that allows local
 officials to appoint or influence election precinct administrators makes it impossible
 for the Commission to police the nationwide system and assure its integrity.
 The Government sought through a peace process to include dissident groups with-
 in the political process. In September 1996, there was a significant peace agreement
 with the Moro National Liberation Front (MNLF). A former MNLF leader was elect-
 ed governor of the Autonomous Region of Muslim Mindanao shortly after the agree-
 ment. The Government sought also to include a second insurgent group, the MILF,
 in the peace process.
 There was growing debate about the orderly change of government in the next
 presidential election, which is scheduled for May 1998. Both the Catholic Church
 and human rights groups criticized efforts to extend President Ramos's term of of-
 fice. In August term extension proponents in the House of Representatives intro-
 duced a measure to convene a constituent assembly and revise the Constitution to
 extend the terms of both the President and congressional incumbents. By year's end,
 these efforts had ceased, and it appeared elections would go forward as scheduled.
 The Government continued periodic "peace process" talks with the leadership in
 exile of the Communist National Democratic Front (NDF), which coordinates with
 its armed resistance group, the New People's Army. A faction that rejects the NDF
 leadership, the Revolutionary People's Army, seeks further armed resistance rather
 than involvement in the peace process.
 There are no restrictions in law or practice on participation by women and minori-
 ties in politics. Three women head cabinet departments, 4 of 24 Senators are
 women, 23 of 204 elected members of the House are women, and 2 additional
 women serve as appointed "sectoral" members of the House.
 Muslim leaders appealed for a constitutional change to elect senators by region.
 They argue that the current method of election from a nationwide list favors the
 established political figures from the Manila area. There are no Muslim senators.
 The lower house of the Congress includes one appointed representative for the in-
 digenous people's "sector." However, such "sectoral" representatives in Congress
 complain that they are excluded from most consultations by congressional colleagues
 elected from regular districts.
 
 
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 A wide variety of human rights groups operated without government restriction,
 investigating and publishing their findings on human rights cases. Many govern-
 ment o ficials, including those of the CHR, are responsive to their views. The Phil-
 ippine Alliance of Human Rights Advocates (PAHRA), a leading NGO network, ef-
 fectively monitors human rights problems and seeks redress through its contacts
 with the Government, the Congress and the CHR. Human rights workers encoun-
 tered minor harassment, largely by individual local military or police commanders.
 The Government blocked participation by Nobel laureate Jose Ramos-Horta in a
 January regional seminar on human rights diplomacy held at a Manila university.
 The Government denied Ramos-Horta a visa, based on official concern that Ramos
 Horta's expression of support for East Timor dissidents could constitute interference
 in the internal affairs of an Association of Southeast Asian Nations partner, Indo-
 nesia.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution prohibits discrimination against women, children, and members
 of minorities. Implementation of constitutional protections is at times hindered by
 lack of implementing legislation and by budgetary constraints.
 Women.-Violence against women, particularly domestic violence, is a serious
 problem. Women's advocates cite the lack of laws on domestic violence, double
 standards of morality, and a traditional societal reluctance to discuss private family
 affairs as some of the reasons for domestic violence. The absence of divorce under
 the law and the lack of job opportunities combine to limit the ability of both poor
 and wealthy women to escape destructive relationships.
 Nonetheless, women's rights advocates describe the greater willingness of women
 to speak out, despite a sense of shame, fear, and a desire to preserve "famil honor,"
 as a positive movement toward gender equality. Working in conjunction with NGO's,
 the Government's Bureau of Women's Welfare established temporary shelters to
 protect female victims from further harm and high risk situations. Bureau officials
 believe that these programs, along with changing attitudes, accounted for the in-
 crease in reports of batterings, which continued to grow rapidly throughout 1996
 and the first half of 1997. Both the Bureau and the PNP maintain a Women's Help
 Desk to protect women and encourage the reporting of crimes. PNP stations include
 female as well as male officers who, with help from NGO's, receive gender sensitiv-
 ity training for dealing with victims of sexual crimes and domestic violence.
 Rape continues to be a major problem. The number of rapes reported to the police
 rose by 22 percent in the first half of the year to 1,466. In September Congress en-
 acted a major reform of legislation on rape, classifying it as a crime against a person
 punishable under the Criminal Code, instead of as a crime against chastity punish-
 able only under the Civil Code. Women no longer must prove that they are either
 virgins or not promiscuous in order to claim legally that they have been raped.
 As with battering, government officials attributed the increase in reported rape
 to changing attitudes. -In a widely publicized case, an 11-year-old girl charged a con-
 gressman with rape. Intense media reporting compelled prosecution. The congress-
 man has been in custody since January, and his Manila trial continued at year's
 end.
 Women's groups believe that the death penalty, which was restored in 1993, in-
 hibits victins, particularly young victims of incestuous rape, from pressing charges.
 Convictions for rape could and often did result in imposition of a death sentence.
 Many women suffer exposure to violence through their recruitment (often through
 deception) into prostitution. Prostitution remains illegal, but widespread. A leading
 NGO working with U.N. Children's Fund (UNICEF) estimated that 300,000 women
 are engaged m prostitution. While penalties for the offense are light, detained pros-
 titutes are subjected to administrative indignities. Women's groups called for legal
 action against local officials who condone a climate of impunity for those who exploit
 prostitutes-both the "entertainment club" employers and their clients. They were
 critical of highly publicized official campaigns to close clubs and brothels, because
 such tactics failed to rescue young women  abuse. In April President Ramos or-
 dered police raids on clubs and brothels following press reports that tour agencies
 used the Internet to advertise sex tourism in Angeles city north of Manila. However,
 a few days after the raids, the offending establishments were back in business. The
 Department of Tourism hosted a world tourism meeting in Manila in May and lob-
 bied strenuously for a declaration on the social impact of tourism, including a con-
 demnation of sex tourism. Hotel and travel industry leaders pledged to cooperate
 with the Government in stopping this practice.
 
 
 Many women seek employment overseas and are particularly vulnerable to exploi-
 tation by unethical recruiters who promise attractive jobs or, in some cases, arrange
 marriages with foreign men. Some end up working as prostitutes or suffering abuse
 at the hands of their foreign employers or husbands. Those recruited to work as
 maids, entertainers, or models may, while overseas, be forced to participate in pub-
 lic shows or dances where nudity and the prospect of sex is the principal attraction.
 Other women knowingly accept questionable jobs to support parents, children, or
 siblings with their remittances. To curb such abuses, the Government campaigned
 to end illegal recruiting and, by raising age, educational, and professional standards
 for young women seeking jobs abroad, tried to discourage employment migration.
 The Migrant Workers and Overseas Filipinos Act of 1995 sought to provide the Gov-
 ernment with greater financial resources and improved authority to combat these
 problems. NGO s agreed that these measures were not adequate.
 Sexual harassment was also a problem. A survey by the Institute of Labor Studies
 found workplace sexual harassment to be widespread yet underreported, due to vic-
 tims' reticence and fear of losing their jobs. A Catholic Church study of conditions
 for female workers in the Special Economic Zone indicated that sexual harassment
 by managers was common there. The women are often in a vulnerable position.
 Most are economic migrants who are required to work long hours and have no inde-
 pendent workers organization that could help them file complaints.
 In law but not in practice, women have most of the rights and protections ac-
 corded men. The Women in Development and Nation Building Act of 1992 termi-
 nated previous restrictions on women's rights to buy and sell property. To imple-
 ment the act, President Ramos directed that each government agency designate 5
 percent of its annual budget for programs to advance opportunities for women. The
 Commission on the Role of Filipino Women, under the office of the President, seeks
 to coordinate programs for women. The Commission works closely with many
 NGO's, including the 10-million-member National Council of Women in the Phil-
 ippines. During the year, the Council conducted seminars and helped launch a pro-
 gram for establishing crisis centers in hospitals for women who are victims of vio-
 ence. The Department of Labor and Employment upgraded its programs in support
 of women, having formed a new Bureau of Women and Young Children to advocate
 major programs. In September a U.N. Development Program report noted that the
 Government had raised the level of opportunities for women.
 However, an inadequate government budget and reluctant implementation of the
 1992 reform legislation in some departments limit the effectiveness of the reforms.
 A former congresswoman who sponsored the 1992 reform legislation complained
 that government agencies failed to implement the act and the President's directive.
 Except for government service and jobs in government-owned or controlled cor-
 porations, women faced discrimination in employment. On average, a woman's sal-
 ary was about 47 percent of a man's. In addition, many women can find only part-
 time work. Sixty percent of the work force is not fully employed; the majority of this
 pool of 17 million part-time workers are women.
 Church opposition to divorce in this overwhelmingly Catholic nation is strong.
 However, changes in the Legal Code have made marriage annulment fairly easy,
 and the practice has become more frequent. The legal cost, however, precludes this
 option for many women. The practice of "unofficial divorce" (permanent separation)
 was common among lower income families; in these cases the wife was usually left
 with the children, and the husband provided little or no financial support.
 Children.-Several government agencies have programs devoted to the education,
 welfare, and development of children. Nevertheless, children faced serious problems
 in their development. Family poverty apparently forces many school dropouts. About
 67 percent of children completed the 6th grade. Approximately 1.5 million children
 age 7 to 12 are not in school. Public primary and secondary schools are free of tui-
 tion charges, but poor families are unable to meet the numercus peripheral costs
 for uniforms, school supplies, shoes, and transportation.
 Widespread poverty forces many young children to work. The Department of
 Labor and Employment worked with the International Labor Organization (ILO)
 and NGO's to address problems identified in a landmark 1996 study that showed
 a widespread incidence of child labor (see Section 6.d.). According to UNICEF and
 the ILO more than 2 million children were exposed to hazardous working environ-
 ments, including in quarries, mines, and at docksides. Child trafficking by illegal
 recruiters oftenbrought children from poor rural areas to low-paying jobs in cities.
 In May a police raid rescued 20 children, the majority age 14 and younger, who
 were disembarking from a Manila ferry with their recruiters bringing them illegally
 from the southern Visayas region. Typically such children worked as domestic help-
 ers or employees in small workshops.
 
 
 887
 The Government's Department of Social Work and Development reported in June
 that there were over 50,000 street children in Manila and over 100,000 nationwide.
 Reportedly most were abandoned with no family support and engaged in scavenging
 or begging. According to another study, the number of street children nationwide
 was over I million; if they were defined as children who worked and lived in the
 streets and returned to their families only occasionally. Street begging and truancy
 were common in large cities. The insurgency in Mindanao and the migration of the
 rural poor to Manila aggrvated the capital's street children problem.
 The Intercountry Adoption Act of 1995, which strengthened safeguards against
 the sale and trafficking of children abroad, expanded on children's rights legislation
 enacted in 1992 and 1993. Children's rights advocates criticized the Congress's fail-
 ure to pass previously introduced legislation that would have created children's and
 family courts to handle juvenile and domestic relations cases. As traditional societal
 values defined children as extensions and property of the parents, ordinary courts
 favored parental authority over the rights of a child.
 Greater public awareness eroded traditional reticence to report abuses against
 children. The CHR reported a major increase in complaints and court cases. Most
 offenders were citizens, although the problem of foreign pedophiles also received sig-
 nificant attention in the press. The Government adopted a tough policy of seeking
 prosecution of pedophiles, including those who had returned to their home country
 after a sex tourism visit. Two foreigners began prison terms in Manila for child-re-
 lated offenses. Some 50 suspected foreign pedophiles were arrested during the last
 3 years. Four foreigners were prosecuted, convicted, and jailed in their home coun-
 tries for child sex crimes committed in the Philippines during the last 2 years.
 The world tourism leaders meeting in May included pedo hilia as a target for its
 efforts against sex tourism. However, despite government efforts at law enforcement
 and expanded children's programs, there are an estimated 60,000 children involved
 in the commercial sex industry according to UNICEF. This marks an increase over
 the estimated 20,000 involved in prostitution reported in a 1987 UNICEF study.
 The same studies showed that the children in the "entertainment industry" worked
 long hours,
 starting in the evening until early morning. They came from families with unem-
 ployed or irregularly employed parents.
 People With Disabiities.-A 1983 law provides for equal physical access for the
 disabled to all public buildings and establishments, and a law passed in 1992 pro-
 vides for "the rehabilitation, self-development, and self-reliance of disabled persons
 and their integration into the mainstream of society." Advocates for the rights of the
 disabled contend that these laws have been ineffective, as implementing regulations
 have not been published, and that government programs are palliative rather than
 focused on reintegration. Senator Orlando Mercado, who authored legislation for the
 disabled, estimated in September that only about 2 percent of an estimated 3.5 mil-
 lion disabled citizens had access to government services.
 Indigenous People.-Indigenous people live throughout the Philippines but pri-
 marily in the mountainous areas of northern and central Luzon and Mindanao.
 They account for about 18 percent of the population. Although no specific laws dis-
 criminate against indigenous people, the remoteness of the areas that many inhabit
 and cultural bias prevent their full integration into society. Their ability to partici-
 pate meaningfully in decisions affecting their lands, cultures, traditions, and the al-
 location of natural resources is minimal. Because they inhabit mountainous areas
 also favored by guerrillas, indigenous people suffer disproportionately from
 counterinsurgency operations. Indigenous children suffer from lack of basic services,
 health, and education.
 In October President Ramos signed the Indigenous Peoples' Rights Act which is
 intended to implement constitutional provisions to protect indigenous people. The
 law establishes a National Commission of Indigenous People stafed by tribal mem-
 bers empowered to award certificates of title to lands claimed by the over 12 million
 native people in the Philippines. It awards "ancestral domain lands" on the basis
 of communal rather than individual ownership, impeding unilateral sale of lands by
 tribal leaders. The law also requires a process of "informed" consultation and writ-
 ten consent by the indigenous group to allow mining on tribal lands. The law also
 assigns the indigenous groups a responsibility to preserve forest, watershed, and
 biodiversity areas in their domains from inappropriate development.
 Other measures affected indigenous communities in adverse ways. For example,
 development planning infringed on indigenous people's lands and rights. The Mining
 Act of 1995 continued a legislative trend promoting mining operations, hydroelectric
 dams, and other large-scale projects that force indigenous communities to relocate
 and abandon farming and hunting lands used for generations.
 
 
 888
 In December President Ramos signed into law the Cordillera Autonomy Act,
 which is intended to strengthen protection for the indigenous people of the northern
 Luzon mountain regions.
 There were numerous cases in which indigenous people faced legal threats to
 their claims to ancestral lands from developers, mining interests, and local political
 interests. The Higaonon people in Mindanao lost portions of their land to the inter-
 ests of a powerful local an owning family, which enforced their removal through
 a violent demolition conducted by the PNP and private security forces (see Section
 L.a.). Lumad people in Mindanao faced repeated legal battles with government au-
 thorities and repeated visits by mining company surveyors and local "mediators" as
 they sought to preserve their ancestral lands against mining concessions. In
 Pampanga province, several indigenous groups resisted the efforts of real estate de-
 velopers to convert their land into a golf resort complex. In Pampanga and Zambales
 provinces, the Aetas, a nomadic people, foundtheir traditional lands cut off by min-
 ing operations. In the same region, another Aeta group faced a dispute over their
 access to ancestral lands.
 Religious Minorities.-About 5 million Muslims, who constitute 7 percent of the
 population, reside principally in Mindanao and nearby islands and are the largest
 single minority group in the country. Historically they have been alienated from the
 dominant Christian majority, and government efforts to integrate Muslims into the
 political and economic mainstream met with only limited success. The national cul-
 ture, with its emphasis on familial, tribal, and regional loyalties, creates informal
 barriers whereby access to jobs or resources is provided first to those of one's own
 family or group. Many Muslims claim that they continue to be underrepresented in
 senior civilian and military positions.
 There was progress in improving Christian-Muslim relations following a Septem-
 ber 1996 government agreement with the MNLF. In accordance with the agreement,
 a Southern Philippines Council on Peace and Development (SPCPD) was established
 to coordinate economic growth in 14 provinces in Mindanao and MNLF Chairman
 Nur Misuari became its chair. Shortly thereafter Misuari was also elected Governor
 of the Autonomous Region of Muslim Mindanao, which was established in 1990 to
 meet the demand of Muslims for local autonomy in areas where they are a majority
 or a substantial minority. The accord also provided for integrating MNLF fighters
 into the armed forces and police. The Government promised to permit a 1999 plebi-
 scite to form the basis for greater autonomy for an Islamic region.
 This initiative eased suspicions between Christians and Muslims, setting the
 stage for cooperation and economic growth. However, as the anniversary of the
 agreement neared in September, Nur Misuari complained that government economic
 support for the region was inadequate and that new jobs and investment remained
 beIow the targets set. Despite the Government's promise to release $1.2 billion in
 funds for development, Misuari said that he had received money to pay only for of-
 fice operations and the salaries of his governmental employees. The agreement
 brought little regional stability, as the Muslim provinces experienced fighting in
 June between government and insurgent MILF forces, in which about 150 persons
 were killed.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The Constitution and laws provide for the right of
 workers, including public employees, to form and join trade unions. Although this
 right is exercised in practice, aspects of the public sector organization law restrict
 and discourage organizing. Trade unions are independent of the Government and
 generally free of political party control. Unions have the right to form or join federa-
 tions or other labor groups. Unions claim to have organized some 12 percent of the
 total work force of 29.1 million. Under the Constitution, there are five representa-
 tives of the labor movement appointed by the President as "sectoral" members of
 Congress.
 Subject to certain procedural restrictions, strikes in the private sector are legal.
 However, a 1989 law stipulates that all means of reconciliation must be exhausted
 and that the strike issue must be relevant to the labor contract or the law. The
 Labor Secretary intervened in 11 labor disputes in the first 11 months of the year,
 exercising his authority to assume jurisdiction" and mandate a settlement. He can
 exercise this authority on the condition that he views the industry involved in the
 strike as "vital to national security." The Labor Secretary interprets this power
 broadly.
 In February 1995, the ILO Committee of Experts noted that certain amendments
 have been proposed to legislation that the Committee had previously criticized for
 placing undue restrictions on the right to strike in nonessential services. The Com-
 mittee remains concerned by the imposition of penalties in cases where strikes have
 
 
 889
 been deemed illegal, by restrictions on the right of government workers to strike,
 by some restrictions on the right to organize and form a bargaining unit that are
 in conflict with ILO Convention 87 on freedom of association, and by limitations on
 the right to elect workers' representatives freely.
 In 1996 the ILO's Committee on Freedom of Association issued a finding that sub-
 stantiated Trade Union Congress of the Philippines (TUCP) and International Con-
 federation of Free Trade Union (ICFTU) charges of worker rights violations at the
 Danao (Cebu province) plant of Japanese manufacturer Mitsumi. The case, which
 began with a February 1994 petition by local union officials to the Department of
 Labor and Employment (DOLE) to hold a certification election, included the arrest
 of top union officials on spurious criminal narcotics charges, the repeated setting
 and postponing of elections, and management efforts to prevent workers from par-
 ticipating, or voting freely, in such elections. The DOLE arranged for a new election
 to b~e conducted, although there has been no agreement on a date.
 According to the Center for Trade Union and Human Rights (CTUHR), which
 publicizes allegations of worker rights violations, attacks on striking workers. How-
 ever, union leaders claimed that in certain lengthy strike situations their members
 faced intimidation tactics by management. The DOLE's efforts at conciliation and
 mediation largely averted instances of violence by either side. Strikers at a foreign
 owned electronics plant occupied the offices of DOLE officials, including the Sec-
 retary, in January in protest over the lack of progress in implementing an agree-
 ment earlier mandated by the DOLE. However, the strikers left without incident
 after making their case to DOLE officials.
 Unions have the right to affiliate with international trade union confederations
 and trade secretariats. Two of the largest trade union centrals, the TUCP and the
 FFW, are affiliated with the ICFTU and the World Confederation of Labor respec-
 tively.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively The Constitution provides for
 the right to organize and bargain colectively. The  ar Code provides for this right
 for private sector employees and for employees of government-owned or controlled
 corporations, but the law limits the rights of government workers. Fewer than
 500,000 workers are covered by collective bargaining agreements. Despite union op-
 position, the DOLE secretary issued a change in rules on "labor only" subcontract-
 ing, which effectively broadens the definition of industries that may legally use part-
 time, rotating staff. Unions have argued that this practice allows unscrupulous em-
 ployers to use subcontractors to evade obligations to their employees and to break
 unions.
 Some employers intimidated workers trying to form a union with threats of firing,
 factory closure or, as happened at Mitsumi, the filing of criminal charges against
 labor leaders. Allegations of intimidation and discrimination in connection with
 union activities are grounds for review as possible unfair labor practices before the
 National Lahor Relations Commission (NLRC). Before disputes reach the time con-
 suming, quasi-judicial NLRC, the DOLE provides the services of the National Con-
 ciliation and Mediation Board (NCMB). The NCMB settles most of the unfair labor
 practice disputes raised as grounds for strikes before such strikes can be declared.
 The number of strikes in the first 11 months remained at roughly the same level
 as in 1996, with 91 cases reported. However, the workdays lost to strikes and the
 number of workers involved increased. Workdays lost were 658,000 compared with
 490,000 in 1996. Workers involved in industrialdisputes increased to 50,783 in the
 first half of the year, from 31,411 in the same period in 1996.
 Labor law is uniform throughout the country, including the industrial zones
 where tax benefits encourage the growth of expert industries. However, local politi-
 cal leaders and officials governing these special economic zones (SEZ's) tried to re-
 strict union organizing  y maintaining "union free/strike free" policies. Hiring is
 often tightly controlled through "SEZ Labor Centers" where political ties to local fig-
 ures often played a role in gaining job eligibility. In spite of sporadic labor unrest
 and some organizing efforts, union successes in the SEZ's have been few and mar-
 ginal. Some mainstream  unions avoid a major unionizing effort in the lower wage
 SEZ industries, such as the garment industry, as unpromising in light of both the
 organizers' restricted access to many zones and the rapid turnover of the young, fe-
 male staff working on short-term contracts.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Comnpulsory Labor.-Forced labor, including forced and
 bonded labor by children is prohibited, and the overnment effectively enforces this
 prohibition.
 The Labor Department has assisted in arrests of illegal recruiters bringing girls
 (age 13 to 17) to work in Manila as domestic helpers under terms that involved a
 loan" advanced to their parents which the children are obliged to pay through their
 
 
 890
 work. The Labor Department has also helped prosecute the case against an informal
 sector manufacturer of bleach who is alleged to have used forced child labor.
 The Government's efforts to protect workers from abuse also extend to the large
 number of citizens who work overseas. By raising the issue in bilateral contacts and
 international forums, it attempts to secure firmer protections of basic rights for
 guest workers and otherwise provides assistance through its diplomatic missions.
 d. Status of Child Labor Practices and Minimum Age for Employment.-The law
 prohibits forced and bonded labor by children, and is fully enforced, although some
 problems remain (see Section 6.c.).
 The law prohibits the employment of children below age 15, except under the di-
 rect and sole responsibility of parents or guardians or where employment as actors
 in cinema, theater, radio, or television is essential to the integrity of the production.
 The Labor Code allows employment for those between the ages of 15 and 18 for such
 hours and periods of the ay as are determined by the Secretary of Labor but for-
 bids employment of persons under 18 ears of age in hazardous or dangerous work.
 However, a significant number of children work in the informal sector of the urban
 economy or as unpaid family workers in rural areas. In the formal manufacturing
 sector, child labor violations are few. Both Labor Department officials and NGO's
 are concerned that the legal process has not yet resulted in a court conviction of
 an employer found using child labor. Children are also abused in the sex tourism
 business. Some children continued to be employed as agricultural workers on ba-
 nana and sugar plantations. Children also reportedly are employed on the docks of
 some regional ports and in a dangerous form of coral reef fishing, which exposes
 them to shark and needlefish attacks and increases their vulnerahflity to disease.
 In addition to projects undertaken with the UNICEF and the ILO's International
 Program on the Elimination of Child Labor, the DOLE investigated and attempted
 to reduce violations of child labor laws outside the agricultural sector through pub-
 licized raids on reported violators. The DOLE's raids were coordinated with police
 and, at times, with personnel from concerned NGO's, especially the Kamalayan De-
 velopment Foundation. Heightened public awareness led to greater cooperation by
 local authorities, increased involvement by government agencies, and prosecution of
 violators. None of these prosecutions led to a conviction and sentencing in either
 1996 or 1997.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-Tripartite regional wage boards set minimum
 wages. The most recent round of wage increases occurred in late 1996 and early
 1997, with the highest rates set in the national capital region (NCR) and the lowest
 in rural regions. The minimum wage for NCR nonagricultural workers was raised
 in stages, culminating on May 1 with a level then worth a pproximately $6.10 (185
 pesos) per day. This wage represents a 12 percent nominal increase over the pre-
 vious minimum for the region. With this pay level, at least two family members
 would have to work full-time to support a family of six above the Government's
 "poverty threshold."
 Regional wage board orders cover all private sector workers except domestic help-
 ers and those employed in the personal service of another. Boards outside the NCR
 exempted some employers because of factors such as establishment size, industry
 sector, involvement with exports, financial distress, and level of capitalization.
 These exemptions excluded substantial additional numbers of workers from cov-
 erage under the law.
 Violation of minimum wage standards was common. Many firms hired employees
 at apprentice rates below the minimum wage, although no approved training was
 entailed in their production line work. A study of the largest export zone showed
 that many workers received less than the minimum wage. In the Manila area,
 DOLE inspections found 239 firms that violated minimum wage levels in the first
 quarter of the year. In southern Mindanao, DOLE surveys disclosed 450 offending
 firms in the same period. Forty percent of the 15,000 establishments inspected
 failed to remit social security premiums. Given the difficulty of prosecuting cases
 through the courts, the DOLE relies on administrative procedures and moral sua-
 sion to encourage voluntary employer correction of violations.
 The standard legal workweek is 48 hours for most categories of industrial workers
 and 40 hours for government workers, with an 8 hour per day limit. An overtime
 rate of 125 percent of the hourly rate is mandated on ordinary days and 130 percent
 on rest days and holidays. The law mandates a full day of rest weekly. Enforcement
 of workweek hours is managed through periodic inspections by the DOLE.
 A comprehensive set of occupational safety and health standards exists in law. Al-
 though policy formulation and review of these standards is the responsibility of the
 DOLE, actual enforcement is carried out by an inspectorate corps of some 260 labor
 and employment officers from 14 regional offices. Statistics on actual work-related
 accidents and illnesses are incomplete, as incidents (especially in regard to agri-
 
 
 891
 culture) are underreported. Workers do not have a legally protected right to remove
 themselves from dangerous work situations without jeopardy to continued employ-
 ment.
