 PHILIPPINES
 Martial law was formally lifted, after more than eight
 years, on January 17, 1981. However, the president retains
 in reserve most of the powers he enjoyed under martial law,
 available for use should he deem it necessary to exercise
 them. Since January, the president has exercised his
 emergency decree making power on two occasions. President
 Marcos continues to dominate the exercise of power in the
 Philippines.
 A modified parliamentary system with a strong presidency was
 established in 1981 with the ratification of constitutional
 amendments in a plebiscite in April. Under the new system,
 President Marcos was elected to a new term of six years on
 June 16, 1981, and parliamentary elections were set for
 1984. A new prime minister was chosen and a new executive
 committee was established to assist the president in the
 exercise of power. The existing legislative assembly,
 elected in 1978, continues to provide a forum for public
 debate on national issues. With the lifting of martial law,
 its powers to legislate have been enhanced.
 The exercise of civil and political rights has improved
 since the lifting of martial law, although some restrictions
 remain. In 1981, opposition political activity increased,
 as did organized activities by labor and students. Opposition-
 ists actively campaigned against proposed constitutional
 changes in the April plebiscite. When the government failed
 to respond to their conditions for participation, they
 campaigned for a national boycott of the June presidential
 election. President Marcos won that election with 88 percent
 of the vote, amid opposition charges of a lower voter turnout
 than the government claimed, and some allegations of election
 fraud. Opposition political figures were given considerable
 access to the media during the plebiscite campaign. In
 contrast, opposition views on the boycott of the presidental
 election received little media coverage.
 Students demonstrated over campus, economic, and political
 issues in Manila and in other cities; in October, some of
 these demonstrations ended in confrontation with police,
 with injuries and arrests. A new labor relations law has
 restored the right to strike in the private sector, with
 binding arbitration in strikes which the government believes
 may adversely affect the national interest. Labor unions
 conducted more strikes in 1981 than at any other time since
 1972.
 Abuses of civilians by some military personnel, including
 killings and summary executions, are a continuing problem in
 insurgency areas. Some Muslims in Mindanao and the Sulu Archi-
 pelago have waged a guerrilla struggle for autonomy since
 1968. The conflict, the result of inequities and misunder-
 standings going back over 400 years, stems from competition
 with Christians for traditional lands, the legacies of the
 colonial era, and the Muslims' desire to preserve their
 cultural identity. The latter objective later acquired
 secessionist overtones. Fighting continued sporadically in
 1981, although at lesser levels than in previous years. The
 government has enjoyed some success negotiating with rebel
 leaders and winning over several of them, who have been
 given seats in the regional assemblies. In contrast, the
 insurgency of the Maoist New People's Army, the military arm
 of the Communist Party of the Philippines (Marxist/Leninist),
 which operates in remote areas of northern Luzon, Samar, the
 (661)
 
 
 662
 Bicol, Davao and other provinces, has continued to grow in
 1981. The government has deployed more troops and resources
 to combat it, and fighting levels have sharply increased.
 The government periodically conducts investigations and
 hearings into alleged incidents of abuse by some members of
 the military, and publicity is given to the abuses and
 subsequent disciplinary actions. President Marcos and other
 officials have spoken out publicly on the importance of the
 military's observing human rights.
 The Philippines is in the lower-middle range of developing
 countries, with a per capita gross domestic product of $734
 in 1980. Over 60 percent of the national budget is committed
 to economic or social development programs. Efforts to
 fulfill basic human needs and foster economic growth have
 been hampered severely by recurring oil price increases,
 fluctuating prices for Philippine export commodities,
 inflation, population pressure, and high interest rates on
 foreign borrowing. The government concentrates on programs
 to improve agricultural productivity, roads, power generation,
 education, population planning, nutrition and land reform.
 Low rural incomes are a key factor in the pervasive incidence
 of undernutrition and the existence of malnutrition. Housing
 and health care for the poor remain inadequate. Land reform
 in rice and corn holdings has affected one million tenants,
 although not all its ambitious original goals have been
 reached. The rate of population growth is decreasingi but
 remains perhaps the single greatest obstacle to improved
 living standards for the poor. Heavy concentrations of
 wealth and corruption are traditional problems.
 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Torture
 Section 20, article IV of the Philippines' 1973 constitution
 prohibits torture of prisoners. Reports of torture in
 insurgency areas continued, but were fewer in 1981 than in
 1980. One source of information on torture and other human
 rights abuses is the Association of Major Religious Superiors
 of the Philippines (AMRSP), whose Task Force Detainees is
 the only private organization in the Philippines which
 attempts to cover the human rights situation on a nationwide
 basis. It collects and publishes reports from Catholic
 clergy around the country. Its coverage of rural conditions
 and Muslim areas has increased steadily in recent years.
 Torture incidents reported to the Task Force Detainees in 1981,
 as in 1980, took place largely in provinces where troops are
 engaged in counter-insurgency operations. According to the
 Task Force Detainees, victims continue to be beaten and some-
 times murdered after interrogation about alleged connections
 with Muslim or communist guerrillas.   Central and eastern
 Mindanao, Samar, and Luzon's Cagayan Valley were most often
 cited. The Task Force Detainees also described torture
 cases in southern Leyte, Nueva Ecija, and other provinces.
 The government is attempting to improve military discipline
 through a variety of steps. The Barbero Committee, a
 high-level government panel created in 1979 to investigate
 military abuses, conducted several inquiries in 1981. The
 government indicated that the results of hearings held in
 1981 include the dismissal, demotion, transfer or reassignment
 of military personnel. Those dismissed from military
 service are subject to charges in civilian courts.
 
 
 663
 b. Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment
 Jail conditions in the Philippines are generally poor.
 Political detainees in Manila enjoy better facilities than
 those in the rest of the country. upon their request, some
 political detainees in Manila were returned to a military
 detention camp from civilian jail in 1981. In Manila and
 Cebu, brief prisoner strikes occurred in 1981 over food
 budgets and living conditions, among other grievances.
 Almost all prisoners have access to their families and
 lawyers early in the detention period, if not during initial
 interrogation. The government says that no prisoner is held
 incommunicado or in solitary confinement, but some private
 sources dispute this claim. The death sentence has been
 carried out only once since 1972, for narcotics trafficking.
 The government continues to give attention to the issue of
 military abuses, a widespread problem in most insurgent
 areas. Complaints range from public drunkenness to assault
 and murder. Abuses continued in 1981 at about the same
 level as 1980 in several provinces -- Cagayan, Negros
 Occidental, Samar -- and reports of abuse increased in the
 Bicol provinces, the Davao provinces, and the Agusan provinces
 where the NPA increased its activities. The government
 states that it took disciplinary action against 673 soldiers
 for various offenses from January through July. Media have
 also given extensive publicity to individual cases and to
 official government statements condemning abuses. The
 ministry of national defense affirms that officers' promotion
 prospects are closely evaluated in terms of their ability to
 deal with civilians-and their record on abuse allegations.
 The Barbero Committee ordered accused soldiers held for
 trial after investigating several cases in 1981.
 In some cities Community Relations Action Centers (CRAC),
 staffed by volunteer bar association lawyers to receive and
 to act on complaints, have been'active in 1981. The CRAC in
 Digos, Davao del Sur is exceptionally effective. Officials
 have also sought assistance from church leaders in some
 investigations. In September, the government announced the
 establishment of Peace and Order Councils at the national,
 regional, provincial, and municipal levels. They are
 intended to promote more effective cooperation between civil
 agencies, the public and law enforcement agencies. Among
 their tasks will be to receive complaints relating to peace
 and order including those lodged against government security
 forces. These councils will supplant the Community Relations
 Action Centers established in several cities. Various
 individual attorneys, bar associations and lawyers' organiza-
 tions also provide legal assistance to members of the public
 with complaints against government.authorities.
 c. Disappearances
 As of December!1981, the Task Force Detainees had received
 reports of twelve instances of disappearances, all in
 Mindanao. The government maintains that, except in rare
 cases, disappearances cannot be attributed to members of the
 security forces. There has been little reported information
 in 1981 to substantiate charges that government security
 forces have engaged in clandestine detention. The Task
 Force Detainees reported the names of more than 100 persons
 alleged to have been "salvaged," that is, seized by armed
 government security forces and summarily executed, sometimes
 "after interrogation. The Task Force Detainees indicates
 
 89-510 0 - 82 - 43
 
 
 664
 that the number of "salvagings' has increased significantly,
 although this contention is disputed by the government
 and some private sources. It is often claimed by critics of
 the government that salvaging victims were killed in the
 context of military operations in rural areas directed
 against insurgents because they were suspected of being
 members of the communist New People's Army or Moro National
 Liberation Front. Sometimes these killings are alleged to
 take the form of reprisals for attacks or assassinations by
 guerrilla groups. Personal disputes or criminal motives
 such as robbery are also said to be reasons for salvaging.
 The government has acknowledged that some cases of abuse,
 including murder, have been committed by military personnel,
 but has consistently stated that its policy unequivocally
 opposes such abuses. Some cases of alleged "salvaging* have
 been publicized by the Catholic bishops and have resulted in
 inquiries by the Barbero Committee or local authorities,
 with compensation paid to the survivors and disciplinary
 action taken against the military personnel involved.
 Several factors complicate efforts to assess the extent of
 illegal killings by members of the government security forces.
 The Task Force Detainees acknowledges that it may not be
 informed of all cases that arise. Philippine press reports
 suggest a tendency among some officers not to report accusa-
 tions of abuse against their subordinates for fear of tarnish-
 ing their own careers. However, information implicating
 government personnel in a specific incident may not be
 conclusive. Besides government personnel, a number of
 individuals and groups have sometimes been blamed for
 "aalvagings" or killings of a similar type. These include
 common criminals, extremist religious sects, private security
 forces, and vigilante groups. Rebels belonging to the Moro
 National Liberation Front have also been accused of murders.
 The communist New People's Army has selectively carried out
 killings of village officials and some private citizens in
 insurgency areas. In some instances the killings are consi-
 dered reprisals for collaboration with the military or the
 government. In others, they are summary executions in
 retaliation for alleged abuses. Individual police or
 military are sometimes the victims of such killings, in
 addition to the casualties they suffer from ambushes and
 other actual military encounters.
 In Samar in September, a group of heavily armed men massacred
 35 or more men, women, and children reportedly in retaliation
 for an NPA ambush and the death of one of the armed men.
 The government has launched an investigation. Some sources
 have alleged that the armed group in question is a "lost
 command" with connections to private business interests and
 the Philippine military. In February, some Muslim residents
 of Pats Island in the southern Philippines killed more than
 100 unarmed   Philippine soldiers. The islanders, according
 to some accounts, reportedly acted in response to allegations
 that some of the soldiers had desecrated mosques and committed
 abuses against the local population. Authorities, who deny
 allegations of abuse, claim the massacre was an act of treachery
 instigated by elements of the Moro National Liberation Front.
 The ensuing Philippine government military operation, according
 to some reports, resulted in numerous civilian as well as rebel
 casualties and forced the evacuation of an estimated several
 thousand villagers from their homes near the battle zone.
 Prominent Philippine sportsman Tommy Manotoc was reported
 missing on December 29. Some of his family members blamed
 the government for his disappearance, a charge which govern-
 ment spokesmen strongly denied, stating instead that communist
 guerrillas or common criminals may have kidnapped him.
 
 
 665
 d. Arbitrary Arrest and Imprisonment
 Philippine human rights groups generally consider political
 detainees to be those arrested for opposition to the govern-
 ment, whether or not they advocate or use violent means.
 Such persons are sometimes charged with crimes against the
 public order, such as subversion, rebellion, illegal assembly,
 possession of firearms, and possession of subversive materials.
 The government denies holding persons for political belief.
 As of September 1, government figures showed 326 public order
 violators in custody. The Task Force Detainees set the
 figure at 749 political detainees as of June. Its sources
 have consistently maintained over the years that many
 prisoners are-held in the provinces without charges and
 are not included in central government statistics. These
 include persons arrested by security forces during military
 operations in rural insurgency areas, detained for a few
 days or weeks without charges and released by the government.
 A further reason for the discrepancy between government and
 Task Force Detainees figures may be government classification
 of some prisoners as common criminals whom the Task Force
 Detainees considers political detainees.
 Under his-powers, the president may issue an arrest order
 for persons suspected of security or public order crimes.
 Since the lifting of martial law in January 1981, this power
 has been used. only sparingly. Arrest orders (formerly known
 as ASSOs)" are no longer employed for non-capital common
 crimes. Detainees arrested under such an order are brought
 before civilian courts.
 Reports of arbitrary arrest persisted in-1981, especially in
 rural insurgency areas, where people are often taken into
 custody on suspicion of. involvement in the communist New
 People's Army:guerrilla forces. Defense lawyers and human
 rights groups claim that some arrests are made without
 presenting a warrant. By law, each prisoner must be informed
 of the charges against-him and arraigned within 72 hours.
 Some persons, however, have been.held .for long periods
 without formal charges. According to lawyers who deal with
 political detainees, during the first days of detention-some
 suspected subversives continue to undergo "tactical interroga-
 tion" without the presence of counsel or family, and their
 statements are presented as evidence in military trials.
 Long term detention without resolution of cases is a fairly
 common phenomenon.inthe Philippines. In.some instances
 there is a long period between formal charges-and beginning
 of trial. Trials sometimes drag on for years. Several
 prominent Communist Party leaders who -have been incarcerated
 for several years are involved in such prolonged legal
 proceedings. -Several others have been held for several
 years without filing of formal charges or, once charged,
 without trial. The government maintains that all cases
 still under military jurisdiction are undergoing trial.
 Many public demonstrations, most of them without incident,
 took place in 1981. However, in Daet,.Camarines Norte, a
 political rally.shortly before the presidential election in
 June left four dead and at least eight injured when Philippine
 Constabulary troops reportedly fired into.the crowd. The
 government maintains that NPA querrillas who had infiltrated
 the demonstration were responsible for the shooting. Two
 leaders of that demonstration were arrested and held without
 charges when they attempted to organize'another protest
 demonstration two weeks later. The supreme court declared a
 habeas corpus petition in this case moot following the
 government's release of the two leaders. In this decision,
 
 
 666
 the court warned the military against violating individual
 human rights in maintaining peace and order, and emphasized
 "that right to peaceful assembly should be safeguarded and
 respected .... especially (by) those entrusted with the task
 of maintaining peace and order." The chief justice noted
 that with the release just as the court was about to hear
 the petition, *an untenable situation has been resolved."
 In 1981, the government reported that it granted 227 temporary
 or permanent releases for prisoners, among them some held on
 subversion charges for several years. The president announced
 the granting of amnesty during the year to 46 persons,
 including some charged with public order violations. Persons
 granted permanent release or amnesty generally already had
 been released on a temporary basis. No prominent moderate
 opposition leader is under detention in the Philippines.
 Former Senator Benigno Aquino remains under death sentence,
 but has resided in the United States since 1980, when the
 Philippine government permitted him to leave the Philippines
 for heart surgery.
 Habeas corpus, suspended with the imposition of martial law,
 was formally restored with the termination of martial law.
 However, the writ is still suspended in regions 9 and 12 of
 Mindanao and national security-related cases. The.president
 can still suspend the writ under existing emergency powers.
 The restoration of habeas corpus has essentially no effect
 on the detention of prisoners described as political detainees
 or public order violators, who are generally charged with
 national security offenses. In a recent decision, the
 supreme court upheld the right of the government to continue
 to detain and to deny habeas corpus to several persons
 accused of subversion. In some cases both during and after
 martial law, however, the government in court hearings has
 permitted the release of defendants accused of national
 security offenses pending court, proceedings.
 a. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Criminal defendants and, with the lifting of martial law,
 all persons accused of public order crimes, receive public
 trials in civilian courts. The courts are subject to the
 administration of:the supreme court. The president can
 replace lower court judges by accepting the resignations
 that all were required to submit-at the outset of martial
 law; he did this in a small number of cases in the 1972-75
 period. A judicial reform act passed by the parliament
 in 1981, but as yet not enacted, calls for the resignation
 of judges at all levels except the supreme court, and a
 complete reorganization of the judicial system. The consti-
 tution gives the president authority to name successors
 for current supreme court justices; so far he has not
 appointed any successors for incumbent justices.
 Only public order violators whose cases were already being
 heard before military tribunals when martial law was lifted
 are still subject to military trials; there are 152 cases in
 this category.  Nine military tribunals still exist for this
 purpose; 58 others were phased out with the lifting of
 martial law in January, 1981. According to the government,
 1,308 cases still in the preliminary investigation stage
 were transferred to civilian jurisdiction when martial law
 was lifted.
 Military trials, held within military camps, are public.
 According to lawyers who represent political detainees,
 military tribunals do not always recognize certain basic.
 
 
 667
 rights guaranteed in civil courts, such as the handling of
 evidence obtained through search and seizure. Defendants in
 military tribunal cases may appeal through boards of appeal
 to the defense minister, and in some circumstances to the
 president. The supreme court must review any military court
 verdict imposing the death penalty on a civilian. Defendants
 tried before civilian and military courts have the right to
 be represented by an attorney of their choice. This right
 is observed bythe Philippine government.
 f. Invasion of the Home
 Under the constitution, a search warrant may be issued on
 the basis of probable cause as determined by a judge or
 another responsible officer under the law. Orders issued
 under the president's existing authority to deal with
 national security cases may also be used to carry out
 searches. There continue to be reports of searches conducted
 without properly executed warrants, especially in insurgency
 areas.
 2. Respect for Civil and Political Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech, Press, Religion and Assembly
 Restrictions of freedom of speech, press, and assembly
 formally ended with the -lifting of martial law. Neverthe-
 -less, some limitations continue to exist.
 Public debate and media coverage of national issues, including
 human rights abuses, continued to expand in 1981, along with
 organized-opposition activities in general. Opposition
 politicians regularly addressed private organizations and
 gave statements to foreign correspondents and to opposition
 newspapers. They actively campaigned against proposed
 constitutional amendments and in favor of a boycott of the
 presidential election of 1981. Oppositionists continue to
 have little access to the most important local media,
 however. While there is no formal censorship, the media
 exercise restraint in criticism of official policies.
 Government information officers sometimes seek to influence
 or pressure editors on coverage of various topics. One
 newspaper editor was forced to resign after the government
 reacted sharply to an article she wrote strongly criticizing
 President Marcos. The largest newspapers and broadcast
 facilities are all owned by persons sympathetic to the
 government. Nevertheless, the media have continued to move
 steadily toward more candid coverage and commentary, especially
 in the provinces. A twice weekly Manila opposition newspaper
 with a limited press run circulates in main cities. In Cebu
 and other cities, radio stations and newspapers have carried
 material strongly critical of the government in 1981. Radio
 commentators critical of the government have regular
 programs in Manila and in the provinces, but usually on
 lesser known stations; Church publications continue to
 appear for limited audiences, including the Task Force
 Detainees! regular eports on-political detainees and human
 rights abuses.
 Censorship of foreign periodicals that contain reports
 offensive to the government has been halted. There is no
 evidence in 1981 of the censorship of any foreign books. At
 the same time, persons sometimes-are arrested for possession
 or distribution-of allegedly subversive literature, reported
 to include Communist Party of the Philippines material but
 also tracts and flyers critical of the government not
 necessarily of communist origin.
 
 
 668
 With the lifting of martial law, the government has liberali-
 zed issuance of permits for public gatherings. Permits were
 issued for large opposition rallies in many provincial
 cities during the 1981 election campaign. Large student
 meetings have taken place regularly in Manila, usually
 without incident. No unauthorized gatherings have been
 broken up by police in 1981, with the exception of a small
 demonstration near the parliament in July. In only one
 instance have student demonstrators been arrested in Manila
 in 1981. In the provinces, however, a few public gatherings
 were broken up by authorities during 1981. In June, in
 Daet, Camarines Norte, constabulary troops allegedly shot
 into the crowd at a unauthorized pro-boycott demonstration
 before the presidential election.
 The right to practice one's religion is fully respected.
 There is constitutional separation of church and state. The
 government has objected to what it considers political
 activities by some clergy. In 1981 one U.S. citizen priest
 was expelled and another denied reentry for alleged subver-
 sive political activities. The priests strongly denied the
 charges and were readmitted after government reconsideration.
 b. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration and Repatriation
 Freedom of travel generally is respected. Within the
 country, the government on October 30 formally lifted
 restrictions which had applied only to foreign tourists in
 areas of Mindanao and the Sulu Archipelago, where Muslim
 insurgents are active. There is free emigration, and travel
 taxes and fees are not prohibitive. In the past, political
 oppositionists sometimes experienced delays before obtaining
 clearances for passports. Former detainees in temporary
 release status need government permission to leave the country,
 but in most cases have obtained it without difficulty. Since
 the lifting of martial law, oppositionists have only rarely,
 if at all, experienced delays in obtaining travel documents
 and leaving the Philippines. A number have in fact traveled
 abroad and returned to the Philippines.
 The government neither encourages nor inhibits emigration or
 repatriation. Workers or other groups are not subject to
 different travel rules of any kind. The government makes
 special provisions to facilitate travel by Muslim Filipinos
 to the Middle East for religious holidays.
 The Philippines continues to offer asylum to Indochinese
 reaching the country by boat and has cooperated effectively
 with international organizations and voluntary agency
 personnel in the administration of refugee issues. In
 October, 6,500 refugees were in first asylum camps. Under
 the sponsorship and with the financial support of the United
 Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the government
 continued to supervise the maintenance and added construction
 of a major refugee processing center which accommodates more
 than 17,000 Indochinese Awaiting resettlement abroad. The
 government seconded administrative personnel to the project,
 absorbed some local costs, and gave priority to establishing
 a successful center. Cooperation between the Philippine and
 the U.S. governments in refugee matters has been excellent.
 c. Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 Although martial law, declared in 1972, was lifted in
 January, 1981, President Marcos continues to control effective
 political power in the Philippines. All decrees, instructions,
 and orders issued by the president during the martial law
 
 
 669
 period remain in effect after the lifting unless amended or
 revoked by the president or the legislature. Most decrees
 passed during martial law cover normal legislative matters,
 but some affect civil liberties. Under Amendment 6 to the
 1973 constitution, the president maintains power to issue
 decrees and orders whenever there is an emergency or whenever
 the parliament fails to act on any matter which requires
 immediate attention. -President Marcos has issued decrees on
 two occasions since the lifting of martial law: one on a
 limited tax amnesty and another on copra pricing.
 Several decrees dated before January 17, 1981, were made
 public some time thereafter.
 Following-constitutional changes ratified in a plebiscite in
 April 1981, a modified parliamentary system with a strong
 presidency was initiated. The changes called for election
 of a president for a six-year term, regular elections for a
 parliament to be held every six years, election of a prime
 minister named by the.president, creation of ar fourteen-person
 executive committee to assist the president in the exercise
 of power, and specified succession provisions.
 The interim legislative assembly elected-in 1978 includes
 some appointed and sectoral members, 150 elected government
 party representatives, and 15 oppositionists. Assembly-
 debates in 1981 featured some criticism of the government
 and national policies. So far, its views primarily have had
 an effect on presidential decisions on secondary matters.
 President Marcos won the presidential election on June 16,
 1981, with a reported 88 percent of the vote,.amid a reported
 turnout of 82 percent of the electorate. Constitutional
 provisions compelling citizens to vote were given special
 emphasis in this election by the government; especially
 since the principal opposition groups, which declined to
 field a candidate, urged a boycott instead., The opposition
 claimed that voter.turnout in the election was 62 percent.
 The principal opposition group decided-not to field a
 candidate because, ,it claimed, its conditions for participa-
 tion in the election were not met. These included a longer
 campaign period, new voter registration, reconstitution of
 the Commission on Elections, and guaranteed access to media
 during the campaign.
 Several political parties or organizations are, active in the
 Philippines, many.of them oppositionist. -Although the
 outlawed Communist Party .of the Philippines is suppressed by
 the government, other parties and political organizations
 are not prevented by the.government from organizing and
 conducting political activities. They sometimes report
 government attempts to interfere with rallies and to limit
 or prevent media access, and in the past, some opposition
 political leaders have been jailed. The commission on
 elections certified nine candidates for the June presidential
 elections, each nominated by a party or political entity.
 New constitutional amendments adopted in April promote a
 two-party system, but the Philippine political scene remains
 fluid, with constant formation anddissolution of numerous
 political groupings.
 There was considerable opposition political activity in
 1981. National figures and regional opposition figures
 organized rallies and began organizational efforts and
 public criticism. -Opposition.figures received unprecedented
 access to radio andtelevision time during the plebiscite
 campaign, usually as-participants in debates on the proposed
 constitutional amendments. "Print media also provided space
 
 
 670
 for airing opposition views during this campaign. In
 contrast, opposition views on the boycott of the presidential
 election received scant attention in the media, although the
 activities of the lesser opposition candidates were covered.
 Public demonstrations in favor of the boycott took place in
 many parts of the Philippines, including large meetings in
 Manila. In some areas, permission for boycott rallies was
 not given, or was withdrawn, depending on local security
 conditions.
 Regional assemblies in Muslim areas of Mindanao were elected
 in 1979 (polls in which a majority of Muslims did not vote)
 as part of the government's effort to fulfill the autonomy
 provisions of the Tripoli Agreement with representatives of
 the.Muslims in 1976. The assemblies have played a marginal
 role in governing their areas. Several Muslim field commanders
 who surrendered in 1980 to the government were appointed to
 the assemblies.
 Philippine women participate widely in the political,
 economic and social life of the country. Women are well
 represented in the legal, diplomatic, medical, and academic
 professions. They outnumber men in graduate schools. A
 significant number of women occupy governor and vice-governor
 positions, and serve as mayors, provincial board members and
 local officials. There are two female cabinet members (one
 is the president's wife), one minister of state, two supreme
 court justices and several members of courts of appeal.
 Social and cultural forces continue to emphasize *tradition-
 al' roles for women, particularly among Muslims and tribal
 Filipinos. These patterns, however, are slowly breaking
 down. Women make up a third of the work force, mostly in
 the lower-paying occupations. Married women, half of those
 in the work force, still generally consider housekeeping to
 be their primary responsibility. Women in the lower economic
 groups suffer greater disadvantages vis-a-vis men. For
 example, a study of poor families has shown that the mother
 is often the least well-nourished family member.
 The right of workers in the private sector to strike over
 impasses in collective bargaining and alleged unfair labor
 practices by employers was restored by the parliament on
 August 17, 1981, when it passed legislation amending the
 labor code. The new law, however, authorizes the president
 or the labor minister to impose binding arbitration in the
 case of any strike or strike threat which they believe may
 adversely affect the national interest. Passage of the law
 came after extensive deliberations were conducted with
 labor, employers, and government representatives and after
 substantial modifications were made in the original draft
 bill formulated by the cabinet.
 The right of employees of the government and corporations
 owned by the government to strike or engage in collective
 bargaining continues to be prohibited by law.
 In the period following the January 17 lifting of martial
 law until August, some 200 strikes took place, most of them
 in violation of the existing law. The government took no
 punitive action against strikers or union officials as long
 as there was no violence, but focused its efforts on resolv-
 ing the issues which prompted the strikes. Since the
 passage of the new labor relations law, several strikes not
 meeting the legal requirements for advance notice or 2/3
 majority strike vote by secret ballot have taken place, with
 the government continuing to show leniency in dealing with
 
 
 671
 these strike situations. However, in September, the president
 threatened to resort to his emergency powers should it
 become necessary to prevent increased infiltration and
 influence of subversive elements into the labor movement,
 without releasing specific details to the public.
 There are no special restrictions against the right of trade
 unions to assemble. Several unions which opposed certain
 provisions of the labor law demonstrated peacefully at the
 parliament and the ministry of labor.
 The Trade Union Congress of the Philippines, the major labor
 confederation, has continued its public campaign for reform
 of the ministry of labor and employment and the removal of
 corrupt or ineffective ministry officials. Its efforts in
 this area led to the resignation of a deputy labor minister.
 3. Government Attitude and Record Regarding International
 and Non-governmental Investigations of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The Philippines is signatory to all United Nations inter-
 regional human rights and refugee conventions. The Philip-
 pine government has usually cooperated with outside observers
 interested in the status of human rights and facilitated
 their contacts with detainees. The Association of Major
 Religious Superiors Philippines (AMRSP) and its Task Force
 Detainees, the latter of which prepares lists of political
 detainees and reports alleged abuses, operate with relative
 freedom. Teams from the International Committee of the Red
 Cross inspected Philippine detention centers in 1973, 1974
 (twice), 1976, 1978, 1980, and 1981. Amnesty International
 issued a critical report in 1976 based on the findings of a
 mission to the Philippines a year earlier. A three man
 Amnesty International team visited the Philippines in
 November 1981 to collect information on the human rights
 situation. Representatives of the International Commission
 of Jurists visited the country in 1975 and again in 1977,
 when they issued a strongly critical report on the status of
 civil and political rights. The Philippine Government has
 criticized what it considers to be interference in its
 internal affairs by such organizations. It also has objected
 to foreign press coverage of abuses, although it has continued
 to allow foreign media to report freely on developments
 within the country.
 4. Economic and Social Circumstances
 Philippine development strategy emphasizes rural development,
 especially agricultural productivity, rural roads, p ower
 generation, nutrition, population planning, and health.
 Recently, however, the government and foreign donors recogniz-
 ed that discrete, short-term projects alone cannot provide
 the broad economic growth and, importantly, the new jobs
 which are needed to improve living standards. About 600,000
 workers enter the labor force annually, and agriculture
 cannot provide sufficientnew employment. The government
 has agreed with the World Bank to attempt to restructure its
 industrial and trade sectors in favor of labor-intensive,
 export-oriented production. The Philippine government has
 expanded its efforts to create employment opportunities for
 low-income groups through small-scale, labor intensive
 livelihood projects. A new program, Kilusang Kabuhayan at
 Kaunlaran (National Livelihood Program), was formally
 established on August 6 to develop employment generating
 projects with participation of local communities and
 
 
 672
 the private sector. The government has begun promulgating
 changes in tax codes andi industripl incentives which will
 remove protection for inefficient industry. In the early
 years, the restructuring program must affect adversely some
 of the urban population, which previously had benefited from
 protectionist policies. Rural development projects neverthe-
 less will continue to receive the majority of development
 funds.
 The Philippines, a predominantly agricultural country, ranks
 in the lower-middle range of developing countries with an
 estimated per capita gross national product of 734 dollars
 in 1980. Economic growth averaged about 6.5 percent in the
 1970's but is expected to decline to about 5.0 percent in
 1981, largely because of lower commodity export prices.
 Other factors that affect Philippine ability to finance
 growth and development are the high petroleum import bill
 and a large foreign debt, which is expected to require over
 2 billion dollars in service payments in 1982. Population
 pressure is a continuing problem. Government commitment to
 population planning is high, however, and the present rate
 of 2.3 percent represents a significant decline from the 3.0
 percent population growth rate of the 1960's.
 Government agricultural programs stressed increased produc-
 tion of basic grains and pilot projects for dairy, beef, and
 poultry. The government's rice production program led to
 self-sufficiency by 1977; but the increased cost of fertilizer
 and insecticide has decreased usage, and rice yields are
 declining to the point where the modest exports of the last
 several years will probably have to cease. Since 1972,
 agrarian reform in rice and qorn holdings has increased
 agricultural support services and security of tenure and
 lowered rents for one million tenants who are now either
 amortizing owners or leaseholders.
 The Philippines historically has had a highly skewed distri-
 bution of income and this income gap continues, with nearly
 80 percent of the poor living in rural areas. The living
 standards of the beneficiaries of development projects and
 land reform have improved. Landless laborers and farmers in
 the unirrigated highlands are the most disadvantaged groups.
 In recent years, inflation has eroded the purchasing power
 of low-income and middle-class families throughout the
 country. The World Bank estimated that in 1975, some 32
 percent of the urban population and 41 percent of the rural
 population was below the absolute poverty level. Largely
 because of low income, chronic undernutrition is a common
 problem. Since 1970, the government has carried out extensive
 studies of the problem, and conducted school feeding and
 outreach programs for mothers and children. Recently, the
 government, working with the World Bank, has been considering
 the adoption of a national food and nutrition program to
 further alleviate the problem.
 Education traditionally has been the key to social and
 economic advancement for Pilipinos. The adult literacy rate
 is high at 88 percent. Elementary school enrollments are
 quite high. University enrollments also are relatively
 high. The quality of education and school attendance in
 rural areas are much lower than in towns and cities, however.
 Education continues to receive the same absolute budget
 expenditures as in the 1960's, while new resources are being
 channeled into other development priorities. Health care
 remains inadequate, particularly in rural areas. Infant
 mortality was 65 per thousand in 1978, improved from 98 per
 thousand in 1960. Government budget levels for health in
 
 
 673
 fiscal year 1982 have been increased to 4.7 percent of the
 total budget from 3.8 percent the previous year. Despite
 the shortfall in medical services, however, health standards
 are improving slowly, as evidenced by the rise in life
 expectancy from 56 years in 1970 to 62 years in 1979.
 The supply of low-income housing is inadequate. The average
 number of persons housed per room in 1970 was 2.4 in the rural
 areas and 2.1 in the urban areas. Significant percentages
 of existing houses lack sanitary toilets or electricity.
 The percentage of the population with access to safe water
 was 66 percent of urban, but only 33 percent of rural
 dwellers in 1975. Government efforts to upgrade housing,
 provide sites and services, and design model communities
 have been at times innovative but also inadequately funded
 and administered.
 Development efforts have been hampered to some degree by the
 government's reliance on central planning and control, the
 vagaries of the budget, and sometimes by abrupt changes in
 priorities assigned to individual programs which may pull
 resources away from worthwhile, ongoing projects. Corrup-
 tion traditionally has been widespread, although its adverse
 effects on development are not always easy to determine. A
 financial crisis touched off in early 1981 brought to light
 questionable financial practices and revealed the economic
 weakness of a number of well-connected businessmen. Swift
 government intervention averted a panic but also has been
 criticized as favoritism. Opposition groups have made
 official corruption a major point of criticism of the
 government.
 
 
 674
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LUANS AND GRANTS- OKLIATIONS ANU LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.t:ISCAL YEAKS - MILLIONS O- DOLLAkS)
 COUNTRY: PHILIPPINES
 197c.    1986     1981
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-IOTAL...        72.0      83.3     97.6
 LOAN............           44.6      31.1     28.4
 GRANTS .............1                52.2     69.2
 A.AID .................... ... '3.7     59.7     66.5
 LOANS .....  .....    ... 35.6      31.1     28.4
 GRANTS. ...........         4.1     28.b     40.1
 (SEL.SUPPAS!,IST.)...        0.0     20.0      30.0
 B. FOOD t-OR PEACE ......       23.6     Ib.8     24.1
 LOANS ................     9.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS............. 14.b           16.8     24.1
 TITLE 1-TOTAL..........          9.0      0.0      0.0
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS.....          9.0      0.0      0.0
 PAY. IN FOR. LURR.....          0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE 11-TUTAL ........                 1. 1.8  8b.b  24.1
 E.RELIEF.EC.DEV L WIP.          2.4.     3.9      4.5
 VOL.RELIE" AGENLY..*..        12.4     14.9     19.6
 C.DTHEk LCON. ASSIST...          '.5      4.8      !.0
 LOANS ..............       0.0       0.0      0.0
 GRANTS.............     .    4.5      4.8      5.0
 PEACE CORPS .... .4.4               4.8      5.0
 NARCOTICS......           0.1       0.0      0.0
 OTHER..............                0.0      0.0
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL...        31.7      75.5     75.6
 LOANS...............       15.6     50.0     50.0
 GRANTS .............    .  16.1      25.5     25.6
 A.NAP GRANTS .........         15.5     25.0     25.0
 B.CREOI1 SALES-FMS....         15.6     50.0     50.0
 C.INTL MIL.E.TRNG....          0.6      0.5      0.6
 O.TRAN-EXCESS STOLK...          0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS........          0.0      0.0      0.0
 III.TUTAL ELON. L MIL...        103.7    158.8    17a.2
 LOANS.............. 60.2           81.1     78.4
 GRANTS.............. ..     43.5     77.7     94.8
 OTHER US LOANS..........          0.6     27.8     69.3
 EX-IM BANK LOANS*......          0.6     27.8     69.3
 ALL OTHER.     ..................  0.0   .0.0      0.0
 ASSISTANCE F.ROM INTERNATION.AL A6ENCALS
 1979     1980     1981     1946-81
 TOTAL........  .441.1     928.5     479.7   4505.9
 IBRO             245.5    695.0     295.0   2960.7
 IFC                 5.3       9.9     40.2    143.4
 IOA               62.0      0.0      0.0     122.Z
 108                0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 AOb              123.7     208.5    135.5   1187.5
 AFOB               0.0       0.0      0.0      0.0
 UNOP               2.4       3.1      9.0     57.4
 OTHER-UN           2.2      12.0      0.0     34.7
 EEC                0.0       0.0      0.0      0.0
 
 
