 THE PHILIPPINES
 The Philippines has a presidential-parliamentary system of
 government dominated by its chief executive, Ferdinand Marcos,
 President since 1965. Through his personal power, control of
 the ruling party, and use of the emergency decree-making
 powers granted by the Constitution, Marcos has dominated the
 political arena. The president is elected to a six-year term
 and may succeed himself indefinitely. The governmental system
 includes a prime minister and a unicameral legislature, the
 National Assembly, both subordinate to the chief executive.
 National Assembly members are elected to six-year terms not
 coinciding with the term of the president.
 After nearly four hundred years of Spanish colonial rule, the
 Philippines became an American colony in 1898. It was granted
 Commonwealth status by the United States in 1935, and, on July
 4, 1946, gained full independence. The Filipino people have a
 long-standing attachment to democratic principles and
 institutions, fostered by the legacy of the American years.
 From independence until 1972 the country was governed under
 its 1935 Constitution, patterned closely after the United
 States Constitution and which provided for government with
 three branches; a strong chief executive, an independent
 judiciary, and a two-house national legislature.
 On September 21, 1972, President Marcos declared martial law,
 citing anarchy, lawlessness, urban terrorism, and open
 rebellion by the New People's Army (NPA), the military wing of
 the Communist Party of the Philippines. Democratic
 institutions were suppressed under martial law. The 1935
 Constitution was replaced by one approved by a constitutional
 convention on November 30, 1972 and ratified in January, 1973,
 in a series of controversial 'Citizens' Assemblies.* In 1981,
 after new constitutional amendments had redefined the
 presidency, Marcos was reelected to a six-year term. Although
 martial law formally ended in 1981, the President has
 continued to exercise broad, discretionary decree-making
 powers to limit criticism of the regime and to suppress
 opposition activity.
 In National Assembly elections held in May 1984, an estimated
 80 percent of eligible voters participated. Opposition groups
 won about one-third of the seats in the Assembly and the
 ruling Kilusang Bagong Lipunan ('New Society Movement' - KBL)
 party and its allies the remainder. Although marred by some
 violent incidents and by charces and countercharges of vote
 buying, illegal overspending, intimidation of voters and poll
 watchers, and other electoral abuses, the election was
 regarded by many Filipinos as a relative success by historical
 standards. An outspoken, vigorous but ultimately unsuccessful
 election boycott movement developed a nationwide following
 during the 1984 election season.
 Two insurgent groups are active, the Communist NPA and the
 Moro National Liberation Front (KNLF), a radical Muslim
 secessionist group. Both employ terrorist tactics, including
 murder, bombings, and extortion. The NPA has expanded
 significantly over the past two years and now operates to some
 degree in most provinces. In some areas, it has gained
 considerable influence, exacting 'taxes' from businesses and
 individuals and administering its own often violent brand of
 "justice". In. some NPA-influenced areas, mayors and other
 local government officials have left their towns, out of fear
 for their own safety.
 
 
 846
 THE PHILIPPINES
 In the South, the MNLF has waged a secessionist struggle since
 1972. This conflict has its origins in inequities and
 misunderstandings dating from the Spanish era, including
 competition with Christians over lands traditionally held by
 Muslims, past efforts by the central government to control and
 expand Christian settlements, and the desire of the Muslims to
 preserve their cultural identity. The level of fighting in
 predominantly Muslim areas has, however, diminished
 considerably in recent years.
 The Government has mounted political, military, and economic
 efforts against both insurgent groups. In large part, these
 counterinsurgency efforts have succeeded better in areas
 affected by the MNLF than in those where the NPA is active.
 The Philippines is a predominantly agricultural country with a
 growing industrial sector. It ranks economically in the lower
 middle range of developing countries. Its private sector is
 subject to both substantial state intervention and favoritism
 toward individual entrepeneurs with close ties to the
 Government and the Marcos family. The Philippine economy
 experienced considerable difficulty in 1984.
 There continued to be serious human rights violations in 1984,
 particularly in areas affected by the Communist insurgency.
 The number of persons detained for alleged national security
 violations did not change appreciably from 1983. There were
 frequent reports, many of them well-founded, of human rights
 abuses by government security forces. These included
 harassment of civilians; arbitrary arrests, detentions, and
 disappearances; instances of torture; unlawful searches and
 seizures; and summary executions or "salvagings" of suspected
 insurgents and insurgent sympathizers. The Government has
 conducted investigations of abuses by the military, and senior
 officials have made public statements on the need for
 discipline and respect in military dealings with civilians.
 However; in practice, few within the military are seriously
 punished for abusive actions.
 An independent, presidentially created fact-finding board was
 established in November 1983 to investigate the circumstances
 of the August 21, 1983, assassination of former Senator
 Benigno Aquino, a popular opposition leader and major
 political rival of President Marcos.
 The fact-finding board, a five-member body with representatives
 from the legal, labor, business, and academic communities,
 conducted a painstaking, vigorous inquiry into the killing
 throughout the first half of 1984, in public and closed
 meetings. In October, a four-member majority of the board
 issued an exhaustive report declaring that there was a
 conspiracy within the Philippine military to murder Aquino.
 The majority report extended legal responsibility in the
 killing to General Fabian Ver, Chief of Staff of the Armed
 Forces who is close to President Marcos. It recommended
 criminal prosecutions against the Chief of Staff, two other
 generals, 22 others in the Philippine military, and one
 civilian for complicity in the murder. The board's majority
 report found that some of these persons were actual
 conspirators in the killing, and that others were accessories
 after the fact. Upon receipt of the board's report, President
 Marcos announced that appropriate prosecution would be
 
 
 847
 THE PHILIPPINES
 undertaken in a civilian court. The President also received a
 minority report from the board's chairman which named only
 seven members of the Philippine military as participants in
 the conspiracy to murder Aquino. In December, the case was
 under review by a government prosecutor.
 The trend towards greater press freedom following the 1983
 Aquino assassination continued. Pro-government newspapers,
 owned by political and personal allies of the Marcos family,
 now often feature articles critical of aspects of the
 Government and its policies, including stories on corruption
 and human rights abuses. The active opposition-oriented press
 which emerged after the assassination flourished throughout
 1984. It has continued to provide a platform for
 anti-government viewpoints, and to furnish straight news
 reporting as well. Change towards greater freedom has been
 less noticeable in radio and television, which the Government
 influences more strongly. Nevertheless, a Catholic
 Church-linked radio station based in the capital city region
 nas gained many listeners because of its independent public
 affairs coverage.
 The Philippines continues to offer asylum to refugees, and to
 cooperate with international organizations, foreign
 governments, and associated private voluntary agencies which
 assist refugees, pending their permanent resettlement
 elsewhere.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 The use of violence for both personal and political purposes
 has been common historically in the Philippines. The
 boundaries between common criminal activity, personal
 vendettas, unauthorized reprisals by individual military or
 constabulary units, and legitimate counterinsurgency
 operations are often blurred. Insurgents are responsible for
 some killings, as are common criminals, extremist religious
 sects, private security forces, and vigilante groups. Some of
 these are clearly connected to government units or
 insurgents. Clashes between insurgents and government forces
 occur with frequency, and often result in fatalities; human
 rights groups assert that many of these deaths are in fact
 summary executions of unarmed civilians.
 Numerous reports of summary executions or 'salvagings"
 occurred throughout the Philippines during 1984. Task Force
 Detainees(TFD), a Catholic Church-related group which
 investigates and compiles statistics on human rights
 violations, reported in June 1984 that a total of 108
 salvagings had taken place throughout the Philippines by
 mid-year. TFD reported a total of 368 salvagings nationwide
 for the entire year of 1983. According to TFD reports, most
 of these killings were of farmers in areas of insurgent
 activity, although other killings did occur in urban settings.
 The Government reported in October that in 1984 it received 14
 complaints of salvagings attributed to the military: two were
 found positive for prosecution purposes and twelve were still
 under investigation as of December.
 
 
 848
 THE PHILIPPINES
 The year was marked by two group slayings, apparently
 involving the Philippine military, which received widespread
 publicity. In March, seven young men were reportedly executed
 by army elements in Butuan, northeastern Mindano. The
 military has denied involvement in the incident, but accounts
 furnished by local residents and one local law enforcement
 agency's investigation strongly suggested military
 involvement. No serious investigation of this incident
 appears to be under way.
 In May of 1984, nine men were killed by elements of the
 Philippine Constabulary near Langoni, Negros Occidental, in
 the Western Visayas region. The military initially described
 the incident as a result of an armed clash between government
 troops and rebels. Local townspeople, however, furnished
 accounts contradicting the military report, and suggesting
 that the civilians were summarily executed by members of the
 Constabulary after having been taken into custody. In
 September, a court martial of 13 Constabulary soldiers
 allegedly involved in the incident was ordered by then Vice
 Chief of Staff and Constabulary head Lt. General Fidel V.
 Ramos, but action taken since the order has yet to be revealed.
 Government officials state that mistakes have been made by
 security forces fighting in insurgency affected areas. The
 Government has carried out investigations and has stated that
 military personnel have been disciplined for abusive
 behavior. In fact, however, they are seldom seriously
 punished, although there were a few cases in 1984 in which
 punishment was ordered. For example, in October, a
 Constabulary captain was sentenced to one year in prison for
 the arbitrary detention of four civilians in Butuan City in
 1982. In the course of the investigation, the defendant said
 that he released the four civilians after questioning them.
 The four have been missing since the incident. The Government
 reported in October that in 1984 a total of I1 military and
 national police personnel were charged before courts martial
 for abuses of civilians. Only eight of those so accused were
 convicted. For those convicted, sentences reportedly ranged
 from dishonorable discharge, with forfeiture of pay, to
 death. The most common form of punishment for abuses,
 however, was an administrative transfer to another region. As
 of October, according to government reports, a total of 120
 military personnel were the subjects of administrative
 disciplinary action, including reprimands, demotions, and
 discharges, for abuse of authority. The activation in Metro
 Manila in June of a controversial 'Secret Marshal" corps of
 some 1,000 armed law enforcement officers gave rise to
 widespread allegations of arbitrary killings. The marshals,
 plainclothes armed officers, were assigned to ride as
 passengers on the Metro Manila public transit vehicles, in a
 government effort to combat the increased crime aboard these
 vehicles. The marshals had summary arrest powers, as well as
 autnority to shoot to kill offenders who refused to submit to
 arrest. Marshals reportedly killed more than 20 alleged
 criminals while the program was in effect. At least one such
 killing was a case of mistaken identity, as a result of which
 authorities brought homicide charges against four officers.
 The program won the approval of some Metro Manila residents as
 a welcome assault on crime. In other quarters, however, it
 drew sharp criticism as a violation of due process. Its
 critics included senior Catholic Church officials, human
 rights activists, and some lawyers and
 journalists. The Secret Marshal program was ended in late
 July.
 
 
 849
 THE PHILIPPINES
 According to press reports, at least 140 civilians were
 summarily executed by the NPA from January to mid-November.
 Insurgents reportedly kill landlords and local officials in
 order to intimidate the population, extort contributions,
 carry out vigilante justice, and demonstrate their strength.
 In May a police general, Tomas B. Karingal, was murdered in
 Metro Manila. While the NPA allegedly took credit for this
 slaying, as of November, the killing was still under
 investigation by the Government.
 On November 14, Mayor Cesar C. Climaco, a frequent outspoken
 critic and opponent of the Marcos regime, was assassinated in
 Zamboanga City. Given the possible political implications of
 the killing, Acting Armed Forces Chief of Staff General Ramos
 was appointed to head the investigation. An arrest had been
 made and the investigation was continuing at the end of
 December.
 b. Disappearance
 The TFD human rights group listed 53 persons as having
 disappeared from January to June 1984. (TFD reported a total
 of 145 disappearances for all of 1983.) The Government
 maintains that its forces were not responsible for these
 disappearances. However, the Government has as a frequent
 practice held persons suspected of national security offenses
 incommunicado in order to complete its interrogation before
 revealing their capture.
 In the course of the investigation of the Aquino
 assassination, it came to the attention of the government
 fact-finding board that three persons believed to have
 knowledge of some circumstances surrounding the alleged
 conspiracy to murder Aquino had disappeared without
 explanation. They were the common-law wife of
 government-alleged assassin Rolando Galman (ultimately found
 by the fact-finding board to have been a scapegoat in a
 military plot to kill Aquino and not the assassin); and two
 nightclub hostesses with whom Galman reportedly was
 acquainted. Testimony presented to the fact-finding board
 indicated that all three women disappeared in early 1984. All
 were reportedly last seen in the company of persons with
 suspected ties to the Philippine military. A nationwide
 search undertaken by military authorities at the direction of
 the fact-finding board yielded no information on the
 whereabouts of the three, who remained missing as of early
 December..
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 Torture is prohibited under the Philippine Constitution.
 However, some persons arrested for alleged national security
 otfenses have reportedly been tortured, although no reliable
 figures are available on the number of instances of torture by
 government security forces.
 The Ministry of National Defense admits that abuses occur, but
 states that some charges of torture are false and are used as
 a legal tactic by arrested subversives to gain release. Most
 complaints of torture or other abuse center on the period
 immediately after arrest, when suspects are reportedly
 detained in 'safe houses.'
 
 
 850
 THE PHILIPPINES
 In areas of military activity against insurgents, as well,
 there have been allegations of military abuse ranging from
 harassment and extortion to rape and murder. These
 allegations have appeared in the press and have also come from
 numerous human rights organizations, which believe that the
 Government is not doing enough to curb abuses and punish
 abusive military personnel. Although the Ministry of National
 Defense has investigated some reported abuses, it frequently
 fails to find evidence, and few personnel receive serious
 punishment.
 Physical punishment is not officially part of the Philippine
 penal system, but prison conditions are often harsh, and
 reports of abuse are frequent. While in confinement, national
 security detainees are frequently allowed visits by family
 members, lawyers, and others, and are also often permitted
 food supplements from outside sources. Judy Taguiwalo,
 arrested on charges of subversion, was four months pregnant at
 the time of her apprehension in January. During her
 confinement at a military detention facility in Metro Manila
 she was allowed regular visits by family members and a private
 physician, and she received food supplements. Ms. Taguiwalo
 gave birth to a healthy baby at the detention facility
 hospital, and as of December continued in confinement with her
 child.
 The use of extended solitary confinement for national security
 detainees appears to be selective and limited for the most
 part to persons whom the Government regards as key figures in
 the underground Communist movement. Jose Maria Sison, reputed
 senior member of the Communist Party of the Philippines, had
 been in solitary confinement since 1977. In 1984, the Supreme
 Court ordered the military to place him in a regular detention
 facility with access to other prisoners.
 Persons held without bail pending completion of their trials
 for national security offenses are usually segregated from and
 have better accommodations than those held without bail for
 common crimes and those already convicted by the courts.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Most human rights groups in the Philippines characterize
 all arrested persons who oppose the Government as "political
 detainees.' The Government asserts that no one is arrested
 for his political beliefs, but that it arrests 'public order
 violators' who commit specific criminal acts relating to the
 violent overthrow of the Government. Generally, such persons
 are charged with subversion and rebellion, possession of
 firearms and subversive documents, and, occasionally, with
 crimes such as arson and murder. The line between national
 security offenses and common crimes is frequently blurred and
 lengthy legal proceedings often result in such cases.
 Arrested persons are generally charged promptly, although this
 is not always the case, particularly with regard to alleged
 .national security' offenders. Such persons are sometimes
 held incommunicado by military intelligence units for days or
 weeks before the Government presents charges or acknowledges
 that it is holding them. Arrests by military security groups
 are sometimes made without warrants or orders of any kind.
 For example, in June, military authorities conducted a
 warrantless raid at the Metro Manila headquarters of the
 National Alliance for Justice, Freedom, and Democracy, and
 
 
 851
 THE PHILIPPINES
 arrested Father Jose Dizon, a Catholic priest who is Deputy
 Secretary General of the organization. Authorities claimed
 that they found subversive documents in the course of this
 raid. Father Dizon was briefly detained but released to the
 custody of his religious superior the same day. No effort has
 been made by government authorities to go forward with the
 prosecution of Father Dizon, although charges against him are
 still pending preliminary investigation by a government
 prosecutor.
 Arrests in national security cases are frequently made under
 'preventive detention actions,' which authorize arrests by
 presidential order without court warrant, and which allow
 persons to be held without bail until the President authorizes
 their release. The 1983 presidential decree which created the
 preventive detention action, however, provides for a yearly
 review of the case of each accused person held without bail.
 Despite this provision, President Marcos still retains the
 power to order anyone's d~tention for an indefinite period of
 time.
 As of November 1983, government figures showed that 492
 persons accused of national security offenses were being held
 without bail. TFD, which compiles statistics on 'political
 detainees," reported as of June that a total of 798 political
 arrests had taken place in 1984, compared with 2,088 for all
 of 1983.
 Numerous alleged national security offenders continued under
 'house arrest' or 'temporary release status' throughout 1984.
 Prominent among these are defendants in the still ongoing 1982
 'We Forum' newspaper subversion case, as well as opposition
 leader Eva Estrada Kalaw, who, while under liberal house
 arrest in connection with national security offense charges
 dating to 1979, successfully ran for a seat in the National
 Assembly. Aquilino Pimentel, former mayor of Cagayan de Oroin
 Mindanao, was released from a restrictive house arrest in
 April to campaign as a candidate for the National Assembly.
 Pimentel won an Assembly seat, but in late October the
 Commission on Elections invalidated his election. As of
 December, an appeal from this decision was still pending in
 the Supreme Court, but he is forbidden to take his seat in the
 National Assembly until the appeal is resolved. Meanwhile,
 Pimentel still enjoyed freedom of movement throughout the
 country.
 In October 1984, the country's longest held detainee, Fidel
 Agcaoli, held since May 1974, was released from custody.
 Prior to his 1984 conviction for conspiracy to commit
 rebellion, Agcaoli had already been held for longer than the
 maximum sentence for this offense.
 Habeas corpus is generally available, but remains suspended
 throughout the country for persons charged with subversion or
 rebellion and for those charged with any crime in the two
 regions in Mindanao where the MNLF insurgency continues.
 Defendants in subversion and rebellion cases or their
 relatives frequently petition the Supreme Court for habeas
 corpus. In some instances the court has granted hearings and
 compelled the Goverment to present persons specified in
 petitions before it. In other cases, however, the Supreme
 Court has been slow to act on such petitions. The Court has
 ruled that preventive detention actions issued by the
 President are constitutional.
 
 
 852
 THE PHILIPPINES
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 All persons currently charged with crimes are legally presumed
 innocent until proven guilty and, if arrested after martial
 law was lifted in 1981, receive public trials in civilian
 courts. As of October, the Government reported that nine
 military commissions, remnants of the martial law period, were
 still in existence. These nine commissions were handling ten
 cases, six of which covered a total of 218 accused and four of
 which covered 37 persons accused of common crimes.
 The right to counsel is guaranteed by law and in general
 honored from the time a person is presented in court for the
 reading of charges. However, there have been instances when
 persons charged with subversion and rebellion have been held
 for periods of time without access to counsel. This occurred
 in the case of Milagros Aguilar Roque, alleged by the
 Government to be a high-ranking operative of the Philippine
 Communist Party, who was held incommunicado for several days
 after her arrest in August. Thereafter, she was represented
 by counsel and was allowed visits by family members.
 If a defendant cannot afford counsel, the court will appoint a
 lawyer. Private and government legal assistance is available
 to indigents, and there are lawyers' organizations which
 provide assistance to alleged national security offenders.
 Because of case backlogs, a shortage of judges, and the
 practice of hearing cases concurrently, trials in civilian
 courts often take two or three years. Subversion and
 rebellion trials have frequently lasted longer. Trial by jury
 is not a part of Philippine jurisprudence. Questions of law
 and fact, including determinations of guilt or innocence, are
 all resolved by the presiding judge.
 The Supreme Court in particular has shown signs of greater
 assertiveness in sensitive areas. For example, it overruled
 the Government's refusal to grant a rally permit for the
 anniversary of Benigno Aquino's death on August 21, 1984. It
 also, in an unusual show of independence, ordered the ballot
 boxes in the disputed election of Aquilino Pimentel to be
 impounded, and stated it would conduct a recount. However,
 there remains widespread Philippine cynicism regarding the
 fairness and independence of the judiciary, and there is
 frequent criticism that political influence or bribery of
 individual judges plays a part in judicial decisions.
 Charges in suoversion and rebellion cases are often vague.
 There have been some cases with multiple defendants, where
 conspiracy to overthrow the Government was alleged but little
 detail was provided in the charges. Members of the opposition
 have sometimes been linked to alleged conspiracies with
 subversive elements, and some have left the country to avoid
 lengthy trials, restriction of movement, or possible
 imprisonment.
 In practice there have been few convictions for subversion and
 rebellion. Trials, including those of better known
 defendants, tend to continue indefinitely. Human rights
 organizations state this serves to harass or intimidate the
 opposition. In many instances, defendants held under
 preventive detention regulations and charged with subversion
 are given "temporary release' while their trials continue.
 Others have been released outright after a few weeks or months.
 
 
 853
 THE PHILIPPINES
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The state intrudes little into the family life of most
 Filipinos. Parents are free to raise their children as they
 see fit. Religious practices are a personal matter, as is the
 decision to join a political party. The Constitution's Bill
 of Rights specifies that persons shall be secure in their
 homes and guarantees the privacy of communications and
 correspondence. These rights are generally respected by the
 authorities.
 A search warrant may be issued by a judge upon a finding of
 probable cause. The President may also order a search. There
 have been allegations that the property of some persons
 accused of subversion or rebellion was searched without a
 warrant, but in most instances the authorities obtain warrants
 before acting. In insurgency affected areas, however, there
 have been reports of military personnel entering premises and
 destroying private property without authorization.
 In some rural areas in Mindanao there were efforts by the
 Government in 1981 and 1982 to force inhabitants to relocate
 to new "hamlets* or *village centers' as part of its drive to
 curb the Communist insurgency. Following reports of these
 practices in the press and by the Integrated Bar of the
 Philippines, the Minister of Defense, on March 2, 1982, issued
 orders to halt such activities, declaring them.lviolative of
 the constitutional rights of the people.* Reports
 nevertheless have continued since March, 1982, of "hamletting'
 or forcible resettlement. There were reports from human
 rights groups that forcible resettlement continued throughout
 1984 notwithstanding the 1982 government ban on the practice.
 One group reported that hamletting, previously confined to
 provinces in Mindanao, occurred in 1984 in the provinces of
 Ilocos, Cagayan, and Quezon in Luzon. The group was, as of
 early 1985, unable to furnish any figures on the incidence of
 this alleged hamletting. According to the Government, higher
 levels of combat between government forces and Communist
 insurgents have led some people in scattered rural areas to
 relocate their homes of their own volition, often for limited
 periods, to avoid danger.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Freedom of speech and the press are guaranteed by the
 Constitution. In practice, however, there are some
 restrictions on the media. These are economic and political
 in nature, rather than in the form of direct government
 censorship. Nevertheless, Philippine media now operate with a
 degree of freedom greater than at any time since the
 imposition of martial law in 1972.
 Three of the nation's largest nationally circulated newspapers
 are owned or controlled by relatives or other close associates
 of the Marcos family. While direct criticism of the Marcos
 family is rare in these papers, they do provide frequent
 coverage, in news reporting, as well as editorials and columns
 sometimes critical of specific government policies and
 personalities. Pro-government newspapers have significantly
 increased their. coverage of opposition political activities
 since the 1983 Aquino assassination.
 
 
 854
 THE PHILIPPINES
 Outspoken anti-government commentary is regularly found in
 independent newspapers and magazines. These include 'Malaya,"
 a popular new Manila daily begun in 1984 as a weekly but which
 switched to daily publication later, and 'Veritas,* a weekly
 newspaper published by a group of businessmen associated with
 the Catholic church. "Malaya" is a sister publication of 'We
 Forum," an opposition newspaper which was closed by the
 Government in 1982. In the 'We Forum* case, the Supreme Court
 ruled on December 26 that the December 1982 raid by the
 military authorities on the "We Forum' headquarters was
 illegal. While subversion charges remain against the 'We
 Forum" defendants, lawyers for the group expressed the view
 that the December 26 decision paved the way for a dismissal of
 tnese charges.
 International news publications such as 'Time," 'Newsweek,"
 'Far Eastern Economic Review,' 'Asian Wall Street Journal,*
 and the "International Herald Tribune" are freely sold in the
 Philippines, and were not censored or embargoed in 1984, even
 though sometimes containing articles or editorials sharply
 critical of the Government. Foreign reporters regularly
 travel in the Philippines and file stories without hindrance,
 although one or two incidents of alleged harassment (e.g.,
 surveillance by suspected government agents) were reported.
 Government influence over the electronic media, particularly
 television, has been more evident than in the area of print
 media. Manila has one government-owned television station and
 four privately-owned stations. All of them produce and
 distribute programs for broadcast in Manila and other major
 cities. Major privately-owned stations are controlled by
 persons well-disposed towards President Marcos. All
 television stations appear to accept government guidance in
 the editorial field and often ignore or downplay opposition
 political activities.
 Radio, especially important as a source of news and
 information in the provinces, is dominated by government
 loyalists, with exceptions like the Catholic Church-linked
 station, Radio Veritas, which gained prominence for its
 coverage of the funeral of Benigno Aquino in 1983. It
 continued to attract a wide audience in 1984.
 Libel is a criminal offense, punishable by up to three years
 imprisonment. Rommel Corro, owner-publisher of the now
 defunct 'Philippine Times," was released from detention in
 November 1984. He was first arrested in 1983 on charges of
 sedition arising out of his newspaper's publication of
 allegations of possible complicity of senior government
 officials in the Aquino assassination. He was temporarily
 released from custody during the 1984 National Assembly
 election campaign period (he ran as a candidate and lost) but
 was returned to custody shortly after election day. In
 November he was again released, by order of the President,
 after the filing of a habeas corpus petition on his behalf in
 the Supreme Court.
 Libel suits are frequently filed in the Philippines, sometimes
 as a pressure tactic against reporters, with varying degrees
 of success. In 1984 Armed Forces Chief of Staff General Ver,
 along with prominent businessman Eduardo M. Cojuangco, filed
 civil and criminal libel complaints against the editor of a
 pro-government newspaper's Sunday magazine supplement, two
 writers, and a lawyer for a person alleged by the Government
 to have been the assassin of Senator Aquino. The charges
 
 
 855
 THE PHILIPPINES
 stemmed from an article in which the lawyer was interviewed,
 and in which he said that the government-alleged assassin was
 seen being taken to Cojuangco's home some two days before the
 Aquino assassination. The merits of the case were not
 resolved as of December, 1984. In 1984, libel suits against
 Rommel Corro and against a 'Newsweek' writer (the latter filed
 in 1983) were dismissed on the merits.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 A broad range of private professional, religious, social,
 charitable, and political organizations flourishes in the
 Philippines. The Constitution provides for the right of
 peaceful assembly. Numerous indoor and outdoor meetings
 protesting government policies and addressing other issues
 were held throughout 1984. The number and size of such
 gatherings varied. On August 21, 1984, several hundred
 thousand persons gathered in Manila for peaceful
 anti-government demonstrations to commemorate the first
 anniversary of Benigno Aquino's death. Opposition rallies are
 frequently held in provincial cities and towns.
 Permits from local authorities are required for demonstrations
 in public places. Rally permits sometimes have been denied on
 grounds of alleged likely involvement of subversive elements;
 in other instances, permits have been issued and later
 withdrawn. In most cases, permits are issued and rallies take
 place. Nevertheless, on several occasions during the year
 authorities broke up ostensibly peaceful permitless
 demonstrations with tear gas and truncheons. In one instance
 in September, government security forces apparently fired into
 a crowd of anti-government demonstrators. One person later
 died as a result of the incident. As of December a National
 Assembly committee was investigating the conduct of security
 forces in this incident.
 Anti-government rallies were common in 1984, some occurred in
 connection with protests against the Commission on Elections
 for suspected charges of tampering with results in the May
 National Assembly elections. A post election rally in the
 city of Cebu protesting alleged irregularities in vote
 counting there resulted in the death of one person in May.
 The trade union sector claims slightly more than two million
 workers in a variety of union organizations. Labor and allied
 farm organizations claim a total membership of approximately
 4.7 million out of a labor force of 20 million, but much of
 this membership is nominal, rather than being composed of
 active, dues-paying members. While there is a weakness in the
 trade union movement, this is inherent ih the economic
 structure of the country and in divisions and rivalries within
 the labor movement itself, and does not arise out of any
 Government violation of the constitutional right of freedom of
 association in labor unions. International labor ties are not
 restricted. Three major world labor organizations, including
 the Communist-dominated World Federation of Trade Unions
 (WFTU), have active affiliates in the Philippines.
 The Trade Union Congress of the Philippines (TUCP), claiming
 1.3 million non-agricultural workers, is the only officially
 recognized trade union umbrella organization in the country.
 As a result of this official status, TUCP officials are
 appointed as representatives of labor on tri-partite boards
 
 40-387 0 - 85 - 55
 
 
 856
 THE PHILIPPINES
 such as the Social Security Commission and the National
 Council on Wages. Because of these links, the TUCP is
 frequently attacked as being government controlled. During
 1984, the TUCP began to distance itself somewhat from the
 Government, making critical statements about government
 actions and policies and displaying less than enthusiastic
 support for the ruling party in the National Assembly
 elections.
 In 1984 the opposition labor groups founded a loose working
 alliance called the National Workers' Coalition Against
 Poverty (PKMK). The PKMK began a dialogue with the Ministry
 of Labor on subjects of friction, most notably on the legal
 restrictions on the right to strike. In August, these
 discussions led to the issuance by the Government of
 additional guidelines on the conduct of strikes. These
 guidelines were responsive to some of the opposition's more
 critical objections to the enforcement of the present strike
 law but did not amend the law as the opposition continues to
 demand.
 In the first half of the year, there were several violent
 confrontations between strikers and police which caused deaths
 and injuries. In the most widely publicized case, involving a
 labor dispute at a textile company in June, initial reports of
 numerous fatal shootings. by the police turned out to be false,
 no fatalities having occurred. With the criticism of police
 violence against strikers and with international attention to
 reports of alleged police brutality in confronting political
 demonstrations, the authorities became cautious in
 enforcement, and there was notable defiance of the labor law
 and Ministry of Labor directives.
 The National Assembly elections demonstrated that labor in the
 Philippines has developed little political strength. Two
 "labor* parties were formed, but only one participated in the
 elections, and its participation was predominately through
 endorsing candidates of both the ruling and opposition
 parties. The militant, leftist May 1 Movement (KMU) joined
 the election boycott movement. Some sectors of the TUCP gave
 a pro forma endorsement to the ruling party.
 Opposition labor has played a role in anti-government rallies
 and demonstrations. The PKMK and its dominant component, the
 KMU, have been active in supplying leaders and manpower.
 However, most demonstrators apparently do not come from the
 ranks of the workers.
 Complaints against the Government considered by the
 International Labor Organization (ILO) were lodged by the KMU
 and centered on the August and September 1982 arrests of
 predominately KMU labor leaders. Only one of those arrested,
 Crispin Beltran, General Secretary of the KMU, continued in
 detention in 1984, and he escaped from custody in November.
 The ILO Committee on Freedom of Association called for
 information on the status of Beltran's case. In a broader
 context, the ILO Committee of Experts in its 1984 report
 concluded that Philippine trade union legislation is
 incompatible with the Convention on Freedom of Association and
 Protection of the Right to Organize, and called on the
 Government to bring the law into conformity.
 
 
 857
 THE PHILIPPINES
 c. Freedom of Religion
 There is no established state religion in the Philippines, and
 the right to practice one's religion is fully respected. Over
 80 percent of the population is Roman Catholic. There are
 several Protestant and independent Christian groups, and a
 sizable Muslim minority. In the Sulu archipelago in the
 Southwest portion of the country and in parts of Mindanao,
 Muslims comprise the majority. The Government is assisting
 efforts to preserve the Filipino Muslim identity and cultural
 heritage. It has established an institute to train Filipino
 Muslim religious and legal leaders for positions in the Sharia
 Court system, which is based on Muslim personal law. The
 Government also provides assistance to Islamic schools and
 centers, and it facilitates the travel of Muslim pilgrims to
 Mecca.
 Foreign clergymen and missionaries of various faiths normally
 perform their duties without difficulty. A notable exception,
 however, was the 1983-84 prosecution of an Australian priest,
 Father Brian Gore, an Irish priest, Father Niall O'Brien,
 along with a Filipino priest, Father Vicente Dangan, and six
 Filipino Catholic layworkers. All were charged in 1983 in the
 1982 ambush slaying of a mayor in the province of Negros
 Occidental in the Western Visayas region. All defendants
 maintained their innocence and asserted that they were the
 victims of a frameup engineered by powerful sugar planting
 interests in Negros in retaliation for the priests' efforts to
 organize the rural population to defend its rights. After
 talks between Australian and Philippine leaders in February,
 1984, an agreement was reached for a speedy trial. In July,
 1984, the prosecution dropped the case for lack of evidence.
 The two foreign priests left the Philippines soon after.
 Major political parties and groupings in the Philippines have
 members and leaders from different religions. Government
 service is open to all on a non-discriminatory basis, and
 several senior civil and military officials belong to minority
 religious groups.
 Throughout 1984, the hierarchy of the Philippine Catholic
 Church, including Jaime Cardinal Sin, the Roman Catholic
 Archbishop of Manila, continued to criticize the Government on
 various issues, including human rights issues. Pastoral
 letters critical of the administration were read from pulpits
 in Catholic churches throughout the Philippines. Many
 Catholic priests and nuns are actively involved in calling
 public attention to cases of human rights abuses.
 Such criticism has at times evoked a negative reaction from
 high-level authorities, including the President, who claim
 that it violates the constitutional doctrine of separation of
 church and state. In late 1984, some ruling party assembly
 members spoke of legislation to refine further this doctrine,
 but as of early December no such proposed law had been
 introduced in the Assembly.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 There is freedom to change one's place of residence and
 employment. Emigration is generally permitted, but former
 detainees on "temporary release' status need Government
 permission to leave the country, as do persons with pending
 criminal (including national security related) cases.
 
 
 858
 THE PHILIPPINES
 Approximately 35,000 Filipinos emigrated to the United States
 in 1984, and many more travel to the United States and
 elsewhere as temporary visitors each year. Emigration to
 other countries, among them Canada and Australia, is also
 substantial and is generally allowed without restriction by
 the Philippine Government. Many Filipinos are employed as
 overseas workers, particularly in the Middle East. Foreign
 travel for this purpose is encouraged by the Government.
 There is a substantial ($80) travel tax, a revenue-generating
 measure which does not appear to impede those who wish to
 depart.
 A 1980 presidential decree provides that persons convicted of
 subversion, rebellion, or sedition shall forfeit their rights
 as citizens, whether such acts are committed inside or outside
 the country. The decree also provides that judgments may be
 rendered in absentia. No instance of enforcement of this
 decree is known.
 At the end of the year, there were 1,988 Indochinese in first
 asylum camps in the Philippines. In addition to providing
 first asylum to "boat people,* the Government, in cooperation
 with the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
 operates a major refugee processing center where refugees from
 camps in the Philippines and other Southeast Asian countries
 receive English language instruction, cultural orientation,
 and vocational training before being resettled elsewhere.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 President Ferdinand Marcos, Chief Executive since 1965, wields
 preeminent power under the country's 1973 Constitution, which
 provides for a strong president in a presidential-parliamentary
 system. The President is elected by direct popular vote.
 President Marcos is serving a six-year term to which he was
 elected in 1981. Of 200 National Assembly seats, 183 are
 elected on a provincial basis, with the number of assemblymen
 from each province assigned on a basis proportionate to
 population. The remaining 17 assembly seats are, under the
 Constitution, subject to presidential appointment. As of
 December, the President had filled three of the 17 appointive
 seats in the newly elected Assembly that convened in July.
 Local government officials, including provincial governors and
 town mayors, are elected by popular vote. Elections for these
 posts are scheduled for early 1986.
 The President appoints the prime minister and all other major
 government officials, including judges, at all levels.
 There is a mandatory retirement age of 70 for members of the
 judiciary. Virtually all present members of the nation's
 judiciary are appointees of President Marcos. Presidential
 appointments, both to judicial and non-judicial posts, are not
 subject to confirmation by the Assembly.
 The President has a veto which may be overridden by a vote of
 two-thirds of the Assembly, and also has the constitutional
 power to dissolve the Assembly. His dissolution power may not
 be used, however, within 18 months preceeding a regularly
 scheduled Assembly election, 18 months following a regular
 election, or while impeachment proceedings are pending against
 the President. The President also possesses certain
 
 
 859
 THE PHILIPPINES
 extraordinary decree-making powers. While described in the
 Constitution as being subject to exercise by the chief
 executive only in emergency situations or in instances where
 the National Assembly is unable to act promptly, these powers
 have, in practice, been frequently used by the President to
 legislate widely.
 In comuination with his authority under the 1973 Constitution,
 the President uses his control of the ruling KBL party to
 dominate the political arena. Within the ruling party, issues
 are often discussed in caucus, and accommodation on key issues
 is reflected in the President's final decisions.
 National Assembly elections for all 183 elective seats were
 held on May 14, 1984, under a special election law, passed to
 govern the 1984 elections only. Several reforms were
 contained in this law and accompanying presidential decrees,
 among them the elimination of "bloc" or straight party ticket
 voting (generally felt to favor the ruling party); a provision
 for the Commission on Elections (the constitutional body
 having jurisdiction over all election matters) to appoint a
 .citizens' arm* as an independent watchdog group to have
 access to the polls on election day and to have authority to
 receive poll tally results; a new, nationwide voter
 registration, to cleanse old registration rolls of deceased or
 fraudulently registered voters; and a ban during the election
 season on arrests under warrantless presidential detention
 actions for election-related offenses. In addition, the
 Constitution was amended by plebiscite in January 1984 to
 allow elections to be based on provincial rather than regional
 constituencies, a measure long sought by the political
 opposition, and one felt to favor opposition candidates. The
 plebiscite also won approval for a constitutional amendment
 prospectively restoring the office of vice president
 (abolished during martial law) and establishing a more
 well-defined mechanism for presidential succession.
 There was active participation in the assembly elections by
 virtually all sectors of society including women and ethnic
 minorities. In addition, a vigorous and outspoken election
 boycott movement gained a nationwide following during the
 election season. Boycott organizers staged public rallies and
 meetings in the weeks and months preceding the elections,
 urging citizens to refrain from any participation in the
 electoral process.
 A nationally organized civic group, the National Citizens'
 Movement for Free Elections (NAMFREL), was accredited in 1984
 by the Commission on Elections as the Commission's official
 citizens' arm. NAMFREL received substantial support from the
 business community, several church groups, students, workers,
 professionals, and ordinary citizens. Its organizers
 successfully lobbied the National Assembly for reforms in the
 election law, and actively solicited and obtained 300,000
 volunteers on a nationwide basis to assist its poll watching
 and vote count monitoring effort. Under the auspices of its
 .operation quick count," NAMFREL conducted its own canvass of
 a majority of electoral seats in the country, and published
 its own results and projections, often well in advance of the
 announcement of official results by the Commission on
 Elections.
 As a result of the May elections, members of various
 opposition parties and independents now hold about one-third
 
 
 860
 THE PHILIPPINES
 of the elected seats in the Assembly, as contrasted to the
 preceeding assembly, which had fewer than 10 active opposition
 members when its term ended in June 1984.
 In the national capital region--Metro Manila--15 of 21 seats
 were won by opposition members. In the provinces, several
 prominent ruling party candidates were defeated at the polls.
 Generally speaking, the Assembly elections were regarded by
 most Filipinos and foreign observers as an overall success.
 Nevertheless, in some areas the elections were marred by
 violence, vote buying, and charges and countercharges, by
 various participants, of improprieties and irregularities. In
 some provinces, the NPA enforced a boycott by threats of
 violence, and interfered in the electoral process by stealing
 ballot boxes. Election results for several seats are widely
 believed to have been fraudulently manipulated to favor ruling
 party candidates.
 The ruling party, by force of numbers, still wields preeminent
 power in the legislature. However, in the new Assembly, with
 an active opposition, there has been substantially more debate
 and airing of opposing views than was the case in the
 preceding Assembly.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Non-governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The Philippines is a signatory to all principal U.N. human
 rights and refugee conventions and is currently a member of
 the U.N. Human Rights Commission. Representatives of the
 International Committee of the Red Cross(ICRC) and the Lawyers
 Committee For International Human Rights visited the
 Philippines in 1984 and traveled throughout the country,
 meeting both Philippine government officials and private
 citizens involved in human rights matters. The ICRC also
 visited the Philippine detention facilities.
 The New York-based Committee to Protect Journalists, together
 with the American Committee for Human Rights and the Newspaper
 Guild, sent a fact-finding mission to the Philippines in 1984,
 and had meetings with government officials, political figures
 and journalists. The committee subsequently issued a report
 critical of the Marcos Government's treatment of the press. A
 fact-finding visit was also made by the International
 Commission of Jurists, which issued a report highly critical
 of the human rights situation.
 Several Catholic and Protestant church groups are active in
 the human rights field. Task Force Detainees(TFD) of the
 Philippines was established in 1974 by the Association of
 Major Religious Superiors of the Catholic Church.
 Headquartered in Manila and with regional field offices, it
 investigates human rights abuses and publishes reports on its
 findings. TFD operates with relative freedom, although a few
 of its members have been arrested on charges of subversion and
 rebellion. It is an outspoken critic of the Marcos Government
 and its human rights practices.
 The Integrated Bar of the Philippines, a national organization
 to which all practicing lawyers must belong, has an active
 human rights committee which has investigated alleged abuses
 and issued reports. Some local chapters carry out their own
 
 
 861
 THE PHILIPPINES
 investigations and have talked with military commanders about
 improving the human rights situation. The Free Legal
 Assistance Group and the Movement of Attorneys for
 Brotherhood, Inegrity and Nationalism, Inc. also assist
 detainees in preparing defenses against charges brought
 against them.
 The Ministry of National Defense has a special committee for
 investigating reported human rights violations involving
 military personnel. The committee's influence has been
 limited, but its investigations have on occasion led to legal
 proceedings against servicemen for abusive behavior.
 The Amnesty International 1984 Report expressed concern that
 the pattern of serious human rights violations established in
 earlier years showed no sign of improving. It stated that it
 had received frequent reports of torture and ill-treatment of
 detainees (often while undergoing interrogation in
 incommunicado detention), 'disappearances,* and extrajudicial
 executions. It believed that the Government continued to be
 reluctant to investigate these practices and to punish those
 responsible. Freedom House's 1984-85 report listed the
 Philippines as 'partly free.'
 ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND CULTURAL SITUATION
 The Philippines, with a population of 55.5 million (mid-1984),
 is a predominately agricultural country ranking in the middle
 range of developing countries.
 The economy was seriously affected by the recent worldwide
 recession, and by domestic mismanagement, including the
 development of agricultural monopolies. This led to a
 financial crisis in the last quarter of 1983, precipitated by
 substantial capital flight and reduced credit availability
 following the Aquino assassination. In 1984, per capita gross
 national product (GNP) was estimated at $616, a decline of 5.5
 percent. With much of the population under the age of 15 and
 a population growth rate of at least 2.3 percent (1984), the
 Philippines can expect a continued high rate of population
 growth in coming years. As a result of rapid expansion of the
 money supply in late 1983 and mid-1984 and devaluations of the
 peso in 1984, the inflation rate for 1984 was expected to be
 over 50 percent.
 In recent years the Government has increased emphasis on rural
 development with programs aimed at increasing production of
 foodgrains, meat, poultry, and fish. The thrust of these
 programs has been dulled by excessive intervention in pricing
 and marketing, resulting in reduced incentives for
 agricultural producers. The Philippines has for several years
 been marginally self-sufficient in rice, the staple food, but
 some rice was imported in 1984 because of drought in 1983.
 Land reform in rice and corn holdings has contributed to
 security of tenure or lowered rents for a substantial portion
 of the rural population, but significant land tenure problems
 still exist in several areas of the country. At present,
 agriculture provides employment for slightly over half the
 workforce, and generates about one-quarter of the GNP. The
 Government is promoting export-oriented industries and
 agrobusiness to spur economic growth, increase foreign
 exchange earnings, and provide employment. Traditionally, the
 Philippines has depended heavily on coconut products and other
 commodity exports that are subject to international price
 
 
 862
 THE PHILIPPINES
 fluctuations. The Government has also facilitated overseas
 employment for Filipinos, with the largest number concentrated
 in the Middle East.
 Poverty in both rural and urban areas is still a serious
 problem. Housing, health care, and diet are inadequate for
 many Filipinos, and problems in the cities have been
 compounded by substantial migration from the countryside.
 Government self-sufficiency and livelihood programs have
 sought to invigorate both large and small-scale enterprises,
 but these programs have been hampered by budget stringencies,
 mismanagement, and shifting priorities.
 Life expectancy at birth in 1984 was 64.8 years. Infant
 mortality in 1984 was 53.7 per 1,000 live births. The
 Philippine organization Business for Social Progress estimated
 in 1984 that 30-40 percent of the population had access to
 safe drinking water, with 20-30 percent of residents in highly
 urbanized areas drawing their daily water needs from unsafe
 sources. In 1980, 41 percent of Filipinos in rural areas
 lived below a government-defined absolute poverty level, with
 32 percent below that level in urban areas.
 Free education in the primary grades is available to all
 Filipinos. However, recent government data indicate that of
 the children who begin primary school only about 70 percent
 complete it. The adult literacy rate approaches 90 percent.
 Women play prominent roles in Philippine society, and are
 represented in large numbers in business and in professions
 such as law, medicine, education, and journalism. They are
 also active in politics, being well represented in both
 national and local governments and within the opposition.
 There are two women members of the Cabinet and 10 in the
 current National Assembly, and numerous posts within the
 judicial and executive branches of government are held by
 women. Imelda Marcos, wife of the President, holds the office
 of Minister of Human Settlements, and is said to exercise
 considerable influence within the highest reaches of
 government. Women also occupy posts in local government as
 governors and mayors. The Mayor of Quezon City, the seat of
 the national government, is a woman, as was the chairman of
 the government fact-finding board which investigated the
 assassination of Aquino. Women enjoy full voting privileges
 and have the right to own and inherit property.
 
 
 863
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: PHILIPPINES
 1982     1983     1984
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL...        107.1    102.8   106.3
 LOANS .................. 25.6       24.3     23.1
 GRANTS .............       81.5     78.5     83.2
 A.AID .................   ..... 89.4    86.8     84.3
 LOANS ................... 25.6     24.3     23.1
 GRANTS .............       63.8     62.5     61.2
 (SEC.SUPP.ASSIST.)...        50.0     50.0     50.0
 8.FOO FOR PEACE .......        12.6     10.7     17.1
 LOANS ................. 0.0         0.0      0.0
 GRANTS.............         12.6     10.7     17.1
 TITLE I-TOTAL....               0.0      0.0      0.0
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS .....        0.0      0.0      0.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR ......0.0             0.0      0.0
 TITLE I-TOTAL.........         12.6     10.7     17.1
 E.RELIEF.EC.OEV & WFP.          1.6      1.2     0.1
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY .....        1l.0      9.5     17.0
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST...          5.1      5.3     4.9
 LOANS ................. 0.0         0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............       . 5.1     5.3      4.9
 PEACE CORPS ......         5.1     5.3      4.9
 NARCOTICS ........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 OTHER ..............      0.0      0.0      0.0
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL...        51.2     51.4     51.5
 LOANS ..............    ... 50.0    50.0     50.0
 GRANTS .............         1.2      1.4      1.5
 A.MAP GRANTS ..........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.CREDIT FINANCING ....        50.0    50.0     50.0
 C.INTL MIL.ED.TRNG...           1.2      1.4      1.5
 D.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK...         0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS........         0.0      0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. & NIL...        158.3    154.2    157.8
 LOANS ................... 75.6     74.3     73.1
 GRANTS .............   ... 82.7    79.9     84.7
 OTHER US LOANS ..........         8.4     0.0      0.0
 EX-I BANK LOANS .......         8.4     0.0      0.0
 ALL OTHER ................. 0.0         0.0      0.0
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1982     1983     1984     1946-84
 TOTAL ........   693.9    757.3     521.0  6432.4
 IBRD             452.9    502.7     183.2  4054.8
 IFC               21.0      5.6      0.0     170.0
 IDA                0.0      0.0      0.0     122.2
 IOB                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 ADB              213.8     235.2    337.8   1974.3
 AFOB               0.0       0.0      0.0     0.0
 UNDP               6.2       3.0      0.0     65.6
 OTHER-UN           0.0      10.8      0.0     45.5
 EEC                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 
 
 864
