 THE PHILIPPINES
 The GoverYfent of .the Philippines oversaw the adoption of a
 new Constitution and the establishment of national democratic
 institutions during 1987. Despite'continued evidence of
 overwhelming popular support for President Aquino and her
 reform agenda, political forces on both left and right sought
 to destabilize or overthrow her Government by force. Civil
 unrest fomented by antidemocratic forces failed to undermine
 the Government's commitment to democratic processes and
 respect for human rights. The Government has complied
 substantially with new constitutional provisions for due
 process safeguards and important civil and political rights.
 President Aquino has appointed a constitutionally mandated
 Commission on Human Rights (CHR) that is empowered to
 investigate all abuses of human rights, whether committed by
 military or civilian officials or by nongovernmental persons,
 including insurgents.
 A stubborn Communist insurgency active in most of the
 country's 73 provinces continues to pose the major long-term
 challenge to democratic practices and the restoration of
 respect for human rights in the Philippines. A 60-day
 cease-fire negotiated late in 1986 between the Government and
 the Communist New People's Army (NPA) ended in February after
 political talks were terminated by representatives of the
 leftist National Democratic Front (NDF). During 1987 the NPA
 increasingly targeted for assassination government officials,
 private citizens, and labor leaders who resisted its
 influence. NDF spokesmen claimed responsibility for the
 October 28 murder of three American citizens, including two
 uniformed servicemen, near Clark Air Base. Communist rebels
 stepped up their killing of soldiers and police in Manila and
 other urban centers while launching offensives aimed at
 destroying bridges, power facilities, and other economic
 infrastructure in rural areas. Popular resentment of the
 insurgents' abuse and extortion gave impetus to the growth of
 anti-Communist citizens' groups. The human rights record of
 some of these organizations was criticized both in the
 Philippines and abroad.
 Rightwing military rebels launched two efforts to depose
 President Aquino during 1987. While predominantly loyal to
 the Government, certain elements of the Armed Forces of the
 Philippines (AFP) sought to overthrow the Government and seize
 power for themselves and the civilian politicians to whom they
 are linked.
 In the southern Philippines, armed rebels continued
 hostilities aimed at securing independence for the nation's
 Muslim minority. Despite a long history of violent encounters
 with government forces, the level of fighting with Muslim
 insurgents in parts of Mindanao and the Sulu Archipelago was
 only a fraction of that of the more geographically dispersed
 Communist insurgency. Periodic discussions between the
 Government. and Muslim rebel leaders took place during the year.
 The Philippines achieved significant economic growth in 1987.
 While modest by Asian standards, the economy's projected 5.5
 percent expansion for the year is a major improvement over
 marginal growth in 1986 and contraction in both 1984 and
 1985. Inflation was low and export prices up for some widely
 produced commodities, such as copra and sugar. Continuing
 political instability, however, had a dampening effect on
 investor confidence in the second half of the year.
 
 
 783
 THE PHILIPPINES
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 Political killings are frequent in the Philippines and take
 place throughout the country. Because successful prosecution
 of political assassins is extremely rare, private vendettas
 are often pursued. Over 100 persons are believed to have died
 during the campaign culminating in nationwide congressional
 elections on May 11. At year's end, nearly 30 persons had
 been killed in violence related to nationwide local elections
 scheduled for January 18, 1988. Prominent figures are not
 immune from violence. During 1987 a cabinet member and the
 secretary general of a leading leftist political organization
 were among those murdered.
 The official fact-gathering human rights institution in the
 Philippines is the constitutionally mandated CHR. In contrast
 to the CHR, which investigates all alleged violations of human
 rights, several private groups focus almost exclusively on
 allegations against government forces. The best known of
 these organizations is Task Force Detainees (TFD), whose broad
 definitions of human rights violations have the effect of
 increasing the number of reported incidents. TFD has been
 accused of using its statistics to support a politically
 motivated finding that the human rights situation in the
 Philippines is deteriorating.
 The CHR and its predecessor, the Presidential Commission on
 Human Rights (PCHR), have received 123 reports of political
 killings since the February 1986 change of government. TFD
 reports 208 summary executions by government forces during the
 first 11 months of 1987 alone. This figure compares to 197
 reported by the organization in all of 1986 and 517 in 1985.
 TFD also reports that 123 persons were killed during the first
 11 months of 1987 in massacres--defined as politically
 motivated killings of groups of individuals. This figure is
 up, according to TFD, from 101 such victims in 1986, but less
 than the 276 claimed in 1985. TFD includes in its figures the
 deaths of 13 people during a protest march in January at
 Mendiola Bridge near the presidential palace in Manila and the
 February shooting of 17 unarmed villagers in Nueva Ecija
 province. Twenty-three soldiers charged with murder in the
 latter incident are about to go on trial.
 The major individual political killings during 1987 included
 the assassinations of Jaime Ferrer, Secretary of Local
 Governments and the first Philippine cabinet member to be
 murdered, and Leandro Alejandro, the Secretary General of the
 leftwing Bayan organization. Conrado Balweg, a former Roman
 Catholic priest and Communist guerrilla who left the NPA and
 cooperated with the Government, survived an NPA ambush in
 which eight of his bodyguards were killed. Bernabe Buscayno,
 founder of the NPA and unsuccessful candidate for the new
 Senate, escaped with minor injuries when unidentified gunmen
 fired on his car, killing two of his companions. Leftist
 academic Nemesio Prudente likewise sustained only minor
 injuries when he and members of his party were ambushed in
 November by unknown assailants. The only charges brought in
 any of these incidents have been against suspects in the
 Ferrer case.
 
 
 784
 THE PHILIPPINES
 The murder of KMU leader Rolando Olalia and his driver in
 November 1986 remains unsolved. A sergeant is charged in the
 case and his trial is ongoing, but other suspects are still at
 large. Two union officials affiliated with the Trade Union
 Congress of the Philippines (TUCP) were also murdered in late
 1986, reportedly by NPA assassins. No one has been apprehended
 in this case. Department of Labor and Employment officials
 say that seven other union officials were killed during 1987
 in incidents that relate to their union activities.
 Political killings go largely unpunished in the Philippines.
 Several major cases involving the murder of a prominent
 political figure are presently being heard. During 1987 the
 only conviction in such a case was entered against eight
 defendahnts who were found guilty and sentenced to life in
 prison for the 1985 killing of Italian priest Tullio Favali.
 Most cases are never solved or prosecuted.
 During 1987 human rights groups focused on proliferating
 anti-Communist citizens' self-defense groups as frequent
 perpetrators of political killings. A locally organized
 counterinsurgency measure, these groups vary considerably in
 character, ranging from unarmed neighborhood watch
 organizations which supplement police intelligence to
 quasi-legal paramilitary patrols. There are also illegal
 private armies and fanatical cults such as the Tadtad which
 kill Communist sympathizers along with other political
 opponents.
 Some such groups have been implicated in political killings.
 Violence by Tadtad members against outsiders, including
 Communists, has qometimes been tolerated by local military
 authorities. On the other hand, there is little evidence of
 human rights abuses by officially unarmed citizens' groups,
 such as Nakasaka, which was organized with the assistance of
 local government officials in Davao del Sur province.
 The best known of the citizens' self-defense groups, Alsa
 Masa, arose in Davao City as a community response to NPA
 excesses. With local military and civilian assistance and
 encouragement, armed civilians--many of whom were formerly
 allied with the Communists--patrol populated areas to prevent
 infiltration by NPA guerrillas. Alsa Masa has killed a number
 of NPA guerrillas and is credited with vastly improving the
 security situation in Davao City. In October President Aquino
 praised members of Alsa Masa as an example in the fight
 against Communism.
 Independent human rights organizations claim that Alsa Masa is
 implicated in widespread human rights abuse, including the
 murder of civilians. The CHR is investigating a number of
 complaints against Alsa Masa. Allegations that the
 organization is imposing a reign of terror, however, ignore
 the overwhelming popular support it receives among people
 living in areas where it operates. Government bodies, such as
 the CHR, and private foundations, like the Integrated Bar of
 the Philippines, have begun providing Alsa Masa members with
 training to help them operate within the law.
 In late October, the Department of Justice, the Department of
 Local Governments, and the CHR promulgated guidelines meant to
 deter human rights violations by the citizens' groups. The
 basic principle of the guidelines is that citizens' groups are
 to operate within the framework of existing law. Arms are to
 be carried by members of citizens' groups only if they are
 
 
 785
 THE PHILIPPINES
 otherwise authorized to do so, i.e., if members are licensed
 firearms holders, military and police reservists, or private
 security ghards. Members of groups who commit criminal
 offenses are subject to arrest and prosecution in the same way
 as any other offender. The groups are not to engage in
 offensive operations and are not to leave their own
 communities except in hot pursuit. The guidelines require
 regional military commanders to submit monthly reports on
 citizens* groups in their areas. Regional monitoring
 committees are to be formed by representatives of the
 Department of Local Government, Department of National
 Defense, the AFP, and the CHR. The volunteer organizations
 will be supervised by local civilian government authorities in
 cooperation with the military and police.
 Human rights allegations involving the Civilian Home Defense
 Force (CHDF), a militia organization often blamed for abuses
 under the Government of former President Marcos, were fewer in
 1987 than in past years. The AFP has tightened its control
 over CHDF units and screened personnel more effectively,
 discharging about 30 percent of their membership. The new
 Constitution contemplates the abolition of the CHDF. Current
 plans call for it to be replaced in 1988 by a new organization
 called the Citizen Armed Force (CAF). CAF units will be
 recruited locally from the communities they are supposed to
 protect.
 b. Disappearance
 There is no convincing evidence that government officials are
 involved regularly in politically motivated disappearances.
 In some cases, however, citizens have been taken into custody
 by government authorities and held incommunicado for several
 days before being released or charged. Since February 1986,
 CHR has received 28 complaints concerning "missing persons"
 whose whereabouts are unknown. TFD claims that during the
 first 11 months of 1987, 59 persons were detained indefinitely
 without the filing of an arrest report. Some, if not most,
 are presumed to have been killed. This figure compares with
 23 such cases in 1986 and 213 in 1985.
 Hostage-taking by armed criminal elements for ransom or
 publicity or both has occurred in parts of the Philippines.
 Prominent kidnaping incidents during 1987 included the
 abduction in Lanao del Sur province of 4 Red Cross employees,
 including 2 Swiss members of the International Committee of
 the Red Cross (ICRC); and the unrelated kidnaping of 16
 students from Mindanao State University. All were released
 unharmed.
 Unreported nonpolitical kidnapings of businessmen for ransom
 occur throughout the Philippines. In a spate of incidents, an
 estimated 100 unpublicized kidnapings of businessmen and their
 relatives took place in Iligan City in Lanao del Norte province
 during 1987. The victims in these cases were eventually
 released, usually after paying ransom. None of the kidnapers
 in these cases has been apprehended. A prominent Japanese
 businessman, who was kidnaped near Manila in November 1986,
 was released after 3 months. His abduction, which remains
 unsolved, does not appear to have been politically motivated.
 In November 1987, two South Korean engineers were reported
 kidnaped by a group of armed bandits in Northern Luzon. Their
 case is unresolved.
 
 
 786
 THE PHILIPPINES
 Two military intelligence agents were acquitted in 1987 of
 complicity in the July 1985 disappearance of Philippine priest
 Fr. Rudy Romano. His order, the Congregation of the Most Holy
 Redeemer, and human rights groups denounced the verdict.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 The new Constitution prohibits torture and makes evidence
 obtained thereby inadmissible in court. Further, the
 Constitution directs that laws be passed providing for
 punishment of torturers, compensation for victims, and
 rehabilitation of victims and their families.
 Forty-two allegations of torture were filed with the CHR
 between February 1986 and September 30, 1987. TFD claims to
 have documented 512 cases of individuals being tortured during
 the first 11 months of 1987. While representing an increase
 over the 438 incidents reported in all of 1986, the TFD figures
 for 1987 include some cases that strictly speaking may not have
 involved torture. These include, for example, reports of
 people being roughly treated during questioning by law
 enforcement authorities. TFD reported 1,326 incidents of
 torture in 1985.
 Philippine human rights groups report that innocent farmers in
 insurgent-influenced areas are detained and tortured by
 military personnel seeking information on rebel activity.
 While torture and related abuses by the military have occurred
 in areas where government forces are actively engaged in
 counterinsurgency operations, such practices do not appear to
 be systematic, widespread, or condoned at senior military
 levels. As of December 17, 606 military personnel were being
 investigated by the CHR for alleged violations of this sort.
 TFD reports that 6,502 of 7,170 persons arrested for violation
 of human rights during the first 11 months of 1987 were
 released.
 The Department of National Defense continues an educational
 campaign to improve military treatment of civilians. Officers
 attend human rights workshops which stress their role in
 communicating respect for such values to their subordinates.
 Basic armed forces training now includes 50 hours of human
 rights instruction. Officers are held responsible for the
 behavior of their troops and have been granted increased
 discretion to discipline them for abuses. In order to be
 promoted, officers must receive clearance from the CHR. As of
 October, 104 military personnel were under investigation for
 human rights violations. The number of soldiers and policemen
 who have been tried, convicted, and sentenced for human rights
 violations is not available since the AFP judiciary does not
 maintain a statistical classification for abuse of human
 rights.
 Although physical punishment is prohibited under the
 Philippine penal system, it occurs frequently in jails and
 prisons. Philippine prison conditions are harsh and charges
 of police brutality commonplace. Despite administrative
 sanctions, persons in police custody are reportedly beaten
 often, either to extract confessions or in retaliation for
 perceived actions against police.
 
 
 787
 THE PHILIPPINES
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, Exile, or Forced Labor
 The new Constitution permits arrests only with a warrant based
 on a judge's determination of probable cause. Philippine law
 prohibits the holding of suspects for more than 36 hours
 without a finding of probable cause. The Constitution further
 provides that bail shall be available to persons charged with
 crimes punishable by any penalty less severe than life
 imprisonment. It also prohibits holding prisoners
 incommunicado or in secret places of detention.
 The Aquino Government repealed authority for preventive
 detention and restored the writ of habeas corpus soon after
 assuming power. Government policy requires that suspects be
 formally charged within 6 to 18 hours after being taken into
 custody, depending on the gravity of the offense. With the
 exception of suspected antigovernment rebels who are often
 detained without charge and interrogated for a pericd of up to
 several days, persons are usually charged promptly after
 apprehension. Military personnel are reportedly impatient
 with the evidentiary requirements and paperwork needed for a
 formal arrest. Even if formally charged, rebel suspects are
 frequently released under an amnesty program.
 Forty-two persons have filed complaints with the CHR since
 February 1986 on grounds of arbitrary arrest and detention.
 TFD reports 2,648 arrests as human rights violations during
 the first half of 1987; of these, 2,242 are recorded as
 released. Because this figure includes some arrests in which
 a warrant was properly issued on criminal charges, it
 overstates the number of arbitrary or unjustified arrests.
 Philippine authorities do not systematically use internal or
 foreign exile of undesired persons for political purposes,
 although the Government has prevented the return of former
 President Marcos and certain of his associates by revoking
 their passports. There is no evidence that forced labor is
 practiced.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Trials in the Philippines are public. The Constitution
 guarantees that those accused of crimes shall be informed of
 charges against them and have the right to counsel. Defendants
 enjoy the presumption of innocence and the right to confront
 witnesses against them, to present evidence, and to appeal
 their convictions.
 The right of defendants to a lawyer is well recognized in law
 and is generally carried out in practice in metropolitan
 Manila. It is much less frequently accorded in the provinces,
 however, where in many cases there are simply no lawyers
 available. Many defendants are released because of this,
 especially those charged with minor crimes. Those charged
 with a capital offense are usually held until a lawyer becomes
 available.
 Judicial proceedings often continue for years. Many criminals,
 especially those who have expert legal representation, escape
 conviction and punishment. Efforts by the Aquino Government
 to reform the Philippine judiciary and to remove judges
 believed to be incompetent or corrupt have aggravated chronic
 docketing delays. Since the judicial appointments commission
 required by the new Constitution has not been implemented, no
 
 
 788
 THE PHILIPPINES
 new judges have been appointed since February. The shortage
 of judges continues to be particularly severe outside the
 Manila area.
 The lethargic pace of the legal system encourages some law
 enforcement officials to act as their own judge, jury, and
 executioner in cases where they believe the guilt of a
 criminal is self-evident. Armed robbers, for example, are
 frequently killed in "shootouts" with police.
 Human rights-groups continue to criticize the practice of
 trying military personnel, police, and firefighters in
 military courts, which they contend are more lenient toward
 such defendants than civilian courts. A bill has been filed
 .n Condress to remove nonservice-related offensas from the
 jurisdiction of courts-martial.
 A new trial of 22 defendants in the 1983 slaying of opposition
 leader Benigno Aquino began in February, after the Supreme
 Court ruled that the previous trial in the case had been so
 marred by denial of due process that the defendants could be
 tried again without putting them in double jeopardy. The
 trial is progressing slowly.
 In 1986 the Aquino Government released over 600 prisoners,
 including several prominent Communists, who had been imprisoned
 on political grounds. Only those prisoners who had committed
 serious criminal offenses, including murder, in furtherance of
 their political beliefs remained in detention. After review
 by a specially appointed commission, 58 of those prisoners
 were pardoned in 1987. Others have been paroled since or
 released on expiration of their sentences.
 According to the Department of National Defense, the only
 political prisoner currently in custody is Rodolfo Salas,
 alleged former head of the Communist Party of the Philippines.
 Salas, who was arrested in September 1986, is charged with
 rebellion. He has applied for bail, which the Government has
 opposed on the ground that his release would be a clear and
 present danger to the community. TFD staffers estimate that
 there are 400 to 500 "political" prisoners in custody at any
 time. Most are held for brief periods on suspicion of
 rebellion.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Under the new Constitution, searches and seizures require a
 warrant issued by a judge on a finding of probable cause.
 These restrictions on search and seizure are generally
 observed. The Government does not arbitrarily interfere in
 family life or the right of parents to raise their children.
 Religious practice and political affiliation, with the
 exception of membership in the outlawed Communist Party of the
 Philippines, is unregulated. The Government does not
 interfere with free personal use of the mails or other public
 communication systems, except upon the issuance of a court
 order during the course of an investigation.
 g. Violations of Humanitarian Law in Armed Conflicts
 Political killings frequently occur in areas where the
 Communist and Muslim rebels engage government forces in
 combat. The Department of National Defense reports that
 government forces and the Communist rebels were involved in
 
 
 789
 THE PHILIPPINES
 2,914 violent incidents through December 17. According to
 government statistics, those incidents--including raids,
 ambushes, assassinations, kidnapings, bombings, and arson--
 resulted in the deaths of 1,056 military, police, and
 paramilitary personnel, 1,590 NPA guerrillas, and 946
 civilians. During the same period, Muslim rebel groups were
 involved in 299 violent incidents resulting in 194 military
 and civilian deaths.
 Communist rebels use many forms of violence to further their
 political goals. To gain control over an area, the insurgents
 intimidate, kidnap, and assassinate government officials,
 businessmen, and other citizens who resist. Assassination of
 local government officials or policemen is a common indicator
 of Communist presence in a locality. Corrupt and abusive
 officials are often killed first, both as an example and to
 attract popular support. Those who resist, those suspected of
 being government informers, those who fail to pay
 "revolutionary taxes," and NPA defectors are also targets for
 assassination. Over 70 policemen and soldiers were killed by
 NPA assassination squads in metropolitan Manila alone during
 the first 10 months of 1987.
 Human rights groups report that military units have sought to
 isolate insurgents from their support base by imposing food
 blockades and forcibly resettling or "hamletting" entire
 communities against their will. CHR has received three as yet
 unresolved complaints of "hamletting" since February 1986.
 TFD reports three instances of "hamletting" and five instances
 of food blockades during the first 8 months of 1987.
 Military engagements between government forces and insurgent
 elements occasionally result in the displacement of civilians
 and disruption of access to food supplies. Such incidents are
 usually brief. Both the Philippine Red Cross and the ICRC
 have programs to assist those who evacuate combat zones. There
 is neither an official resettlement policy nor convincing
 evidence that AFP patrols have imposed food blockades directed
 against civilian populations. In some areas, however,
 government forces have sought to prevent food supplies from
 reaching armed rebels.
 The Philippine armed forces lack adequate medical resources
 for its members, and wounded rebels are treated after wounded
 soldiers. There is no evidence, however, that they are
 systematically denied medical care when supplies are available.
 The Philippines adheres to Protocol II of the Geneva
 Conventions, which governs the conduct of forces in an
 internal conflict, and the leadership of the AFP is committed
 to treating prisoners according to the rules of war. After
 initial interrogation, prisoners are turned over to civil
 authorities and charged in the civilian courts. Captured
 rebels may apply for a government amnesty program and return
 to civilian life if they promise to abide by the law.
 Human rights groups allege that military dissatisfaction with
 the amnesty program encourages some soldiers to kill their
 adversaries rather than take them prisoner. While isolated
 incidents of this nature may occur in remote areas where
 observers are few, there is no direct evidence to support
 charges that such conduct is common. The large number of
 Communist rebels regularly reported as having been taken
 captive by the AFP, more than 344 as of late 1987, contradict
 assertions that summary executions of prisoners are widespread.
 
 
 790
 THE PHILIPPINES
 Killings of captives, if it does occur, clearly contravenes the
 policy of the civilian Government and the military command.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Restrictions on freedom of expression in the Philippines were
 completely lifted in 1986, after 14 years of media control
 under martial law. The press is lively, unfettered, and
 highly competitive. There are about 30 daily newspapers in
 Manila, and many more in the provinces. In all, about 1.4
 million newspapers are sold each day around the country.
 Newspapers cover the political spectrum and display no
 reluctance to criticize the Government. Newspapers published
 by the Communist Party are illegal, but Communist views are
 expressed in other publications. Although the Government has
 sequestered assets of some media businesses owned or controlled
 by relatives or close associates of former President Marcos,
 there is no convincing evidence of an intent to control
 opinion, as opposed to monetary assets, in these cases. In
 October President Aquino filed a libel suit against a
 prominent columnist who accused her of cowardice during a coup
 attempt on August 28.
 Human rights groups have registered a number of complaints
 about harassment of journalists, particularly by the military,
 but such harassment does not appear to be systematic or
 frequent. Journalists are able to meet with and interview
 those in rebellion against the Government, including military
 mutineers and Communist leaders. Such interviews have also
 been aired on radio and television. There are popular
 politicallyoriented talk shows on television which air
 controversial issues and opinions. Rebel groups issue press
 releases which are covered by the media. In December the
 Government issued and then revoked an order expelling an
 Australian correspondent charged with biased reporting on
 economic issues.
 Radio and television are important news sources in the
 Philippines. Nearly 300 radio stations reach more than 70
 percent of all households. There are about 4 million
 television sets in the Philippines, bringing programming to
 some 40 percent of households. Provincial broadcasting
 outlets are generally branches of the five Manila channels.
 Like the newspapers, radio and television stations come in
 many shades of political orientation. Citing public safety
 and interest, the Government closed one radio station in
 October and warned a select number of other radio stations and
 one television channel, which had broadcast programs that
 appeared to support military rebels who staged an attempted
 coup August 28.
 There is no censorship of publications from.overseas. Foreign
 journalists are usually able to report freely and have often
 interviewed rebels, at times in areas they control. Major
 U.S. papers and television networks have bureaus in Manila.
 Critics charge that the Movie and Television Classification
 Board, whose mandate is. to monitor films and television
 programs for pornographic content, has hampered political
 expression. In 1987 broadcast of a documentary on urban poor
 in Manila was delayed for allegedly political reasons.
 
 
 791
 THE PHILIPPINES
 Academic freedom is respected in theory and practice. There
 are approximately 1.5 million students enrolled in the
 nation's 78 state colleges and universities and 1,000 private
 schools and colleges. Many shades of political opinion are
 freely expressed on campuses. There is no government
 censorship of subject matter in classes, university
 publications, or conferences.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Permits from local authorities are legally required for
 outdoor demonstrations in public places, but rallies and
 marches are often held without permits. The Aquino Government
 observes a liberal policy in this regard, allowing
 demonstrations in all but the most provocative circumstances.
 A tragic exception to the general rule of peaceful
 demonstrations occurred January 22. Soldiers guarding
 Mendiola Bridge near the presidential palace fired at an
 aggressive crowd of around 5,000 supporters of the militant
 peasant's union, K4IP. Thirteen marchers were killed and over
 100 injured. An official inquiry found that the soldiers had
 overreacted to violence, including rock-throwing and possibly
 gunfire, from some members of the crowd. The investigating
 commission recommended that a number of the soldiers be
 charged with negligence and that some of the demonstration's
 leaders, including K.IP head Jaime Tadeo, be charged with
 sedition. As of late 1987, no criminal charges have been
 filed as a result of the incident. A number of soldiers have
 been reprimanded, and an investigation continues, focusing on
 which troops actually opened fire during the demonstration.
 A broad range of private, professional, religious, social,
 charitable, and political organizations flourish in the
 Philippines. Countless popular and civic organizations exist
 and meet regularly. The Communist Party of the Philippines,
 which advocates the violent overthrow of the Government, is
 outlawed.
 The Constitution assures all workers, including those in
 public service, the right to form unions. Unions may call
 strikes only to resolve deadlocks in collective bargaining
 agreements or protest unfair labor practices, e.g., firing a
 union official without cause. At least 90 percent of the 414
 strikes occurring during the first 11 months of 1987 were
 legal.
 - The Aquino Government has taken measures to make union
 organizing less difficult even for groups ideologically
 opposed to it. Only 20 percent of workers in a given
 establishment are needed to organize a union. This compares
 with the 30 percent previously required by law. Unions in the
 Philippines are free to affiliate with international labor
 organizations.
 Unions bargain collectively, and most unions in the
 Philippines are independent of government and political party
 control, although various unions are active in politics. The
 former secretary general of the Trade Union Congress of the
 Philippines (TUCP) is a senator. Officers of the major
 left-leaning union, KMU (Kilusang Mayo Uno, or May First
 Movement), ran for Congress under the banner of Partido ng
 Bayan, a legal political party with ties to the far left and
 the Communist Party.
 
 
 792
 THE PHILIPPINES
 On November 30, there were 3,185 collective bargaining
 agreements, covering 354,000 workers, on file with the
 Department of Labor. This compares with 2,029 agreements
 covering 262,000 workers only 2 years ago. Membership in
 unions was about 2.2 million as of August 1987, or about 10
 percent of the labor force. Another 2.7 million are nominal
 members of the National Union of Farmers. The discrepancy
 between the number of workers covered by collective bargaining
 agreements and total union membership results from the fact
 that many unions and employers sign memos of understanding in
 lieu of formal collective bargaining agreements.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 There is no state religion. Freedom of religion is fully
 respected, and no official discrimination is practiced against
 any religious group or its members. Although over 80 percent
 of the population is Roman Catholic, the country's sizable
 Muslim minority, a number of Protestant churches, the
 indigenous Iglesia ni Kristo, Aglipayan Church, and other
 sects all enjoy full religious freedom. Non-Christian
 Filipinos may follow their traditional faiths. Many minority
 cultural groups follow animistic religious beliefs. Foreign
 clergymen and missionaries of many faiths practice their
 profession freely.
 Religious minorities are represented among the leadership and
 rank and file of broad-based political parties. Government
 service is open to all on a nondiscriminatory basis, and there
 are senior civil and military officials who belong to minority
 religious and cultural groups.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the-Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and'Repatriation
 Filipinos enjoy unhampered freedom to change their place of "
 residence and* employment. They regularly travel and work
 abroad. More than 600,000 Philippine nationals work overseas,
 many in the Middle East.
 Former President Marcos and some close associates have,
 however, had their passports revoked, preventing their free
 travel and return home. In addition, the Presidential
 Commission on Good Government in 1986 issued "hold orders"
 preventing certain Marcos associates from leaving the
 Philippines pending investigation of their alleged misconduct
 during the previous regime. Most of the hold orders have been
 lifted after settlement of the cases involved, but some remain
 in effect.
 While the Philippine Government does not accept refugees for
 internal resettlement, it does not turn away those who arrive
 on its shores. As of September 1987, there were spme 3,500
 Indochinese in a first asylum camp in Palawan. In addition to
 providing first asylum for "boat people," the Government
 cooperates with the United Nations High Commissioner for
 Refugees by permitting the operation of a major refugee
 processing center in Bataan province. There are more than
 10,000 refugees and other displaced persons at the center
 receiving cultural orientation, language instruction, and
 vocational training before being resettled elsewhere.
 
 
 793
 THE PHILIPPINES
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 A new Constitution was ratified by a 3 to 1 margin in a
 nationwide plebiscite on February 2--less than 1 year after
 President Aquino assumed office. Prior to the adoption of the
 new charter, President Aquino had governed under the authority
 of Proclamation No. 3. Popularly referred to as the "Freedom
 Constitution," the Presidential Decree preserved many of the
 provisions of the 1973 Constitution but abolished the
 legislature.
 The new Constitution establishes a presidential system similar
 to that in existence before the 1972 declaration of martial
 law. It carefully limits the power of the President,
 establishing a strong bicameral legislature and independent
 local governments to discourage authoritarian rule such as
 that exercised by former President Marcos. It also creates
 autonomous regions for Muslims in the southern Philippines and
 for cultural minority groups in remote mountainous regions of
 northern Luzon. Implementing legislation is left to Congress.
 Candidates of a large number of political parties campaigned
 for election to the new Senate and House of Representatives in
 nationwide balloting on May 11. A progovernment coalition won
 a large majority in both chambers amidst charges by opposition
 groups that the elections were marred by massive,
 government-assisted cheating. Although some irregularities
 occurred, there is no convincing evidence of cheating on a
 scale that would undermine the legitimacy of the elections.
 Election-related violence resulted in more than 100 deaths.
 Voters in some remote areas were intimidated by NPA and other
 armed supporters of some candidates. Despite such flaws, the
 May elections were, overall, a free and fair exercise of the
 franchise by the Philippine people. The new Congress convened
 without incident on July 27.
 Eight parties are represented in the House of Representatives
 and five in the Senate. There are ideological variations
 among members of the government coalition. Political
 alliances and political party membership are fluid in the
 Philippines. Debate in both houses of Congress has been
 lively and uninhibited. Opposition legislators are free to
 state their positions, and many in the ruling coalition
 criticize the Government.
 Local elections to replace officials appointed by the Aquino
 Government upon assuming power in February 1986 are scheduled
 for January 18, 1988. Originally scheduled for November 1987,
 the elections were postponed upon request of the Commission on
 Elections which needed additional time to ensure their
 efficient administration. Under the Constitution, all elected
 officials will remain in office until 1992, when presidential,
 national, and local elections are to be held simultaneously.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 Representatives of international human rights groups are free
 to travel in the Philippines and investigate alleged abuses.
 Delegates of the ICRC, resident in the Philippines, travel
 freely to monitor prison conditions and assist persons
 displaced by conflict.
 
 
 794
 THE PHILIPPINES
 Many of the leaders of the anti-Marcos opposition that helped
 bring President Aquino to power had fought for better human
 rights practices in the Philippines. President Aquino and her
 administration have been especially committed to improving
 observance of human rights and established the PCHR within a
 month after assuming office in 1986. The PCHR was disbanded
 in May 1987 to make way for the constitutionally mandated CHR.
 Unlike the PCHR, the CHR accepts complaints of human rights
 violations against insurgent forces as well as against the
 military. When a complaint is filed, the CHR conducts an
 investigation, including a hearing with testimony by the
 complainant and the accused, if the accused can be served with
 a subpoena. If the CHR determines that a prima facie case has
 been made, it has the power to refer the case to military or
 civilian courts for trial. The Aquino Government's promotion
 of human rights is also evident in its efforts to introduce
 instruction in human rights into educational curriculums at
 all levels.
 Many Philippine religious groups are active in the human
 rights field. These organizations are almost exclusively
 concerned with abuses committed by military and civilian
 government officials and generally do not address
 nongovernmental violations of human rights, such as those
 committed by the NPA. These groups are unhindered in
 conducting investigations around the country and are routinely
 able to obtain safe-conduct letters from the Philippine
 Department of National Defense.
 TFD, established in 1974 by the Association of Major Religious
 Superiors of the Catholic Church, is the best known
 nongovernmental investigative body. Headquartered in Manila
 and with an extensive network of offices throughout the
 country, TFD investigates alleged human rights violations and
 publishes its findings. Long an outspoken critic of the Marcos
 regime and its military establishment, TFD has taken an
 increasingly critical stand toward the Aquino Government as
 well. Its view that the human rights situation in the
 Philippines is deterioriating is echoed by organizations
 comprising the Philippine Alliance of Human Rights Advocates
 (PAHRA), including the Ecumenical Movement for Justice and
 Peace, the National Movement to Disband the Vigilantes, and
 the National Movement for Civil Liberties.
 The Free Legal Assistance Group (FLAG), the Mabini Lawyer's
 Group, and the Protestant Lawyer's League continue to provide
 some legal assistance to victims of human rights violations.
 These organizations have become less active, however, since
 many-of their members joined the present Government and the
 political repression of the Marcos regime ended. The
 Integrated Bar of the Philippines, a national bar association
 to which all Philippine lawyers belong, takes positions on
 human rights matters and has organized human rights committees
 active on the provincial level.
 The Philippines is a party to the principal U.N. human rights
 and refugee conventions. In June the Philippines acceded to
 Protocol II of the Geneva Conventions, which enunciates rules
 governing the law of war in an internal conflict.
 
 
 THE PHILIPPINES
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 Muslims in the southern Philippines constitute the most
 numerous national minority. While not the victims of a
 concerted policy of discrimination, they and other indigenous
 groups have historically received less than their fair share
 of government services. Many Muslims believe that their
 professional progress in the military or other government
 service is hampered by discrimination. The Aquino Government
 has committed resources to correcting inequitie, and the new
 Constitution recognizes the rights of national minorities
 within the framework of national unity add development.
 Two regional autonomous governments were established in the
 Muslim region under the Marcos regime. Since 1977 separate
 religious courts have had the authority to apply Muslim law to
 civil disputes. The new Constitution provides for a single
 autonomous region for "Muslim Mindanso," subject to
 implementing legislation. Despite such concessions, Muslim
 groups continue to press for greatcr autonomy.
 Philippine ethnic Chinese have become increasingly integrated
 into the population as a whole. An estimated 1 in 10
 Filipinos has some Chinese blood, and discrimination against
 ethnic Chinese is uncommon.
 Women enjoy full voting rights and the right to own and
 inherit property. They are prominent in Philippine society
 and well-represented in business and professions, particularly
 law, medicine, education, and journalism. President Aquino is
 the best known of a large number of women active and
 influential at all levels of government. Nonetheless,
 Philippine law and custom continue to discriminate against
 women in some ways. Prominent examples of discrimination
 include limitation on women's rights to buy and sell property
 and more exacting standards in criminal prosecutions of men
 for adultery. The new Constitution does not prohibit
 discrimination on account of sex.
 CONDITIONS OF LABOR
 The official minimum wage ranges from $3.10 per day for
 workers in the national capital region to as little as $2.02
 per day for nonplantation agricultural workers. Despite
 having been raised in late 1987, the minimum wage is generally
 considered inadequate to support a single adult wage-earner,
 much less a family. Widespread failure to observe the minimum
 wage results in that rate of pay closely approximating the
 country's average wage.
 The Government inherited reasonably progressive labor laws.
 Senior officials generally seem to be dedicated to the
 enforcement of the labor code for the benefit of workers and
 unions. The law mandates a 48-hour workweek and a full day of
 rest per week. Employees with more than 1 year on the job are
 entitled to 5 days' paid leave. The minimum age of employment
 is 15. The Government has authority to determine hours and
 working conditions among youths aged 15 to 18 years.
 Discrimination in payment of such persons is prohibited.
 A comprehensive set of enforceable occupational safety and
 health standards is in effect, and provisions prohibiting
 child labor, protecting younger workers and women, and
 regulating hazardous or harmful working conditions are
 
 
 796
 THE PHILIPPINES
 relatively advanced. However, funding for an appropriate
 number of professional labor inspectors to enforce payment of
 the minimum wage and provision of adequate working conditions
 is limited. Despite these constraints, the Department of
 Labor is making a vigorous effort to secure compliance with
 minimum wages and safer working conditions. A regular
 inspection program resumed in 1987, and over 10,000
 inspections were carried out by the end of October. This
 stands in'contrast to only 1,441 inspections in all of 1986.
 
 
 797