PHILIPPINES
 The Philippines is a democratic republic with an elected president, a functioning
 political party system, and a bicameral legislature. However, political corruption re-
 mains endemic in many areas of government, including the electoral and law en-
 forcement systems. The Constitution provides for an independent judiciary; how-
 ever, the judicial system suffers from both corruption and inefficiency. President Jo-
 seph Estrada was elected in May and took office on June 30. The Government made
 progress in talks with insurgent groups.
 The Department of National Defense directs the Armed Forces of the Philippines
 (AFP), and the Department of Interior and Local Government has authority over the
 civilian Philippine National Police (PNP). In mid-1998, the AFP implemented a late
 1997 law and gradually took over most counterinsurgency operations from the PNP.
 The AFT also was involved in local law enforcement efforts, including the pursuit
 of kidnapers, in Mindanao in 1998. The security forces, including police, soldiers,
 and local civilian militias committed human rights abuses.
 The Government has succeeded in liberalizing the investment, trade, and foreign
 exchange regimes. Garments-and electronics make up more than half of merchan-
 dise export receipts and are complemented significantly by overseas worker remit-
 tances totaling an estimated $3 billion in the first half of 1998. As a result of the
 regional economic crisis, the economy recorded almost no growth in 1998. President
 Estrada set better education, shelter, and jobs for the rural and urban poor as top
 priorities. However, hampered by severe revenue shortfalls induced, in part, by the
 economic crisis, his administration has been unableto introduce measures to assist
 the poor. Over 35 percent of the population of over 73 million have difficulty meet-
 ing basic nutritional and other needs. According to a July government survey, the
 gap between rich and poor continues to grow. The richest 20 percent of families con-
 trol more than 50 percent of the country's income, while the poorest 20 percent re-
 ceived less than 5 percent. Largely as a result of currency devaluation, annual per
 capita national income declined to $427 for the first 6 months of 1998. .
 The Government generally respected the human rights of its citizens; however,
 there were problems in some areas. Members of the security forces were responsible
 for extrajudicial killings, disappearances, torture, arbitrary arrest and detention,
 and other physical abuse of suspects. Prison conditions are harsh and in some cases
 life threatening. According to the statistics of the Government's Commission on
 Human Rights (CHR), members of the police continued to be the leading abusers
 of human rights. Some abuses were committed by police and military personnel in-
 volved in illegal activities, including coerced protection, kidnaping gangs, drug syn-
 dicates, and illegal logging. In some cases, police authorities appear to sanction po-
 lice brutality and killings tacitly as an expedient means to fight crime. The Govern-
 ment has taken few effective steps to reform the police, the military forces, or a
 court system that appears susceptible to the influence of the wealthy and powerful
 while not providing equal justice for others. There is a failure to prosecute many
 who break the law. However, President Estrada's Anti-Organized Crime Commis-
 sion achieved progress in combating kidnaping rings. Like the security services and
 proscutors, the judiciary is inefficient, lacks sufficient staff, paid poorly, and suffers
 from corruption. The courts are hobbled by backlogs and limited resources, and long
 delays in trials are common. There was a decrease in the violent displacement of
 urban area squatters to make way for development projects, but efforts to remove
 farmers for industrial, resort, or large-scale farming developments Still led to dis-
 putes and human rights violations, including the killing of two members of an indig-
 enous group.
 An estimated 5 to 6 million citizens living abroad are disenfranchised because the
 Congres    s not enacted an absentee voting law, as required by the Constitution.
 Violence and discrimination against women and abuse of children continued to be
 serious problems. Discrimination against indigenous people and Muslims persists al-
 though the Mindanao peace process is addressing the latter problem in many com-
 munities. The Government has begun to implement 1997 legislation that signifi-
 cantly improved protection for the rights of indigenous people to land and their cul-
 tural identity. Rural poverty and family displacement worsened the persistent child
 labor problem, which the Government has addressed only partially.
 The CHR, whose mission is to promote respect for human rights, further aug-
 mented the system of locality ("barangay") human rights officers who monitor local
 authorities and report complaints to regional CHR offices. It expanded the total
 number of such officers to over 8,000.
 Communist and     Muslim   insurgent groups   committed   abuses, including
 extrajudicial killings, kidnapings, torture, and detentions.
 
 
 1033
 
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-Police and military forces committed
 extrajudicial killings. The nongovernmental organization (NGO) Task Force Detain-
 ees of the Philippines (TFDP) reported 33 extrajudicial killings by members of the
 security forces in 1998, compared with 12 in 1997. The CHR, which includes killings
 by antigovernment insurgents in its totals, investigated 201 extrajudicial killings in
 1998, compared with 254 in 1997.
 xIn combating criminal rings, police personnel sometimes resorted to "salvaging"
 (summary execution of suspects). Police spokesmen later reportedly misrepresented
 these murders as the unavoidable result of an alleged exchange of gunfire with the
 suspects. During a hostage rescue attempt in March, police shot and killed a pris-
 oner who was asleep (see Section 1.c.). According to a preliminary police investiga-
 tion, members of the Manila police are suspected of killing 4 robbery suspects in
 custody in October. Prosecutors had not brought charges at year's end, although
 some officers involved were transferred.
 The AFP continued its counterinsurgency campaign in Mindanao and parts of
 Luzon (see Section l.g.). The CHR investigated the March killing of two members
 of an indigenous people's group, the B'laan, who occupied part of a Polomolok,
 Mindanao pineapple plantation, which they claimed as their ancestral domain. The
 Philippine Arms 60 1st infantry battalion forcibly removed 137 B'laan families from
 the land, allegedly on suspicion that they were cooperating with a Muslim insurgent
 group. After bombing and strafing the area, the APP soldiers reportedly singled out
 and executed two B'laan community leaders who were active in the B'laans' land
 dispute with the plantation owners. In September the B'laan requested the CHR's
 help in returning to their homes, which the nearby community of Polomolok is help-
 ing to rebuild.
 The Ecumenical Commission for Displaced Families and communities (ECDFC),
 while assisting the B'laans' relocation, helped exhume the bodies of the two executed
 persons, Jimmy Tuan and Jonathan Tuan. In defending the operation, AFP leaders
 alleged that they were pursuing a Moro Islamic Liberation Front (MILF) officer,
 Tahir Alonto, who was allegedly the commander of an MILF "lost command" (a
 breakaway unit) operating in a region remote from the MILF's focus of operations
 in western Mindanao.
 The CHR investigated a reported June 9 summary execution by AFP members of
 four young persons in a rural area in Dingalan, Aurora province. The victims were
 two young men (ages 17 and 19) and two girls (ages 14 and 16) who apparently were
 raped before their deaths. According to the Ecumenical Movement for Justice and
 Peace, the AFP's 56th infantry battalion shot the four young persons as suspected
 members of the insurgent New People's Army (NPA), although there was no evi-
 dence that the four were armed at the time. A fifth suspected NPA member cap-
 tured while fishing in a nearby stream told the CHR that there was no exchange
 of fire and that he saw soldiers removing the pants of the young women before his
 guards took him away. The CHR found it suspicious the AFP unit burned the young
 women's personal effects, shot them several times in the pelvic area, and imme-
 diately had the bodies embalmed without contacting the victims' next of kin. Inves-
 tigators found their bodies in a large clearing, raising questions about the AFP
 members' report that they sought to engage the soldiers in an exchange of fire in
 that location.
 In October soldiers of the 1st Marine Battalion shot and killed Roberto Bornales,
 an organizer of a fishing community in Palawan province, claiming that Bornales
 fired on them in an insurgent ambush. According to the TFDP, Bornales' companion
 rejected the soldiers' account, indicating that they both were unarmed. A forensic
 examination showed that Bornales was shot twice in the back at close range.
 The CHR investigated the AFP's July killing of two civilians in the Marilog dis-
 trict of Davao City in Mindanao. According to the Ecumenical Commission
 (ECDFC), AFP members of the 73rd infantry battalion fired into the victims' home
 on suspicion that the NPA was meeting with local indigenous tribal leaders there.
 The TFDP reported one civilian death by crossfire in a military clash. According
 to the ECDFC, civilians suffered casualties resulting from clashes between the AFP
 and the Moro Islamic Liberation Front (MILF) (see Section 1.g.).
 A court has yet to try the top police officials suspected of involvement in the 1995
 killing of 11 criminal suspects from the "Kuratong Baleleng" gang. In May 1995, the
 Ombudsman, Aniano Desierto, recommended the filing of criminal charges against
 five top PNP officials. The case was delayed by the defendants' appeal to the Su-
 preme Court to decide whether the antcorruption court, the Sandiganbayan, has ju-
 risdiction and the appeal was still pending at year's end. After waiting more than
 
 
 -1034
 
 3 years for a trial, four of the five key witnesses for the prosecution have left a wit-
 ness protection program. In August a young police official recanted his former testi-
 mony when he tired of the restrictions of the witness program within an army camp.
 Despite the accusations against them, President Estrada named one of the Kuratong
 Baleleng suspects, PLNP Superintendent Panfflo Lacson, as head of the Presidential
 Anti-Organized Crime Commission in August, while others have been promoted to
 more senior ranks. In 1997 the U.N. Special Rapporteur on Summary and Arbitrary
 Execution asked the Government for a report on the case, urging it to .enforce the
 fundamental principles of the Universal Declaration on Human Rights. In August
 Justice Secretary Serafin Cuevas told the press it might be time for the Government
 to drop the case. According to an attorney for the remaining witness, security offi-
 cials are pressuring this witness to leave the witness protection program.
 Civilian militia units also were accused of extrajudicial killings. According to the
 CHR, paramilitary units were responsible for one killing in the first 3 months of
 1998, and civilians and local (nonpolice) officials killed 13 persons. Often formed as
 security guard units for mining or-plantation areas, members of these militias are
 often veterans of the Citizen Armed Forces Geographical Units (CAFGUS). These
 militia forces remain active in many rural areas despite the AFP's announcement
 in March that the CAFGUS were disbanded. The ECDFC reported that, a militia
 unit member killed a 13-year-old boy in January when he threw a grenade at a
 house during an effort to disperse persons from land claimed by a mining operation
 in Sirawai, Zamboanga del Norte. In September security guards at a 9,900-acre or-
 chard in Negros Occidental shot and killed three apparently unarmed men who
 were leaving the property after collecting spiders.
 Police personnel supported some landowners' efforts to resolve rural land disputes
 by displacing farmers. According to the TFDP, the Mindoro Occidental police ar-
 rested and held 10 farmers in August on a fabricated charge of possessing illegal
 firearms. The landowner sought to evict these and other farmers who were due to
 obtain title to the land under the Agrarian Reform law. In July the owners' security
 guards reportedly shot and killed-a farmer as he sought to enter the estate.
 In November members of a Mindanao vigilante group linked to local landowners
 killed 2 'members of the Manobo indigenous group and destroyed the homes of 30
 families in a Manobo village in Bukidnon province. According to the TFDP, the
 landowners have sought to drive the Manobos from their land for several years.
 The assailants who killed the head of the Catholic diocese of Sulu, Bishop Ben-
 jamin de Jesus, in 1997 have not been tried. Those persons initially arrested remain
 under detention, although human rights groups report that other prominent sus-
 pects remain at large.
 AFP elements violated the cease-fire accord. An AFP unit attacked a'group of 25
 NPA members in Samar province in September, killing 5 of the insurgents.
 Election related violence was widespread in the campaign period before the May
 national elections, though low compared with previous years. In spite of government
 efforts to ensure a peaceful vote, local political rivalries resulted in shootings and
 other violence. The Commiusion on Elections reported that 47 provincial or mayoral
 ,candidates, campaigners, or polling place staff were killed and 97 wounded. How-
 ever, rival political party groups were known to claim NPA involvement to deflect
 charges against them.
 There were periodic reports of incidents in which NPA members reportedly killed
 or wounded candidates or elections staff in the period prior to the May elections.
 NPA assailants reportedly fired on the car of Surigao del Sur governor Primo
 Murillo in early May, wounding members of his staff. NPA elements violated the
 cease-fire accord.
 According to press reports, NPA units in Luzon and the Visayas sometimes at-
 tacked army or police patrols to obtain arms. About 40 NPA members attacked a
 PNP patrol in northern Samar province in-July, killing 2'policemen and an army
 officer who was patrolling the area separately.
 b. Disappearance.-The CHR cited 10 cases of involuntary disappearance in 1998,
 compared with 15 disappearances in 1997. The TFDP reported 'two disappearances.
 The international NGO Families of Victims of Involuntary Disappearance (FIND)
 also reported four cases of involuntary disappearance. (The FIND defines disappear-
 ance as taking place if the individual is missing for 48 hours; the TFDP uses 72
 hours as its criterion.) The FIND documented the APP's attempt to hide its involve-
 ment in the March deaths of two Mindanao indigenous group members killed in the
 wake of a land dispute in Polomolok near General Santos (see Section l.a.). Accord-
 ing to the FIND, the AFP buried the two in a shallow grave after executing them.
 Due to the efforts of NGO's, the National Bureau of Investigation exhumed and
 identified the bodies only 3 days later and established that they died of multiple
 gunshot wounds.
 
 
 1035
 The courts and the police have failed to address complaints of victims' families
 concerning numerous disappearances in the 1980's. The FIND presented to the Gov-
 ernment records of 1,635 documented cases of individuals considered victims of an
 officially arranged "disappearance." (According to Amnesty International, there were
 759 disappearance cases under former President Marcos, 830 disappearances under
 former President Aquino and 46 under former president Ramos.) Although Presi-
 dent Ramos appointed a committee in 1992 to look into responsibility for the many
 disappearances, the committee disbanded in July without ever functioning. FIND
 appealed for a return visit by the U.N. Working Group on Enforced and Involuntary
 Disappearances (UNWGEID), which last visited in 1990. Amnesty International in
 Manila has placed a top priority on supporting the pleas of the victims' families for
 a court hearing. Court inaction on these cases helps create a climate of impunity
 that undermines confidence in the justice system.
 Kidnapings of members of ethnic communities remained a problem. Criminal syn-
 dicates and bandit elements linked to insurgent groups primarily targeted members
 of Filipino-Chinese families, although their victims also included Filipino business
 persons and some foreign managers (again mainly Chinese). According to the Chi-
 nese community group that monitors incidents that victims' families have chosen
 not to report, there were 66 kidnapings for ransom in the first 8 months of 1998,
 involving 118 victims. A total of over $2 million (91.7 million pesos) were paid as
 ransom. Thirty-four of these abductions took place in Manila and 22 in the Muslim
 area of Mindanao.
 In December 1997, the Filipino-Chinese community in Manila closed shops and
 schools in a 1-day protest of the Government's failure to counter the kidnaping men-
 ace. The Filipino-Chinese community, which numbers perhaps 1 to 2 percent of the
 population hut wields a major influence in the business sector, normally refuses to
 cooperate with the PNP authorities. According to officials, the community deeply
 distrusts PNP officials, whom they believe collude with the kidnap gangs. Observers
 believe that police involvement is indicated by the kidnapers' frequent use of sophis-
 ticated communications equipment and high-powered weapons.
 Along with Manila, the city of Cotabat in Mindanao was a frequent site of
 kidnapings. Its proximity to areas controlled by the insurgent Muslim force, the
 MILF, has made it especially vulnerable to lawless elements. Although AFP leaders
 have charged the MILF with seeking ransom funds and using the kidnapings as a
 show of force, observers believed that many kidnapings were carried out by var-
 ious gangs, many of which were composed of former insurgents or police and army
 veterans.
 Reflecting the scope of such gangs, a German businessman, kidnaped by a gang
 in Zamboanga del Norte in September 1997, was held by a large bandit group until
 late December 1997 when a ransom was paid. He indicated that at least 70 persons
 were involved as he was moved from place to place.
 President Estrada has given top priority to apprehending kidnapers as part of his
 emphasis on "law and order." In late 1998, his Presidential Anti-Organized Crime
 Commission arrested members of some major rings, including a few active or former
 police officers.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution prohibits torture, and evidence obtained through its use is legally
 inadmissible in court; however, members of the security forces and police continued
 to use torture and otherwise abuse suspects and detainees. The CHR and the De-
 partment of Interior and Local Government (DILG) provide the police with human
 rghts training, including primers on the rights of suspects. However, such training
 is voluntary and dependent on the DILG's uncertain budget allocation. Police aware-
 ness of the rights of those in custody remains poor.
 The CHR reported 2 cases of torture of suspects while in official custody in 1998;
 the TFDP reported 6 cases for the year, compared with 11 reported in 1997.
 Attorneys in legal reform and public defender groups identifyr the most common
 forms of abuse during arrest and interrogation as mauling, slapping, hitting with
 clubs, and poking defendants with guns. Police also reportedly used electric shocks
 to extort confessions. There were no 1998 reports of interrogation abuses involving
 cellophane bags over a victim's head or the use of electric shock to the genitals. Nor
 were there reports that the police burned or dragged suspects behind cars to force
 confessions.
 AFP members raped and killed four youths in June (see Section l.a.).
 Prison conditions are harsh and life threatening. Provincial jails and prisons are
 overcrowded, have limited exercise and sanitary facilities, and provide prisoners
 with an inadequate diet. Administrators reportedly budget a daily subsistence al-
 lowance of about $0.60 (25 pesos). Following a 1990-96 CHiR study on 6,939 jail fa-
 
 
 1036
 cilities, the CHR pointed to the problem of women and children being held in facili-
 ties not fully segregated from the male inmates.
 Guards often abuse prisoners. Female prisoners are at particular risk of sexual
 assault. A CHR report on jail facilities throughout the country indicated that of 613
 jails visited; only 64 had adequate facilities and were in good condition. However,
 some prominent prisoners and celebrities were treated far better. Aprovincial gov-
 ernor held on suspicion of murder was able to run successfully for reelection in" May
 from within his cell through his privileged use of a cellular phone and other commu-
 nication equipment. He also -enjoyed a short furlough to celebrate his birthday in
 his home province. In May an incumbent congressman was reelected while- serving
 a life sentence following his 1997 conviction for rape.'
 Official corruption is a serious problem in the prison- system. Jail administrators
 reportedly delegate authority in order to maintain order to senior inmates. Favored
 ,inmates reportedly enjoy access to outside contacts, enabling them to trade in pros-
 titution and drugs within the jail walls.
 Conditions in the provincial jails were often as Spartan and overcrowded as in
 Manila. Inmates depended on their families for food because of the insufficient sub-
 sistence allowance. According to the penal authorities, there were over 20,000 de-
 tainees held in regional jails. Many were there at the discretion of local law enforce-
 ment authorities without benefit of a trial. Through the efforts of the CHR, 627 pris-
 oners and detainees were released between 1988 and 1996 because they had been
 detained beyond the sentences imposed, or because the CHR helped obtain their pa-
 roles or pardons. The CHR study found that a major cause for congestion in jails
 was that those awaiting trial lacked the funds to- post bail and remained in lengthy
 pretrial detention.
 Harsh prison conditions helped spark inmate protests at a government penal col-
 ony in Dapecol, Davao province in March. Prisoners protested living quarters and
 food that the Regional CHR Director described as belonging in a "pig-sty." According
 to the CHR, the prison director gave authority to senior inmates to administer rules,
 resulting in a "reign of terror." Eight prisoners sought to force reforms through tak-
 ing hostages. Despite progress, over 3 days of negotiations, the Presidential Assist-
 ant for Mindanao.decided to have police attempt an armed rescue of the five hos-
 tages. The eight prisoners and a female prison counselor were killed and the other
 four hostages were wounded. The CHR Regional Director, ,who-had assisted in the
 negotiations, faulted the police methods and timing. A news photograph disclosed
 that one prisoner was shot while asleep on- a cot. The Justice Secretary dismissed
 the Penal Colony Director. (NGO's had charged the same director with conspiracy
 in the 1997 murder of a lay church worker at the penal colony.)
 International monitoring groups, the International Committee of the Red Cross,
 and foreign embassy officials are allowed free access to jails and prisons.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-Although the Constitution requires a ju-
 dicial determination of probable cause before issuance of an arrest warrant and pro-
 hibits holding prisoners incommunicado or in secret places of detention, police con-
 tinued arbitrarily to arrest and detain citizens, although less frequently than in the
 previous year.
 Detainees have the right to a judicial review of the legality of their detention and,
 except for offenses punishable by a life sentence or death (when evidence of guilt
 is strong), the right to bail. Authorities are required to file charges within 12 to 36
 hours of a warrantless arrest, depending on the seriousness of the crime for which
 the arrest was made. The CHR listed 59 cases of illegal arrest and detention in
 1998,' compared with 104 in 1997. The TFDP found that 50 persons were arrested
 illegally in 1998, compared with 81 in the first 10 months of 1997.
 The NPA and the MILF were responsible for some arbitrary- arrests and deten-
 tions, often in connection with informal courts set up to try civilians and local politi-
 cians for "crimes against the people."
 Members of the MILF tried two persons on criminal charges in a Muslim area
 of Mindanao in October. Reflecting the MILF's claim to recognition as an independ-
 ent state in areas it controls, MILF spokesmen asserted that their self-proclaimed
 courts have criminal jurisdiction.
 Forced exile is illegal and is not practiced.
 e. Denial of Fair Public TriaL-The Constitution provides for an independent judi-
 ciary, but the judicial system suffers from corruption and inefficiency. Personal ties
 undermine the commitment of some government institutions to ensuring due proc-
 ess and equal justice, resulting in impunity for those who commit offenses but are
 rich and influential.
 The national court system consists of four levels: Local and regional trial courts,
 a National Court of Appeals divided into 15 divisions, a 15-member Supreme Court,
 and an informal local system for arbitrating or mediating certain problems outside
 
 
 1037
 
 the formal court system. The Sandiganbayan, the Government's anticorruption
 court, hears criminal cases of misconduct brought against officials.
 The Constitution provides that those accused of crimes be informed of the charges
 against them, have the right to counsel, and be provided a speedy and public trial.
 Defendants are presumed innocent and have the right to confront witnesses against
 them, to present evidence, and to appeal convictions. The authorities generally re-
 spect the right of defendants to be represented by a lawyer although poverty often
 inhibits a defendant's access to attorneys. There is no jury system under the law;
 all cases are heard by judges.
 According to the NGO Alterlaw, the use of personal connections, patronage, influ-
 ence peddling, and bribery are common. The judicial process is perceived as biased
 in favor of the rich and influential, and there are few instances of the police inves-
 tigating and the courts trying white collar criminals. Legal experts in and outside
 the justice system also criticize personal and professional relationships between
 judges and the individuals and corporations whose cases they are assigned. Some
 law firms, known in that profession as "case fixers," gain the favor of judges and
 other court officials, and bribe some witnesses. While it is technically illegal to settle
 criminal cases out of court, the practice of reaching an "amicable settlement" is rou-
 tine; without key victims or witnesses to testify, the authorities are forced to aban-
 don their case. The Government has been unable, for the most part, to take effective
 action to intervene in these situations, and such practices appear to be firmly en-
 trenched in the culture.
 The pace of justice is slow. The court system is unable to assure detained persons
 expeditious trials. There is a widely recognized need for more prosecutors, judges,
 and courtrooms. A leading court administrator indicated that 692 positions for
 judges remained vacant in 1998 for lack of qualified applicants. Many vacancies
 were in provincial capitals unattractive to jurists. In other cases, judges' salaries
 were considered too low compared with other opportunities. Further impeding jus-
 tice was a shortage of prosecutors. A Justice Department official in charge of nation-
 wide prosecutors acknowledged at a human rights seminar that he lacked sufficient
 resources to hire the prosecutors needed for the nationwide case load. He also ac-
 knowledged that prosecutors are susceptible to corruption because of their low sala-
 ries.
 According to the Constitution, cases are to be resolved within set time limits once
 submitted for decision: 24 months for the Supreme Court; 12 for the Court of Ap-
 peals, and 3 months for lower courts. There are no time limits for trials. Because
 of numerous technical delays and frequent failures of judges and prosecutors to ap-
 pear, trials can last many months. Prosecutors often declined to prosecute certain
 types of cases. Officials in the Labor and Social Welfare Departments complain that
 prosecutors generally fail to follow up on cases involving child labor violations (see
 Section 6.d.).
 The CHR reported in 1997 that only 18 percent of the human rights cases that
 it referred to courts and other government agencies were resolved, and that the
 courts dismissed 76 percent of the few cases that went to trial. The CHR had to
 suspend its 1997 agreement for adding Justice Department prosecutors to its staff
 because of a lack of funds and available prosecutors.
 An NGO representing over 400 families of crime victims (Crusade Against Vio-
 lence--CAV) reported some success in providing families with legal advice, monitor-
 ing court processes and spurrng prosecutors to address cases despite the efforts of
 local crime lords or officials to hinder proceedings.
 Attorneys involved in prominent human rights cases expressed concern over at-
 tempts to intimidate them. Those assisting the witnesses in the "Kuratong
 Baleleng" case (see Section l.a.) indicate that both they and some prosecutors in the
 Ombudsman's Office faced pressures, including surveillance and telephone threats.
 The attorneys assisting in the preparation of the prosecution of AFP officials ac-
 cused of responsibility for the murder of a prominent student leader in the 1980's
 expressed concern over a burglary of their law office and telephone threats.
 The victims claiming indemnification for alleged Marcos-era human rights abuses
 await the outcome of either a Philippine court case or a negotiated settlement
 among the claimants (the Government, the Marcos family, and victims). The victims'
 attorneys seek to have a local court enforce the findings of foreign courts that the
 Government share with the victims money recovered from Swiss bank accounts held
 by the Marcos family. The court has not yet made a finding. President Estrada pro-
 posed in August that the case be resolved through an agreement among the victims,
 the Government and the Marcos family to share the over $500 million that the
 Swiss Supreme Court ordered Swiss banks-to transfer to an escrow account in the
 Philippines in 1998. The Swiss minimum conditions for the fund's release are either
 a Philippine court judgment that the Marcos deposits in Switzerland were "rl-gotten
 
 
 1038
 
 wealth" or a mutual agreement similar to that President Estrada suggested. In both
 cases, the Government is obliged to submit a report to the Swiss Government that
 human rights victims are to be duly indemnified before the Swiss authorities can
 release the money.
 Amnesty International (AI) questioned the apparent unfairness in many of the
 court proceedings that result in death sentences, since the judicial system does not
 ensure the rights of defendants to due process and legal representation. At times
 defendants in such cases had no lawyers to assist them when they were arrested,
 indicted, and brought to trial.
 In 1995 the Government offered an amnesty to former rebels and members of gov-
 ernment security forces up to a June 1, 1995 deadline. In the case of rebels, crimes
 covered by the amnesty had to have been committed in pursuit of political beliefs;
 in the case of members of government forces, crimes covered were those committed
 in the performance of duty. Members of government security forces who committed
 serious human rights violations such, as extrajudicial killings, massacres, torture,
 and rape were excluded from the program. A quasijudicial National Amnesty Com-
 mission (NAC), whose decisions are subject to review only by the Court of Appeals,
 was established to process amnesty applications. The NAC processed and oversaw
 -the release of 41 political prisoners in 1995 and 1996. None has been released since.
 The NPA "tries" civilians and local politicians for "crimes against the people" in
 informal courts. Defendants in such trials are sometimes tortured or summarily exe-
 cuted. Former leaders of the Communist Party have been at particular risk in "peo-
 ple's court" trials.
 Members of the MILF tried two persons on criminal charges in a Muslim area
 of Mindanao in October, reflecting the MILF claim that its self-proclaimed courts
 have criminal jurisdiction.
 The TFDP reported that there were 147 political prisoners at year's end, com-
 pared with 190 political prisoners held at the end of 1997. The Government disputes
 charges that it holds political prisoners, contending that those held for allegediy po-
 litical reasons really were imprisoned for common crimes. Frequently those political
 prisoners counted by the TFDP were charged with illegal possession of firearms.
 The TFDP claims that the authorities deliberately "criminalized" the political of-
 fender cases in order to strip political prisoners of public sympathy. In the first half
 of 1998, TDFP investigations indicated that there were 12 new illegal, arrests for
 political reasons (compared with 87 during the same period in 1997). During peace
 talks, the- Government and the exiled -leaders of the Communist National Demo-
 cratic Front discussed the release of prisoners held for political crimes, although the
 Government denies that it holds prisoners on these grounds. Nevertheless, accord-
 ing to the CHR, the Government finds some basis to release periodically some of
 the prisoners that the TFDP considers are held for political reasons. President
 Ramos released 14 such persons in early 1998 on humanitarian grounds in response
 to an appeal for those in poor health.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 .Constitution provides that a judge may issue search warrants on a finding of prob-
 able cause. Restrictions on search and seizure within private homes generally are
 observed, although searches without warrants do occur. Judges have declared evi-
 dence obtained illegally to be inadmissible.
 According to CHR officials, there was a decrease in the displacement of families
 from their homes to make way for infrastructure and commercial developments. Fol-
 lowing critical media reports and international attention on the forced demolitions
 of homes of urban "squatters" in 1997, both the central and local governments ap-
 peared to refrain from dislodging squatters without their consent to move to other
 housing. Having campaigned as the "propoor" candidate President Estrada sought
 to avoid confrontations with squatter communities. However, the Government had
 difficulty in implementing the 1992 housing law, which provides for consultation,
 compensation, and substitute housing for the squatter families affected by removal
 plans.
 The major incidents of forced removals generally involved land disputes in rural
 areas. In Mindanao AFP forces killed two members of an indigenous group, and in
 Mindoro Occidental owners' security guards reportedly shot and killed a farmer (see
 Section L.a.). Landowners in Sumilao, Bukidnon province continued to block entry
 of members of the Higaonon indigenous group, who claimed 355 hectares of farm
 land the landowners seek to develop. Although President Ramos personally brokered
 a land agreement between the two parties in late 1997 following the deaths of three
 Higaonons, the case remains unresolved, and lengthy court appeals by the land-
 owners continued. There were periodic clashes between real estate development se-
 curity guards and farmers claiming the land in Hacienda Looc in Batangas province
 south of Manila. Approximately 1,200 farmers and fishermen have protested the de-
 
 
 1039
 velopment of the land into a resort area, resisting heavy pressure from local au-
 thorities, police, and security guards to abandon their claim to the land.
 g. Use of Excessive Force and Violations of Humanitarian Law in Internal Con-
 flicts.-Despite a September 1996 peace agreement between the Government and
 the Moro National Liberation Front (MNLF), there were periodic AFP clashes with
 the remaining Islamic insurgent group the Moro Islamic Liberation Front (MILF).
 These military operations continued to inflict hardship on civilians. Most of the
 fighting took place in western Mindanao provinces, particularly North Cotobato,
 agu*ndanao, Zamboanga del Norte, and Basilan.
 Displaced families fear being casualties in artillery exchanges or bombing exer-
 cises near their areas of residence. According to the Ecumenical Commission for Dis-
 placed Families and Communities, 19 incidents of armed clashes in Mindanao and
 asfian Island displaced an estimated 7,224 families or about 43,000 persons in
 1998. According to the TFDP, two civilians were killed as the result of military
 crossfire and others were killed by AFP forces (see Section l.a.). The AFP's oper-
 ation in the Marilog District of Davao City in Mindanao forced 400 Marilog families
 to flee (see Section l.a.).
 Although neither side appears to target civilian populations or restrict relief sup-
 plies, there were periodic food shortages associated with the large number of dis-
 placed families in the army's clashes with the MILF.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of speech
 and of the press, and the Government respects these rights in practice.
 The Philippine Press Institute (PPI) in Manila is active in helping investigate
 cases of harassment of journalists. It continued a campaign to reopen the police in-
 vestigation into the 1997 murder of Manila journalist Danny Hernandez, who re-
 ported on large Manila area drug rings.
 Three Mindanao radio broadcasters were killed, possibly to silence their investiga-
 tive reporting. In February Odilon Mallari, employed by a Roman Catholic radio sta-
 tion in General Santos City, was killed by two assailants. Two NPA insurgents were
 arrested. In March Rey Bancairin, a radio commentator in Zamboanga City, was
 shot and killed by two unidentified men inside his broadcasting studio. In April Nel-
 son Catipay, an investigative reporter for a Cotabato city station, was shot and
 killed by an assailant while returning home from work. However, in all three cases,
 the Association of Broadcasters of the Philippines believes that the assailants may
 have had motives unrelated to the broadcasters' professional activities and, there-
 fore, did not issue any protests.
 The PPI favors the repeal of legislation banning political advertising in the media.
 The PPI believes that the total ban, enacted in the interest of fairness, favors in-
 cumbents and deprives new candidates of the opportunity to make their views
 known.
 There appears to be no invasive use of censorship although there is a government-
 appointed Movie and Television Review and Classification Board (MTRCB). In 1997
 the Government succeeded in delaying the release of a film depicting the hardships
 and alleged rape of an overseas Filipino 14-year-old girl working illegally in a
 household in the Middle East. Officials persuaded the film company to withhold the
 film on the grounds that its content could affect sensitive bilateral relations.
 Movie producers find that films containing sexually explicit scenes reach audi-
 ences despite the ostensible MTRCB ban on them. Although an officially sanctioned
 version of the film may be edited, film distributors find that they can prevail on
 MTRCB inspectors to overlook the screening of uncut versions in many cinemas.
 The MTRCB imposes a classification system rating violence or sexual content on tel-
 evision broadcasters, requiring entertainment programs to meet its criteria. It may
 require a programmer to edit scenes if they do not meet MTRCB standards. Under
 President Estrada's administration, in August the MTRCB sought to extend its clas-
 sification authority over news programs. However, the Association of Broadcasters
 of the Philippines protested the attempt, and the MTRCB was considering the
 group's appeal at year's end.
 The Government respects academic freedom.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution provides for
 these rights, and the Government respects them in practice.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for freedom of religion, and the
 Government respects this right in practice.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-Citizens enjoy the freedom to change their place of residence and em-
 ployment. Travel abroad is limited only in rare circumstances, such as pending
 court cases or when government authorities try to discourage travel by vulnerable
 
 
 1040
 
 workers such as young women to areas where they face personal risk. The Phil-
 ippine Overseas Employment Administration (POEA) seeks to limit departures for
 work abroad to only those whom the POEA certifies as qualified for the jobs. An
 estimated 5 to 6 million Filipinos work overseas and remit money home, which
 amounts to nearly over 10 percent of the gross national product.
 There is no comprehensive legislation that provides for granting refugee/asylee
 status in accordance with the provisions of the 1951 U.N. Convention Relating to
 the Status of Refugees and its 1967 Protocol. However, in March the Government
 issued a regulation forming a "Refugee Unit" in the Department of Justice to deter-
 mine whether asylum seekers qualify as refugees. This measure implemented many
 of the basic provisions of the 1951 U.N. Convention. The Government continued to
 allow approximately 1,400 asylum seekers from Vietnam to remain in the Phil-
 ippines after the termination of the Comprehensive Plan of Action (CPA) on June
 30. All these asylum seekers have been "screened out" from refugee status in accord-
 ance with CPA provisions. A pproximately 350 of these persons regularly reside in
 the Vietnamese village in Palawan, while the remainder live in major urban areas.
 The Government continued to encourage voluntary repatriation of these asylum
 seekers and has ruled out forcible repatriation. There is significant government and
 nongovernment support (particularly from the Catholic Church) for allowing those
 asylum seekers who do not wish to repatriate and are ineligible for resettlement in
 other countries to remain in the country permanently.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 The Constitution provides citizens with the right to change their government
 peacefully, and citizens exercise this right through periodic elections. However, Con-
 gress has yet to enact a system for absentee voting, as required by the Constitution.
 This provision affects an estimated 5 million potential voters or about 10 percent
 of the electorate, most of whom are expatriates.
 An estimated 80 percent of registered voters participated in the 1998 national and
 local elections. President Estrada was elected by a wide margin, and his party won
 a majority in both the House of Representatives and the Senate. Despite widespread
 concern over possible fraud that could have discredited the election results, the 1998
 elections resulted in a smooth transition to a new administration. Nevertheless, the
 hand-counting of millions of paper ballots delayed the public knowledge of results
 and provided opportunities for fraud.
 In 1997 a Senate Electoral Tribunal concluded that vote tampering known as
 "Dagdag-Bawas" (literally "Addition-Subtraction") deprived a Senate candidate of
 his seat in the 1995 by-election. Despite this finding, the candidate who won
 through fraud was not replaced. A senior official of the Commission on Elections
 (COMELEC) at the time, Commissioner Regalado Maambong, stated that his Com-
 mission was powerless to prevent such cheating. He indicated that since the system
 allowed local officials to appoint or influence election precinct administrators, it was
 impossible for the Commission to police the nationwide system and assure its integ-
 rity.
 The May election ballots included for the first time a "party list" option in an ef-
 fort to provide more seats to marginal groups from social sectors that do not nor-
 mally send members to the Congress. A party that received a sufficient percentage
 of votes received a seat in the lower House. The election regulations limited each
 party to a maximum of three seats. However, widespread voter confusion about how
 to use the "party list" ballot resulted in fewer than half of the intended seats being
 awarded. Few socially marginalized groups won seats. Those elected declared their
 intention to amend the "party list" law, in order to facilitate the election of sectoral
 representatives in the next election.
 The Government sought through a peace process to include dissident groups with-
 in the political process. In September 1996, there was a significant peace agreement
 with the Moro National Liberation Front (MNLF). The MNLF leader, Nur Misuari,
 was elected governor of the four-province Autonomous Region of Muslim Mindanao
 shortly after the peace agreement. The Government is continuing talks with a
 smaller insurgent group, the Moro Islamic Liberation Front (MILF).
 The Government continued periodic "peace process" talks with the leadership in
 exile of the communist National Democratic Front (NDF), which coordinates with
 its armed guerrilla group, the New People's Army (NPA). In March after - 2-year
 impasse, the Government and the NDF succeeded in reaching agreement on the text
 of a "Comprehensive Agreement on Respect for Human Rights and International
 Humanitarian Law," and President Estrada's administration entered talks on imple-
 menting it in late 1998. The Agreement sets a framework for both sides to address
 human rights violations related to insurgent activities.
 
 
 1041
 The leftist armed insurgency is divided. A faction rejecting the NDF leadership,
 the Revolutionary People's Army, has gained a strong foothold on the economically
 troubled province of Negros Occidental, where it seeks further armed resistance
 rather than involvement in the Government's peace process.
 There are no restrictions in law or practice on participation by women and minori-
 ties in politics. Two women head Cabinet departments, 4 of 23 senators are women,
 and 25 of 218 elected members of the House are women.
 Muslim leaders appealed for a constitutional change to elect senators by region.
 Along with many other citizens, they argue that the current method of election from
 a nationwide list favors the established political figures from the Manila area. There
 are no Muslim senators, and no members of President Estrada's Cabinet are Mus-
 lim. However, the House of Representatives has nine Muslim members.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 A wide variety of human rights groups operated without government restriction,
 investigating and publishing their findings on human rights cases. Many govern-
 ment officials, including those of the CHR, are responsive to their views. The De-
 partment of Foreign Affairs arranged for a symposium on human rights with NGO
 group participation in the context of celebrating the 50th anniversary of the Univer-
 sal Declaration on Human Rights. Human rights groups are able to assemble peace-
 fully and protest human rights violations, for example, protesting against leaders
 of the Burmese Government during their official visits to Manila.
 The Philippine Alliance of Human Rights Advocates (PAHRA), a leading NGO
 network, effectively monitors human rights problems and seeks redress through its
 contacts with government agencies, the Congress and the Commission on Human
 Rights. Human rights activists continued to encounter minor harassment, which
 largely appears to be committed by local military or police.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution prohibits discrimination against women, children, and members
 of minorities. Implementation of constitutional protections is at times hindered by
 lack of implementing legislation and by budgetary constraints.
 Women.-Violence against women, particularly domestic violence, is a serious
 problem. Women's advocates cite the lack of laws on domestic violence, double
 standards of morality, and a traditional societal reluctance to discuss private family
 affairs as some of the reasons for domestic violence. The absence of divorce under
 the law and limited job opportunities combine to limit the ability of both poor and
 wealthy women to escape destructive relationships.
 Nonetheless, women's rights advocates describe the greater willingness of women
 to speak out, despite a sense of shame, fear, and a desire to preserve "family honor,"
 as a positive movement toward gender equality. Working in conjunction with NGO's,
 the Department of Social Welfare and Development (DSWD) established temporary
 shelters to protect female victims from further harm and high risk situations. In the
 first 6 months of 1998, the DSWD's Women's Bureau assisted in 1,801 cases of bat-
 tered or physically abused women. Both the DSWD and the PNP maintain a Wom-
 en's Help Desk to protect women and encourage the reporting of crimes. Their role
 was strengthened by the appointment of Vice President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo as
 the Secretary of DSWD on June 30. She gave women's issues a high public profile
 in her first months in office. PNP stations include female as well as male officers
 who, with help from NGO's, receive gender sensitivity training for dealing with vic-
 tims of sexual crimes and domestic violence.
 Rape continues to be a major problem, as the number of rape cases reported to
 the police has risen by about 16 percent annually since 1992. The PNP reported
 2,913 cases in 1997 and 1,510 cases in the first 6 months of 1998. In September
 1997, Congress enacted a major legislative reform, classifying rape as a crime
 against a person instead of as a crime against chastity, which had been punishable
 only under the Civil Code. Women no longer have to prove that they are either vir-
 gins or not promiscuous in order to claim in court that they were raped.
 As with battering, government officials attributed the increase in reported rape
 to changing attitudes. In a widely publicized 1997 case, an 11-year-old girl charged
 a congressman with rape. Reflecting intense media coverage and greater sensitivity
 to the crime among officials, a Manila court convicted the congressman and sen-
 tenced him to life imprisonment in late December 1997.
 Women's groups believe that the death penalty, which was restored in 1993,
 sometimes inhibits victims from pressing charges. Men convicted for rape constitute
 
 
 1042
 over half of the more than 600 persons who have received death sentences since the
 penalty was restored.
 Many women suffer exposure to violence through their recruitment (often through
 deception) into prostitution. Prostitution remains illegal, but widespread. A 1998
 International Labor Organization (ILO) study estimated that 500,000 women are
 engaged in prostitution. While penalties for the offense are light, detained pros-
 titutes are subjected to administrative indignities. Women's groups in 1997 called
 for legal action directed against local officials who condone a climate of impunity
 for those who exploit prostitutes-both the "entertainment club" employers and
 their clients. They were critical of highly publicized official campaigns to close clubs
 and brothels, because such tactics fail to rescue young women from the abuse. A
 few days after such raids, the offending establishments are usually back in business.
 In August the Department T Social Welfare and Development (DSWD) reported
 its rescue of 1,091 victims of flicit recruitment who were trapped in prostitution.
 DSWD officials noted that the number failed to reflect the "true state of prostitution
 in the country" since it reflected only those women who obtained temporary shelter
 and counseling through the DSWD and local governments. NGO's argue that the
 Government first must address the abuses of dislocation and homelessness in order
 to address genuinely the problem of women's exposure to the structural violence in-
 herent in prostitution. Hotel and travel industry leaders have pledged to cooperate
 with a code endorsed by international tourism groups to stop "sex tourism."
 Many women seek employment overseas and are particularly vulnerable to exploi-
 tation by unethical recruiters who promise attractive jobs or, in some cases, arrange
 marriages with foreign men. Some end up working as prostitutes or suffering abuse
 at the hands of their foreign employers or husbands. Those recruited to work as
 maids, entertainers, or models may, while overseas, be forced to participate in pub-
 lic shows or dances where nudity and the prospect of sex are the principal attrac-
 tions. Others knowingly accept questionable jobs to support parents, children, or sib-
 lings with their remittances. To curb such abuses, the Government campaigned to
 end illegal recruiting and, by raising age, educational, and professional standards
 for young women seeking jobs abroad, tried to discourage employment migration.
 The Migrant Workers and Overseas Filipinos Act of 1995 sought to provide the Gov-
 ernment with greater financial resources and improved authority to combat these
 problems. However, NGO's believe that these measures have not been adequate
 since traffickers are numerous and remain effective in luring women with promises
 of lucrative overseas contracts.
 Sexual harassment was also a problem. A survey by the Institute of Labor Studies
 found workplace sexual harassment to be widespread yet underreported, due to vic-
 tims' reticence and fear of losing their jobs. A Catholic Church study of conditions
 for female workers in one "special economic zone" indicated that sexual harassment
 by managers was common there. The women are often in a vulnerable position.
 Most are economic migrants who are required to work long hours and have no inde-
 pendent workers organization that could help them file complaints.
 In law but not in practice, women have most of the rights and protections ac-
 corded men. The Women in Development and Nation Building Act of 1992 termi-
 nated previous restrictions on women's rights to buy and sell property. The Commis-
 sion on the Role of Filipino Women, under the Office of the President, seeks to co-
 ordinate programs for women. The Commission works closely with many NGO's, in-
 cluding the 10-million-member National Council of Women in the Philippines. The
 Department of Labor and Employment upgraded its programs in support of women,
 having formed a new Bureau of Women and Young Children in 1997 to advocate
 major programs. In December 1997, an Asian Development Bank study found that
 women had made important gains towards gender equity. More women than men
 enter secondary and tertiary education.
 However, the 1998 economic crisis had a particular impact on women, partially
 reversing some recent employment gains. Unemplent nt rates among women are
 consistently higher than those among men. Based on 1998 statistics, 10.2 million
 women were employed while 17.4 million men had formal jobs, although the number
 in the labor force was roughly equal for both sexes. A 1998 ILO study concluded
 that women continue to have a subordinate position in the home and in society.
 Except for government service and jobs in government-owned or controlled cor-
 porations, women faced discrimination in employment. On average, a woman's sal-
 ary was about 47 percent of her male counterpart's. Joblessness and poverty most
 affected the lot of women, as reflected in their unemployment rate of about 9 per-
 cent in January, compared with a rate for men of about 7 percent. The continuing
 economic crisis was expected to lead to a widening in this employment gap.
 Church opposition to divorce in this largely Catholic nation is strong. However,
 changes in the Legal Code have made marriage annulment fairly easy and increas-
 
 
 1043
 ingly common. However, the legal cost precluded this option for many women. The
 practice of "unofficial divorce" (permanent separation) was common among lower in-
 come families; in these cases the wife usually was left with the children, and the
 husband provided little or no financial support.
 Children.-Several government agencies have programs devoted to the education,
 welfare, and development of children. Nevertheless, children faced serious problems
 in their development. Family poverty forces many school dropouts. Only about 65
 percent of children complete the 6th grade. As the grade level goes up, the number
 of children who stay in school continues to decline. Public primary and secondary
 schools are free of tuition charges, but poor families are unable to meet numerous
 peripheral costs for uniforms, school supplies, shoes, and transportation. In a 1998
 study, the Asian Development Bank reported an apparent growing inequity in the
 opportunity for an education as -public spending per pupil declines. In the 1980's,
 public spending covered 80 percent of the cost of elementary education; however,
 this share declined to only 69 percent by the mid-1990's.
 Widespread poverty forces many young children to work. The Department of
 Labor and Employment (DOLE) worked with the ILO and NGO's to address prob-
 lems identified in a landmark 1996 study supported by the ILO that showed wide-
 spread child labor. According to UNICEF and ILO studies, over 2 million children
 were exposed to hazardous working environments (e.g., in quarries, mines, and at
 docksides) in order to earn their living. Child trafficking by illegal recruiters often
 brought children from poor rural areas to low-paying jobs in cities. In August DOLE
 officials apprehended a foreign employer who lured children from distant provinces
 to work in a "sweatshop" garment factory in Tarlac province (see Section 6.d.).
 The Government's Department of Social Welfare and Development reported in
 1997 that there were over 50,000 street children in Manila and over 100,000 nation-
 wide. Welfare officials believe that the number is increasing, in view of widespread
 unemployment in rural areas. Reportedly many of these children are abandoned,
 with no family support, and engage in scavenging or begging. According to another
 study, the number of street children nationally is greater if they are defined as
 those who work and live in the streets and return to their families only occasionally.
 Street begging and truancy are common in Manila and other large cities, and chil-
 dren frequently are seen as street vendors amidst the chaotic traffic of Manila.
 The Intercountry Adoption Act of 1995, which strengthened safeguards against
 the sale and trafficking of children abroad, expanded on children's rights legislation
 enacted in 1992 and 1993. President Ramos signed landmark legislation in October,
 which created a family court system to expedite juvenile and domestic relations
 cases. This separate court helps address a problem of traditional societal values that
 influenced less specialized courts to regard children as extensions and property of
 the parents and to favor parental authority over the rights of a child.
 Greater public awareness eroded traditional reticence to report abuses against
 children. In the first half of 1998, DSWD offices cared for 724 children who were
 the victims of rape. The problem of foreign pedophiles continued to receive signifi-
 cant press coverage. The Government followed a tough policy of seeking the prosecu-
 tion of pedophiles, including those who returned to their homes abroad after a "sex
 tourism" visit. More than 50 suspected foreign pedophiles have been arrested over
 the last 3 years.
 Despite government efforts at law enforcement and expanded children's programs,
 there are an estimated 60,000 children involved in the commercial sex industry ac-
 cording to a 1996 UNICEF study. This marks an increase over the estimated 20,000
 involved in prostitution in a 1987 UNICEF study. The same studies showed that
 the children in the "entertainment industry" worked long, odd hours (10 to 12
 hours), starting in the evening until early morning. They came from families with
 unemployed or irregularly employed parents.
 People With Disabilities.-A 1983 law provides for equal physical access for the
 disabled to all public buildings and establishments, and a law passed in 1992 pro-
 vides for "the rehabilitation, self-development, and self-reliance of disabled persons
 and their integration into the mainstream of society." Advocates for the rights of the
 disabled contend that these laws have been ineffective, as implementing regulations
 have not been published, and that government programs are palliative rather than
 focused on reintegration. Senator Orlando Mercado, who authored legislation for the
 disabled, estimated in 1997 that only about 2 percent of an estimated 3.5 million
 disabled citizens received access to services.
 Indigenous People.-Indigenous people live throughout the Philippines but pri-
 marily in the mountainous areas of northern and central Luzon and Mindanao.
 They account for about 18 percent of the national population. Although no specific
 laws discriminate against indigenous people, the remoteness of the areas many in-
 habit, and cultural bias, prevent their full integration into society. Because they in-
 
 
 1044
 habit mountainous areas also favored by guerrillas, indigenous people suffer dis-
 proportionately from counterinsurgency operations. In August a Higaonon tribal
 leader in northern Mindanao expressed concern that, despite repeated peace pacts,
 the AFP conducts renewed military operations against Higaonon groups each time
 the regional commander changes. He appealed for a withdrawal of AFP troops from
 his region. Indigenous children suffer from lack of basic services, health, and edu-
 cation.
 In October 1997, President Ramos signed an Indigenous Peoples' Rights Act,
 which was intended to implement constitutional provisions to protect indigenous
 people. The law established a National Commission of Indigenous People staffed by
 tribal members empowered to award certificates of title to lands claimed by the over
 12 million native people. It awards "ancestral domain lands" on the basis of com-
 munal rather than individual ownership, thus impeding sale of the lands by tribal
 leaders. The law also requires a process of "informed" consultation and written con-
 sent by the indigenous group to allow mining on tribal lands. The law also assigns
 the indigenous groups with a responsibility to preserve forest, watershed and bio-
 diversity areas in their domains from inappropriate development. However, the Gov-
 ernment has been slow to implement the legislation, as it faces strong opposition
 from mining and agribusiness interests. Attorneys for an indigenous people's advo-
 cacy group warned that, like much social legislation, the new law could be a "dead
 letter" if weakly implemented.
 Other measures have affected indigenous communities in adverse ways. For ex-
 ample, development of mineral and water resources infringed on their lands and
 rights. The Mining Act of 1995 continued a legislative trend promoting mining oper-
 ations, hydroelectric dams, and other large-scale projects that force indigenous peo-
 ple to relocate and abandon farming and hunting land used for generations.
 There were numerous cases in which indigenous people faced legal threats to
 their claims to ancestral lands from developers, mining interests, and local political
 interests. The Higaonon people in Mindanao continue to be deprived of portions of
 their ancestral land by a powerful local landowning family, which enforced their re-
 moval through a violent demolition conducted by the PNP and private security
 forces in 1997 (see Section L.a.). The Catholic Bishops Conference of the Philippines
 expressed strong concern over the effects of current and planned large-scale mining
 on the livelihood of the many indigenous people of Mindanao. The Bishop of
 Pagadian, Zamboanga del Sur, criticized both the Rio Tinto Zinc Company and local
 officials for ignoring the opposition of the Subanen tribe (250,000 members) to the
 mining planned for their lands. In July the governor of Mountain province in Luzon
 asked the Government to deny mining company applications due to concern about
 their impact on the livelihood and customs of the indigenous people in the area, the
 Kankanaeys, Bontoc, and Kalinga tribes. In August NPA rebels cooperating with
 tribal leaders ambushed an AFP platoon in the Bontoc region and killed two sol-
 diers. Local officials warn of further hostilities if the Government approves mining
 in the area.
 Religious Minorities.-About 5 million Muslims, who constitute 7 percent of the
 population, reside principally in Mindanao and nearby islands, and are the largest
 single minority group in the country. Historically they have been alienated from the
 dominant Christian majority, and government efforts to integrate Muslims into the
 political and economic fabric of the country met with only limited success. The na-
 tional culture, with its emphasis on familial, tribal, and regional loyalties, creates
 informal barriers whereby access to jobs or resources is provided first to those of
 one's own family or group. Many Muslims claimed that they continue to be under-
 represented in senior civilian and military positions. A 1998 Asian Development
 Bank study noted that the Muslim provinces in Mindanao, lag behind the rest of
 the island in almost all aspects of socioeconomic development.
 There was progress in improving Christian-Muslim relations following a Septem-
 ber 1996 government agreement with the insurgent MNLF. In accordance with the
 agreement, a Southern Philippines Council on Peace and Development (SPCPD) was
 established to coordinate economic growth in 14 provinces in Mindanao and MNLF
 Chairman Nur Misuari became its chair. Shortly thereafter Misuari also was elected
 governor of the Autonomous Region of Muslim Mindanao, which was established in
 1990 to meet the demand of Muslims for local autonomy in areas where they are
 a majority or a substantial minority. The accord also provided for the integration
 of MNLF fighters into the armed forces and police. A promised 1999 plebiscite to
 create autonomy for an expanded Islamic region still requires enabling legislation.
 This initiative eased suspicions between Christians and Muslims, setting the
 stage for cooperation and economic growth. However, progress has been halting. Al-
 though the agreement has brought somewhat more regional stability, the Muslim
 
 
 1045
 provinces continue to be the site of intermittent military clashes with insurgent
 MILF forces, resulting in family displacements and economic problems.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The Constitution and laws provide for the right of
 workers, including public employees, to form and join trade unions. Although this
 right is exercised in practice, aspects of the public sector organization law restrict
 and discourage organizing. Trade unions are independent of the Government and
 generally free of political party control. Unions have the right to form or join federa-
 tions or other labor groups. Several trade union confederations entered candidates
 in the country's first election using a "party lst" ballot in May, which was meant
 to provide congressional seatto o a sectoral" group like labor. However, the entry
 of many rival labor candidates and confusion over the voting process resulted in
 only two seats being won by a labor group (a decline from the number of labor seats
 held under a presidential appointment system in the last Congress.) At-year's end,
 the Commission on Elections was studying whether to award further seats through
 a change of vote threshold rules.
 Subject to certain procedural restrictions, strikes in the private sector are legal.
 However, a 1989 law stipulates that all means of reconciliation must be exhausted
 and that the strike issue has to be relevant to the labor contract or the law. The
 Labor Secretary can intervene in some labor disputes by "assuming jurisdiction" and
 mandating a settlement. The Secretary can exercise this authority if he views the
 industry involved in the strike as "vital to national security." In June the Labor Sec-
 retary intervened on this basis in a strike by Philippine Airlines (PAL) pilots, order-
 ing a return to work in a few days. The pilots did not return by the deadline, claim-
 ing that they did not receive the "return to work" order. PAL management fired all
 620 pilots, claiming they were engaged in an illegal strike. The National Labor Rela-
 tions Commission dismissed a pilots' complaint, but the pilots' union appealed the
 dismissal to the Supreme Court.
 In February 1995, the ILO Committee of Experts noted that certain amendments
 have been proposed to legislation that the Committee previously had criticized for
 placing undue restrictions on the right to strike in nonessential services. The Com-
 mittee remains concerned by the imposition of penalties in cases where strikes have
 been deemed illegal, by restrictions on the right of government workers to strike,
 and by some restrictions on the right to organize and form a bargaining unit in
 which the restrictions conflict with ILO Convention 87 on freedom of association.
 Employers' lengthy legal appeals hamper workers' ability to organize trade
 unions. Both labor and employers groups complained that the Supreme Court fur-
 ther slowed the process in September by requiring a court of appeals to review all
 National Labor Relations Commission (NLRC) cases under appeal before the Su-
 preme Court will take jurisdiction. In late 1997, the ILO's Committee on Freedom
 of Association expressed concern that the Government still had failed to ensure a
 certification election at the Mitsumi electronics plant near Cebu, although the work-
 ers first filed a petition for certification 4 years previously. The Government re-
 sponded to earlier ILO inquiries by stating that it would facilitate a new election
 to address the complaint that the employer disrupted the 1994 attempt. However,
 no election took place during the year. The Mitsumi Company filed an appeal of the
 Labor Secretary's order for a new election.
 Union leaders and NGO's express concern that workers involved in union activity
 face intimidation tactics by management, including physical assaults by security
 guards. According to the TFDP, security guards broke up the picket line of striking
 bus company workers in September, injuring 20 strikers with baton blows. Report-
 edly the guards fired gunshots to drive away the workers. In late 1997, the ILO's
 Committee on Freedom of Association expressed concern about the violent dispersal
 of pickets and the brief police detention of union leaders during a 1995 strike at
 the Telefunken Semiconductor plant near Manila. The management ignored re-
 peated the DOLE Secretary's orders to reinstate workers fired for their strike deci-
 sion. The company has not reinstated the workers, although it has been 3 years
 since the DOLE order was issued. In March union members picketing a large ply-
 wood factory of Picop Resources in Surigao del Sur were injured when plant guards
 beat them. In September workers at the Filipino Telephone Corporation in Manila
 alleged that company security guards fired shots into the air to intimidate picketing
 employees.
 Unions have the right to affiliate with international trade union confederations
 and trade secretariats. Two of the largest trade union centrals, the TUCP and the
 FFW, are affiliated with the International Confederation of Free Trade Unions
 (ICFTU) and the World Confederation of Labor (WCL), respectively.
 
 
 1046
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The Constitution provides for
 the right to organize and bargain collectively. The Laor Code provides for this right
 for private sector employees and for employees of government-owned or controlled
 corporations, but current law limits the rights of government workers.
 Although unions claim to have organized about 8 percent of the total work force
 of 31.2 million, fewer than 500,000 workers are covered by collective bargaining
 agreements. Despite union opposition, the DOLE Secretary issued a change in rules
 on " labor only" subcontracting in 1997, which effectively broadened the definition of
 industries that legally may use part-time, rotating staff. Unions have argued that
 this practice allows unscrupulous employers to use subcontractors to evade obliga-
 tions to their employees and to break unions. In August the DOLE reported a 51
 percent increase since 1994 in the number of firns (primarily large employers) that
 use "contractual" labor. The DOLE Secretary expressed concern in July about firms
 that used the economic crisis as a pretext for replacing regular workers with
 "contractuals."
 Some employers intimidated workers trying to form a union with threats of firing
 or factory closure. In April guards employed by the management of a prominent Ma-
 nila hotel shoved and intimidated hotel workers who picketed after the management
 refused to accept the results of a union certification election and engaged in lengthy
 legal delays.
 Allegations of intimidation and discrimination in connection with union activities
 are grounds for review as possible unfair labor practices before the National Labor
 Relations Commission (NLRC). Before disputes reach the time-consuming, quasi-ju-
 dicia NLRC, the DOLE provides the services of the National Conciliation and Medi-
 ation Board (NCMB). The NCMB settles most of the unfair labor practice disputes
 raised as grounds for strikes before such strikes can be declared.
 The NCMB reported 92 strikes in 1998, compared with 91 strikes the previous
 year. The workdays lost t strikes decreased to 557,000 in 1998, compared with
 673,000 in 1997.
 Labor law is uniform throughout the country, including the industrial zones
 where tax benefits encourage the growth of export industries. However, local politi-
 leaders and officials governing these "special economic zones" (SEZ's) tried to
 frustrate union organizing efforts b maintaining "union free/strike free" policies."
 A conflict over interpretation of the SEZ law's proevisions for labor inspection creates
 fiuther obstacles to enforcement of workers' rights to organize. Despite DOLE objec-
 tions, SEZ local directors claim authority to conduct their own inspections as part
 of the zones' privileges intended by Congress. Hiring often is controlled tightly
 through "SEZ labor centers" _where political ties to local figures often played a role
 in gaining job eligibility. 'In spite of sporadic labor unrest and some organizing ef-
 forts, union successes in the SEZ's have been few and margnal. Some mainstream
 unions avoid a major unionizing effort in the lower-wage SEZ industries (e.g., the
 garment industry) as unpromising. They do so in light of both the organizers' re-
 stricted access to the closely guarded gates of many zones and the rapid turnover
 of the young, female staff working on short-term contracts in the zones' many elec-
 tronics and garment factories.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-Forced labor is prohibited, and the
 Government effectively enforces this prohibition.
 Forced and bonded labor by children is prohibited, however, there were reports
 of its use. The DOLE is targeting for prosecution the employment of underage work-
 ers as household domestics. Recruiters bring girls between the ages of 13 and 17
 to work in Manila or Cebu homes under terms that involve a "loan" advanced to
 their parents that the children are obliged to pay through their work. Over 300,000
 children 17 years of age and below work as family domestics in urban centers.
 NGO's report that "piggeries" in Buacan province near Manila employ underage
 workers and restrict them from leaving the breeding farms.
 d. Status of Child Labor Practices and Minimum Age for Employment.-dThe law
 prohibits the employment of children under the age of 15, except under the direct
 and sole responsibility of parents or guardians or where employment in cinema, the-
 ater, radio, or television is essential to the integrity of the production. The Labor
 Code allows employment for those between the ages of 15 and 18 for such hours
 and periods of the day as are determined by the Secretary of Labor but forbids em-
 ployment of persons under 1t years of age in hazardous or dangerous work. How-
 ever, a signficant number of children are employed in the informal sector of the
 urban economy or as unpaid family workers in rural areas.
 There are few child labor violations in the formal manufacturing sector. However,
 children are employed on the docks of some Mindanao and Visayan ports by labor
 contractors. Crews of over 100 children unload bulk cargo ships, bringing heavy
 bags of cement or fertilizer from freighter holds. Working at a piece rate, the chil-
 
 
 1047
 dren earn far less than adults would demand for the same work even though they
 are exposed to harmful dust and chemicals in the ships' holds. An August investiga-
 tive report documented the employment of children aboard Palawan coastal fishing
 vessels as divers in a dangerous form of coral reef fishing, in which they are obliged
 to be submerged for long and repeated periods. In Mindanao plantations raising ba-
 nanas for export frequently use children as day laborers in trimming and fertilizing
 plants and clearing irrigation ditches.
 A priority concern for the DOLE is the condition of underage agricultural workers
 in situations in which children join their parents in piecework labor on sugar plan-
 tations. Many work in order to help their parents repay loans to planters; parents
 often have difficulty with food and shelter during the long "dead season" in sugar
 farming
 The SOLE and other agencies have worked closely with UNICEF and the ILO's
 International Program for the Elimination of Child Labor (IPEC) to reduce viola-
 tions of child labor laws. The DOLE's approach is to work with local NGO's to edu-
 cate the community on the negative aspects of child labor, while providing counsel-
 ing and other outlets for children. It has enlisted the Department of Education, Cul-
 ture, and Sport in an interagency effort to put children back in school. Only a few
 child labor cases have resulted in court action. In March the DOLE's cooperation
 with prosecutors succeeded in obtaining the first conviction under 1993 legislation.
 A Manila area court convicted a night club owner for employing underage "enter-
 tainers."
 The law prohibits forced and bonded labor by children; however, despite govern-
 ment enforcement efforts, there were reports of its use (see Section 6.c.).
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-Tripartite regional wage boards set minimum
 wages. The latest round of wage increases occurred in late 1997 with the highest
 rates set in the National Capital Region (NCR) and the lowest in rural regions. The
 minimum wage for NCR nonagricultural workers is about $5.00 (198 pesos) per day.
 With this pay level, at least 2 family members would have to work full-time to sup-
 port a family of 6 above the level of the Government's minimum daily cost of living
 or the Manila area. Large numbers of workers do not receive the minimum wage
 set for their area.
 Regional wage board orders cover all private sector workers except domestic help-
 ers and those employed in the personal service of another. Boards outside the NCR
 exempted some employers because of factors such as establishment size, industry
 sector, involvement with exports, financial distress, and level of capitalization.
 These exemptions excluded substantial additional numbers of workers from cov-
 erage under the law.
 Violation of minimum wage standards was common. Many firms hired employees
 at subminimum apprentice rates, although no approved training was entailed in
 their production line work. A study of the largest export zone showed that many
 workers received less than the minimum wage. DOLE officials estimate a 30 to 40
 percent rate of noncompliance with the minimum wage requirement, and acknowl-
 edge that the shortage of inspectors makes the law difficult to enforce. The DOLE
 relies on administrative procedures and moral suasion to encourage voluntary em-
 ployer correction of violations.
 The standard legal workweek is 48 hours for most categories of industrial workers
 and 40 hours for government workers, with an 8 hour per day limit. An overtime
 rate of 125 percent of the hourly rate is mandated on ordinary days and 130 percent
 on rest days and holidays. The law mandates a full day of rest weekly. However,
 there is no legal limit on the number of overtime hours an employer may require.
 Enforcement of workweek hours is managed through periodic inspections by the
 DOLE.
 Several NGO's seek to protect the rights of the country's over 5 million overseas
 workers. The Government uses financial sanctions and criminal charges against un-
 fair practices by Philippine recruiting agencies. Although the Philippine Overseas
 Employment Agency (POEA) has registered and supervised domestic recruiters'
 practices successfully, the Government largely is unable to ensure workers' protec-
 tions overseas. It seeks cooperation from receiving countries and proposes migrant
 worker rights conventions in international forums. However, problems remain. The
 Government raises the issue in bilateral contacts and otherwise provides assistance
 through its diplomatic missions.
 A comprehensive set of occupational safety and health standards exists in law. Al-
 though policy formulation and review of these standards are the responsibility of the
 DOLE, actual enforcement often is carried out by local authorities. DOLE officials
 acknowledge that its 260 inspectors nationwide are inadequate for the number of
 work sites needing visits. Statistics on actual Work related accidents and illnesses
 are incomplete, as incidents (especially in agriculture) are underreported. There
 
 
 1048
 were frequent press accounts of workers killed in the construction of high rise build-
 ings in urban Manila. Workers do not have a legally protected right to remove them-
 selves from dangerous work situations without jeopardy to continued employment.