PHILIPPINES
The Report on the Philippines, covering the period before the recent transition to democracy there, is substantially inferior to the previous year's Report. Although — with several notable exceptions — the 1985 Report touches on the more significant human rights trends, it goes to great lengths to understate or excuse government abuses and to cast doubt upon the reliability of reports of such abuses. Particularly disturbing, the Report repeatedly calls into question the integrity of Task Force Detainees of the Philippines (TFD), the leading human rights monitoring group in the Philippines.
The first attack is lodged in the Report's introduction:
The accuracy of statistics on human rights abuses in the Philippines which are collected only by the Government and [TFD], is highly questionable. The TFD is a politically active, antigovernment. Catholic church-related group which investigates and compiles statistics only on alleged government violations of human rights. TFD does not document atrocities and murders committed by the NPA [the communist insurgency], a policy which reinforces reports that TFD has significant links to leftist elements. Also, TFD ascribes responsibility to the Government for some killings for which the motivation is unclear but probably not political.
TFD in fact provides the most reliable information available about human rights abuses in the Philippines. Numerous independent monitors, including the Lawyers Committee for Human Rights, have repeatedly verified TFD's accounts of human rights violations.
82
As to TFD's practice of monitoring government abuses only, the Report should have noted that TFD has been operating for over a decade, and guerrilla abuses emerged as a problem only in the last year or so of the Marcos Administration. TFD officials have noted this in explaining why, up until now, they have monitored only government abuses.* They also have noted the extreme difficulty of gathering data about guerrilla abuses, which generally occur in remote rural areas. While we also believe it desirable that human rights monitors address guerrilla abuses when insurgencies are active in a country, the State Department's treatment of this issue in the 1985 Philippines Report is simply irresponsible, unfair and dangerous.
More generally, the Report repeatedly soft-peddles accounts of human rights violations by the government of Ferdinand Marcos, and seeks to imply that the government made genuine efforts to curb abuses when, in fact, the opposite was true. Describing violations by the notoriously abusive Civilian Home Defense Forces (CHDF), for example, the Report state that they "sometimes operate independently of direct government or military control." While the CHDF has indeed been wholly undisciplined, it operates under the command of the Philippine military. The Report also crédités former President Marcos with intentions of reform, stating: "President Marcos announced in late October that the CHDF would be overhauled to insure better screening and training...." The Report does not mention that, when opposition members of Parliament called for the dissolution of the CHDF in April 1985, President Marcos immediately attacked the proposal without registering any concern
* Shortly before Marcos lost power in February 1986, TFD decided that changed circumstances warranted its trying to monitor guerrilla abuses as well as those committed by the military. It is unclear whether this decision will be put into effect in view of the possibility of a cease-fire and negotiations between the guerrillas and the new administration.
83
about the need to improve CHDF training or recruitment. The same day that he spoke, his Defense Minister announced the formation of a committee to re-examine the CHDF program, but President Marcos gave no indication of support for this effort.
The Report similarly gives the Marcos government far more credit than it deserved for investigating human rights violations. Recounting cases in which government forces killed civilians in 1985, the Report repeatedly stresses government efforts to investigate and prosecute those responsible. In fact, however, as the Report later acknowledges, such efforts rarely led to conviction and punishment under the Marcos Administration.
The Report proceeds to describe supposed reforms within the military, implying improvement when no such implication is warranted. It notes, for example, that according to government reports 1,153 military personnel had been subjected to administrative disciplinary action for "abuse of authority" as of October. It does not state, as it should, that most of those cases involved such minor infractions as being drunk on duty.
The Report even seeks to justify the summary killing of "as many as 25 alleged criminals" in one month by "secret marshalls," plainclothesmen who rode public buses in a program to curb robberies and assaults in those vehicles and who had authority to shoot to kill suspects who refused to submit to arrest. The Report states: "As in previous years, the program was viewed positively by some Metro Manila residents." It then weakly concedes that "[i]n other quarters, however, it drew sharp criticism as a violation of due process."
Discussing disappearances, a serious and growing problem in the last years of the Marcos era, the Report misleadingly implies that most such cases involved short-term unacknowledged detention. After repeating the government's denial of responsibility for reported disappearances, the Report continues: "However, the Government as a frequent practice has held persons suspected of national security offenses incommunicado in order to complete interrogation before revealing their capture." In fact, in recent years both domestic and international human rights bodies documented a pervasive pattern of
84
disappearances, and found that persons who were not found within several days of their disappearance generally turned up dead if they were found at all. (The newly established Human Rights Commission of the Aquino Administration has stated that mass graves hold the corpses of hundreds of persons who disappeared during the Marcos era.)
One very serious omission is the Report's failure to even allude to the Marcos government's crackdown on human rights lawyers in 1985. Two lawyers affiliated with the Free Legal Assistance Group (FLAG), whose members represent people in human rights-related cases, were killed in 1985 (another FLAG lawyer was killed at the end of 1984), and five were arrested that year. Two lawyers affiliated with another human rights lawyers' group, MABINI, also were arrested in 1985. Numerous other human rights lawyers were threatened with death or arrest in the same period. The pervasive crackdown provoked an international outcry, including a protest to President Marcos from the President of the American Bar Association. It did not claim even a passing reference in the State Department's Report. The omission is as misleading as it is disturbing, for the Report explicitly takes up the issue of human rights monitoring in the Philippines, and observes simply that FLAG and MABINI "assist detainees in preparing defenses against charges brought against them" — implying that they functioned freely in 1985.
In the same section, the Report states without comment that the Defense Ministry "reported that it cooperates on human rights cases with...international organizations such as the International Committee of the Red Cross and Amnesty International." A Lawyers Committee delegation that visited the Philippines in January 1985 was unable, despite repeated requests, to meet with the Defense Minister or the Acting Chief of Staff of the Armed Forces.
The Report's discussion of habeas corpus also is misleading. It states that the writ "is generally available," but then acknowledges
85
that it remained suspended in national security cases and in certain regions. It continues:
Defendants in subversion and rebellion cases or their relatives frequently petition the Supreme Court for habeas corpus'. In some instances the Court has granted hearings and compelled the Government to present persons specified in petitions before it. In other cases, however, the Supreme Court has been slow to act on such petitions.
In fact, the Supreme Court under Marcos was extremely deferential to the President's excercise of emergency powers, including his suspension of habeas corpus and his use of preventive detention. It was willing to order that subjects of habeas petitions be produced when there was reason to believe they were being tortured, but consistently declined to inquire into the merits of their detention.
The most balanced section of the Report is its treatment of press freedom. That section accurately portrays both the extent and the limits of press freedom in 1985.
86
