 THE PHILIPPINES
 The Philippines has a republican form of government, headed by
 a popularly elected president and with a bicameral legislature
 consisting of an upper chamber (Senate) and a lower chamber
 (House of Representatives) and an independent judiciary.
 President Corazon C. Aquino was sworn into office following a
 nearly bloodless civilian-military popular uprising which
 forced former President Ferdinand Marcos to flee the country
 after the February 7, 1986, elections. The new Government
 immediately began to dismantle restrictions on human- rights
 and to restore full democratic institutions. A new
 Constitution was ratified in 1987. The Government has largely
 implemented the new Constitution's provisions on political,
 social, and civil rights. Congressional elections in 1987
 were followed by local elections in 1988.
 The Armed Forces of the Philippines (AFP), which expanded
 during the Marcos years as the Communist and Muslim
 insurgencies grew, have since remained around 150,000 active
 duty personnel in the Army, Navy, Coast Guard, Air Force, and
 Philippine Constabulary. Defense officials hope to recruit
 80,000 volunteers for the central government-recruited and
 trained Citizens Armed Forces Geographical Units (CAFGU's).
 The CAFGU's will replace the discredited Civilian Home Defense
 Forces (CHDF) and various unofficial armed anti-Communist
 groups and are expected to incorporate acceptable personnel
 from government-assisted anti-Communist groups in some areas.
 In addition, the Integrated National Police, whose Director
 General serves as the Chief of the Constabulary, has
 approximately 40,000. members.
 The Philippine economy, which has enjoyed a high rate of
 growth since President Aquino assumed office, expanded at a
 7.5 percent annual rate in the first three quarters of 1988.
 Internal reinvestment is accelerating, but more is needed,
 particularly from foreign sources, to sustain long-term
 growth. Inflation, which rose in the first months of 1988,
 peaked near 9 percent and has remained at single digit levels.
 Philippine foreign debt service took about 31 percent of export
 earnings in 1988. This heavy debt service burden would have
 been significantly greater without public and commercial debt
 reschedulings.
 There were signs of deterioration in the human rights situation
 in 1988, despite strong popular support for President Aquino's
 reform agenda and her frequently expressed commitment to the
 preservation of human rights. Political forces on both the
 far left and the far right continued efforts to destabilize
 the Government. Although there were no rightwing military
 coup attempts in 1988, rumors of plotting and coup attempts
 were common. A widespread Communist insurgency poses a
 long-term challenge to the Government. During 1988 the
 Communist Party of the Philippines (CPP) and its armed wing,
 the New People's Army (NPA), continued their campaigns of
 urban terrorism, rural insurrection, political agitation, and
 propaganda activities. The growth of anti-Communist citizens'
 groups, widely termed "vigilantes' and formed in reaction to
 the NPA, continued in many areas of the country. In step with
 this growth, the number of allegations of human rights abuses
 by some of these groups also increased. The Muslim
 secessionist movement remained largely quiescent as the
 Government sought tb implement a constitutional mandate
 requiring establishment of an autonomous region in Muslim
 areas of Mindanao.
 
 
 900
 THE PHILIPPINES
 The constitutionally mandated Commission on Human Rights (CHR)
 established branch offices in each region. The CHR
 investigated numerous reports of human rights violations and
 referred many to the court system for prosecution. However,
 due in part to the inefficiencies of the judicial system, few
 major human rights prosecutions were concluded successfully.
 Responding to concerns regarding human rights, President
 Aquino in December strongly reaffirmed the commitment of her
 Government to protect human rights and announced the formation
 of a presidential advisory committee, with members drawn from
 the Government, Congress, and private human rights groups,
 that will monitor the human rights situation and advise the
 President on measures the Government should take to improve
 respect forhuman rights. She also issued an order to the
 military and police to respect legal protections for detained
 persons more carefully, while Defense Secretary Ramos directed
 that military commanders be held responsible for violations by
 their subordinates.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 Political killings are frequent and widespread. The several
 insurgencies which have long afflicted the Philippines and
 local efforts to respond are the major cause of such killings.
 Communist rebels often assassinate government security forces
 and occasionally kill civilian government personnel,
 particularly those who resist Communist influence. NPA
 "sparrow units" claimed the assassination of more than 300
 persons nationwide during 1988. Police and military officials
 have expressed frustration over what they view as unjustified
 legal restraints which hinder counterinsurgency activities,
 and have lamented the absence of an effective judiciary.
 There is credible evidence that some members of the police and
 the military have resorted to extralegal killing to combat the
 insurgents and their perceived sympathizers. These actions
 are in violation of government policies. Some armed
 anti-Communist groups also ignore the law in attacking
 suspected insurgents and sympathizers.
 Killings, some of which may be politically motivated, also
 frequently occur as the result of local rivalries and
 grudges. Because assassinations are rarely prosecuted,
 private vendettas are often pursued, sometimes for generations.
 An ineffective judicial system and the easy availability of
 firearms have encouraged lethal solutions to private disputes.
 The constitutionally mandated Commission on Human Rights (CHR)
 is the official governmental body that accepts all complaints
 of human rights violations (against insurgent forces as well
 as the military). The CHR has been criticized by some human
 rights observers as an apologist for the Aquino Government and
 the military. The CHR publishes statistics based on formal
 complaints filed with it but does not compile them from other
 sources. It has a "quick reaction" team in Manila and branch
 offices in each region. When a complaint is filed, the CHR
 conducts an investigation, gathering evidence and testimony
 from the complainant and the accused.
 
 
</pre>
<pre>
 901
 THE PHILIPPINES
 The Department of National Defense (DND) compiles statistics
 on military, insurgent, and civilian casualties during clashes.
 Several private groups, of which the Task Force Detainees of
 the Philippines (TFD) is the best known, restrict their focus
 to allegations against government forces. The TFD, considered
 by many to have links to the CPP, collects information only on
 alleged government abuses. The TFD has been criticized for
 inflated figures and lack of corroborative evidence.
 The CHR received 362 formal complaints of political killings
 from January to October 1988. The CHR reported an additional
 83 cases of multiple killing. The TFD reported 242 summary
 executions by government forces and an additional 127 persons.
 slain in massacres (politically motivated killings of groups
 of individuals) from January to November 1988. The Armed
 Forces of the Philippines recorded an estimated 1,100
 civilians killed in insurgency-related incidents in 1988. In
 the absence of disinterested reporters, statistics on political
 killings in the Philippines should be taken as providing an
 order of magnitude rather than a reliable figure.
 The deaths of four human rights lawyers during 1988 attracted
 considerable attention; in at least two cases, involvement by
 government security personnel is alleged. These cases are:
 --Vicente A. Mirabueno was murdered in February in General
 Santos City, South Cotabato. While some Human Rights
 activists believe that the police were involved, the police
 concluded that the murder was more likely related to a
 business quarrel than to his human rights activism.
 --Ramos Cura of Angeles City, Luzon, was murdered in June.
 Eyewitnesses could not identify the gunmen. Cura was the
 attorney for detained Communist leader Rodolfo Salas.
 --Alfonso A. Surigao of Cebu City, Cebu, was murdered in
 June. The alleged gunman was apprehended and charged less
 than a month after the killing. A military intelligence
 officer reportedly linked to the gunman was relieved of duty.
 Jurisdiction in the case of the military officer was
 transferred by the Government to a civilian court which
 subsequently dropped charges.
 --Emmanuel Mendoza of Manila was killed in July. Investigators
 identified and arrested two policemen as suspects who were
 subsequently charged in civilian courts. (Mendoza was an
 associate of a university president who survived an ambush in
 which three of his bodyguards were killed. Five policemen
 charged in this assassination attempt are currently being
 tried in civilian courts.)
 During 1988 three non-Communist union leaders were reportedly
 killed by the NPA: the local leader of the Confederation of
 Filipino Workers in Bataan; an official of the Trade Union
 Congress of the Philippines (TUCP); and an official of the
 National Federation of Sugar Workers (NFSW) in Negros. The
 NFSW is affiliated with the leftist union Kilusang Mayo Uno
 (KMU); however, the assassinated official, Jun Tanpinco, had
 resigned from the CPP and criticized its violence and
 extortion. Another TUCP official was murdered in Leyte in a
 killing ascribed to union rivalry.
 President Aquino has ordered the AFP to disband the armed
 civilian volunteer organizations (CVO's) that have sprung up
 in recent years, often under the sponsorship of local military
 
 
 902
 THE PHILIPPINES
 commanders and business groups. These groups, probably
 numbering several hundred and operating in most insurgency-
 affected areas, range from neighborhood watch organizations to
 quasi-religious cults.
 Some armed civilian anti-Communist groups have been implicated
 in a number of political killings as well as in intimidation
 and threatening of opponents. In the first 6 months of 1988,
 -14 of the political killing cases brought to the CHR involved
 persons from such groups. In the first 9 months of the year,
 93 cases brought to the CHR involved CHDF members. The
 confessed killer of an American priest in South Cotabato
 belonged to a CHDF, although it is unclear whether the killing
 arose from a personal grudge or was politically motivated. At
 the end of 1988, the trial in this incident was continuing.
 Members of existing CVO's, after screening and military
 training, may be incorporated into the new CAFGU units, under
 provincial government control and with professional military
 leadership and military discipline. Members of the Marcos-era
 CHDF, which is being phased out under a constitutional mandate,
 may also join the CAFGU's if they meet entry requirements.
 Unarmed CVO's are encouraged. Implementation of government
 guidelines for CVO operations is reported to be uneven.
 During 1988 only one case of politically motivated killing
 resulted in convictions and sentences. In December, 6 persons
 were sentenced to prison terms of 9 to 20 years for the murder
 of a civilian during an antigovernment rally in July 1986.
 Several trials are ongoing. The practice of scheduling
 hearings only at monthly intervals has drawn out the
 proceedings in several well-known trials. In the Aquino-
 Galman trial, relating to the murder of former Senator Benigno
 Aquino, the prosecution, after nearly 2 years, expected to
 finish its presentation of evidence by the end of 1988 but did
 not succeed in doing so. The Citizens' Mendiola Commission,
 created by President Aquino to investigate the 1987 Mendiola
 incident, condemned as unjustified the use of force by
 government forces against marchers; however, a damage suit
 against the Government was dismissed on the grounds of
 government immunity from suit. In the 1987 Lupao incident
 involving the killing of 17 persons by Philippine Army
 soldiers, the CHR investigated and recommended that the Judge
 Advocate General's (JAG) office file murder charges against
 several officers and men. The JAG is investigating the case.
 Concerning the 1985 Escalante shooting incident, the court has
 found that the accused soldiers did conspire to murder
 protesters and has revoked bail during the balance of the
 trial, which continues.
 Prosecutions of alleged human rights abuses are often stymied
 by witnesses unwilling to testify because they fear reprisals.
 The CHR initiated a witness protection program to encourage
 testimony. Legislation to protect witnesses is pending in the
 House. In at least one case involving displaced persons
 charged with subversion, the trial venue was changed both to
 protect the witnesses and to ensure a fair hearing.
 b. Disappearance
 The Government has strongly condemned politically motivated
 disappearances. Despite allegations to the contrary,
 no conclusive evidence links government officials with
 involvement in politically motivated disappearances. However,
 Philippine law permits holding suspects up to 36 hours without
 
 
 903
 THE PHILIPPINES
 charge, and there have been cases of citizens who have been
 taken into custody by government authorities and held
 incommunicado for several days before being released or
 charged.
 Between January and October 1988, the CHR received 84
 complaints concerning missing persons. The TFD claimed there
 were 37 missing persons arrested by government authorities and
 73 missing without report of arrest in the first 10 months of
 1988. The TFD believes that in many cases the missing persons
 have been killed and that some militaryofficers or anti-
 Communist groups were responsible. In those cases reported by
 the CHR, complainants attributed only a very small percentage
 of the disappearances to Government forces. However,
 according to a Philippine human rights group known as FIND,
 which began tracking alleged abductions 13 years ago, hundreds
 of persons have been abducted in recent years. Some have been
 released, while others have been reportedly killed or
 discovered in Government detention, and the whereabouts of 212
 persons, who disappeared in past years, remain unknown.
 In response to reports of disappearances, President Aquino in
 December designated city and provincial state prosecutors as
 "human rights coordinators" who are to assist families ir
 searching for missing relatives in military camps and
 detention centers.
 Several leftwing groups, including the KMU and the student
 activist group Kadena, reported harassment and threats. One
 KMU staff member, Benjamin Clutario, disappeared in August.
 An increase in alleged disappearances took place in the second
 half of the year, primarily involving middle- and low-level
 members of activist and human rights groups. While human
 rights groups pointed to the military, at least some of the
 disappearances were linked to an internal CPP purge, which
 included suinmary executions, of party members after a series
 of arrests of high-level members of the party in the spring.
 Although human rights groups charged that a "mass grave"
 discovered in Manila in April contained the bodies of 22
 abducted leftists, a police investigation concluded that all
 had been previously identified and autopsied. Most were
 victims of street violence or had died of tuberculosis during
 1987.
 The NPA is also linked to disappearances. Throughout the
 year, there were reports of "mass graves" of victims of NPA
 executions in different parts of the Philippines. In July in
 Quezon Province, former rebels identified a grave containing
 the bodies of 20 missing civilians they say were abducted by
 the NPA. In Leyte Province another such burial site yielded
 18 bodies. The military estimates that the same area in Leyte
 has a total of 400 missing persons believed kidnaped or killed
 by the NPA, including local officials, suspected informers,
 farmers, and other civilians not directly involved in the
 conflict.
 Hostage-taking by rebels and armed criminal gangs for ransom
 or publicity is common. In the first 6 months of 1988, the
 Philippine Constabulary (PC) reported that NPA rebels kidnaped
 a total of 33 persons, including a number of candidates for
 local office in the January elections. The rebels also
 allegedly held hostage 50 school children after a gun battle
 with government troops in August. Nineteen Communist rebels
 were charged with kidnaping 5 military officers for 75 days in
 
 
 904
 THE PHILIPPINES
 Quezon Province. In September Communist rebels again kidnaped
 soldiers not engaged in combat operations in the same region.
 In August an American citizen and his Philippine-born wife
 were held hostage by armed Muslim elements in Mindanao. They
 were released unharmed after several weeks.
 In September a case involving the disappearance of a newsman
 ended in acquittal of two members of a criminal syndicate on
 the grounds that improper methods had been used to obtain the
 confession and because the victim's body could not be found.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 The Constitution prohibits torture and makes evidence obtained
 thereby inadmissible in court. It also directs that laws be
 passed providing for punishment of torturers, compensation for
 victims, and rehabilitation of victims and their families.
 Guidelines issued by the CHR in May direct all law enforcement
 agencies and military elements to avoid unnecessary force in
 investigation, arrest, detention, interrogation, and other
 related activities.
 The CHR received 25 complaints concerning torture from January
 to October 1988. TFD claimed to have documented 636 cases of
 torture in the first 10 months of 1988. For a finding of
 torture, TFD requires that a person must have been arrested
 and charged with a crime and that some coercion, such as
 threats of violence, was used by government investigators. In
 December Amnesty International (AI) sent a letter to President
 Aquino alleging that torture appears to be reemerging in the
 Philippines as a common practice.
 In March military officials allegedly detained and tortured
 two members of the student activist group Kadena for several
 days, one of whom allegedly died from the injuries he
 sustained. The CHR is assisting the survivor to prepare
 evidence to file charges. In July leftist church worker Noel
 Villalba claimed that his military interrogators used water
 torture to obtain from him a confession that he used his
 church position in Hong Kong to channel foreign funds to the
 Communist Party of the Philippines. The Government admitted
 that the military held Villalba without charge longer than
 permitted by law, and he was released on bail soon after
 subversion charges were filed. Charges, instigated by
 Villalba, were filed in military courts against his alleged
 torturers; Villalba subsequently dropped these charges and
 refused to cooperate with an investigation by the CHR of his
 widely publicized charges. Villalba failed to appear at his
 hearing in December, and a warrant was issued for his arrest.
 The CHR ordered the filing of criminal charges against the
 entire police force of Ballesteros, Cagayan Province, for
 manhandling a detainee during 3 days of interrogation in
 June. The case had not gone to trial by year's end. The
 Government is paying for the victim's rehabilitation.
 There also have been reports of torture by the NPA. For
 example, in northern Luzon, NPA rebels reportedly brutally
 tortured and slowly beat to death two kidnaped PC members.
 Although physical punishment is prohibited by law in the
 Philippine penal system, it occurs in jails and prisons.
 Prison conditions are harsh and charges of brutality
 
 
 905
 THE PHILIPPINES
 commonplace. For example, in the 100-year old Manila City
 Jail, up to 150 people share a large cell in a prison which
 lacks medical facilities, adequate plumbing, and garbage
 collection. In one case, prison conditions were reportedly so
 severe that the CHR investigated and recommended remedial
 actions. A group of 26 alleged NPA sympathizers from Leyte
 Province was held in a single cell in Cebu with a cement
 floor, one toilet, and no beds. Several prisoners were
 diagnosed as having contagious pulmonary diseases but were not
 treated. Persons in police custody are reportedly beaten.
 In December President Aquino formed a task force to review
 prison conditions and make recommendations for improvements.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 The Constitution permits arrest warrants to be issued only
 after a judge determines probable cause. Philippine law
 prohibits holding suspects for more than 36 hours without a
 finding of probable cause that the person committed a crime.
 The Constitution also prohibits holding prisoners
 incommunicado or in secret places of detention. Detainees
 have the right to a judicial determination of the legality of
 detention. The Constitution further provides that bail shall
 be available to persons charged with crimes punishable by any
 penalty less severe than a life sentence. In practice, if a
 detainee challenges the legality of the detention (exercising
 his right of habeas corpus) and is released on bail, the
 arrest is considered legal and the habeas corpus proceedings
 are moot.
 In May the CHR published guidelines on visitation rights of
 detainees and on the conduct of investigation, arrest,
 detention, and related operations by government authorities.
 The guidelines direct all law enforcement agencies, commanders,
 and elements of all units under their command to avoid
 unnecessary force and to follow the rules of court and national
 police commission policies on arrests and investigations.
 Nonetheless, the CHR, the TFD, and other human rights groups
 continue to receive complaints of abuses of these rights.
 With the exception of suspected antigovernment rebels, who are
 often detained without charge and interrogated for several
 days, arrested persons are usually charged promptly after
 apprehension, within a day of arrest. The evidentiary
 requirements needed for a formal arrest are often not fully
 honored by military personnel in detaining suspected Communist
 insurgents. There is concern that the requirement of obtaining
 a warrant risks breaching the security of a planned arrest of
 suspected Communist insurgents. During the year, there were
 several raids on Communist safe houses in. Manila, resulting in
 the arrest of important CPP/NPA leaders. These detainees were
 charged and allowed visitation and lawyers but were not
 permitted bail for security reasons.
 The military has filed charges against suspected NPA
 terrorists in advance, so that charges already exist in the
 event of their arrest. The PC reported 757 human rights
 violations committed by Communist insurgents from January to
 July. As of October, 280 cases against NPA members for
 murder, kidnaping, physical injuries, robbery, extortion,
 grave threats, and arson had been filed by the PC.
 Philippine authorities rarely use internal or foreign exile
 for political purposes. However, former President Marcos and
 some of his associates have had their passports revoked and
 
 
 906
 THE PHILIPPINES
 have been discouraged from returning to the Philippines. The
 Government suspects these persons of conspiring with
 opposition elements within the Philippines to destabilize the
 country.
 With regard to forced or compulsory labor, see Section 6.c.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The Constitution ratified in 1987 established an independent
 judiciary and guarantees that those accused of crimes shall be
 informed of charges against them and have the right to counsel.
 Trials in the Philippines are public. Defendants enjoy the
 presumption of innocence and the right to confront witnesses
 against them, to present evidence, and to appeal their
 convictions.
 The right of defendants to a lawyer is well recognized in law
 and is generally carried out in practice in Metropolitan
 Manila. It is less frequently accorded in the provinces,
 where in many cases no lawyers are available. Many defendants
 are released because of a lack of legal representation,
 especially those charged with minor crimes. Those charged
 with a capital offense are usually held until a lawyer becomes
 available.
 Trials are usually noncontinuous and often last for years.
 The percentage of individuals charged with criminal offenses
 who are actually convicted is very low. This is especially
 true of those who have expert legal representation. Efforts
 by the Aquino Government to reform the Philippine judiciary
 and to remove incompetent or corrupt judges have, at least in
 the short run, increased the already large number of backlogged
 cases and aggravated the chronic delays.
 An example of the lengthy trial process is the trial of the
 defendants in the 1983 slaying of opposition leader Benigno
 Aquino. A new trial began in February 1987, and the
 prosecution had not completed presentation of the case by
 year's end. Trial sessions are held at intervals of several
 weeks or longer.
 The Government is attempting to accelerate the replacement of
 judges and the adjudication of cases. A constitutionally
 mandated Judicial Appointments Commission screens applicants
 and makes recommendations for-appointments to the President.
 In September President Aquino pledged to fill all vacancies in
 the judiciary, to improve the Administration of Justice in the
 country, and to create nearly 2,000 new judicial positions.
 President Aquino has also ordered speedy prosecution and
 disposition of graft and human rights cases against government
 officials, including military personnel.
 Supreme Court Chief Justice Fernan, sworn into office in July,
 vowed to impose administrative sanctions on ineffective judges
 and to discourage dilatory tactics that "affect the integrity
 of the judiciary and respect for the rule of law." He also
 announced a major initiative in the area of judicial reform.
 In December selected courts nationwide began conducting trials
 on a daily basis with the objective of rendering decisions in
 a maximum of 3 months.
 Human rights groups continue to criticize the practice of
 trying military personnel, police, and firefighters in military
 courts under Presidential Decree 1850. Although the legality
 
 
 907
 THE PHILIPPINES
 of the decree was upheld by the Supreme Court in 1988, in
 practice President Aquino has waived military jurisdiction in
 cases involving human rights abuses. A bill filed in Congress
 could remove nonservice-related offenses from court-martial
 jurisdiction.
 Prisoners who now claim to be long-term political prisoners
 are those remaining from the Marcos administration who were
 charged with serious criminal activity. Rodolfo Salas, former
 head of the CPP, was arrested in 1986 and remains in custody
 although not convicted. DND does not recommend bail for high-
 ranking members of the CPP/NPA on the grounds that release
 would be a clear and present danger to the community and bail
 would not be adequate to ensure their appearance at trial.
 The CHR received four complaints of political prisoners from
 January to October 1988. The TFD claims 2,310 persons were
 arrested or detained for political reasons in the first 10
 months of 1988. Most of these were persons detained for
 -several hours before being released following mass arrests
 accompanying army sweeps of areas harboring suspected rebels.
 A TFD roster of political prisoners detained as of September
 1988 indicated 50 persons held on subversion or rebellion
 charges filed in 1988, another 50 held on similiar charges
 filed in 1987, and the balance on criminal charges, such as
 murder and attempted homicide.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Under the Constitution, search warrants may be issued by a
 judge on a finding of probable cause. Restrictions on search
 and seizure are generally observed. The Government does not
 interfere in family life or the right of parents to raise
 their children. The Government does not interfere with free
 personal use of the mails or other public communication
 systems, except upon issuance of a court order during the
 course of an investigation.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Restrictions on freeddm of expression were completely lifted
 following the revolution of February 1986. The daily press
 which has emerged is lively, unfettered, and highly
 competitive. There are some'25 daily newspapers in Manila and
 many more in the provinces. In all, about 1.4 million
 newspapers are sold each day around the country. Newspapers
 cover the political spectrum and show no hesitation to
 criticize the Government. Publications of the CPP are illegal
 because of their advocacy of armed rebellion but circulate
 clandestinely. Although the Government has sequestered assets
 of some media organizations owned or controlled by relatives
 or close associates of former President Marcos, there is no
 evidence of intent to control opinion, as opposed to monetary
 assets, in those cases.
 Human rights groups have registered few complaints about
 harassment of journalists. Such harassment does not appear
 frequent or systematic. Journalists have been able to meet
 and interview those in rebellion against the Government,
 including military mutineers and Communists. The Government
 threatened, but did not impose, new restrictions on foreign
 media after a foreign television crew allegedly paid the NPA
 
 
 908
 THE PHILIPPINES
 for permission to film a Communist ambush in which several
 Filipino soldiers were killed.
 Radio and television are important news sources in the
 Philippines. There are 312 licensed radio stations. An
 estimated 78 percent of all households have radios. Four
 million television sets bring programming to 40 percent of
 Philippine families. In Metro Manila, approximately 90 percent
 of the households have radio or television sets. Most
 provincial television stations are affiliates of the five
 Manila channels. Like the press, radio and television
 stations report views across a wide political spectrum.
 Radio station owners and managers have complained about NPA
 efforts to intimidate them into broadcasting Communist
 propaganda. Several radio facilities and transmitters have
 been damaged by insurgents. In some areas, military personnel
 are stationed at transmitter sites to protect them. Stations
 that have broadcast material provided by the NPA have been
 warned informally by local military authorities. Nonetheless,
 during 1988 no newspapers, radio stations, or television
 stations were closed by the Government for political reasons.
 There is no censorship of publications from abroad. Foreign
 journalists are able to report freely and generally move about
 the country, even in areas under rebel control. Major foreign
 newspapers and television networks have bureaus in Manila.
 Critics have charged that the Movie and Television
 Classification Board (MTCB), whose mandate is to monitor films
 and television programs for pornographic content, has
 occasionally stifled political expression. However, no
 complaints occurred in 1988. The mandate of the MTCB is being
 questioned by many as a violation of free speech and freedom
 of artistic expression, but it is likely to remain unchanged
 because of strong public support for its role in controlling
 distribution of pornography.
 Academic freedom is respected in theory and practice.
 Approximately 1.5 million students are enrolled in the nation's
 78 state colleges and universities and 1,000 private schools
 and colleges. There is no government censorship of subject
 matter in classes, university publications, or conferences.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Permits from local authorities are legally required for
 outdoor demonstrations in public places and are routinely
 issued. Nevertheless, rallies and marches are often held
 without permits. Except in the most provocative circumstances,
 the Government has not prevented unauthorized demonstrations.
 Protest activities are generally peaceful. Increasingly,
 rallies without permits held by groups linked to the outlawed
 CPP have ended in a number of arrests for illegal assembly,
 public disturbance, or sedition. Typically, those arrested
 are quickly released and not brought to trial. An exception
 to the generally peaceful assemblies was the violent dispersal
 of about 800 demonstrators near the U.S. Embassy in April.
 Police claim protest leaders did not have a parade permit and
 attempted to storm the Embassy. The protest's five leaders
 were charged with illegal assembly and public disturbance.
 A broad range of private, professional, religious, social,
 charitable, and political organizations flourishes in the
 
 
 909
 THE PHILIPPINES
 Philippines. Countless popular and civic organizations exist
 and meet regularly. Organizations are permitted to maintain
 relations or affiliate with recognized international bodies in
 their fields. The Communist Party of the Philippines is
 outlawed because it advocates the violent overthrow of the
 Government, but nonviolent Marxist parties are legal.
 For a discussion of freedom of association as it applies to
 labor unions, see Section 6.a.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 There is no state religion. Freedom of religion is fully
 respected, and no official discrimination is practiced against
 any religious group or its members. Although over 80 percent
 of the population is Roman Catholic, the country's sizable
 Muslim minority, Protestant churches, indigenous Iglesia Ni
 Kristo, Aglipayan Church, and other sects all enjoy full
 religious freedom. Many minority cultural groups follow
 animistic religious beliefs. Foreign clergymen and
 missionaries of many faiths practice their profession freely.
 Religious minorities are represented among the leadership and
 rank and file of broad-based political parties. Government
 service is open to all on a nondiscriminatory basis, and there
 are senior civil and military officials who belong to minority
 religious and cultural groups.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Filipinos enjoy unhampered freedom to change their place of
 residence and employment within the Philippines. They
 regularly travel and work abroad. The right to emigrate is
 unrestricted and citizens have the right to return.
 There have been exceptions, in particular two cases which the
 Government said affected national security. In 1988 the
 Government revoked the passport of Jose Maria Sison, the
 founder of the outlawed Communist Party of the Philippines,
 while he was resident in Europe where he was reportedly
 engaged in fundraising for the Communist movement. As noted
 in Section l.d., the Government has discouraged the return to
 the Philippines of former President Marcos.
 Although the Philippine Government does not accept refugees
 for internal resettlement, it does provide first asylum for
 4,300 Indochinese boat people in Palawan and permits the
 United Nations to operate a major processing center for 16,000
 refugees in Bataan Province. Approximately 25,000 refugees
 passed through these facilities in 1988.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 The Constitution ratified in 1987 returned the Philippines to
 the presidential system of government similar to that in
 existence from 1935 to 1972. The Constitution limits
 presidential power, establishes a strong bicameral legislature
 and an independent judiciary, and encourages stronger local
 governments to check executive branch authority. Presidential
 pgwer to declare martial law is curtailed. The Constitution
 calls for the creation of autonomous regions by 1989 for
 Muslims in the southern Philippines and for cultural minority
 groups in mountainous regions of northern Luzon.
 
 
 910
 THE PHILIPPINES
 The Philippines has a multiparty system with secret ballots
 cast in scheduled elections. In the House of Representatives,
 a single progovernment party enjoys a 75 percent majority.
 The 23-member Senate is more evenly divided between 3
 progovernment parties and progovernment independents in
 political competition with one another; there is one opposition
 member. Women and minority groups are represented in Congress.
 Debate is lively and there is opportunity to criticize, amend,
 ,and even occasionally defeat government-sponsored legislation.
 Democratic opposition to the Government is widely tolerated.
 Filipinos are free to organize political parties, so long as
 they do not seek to overthrow the Government by force.
 Most provincial and city officials support the Government. In
 January 1988, elections were held for over 15,000 provincial
 and municipal positions. Over 150,000 persons competed for
 these offices. While there were incidents of violence and
 charges of fraud, the elections were generally fair and
 efficient. In some remote areas the NPA and armed supporters
 of other candidates intimidated voters. Local elections to
 replace barangay or village level officials, twice postponed,
 are now rescheduled for March 1989. Presidential,
 congressional, and local elections are next scheduled for 1992.
 The voting age begins at 18. There are few restrictions on
 suffrage. Women enjoy full voting rights and play an active
 role in political life from the highest to lowest offices.
 President Aquino is only one of a large number of women in
 government.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 Representatives of international human rights groups are free
 to travel in the Philippines and investigate alleged abuses.
 Resident delegates of the International Committee of the Red
 Cross travel freely to monitor prison conditions and assist
 persons displaced by conflict.' The United Nations Center for
 Human Rights cosponsored with the CHR a conference in Manila
 on human rights during Human Rights Week in December.
 The CHR responds to international inquiries regarding specific
 cases and will initiate investigations based on third party
 requests. Government representatives are willing to discuss
 human rights problems with outside governmental or non-
 governmental organizations. Representatives of AI, the
 Lawyers Committee for Human Rights, Asia Watch, and The
 American Bar Association visited the Philippines in 1988 to
 discuss human rights issues with government officials. AI and
 the Lawyers Committee for Human Rights issued separate reports
 critical of human rights violations committed by so-called
 vigilante groups. As noted in Section l.c., AI alleged
 continuing incidents of torture. These reports were publicized
 in the local press. President Aquino and other senior
 government officials have met with representatives of AI and
 other groups and reiterated to them the Government's strong
 commitment to human rights.
 The Task Force Detainees (TFD) and several international
 nongovernmental organizations filed a case alleging a
 Government policy of systematic human rights violations with
 the United Nations Subcommission on the Prevention of
 Discrimination and Protection of Minorities in 1987. The
 chairwoman of the CHR presented the Government's defense, and
 
 
 911
 THE PHILIPPINES
 in September, based on the Subcommission's recommendation, the
 United Nations removed the Philippines from the list of
 countries with a pattern of human rights violations. CHR
 representatives regularly participate in factfinding missions
 and jail visits with nongovernmental organizations and other
 governmental agencies.
 From January to October, the CHR received 702 complaints of
 human rights violations and conducted investigations on nearly
 half of those complaints. If the CHR determines that a prima
 facie case has been made, it refers the case to the appropriate
 agency--Judge Advocate General's office, National Police .
 Commission, Civil Court, or Fiscal's office. From January to
 June, the CHR issued 178 referrals. The CHR continues to
 monitor a case after it is referred to another agency. During
 the first 6 months of the year, the CHR monitored 218 cases.
 The CHR has completed the organization of 12 regional offices
 covering the entire country. While reportedly short of
 personnel, each office is staffed with attorneys and
 investigators, and the entire CHR staff numbers 600.
 A number of nongovernmental organizations (NGO's) are active
 in the human rights field. These groups are generally
 unhindered in conducting investigations around the country and
 are routinely able to obtain safe-conduct letters from the
 Department of National Defense. Local military and civilian
 officials have reportedly been uncooperative in some instances.
 According to the Government, investigations conducted by NGO's
 frequently produce insufficient evidence to prosecute
 successfully cases against alleged perpetrators of human
 rights violations. The CHR states that only a small
 percentage of cases referred by NGO's for investigation have
 sufficient evidence for a prima facie case.
 As noted in Section l.a., the best known human rights NGO is
 the TFD. The Association of Major Religious Superiors in the
 Philippines established it in 1974. Headquartered in Manila
 with branch offices throughout the Philippines, the TFD
 collects information on alleged human rights violations and
 publishes statistics on a quarterly basis. It is an outspoken
 critic of the Government's response to human rights violations.
 Several TFD workers are among those who reportedly disappeared
 in 1988. One TFD worker alleged before a Senate hearing that
 he was tortured for 50 hours by military intelligence in
 Baguio.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 Women enjoy most of the same legal rights as men. However,
 Philippine law and custom continue to discriminate against
 women and include a limitation on their right to buy and sell
 property. Women are prominent in Philippine society and well
 represented in business and professions, such as law, medicine,
 education, and journalism. Women reportedly hold one-fourth
 of executive and management positions. Nonetheless,
 women, like many men, are often employed in low-wage jobs
 requiring manual dexterity and little decisionmaking or use of
 technology, and their wages are estimated to be 37 percent of
 those for men.
 An estimated 10 percent of Filipinos, including President
 Aquino, have some Chinese ancestry. Philippine ethnic Chinese
 have become increasingly integrated into the population as a
 
 
 912
 THE PHILIPPINES
 whole, and there is no official discrimination against them
 today.
 At roughly 5 percent of the population, Muslim Filipinos on
 the southern island of Mindanao and the adjacent Sulu
 Archipelago are the country's single largest national minority.
 The historic neglect of the southern Philippines by successive
 governments has made this region one of the country's most
 -economically disadvantaged.
 The Philippine Government does not officially discriminate
 against Muslim Filipinos in providing access to jobs or social
 services. Informal discrimination in hiring and promoting,
 however, exists in both the military and the civil service.
 Muslims have been elected to public office at the local and
 national levels and are also employed in various responsible
 positions in Government offices at the local level. The reason
 there are proportionately fewer Muslims at the highest levels
 of the national Government than there are in the population as
 a whole is a result not of contemporary discrimination against
 Muslims but rather of the historic neglect of the southern
 Philippines.
 Muslims have preferred to educate their children in Islamic
 schools in an effort to preserve traditions. In addition to
 perpetuating differences based on religion, this practice
 among Muslim Filipinos often has had the unintended effect of
 depriving them of the skills required to advance into the
 professional ranks of the civil service. The resulting
 scarcity of Muslims in the higher levels of the national
 Government has meant that over the years there have been few
 advocates for the interests of Mindanao--and fewer still for
 the interests of Muslim Filipinos--at the cabinet or sub-
 cabinet level'. The Aquino Government has begun to correct
 Manila's historic neglect of Mindanao, but it will be some
 time before Christians and Muslims in economically neglected
 Mindanao catch up with the country's more developed northern
 islands.
 President Aquino is committed to a peaceful resolution of the
 long-simmering Muslim rebellion. As part of this process, she
 has established two consultative commissions to draft proposals
 to grant greater autonomy to Muslim Mindanao and the
 Cordillera area of Northern Luzon. The Constitution gives the
 Congress until January 1989 to pass legislation to establish
 these autonomous regions.
 There are also several million Filipinos who belong to other
 non-Christian and non-Muslim groups which range in size from a
 few thousand to several hundred thousand. Although most
 numerous in the Cordillera of Northern Luzon and in Mindanao,
 these cultural minority groups are found in almost every
 province. Modernization has reduced the isolation in which
 these groups have traditionally lived. The ancestral lands of
 many have been damaged by logging and mining companies, and
 lowland farmers have expanded into their areas of traditional
 habitation. They have also not always been afforded equal
 legal protection. The Government's office of cultural
 minorities is responsible for protecting the interests of
 these groups. Representatives of tribal groups have been
 elected to the Congress and local government offices.
 
 
 913
 THE PHILIPPINES
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 The right of workers, including public employees, to join
 trade unions is assured by the Constitution and freely
 practiced without government interference. While reliable
 figures on union membership are not available, about 10
 percent of the nation's employed work force of approximately
 21 million workers are organized into over 3,000 trade unions,
 not including the 2.7 million workers who are members of the
 National Congress of Farmers Organization. Most .of the trade
 unions belong to relatively small federations which for the
 most part are members of two larger trade union groupings, the
 largest of which is the Trade Union Congress of the Philippines
 (TUCP), an affiliate of the International Confederation of
 Free Trade Unions (ICFTU). Politically, the TUCP takes a
 moderate, prodemocratic, and pro-Aquino stance.
 The second largest trade union grouping is the leftist KMU
 (Kilusang Mayo Uno, or May First Movement) which is heavily
 infiltrated and influenced by the CPP. Three much smaller
 trade union groupings are affiliates of the Communist-
 dominated World Federation of Trade Unions (WFTU). The best
 known of these is TUPAS (Trade Unions of the Philippines and
 Allied Services), founded by Bonifacio Tupaz and, until
 recently, dominated by him and members of his family.
 The KMU, the WFTU affiliates, the Federation of Free Workers
 (FWW) and seven or eight independent trade unions are members
 of the Labor Advisory Consultative Council (LACC) which
 together with the TUCP constitutes the worker group when the
 Government has tripartite conferences of workers, employers,
 and government. Some union leaders from this group serve as
 paid, full-time worker representatives in several government
 agencies, including social security, housing, and maritime
 regulation. Several union leaders are members of the national
 legislature. Union officials from the LACC and the TUCP serve
 on the worker delegation to the International Labor
 Organization (ILO).
 Strikes are legal, including in export processing zones,
 (EPZ's), and they take place frequently, particularly on the
 part of the leftist-dominated unions. Industrial relations
 disputes in 1988 through November resulted in over 1.4 million
 man-days lost in 256 strikes. The Aquino Administration
 pursued legal efforts to resolve disputes and rejected calls
 for "no-strike laws" despite the disincentive that strikes
 pose to needed investment. On the local level, there have
 been several cases of violence provoked by unions or
 management. Sometimes the police or military have been called
 in to break up illegal strike barricades, and on several
 occasions their attempts to enforce the law have resulted in
 violent clashes with strikers. The Department of Labor and
 Employment (DOLE) has had modest success in averting strikes
 by encouraging labor-management cooperation and by expanding
 the mediation and conciliation service provided by the
 National Conciliation and Mediation Board (NMCB) established
 by President Aquino under Presidential Decree No. 126.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 Labor's right to organize and bargain collectively is provided
 for in law and strongly supported by President Aquino. During
 the first 20 months she was in office, the number of collective
 
 
 914
 THE PHILIPPINES
 bargaining agreements in force increased from 2,029 to 3,112.
 In the same period of time, the number of registered unions
 increased by about 20 percent.
 It is an unfair labor practice to dismiss a union official or
 a worker who is trying to organize a union. Nevertheless,
 employers sometimes attempt to intimidate workers by threats
 of firing or closure. There is a history of industrial
 relations violence in the Philippines which worsened as a
 consequence of the insurgency and counterinsurgency. Unionists
 have been threatened, beaten, and killed. The CPP/NPA, rival
 unionists, and hired gunmen have all been implicated in such
 violence, as have civilian defense groups and rightwing
 elements of the military, whose involvement in such violence
 has been sharply condemned by the Government. The ILO's
 Committee on Freedom of Association, at its November 1988
 meeting, considered "serious allegations," made by the
 International Union of Food and Allied Workers' Associations
 on behalf of the KMU-affiliated National Federation of Sugar
 Workers, of military or paramilitary repression of trade union
 activity in Negros Occidental Province. The allegations
 included reports of violent murders, woundings, arbitrary
 arrests and detentions, and destruction or damage to rural
 workers' houses and property from 1987 to mid-1988. The
 Philippine Government's response to the Committee described
 the machinery in place to investigate alleged human rights
 violaLtons but did not respond to all the allegations. The
 Committee considers the case still open and will reexamine it
 when the Government supplies further information. AI reported
 that more than 100 union members, organizers, and political
 workers with apparent links to the left had been killed in the
 last year. There were no completed prosecutions in 1988 of
 those accus.ed of violence against union officials or members.
 The DOLE, through the NLRC, has a quasi-judicial system of
 hearing and adjudicating workers' claims. it is usually slow,
 but no slower than other elements of the courts and the
 bureaucracy. With DOLE Secretary Drilon's emphasis on
 mediation and conciliation, the NMCB has helped reduce the
 high number of illegal work stoppages. The Secretary has said
 he prefers this method and other voluntary arbitration schemes
 to a "strike ban," which he regards as unjust and unnecessary.
 Labor legislation is applied uniformly throughout the country,
 including in the export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Compulsory or Forced Labor
 The Government prohibits forced labor, and there are no reports
 of it being practiced.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 The Constitution contains prohibitions against employment of
 children below age 15, except under the sole responsibility of
 parents or guardians and then only if the work does not
 interfere with schooling. It allows employment for those
 between the ages of 15 and 18 for such hours and periods of
 the day as are determined by the Secretary of Labor to be
 appropriate, but provides that in no case may persons under 18
 years of age be employed in an undertaking which the Secretry
 of Labor has determined is hazardous or deleterious in nature.
 The most serious violations of child labor laws occur in
 piecework or contracting out of embroidery and other garment-
 
 
 915
 THE PHILIPPINES
 related production. The Aquino Administration has made a
 sustained effort to investigate and reduce violations of child
 labor laws outside of the agricultural sector. However, there
 have been few successful prosecutions of violators of the law
 and little observable success in reducing the severity of the
 problem.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 The minimum wage in nonagricultural enterprises is $3.33 per
 day. The agribusiness minimum is $2.81 per day. Despite the
 minimum wage laws, substantial numbers of workers (mostly
 laborers, janitors, messengers, drivers, and clerk-typists)
 earn less than the law stipulates. The average wage of
 workers in large cities is close to the minimum wage, and in
 the industrial sector the average wage is considerably above
 it. In rural areas, wages often fall below the minimum wage.
 The minimum wage is not adequate for the support of a single
 adult wage-earner, much less of a family.
 The standard workweek is 48 hours. The law mandates a full
 day-of rest per week. Employees with more than 1 year on the
 job are entitled to 5 days of paid leave.
 A comprehensive set of enforceable occupational safety and
 health standards is in effect, and provisions regulating
 hazardous or harmful working conditions are relatively
 advanced. However, enforcement of minimum wage and health and
 safety regulations is severely hampered by too few professional
 labor inspectors. Nonetheless, compliance with health and
 safety rules is a DOLE priority, and regular inspections take
 place. In 1988 the DOLE opened a modern occupational safety
 and health center and began a 5-year training program in
 occupational safety and health.
 
 
 916
