 THE PHILIPPINES
 The Philippines has a presidential-parliamentary system of
 government headed by Ferdinand Marcos, President since 1965.
 Through his personal power, control of the ruling party, and
 use of emergency decree powers granted by the Constitution,
 President Marcos has dominated the political arena. The
 President is elected to a 6-year term and may succeed himself
 indefinitely. The Government includes a Prime Minister and a
 unicameral legislature, the National Assembly. National
 Assembly members are elected to 6-year terms not coinciding
 with the term of the President. Elections for President and
 Vice President are set for February 7, 1986.
 The Filipino people have a longstanding attachment to
 democratic principles and institutions, fostered by the legacy
 of the American colonial period, which began in 1898. From
 independence in 1946 until 1972 the country was governed under
 its 1935 Constitution, patterned closely after the United
 States Constitution. In 1972, President Marcos declared
 martial law, citing anarchy, lawlessness, urban terrorism, and
 open rebellion by both Muslim separatists and the New People's
 Army (NPA), the military wing of the Communist Party (not
 Moscow-oriented) of the Philippines (CPP). Democratic
 institutions were suppressed under martial law. The 1935
 Constitution was replaced by one ratified in 1973, in a series
 of controversial "Citizens Assemblies." In 1981, after new
 constitutional amendments had redefined the presidency, Marcos
 was reelected to a 6-year term. Although martial law
 formally ended in 1981, Marcos has continued to exercise
 broad, discretionary decree-making powers to limit criticism
 of the regime and opposition activities.
 Two insurgent groups are active, the NPA and the Moro National
 Liberation Front (MNLF), a radical Muslim secessionist group.
 Both employ terrorist tactics. The NPA is under the direct
 control of the CPP, a Marxist-Leninist party committed to the
 establishment of a totalitarian Communist regime in the
 Philippines. The NPA has grown significantly in recent years
 and is believed by some observers to have as many as 16,000
 full-time armed guerrillas, a similar number of part-time
 fighters, and a large political and logistic support
 structure. It operates to some degree in most provinces. In
 some areas it has gained considerable influence, exacting
 "taxes" and administering its own arbitrary brand of "law and
 order," including summary killings. The MNLF, active in the
 south, since 1972 has waged a secessionist struggle
 originating in inequities and misunderstandings dating from
 the Spanish era, including competition with Christians over
 land, past efforts by the Central Government to control and
 expand Christian settlements, and the desire of the Muslims to
 preserve cultural identity. The level of fighting in
 predominantly Muslim areas has diminished considerably in
 recent years. The Government has mounted political, military,
 and economic efforts against both insurgent groups. These
 efforts have been more successful against the MNLF than
 against the NPA.
 The Philippines is a predominantly agricultural country with a
 growing industrial sector. It ranks economically in the lower
 middle range of developing countries. Its private sector is
 subject to both substantial state intervention and favoritism
 toward individual entrepreneurs with close ties to the
 Government and the Marcos family. The economy continued to
 experience considerable difficulty in 1985.
 
 
 849
 THE PHILIPPINES
 In 1985 there continued to be serious human rights violations
 throughout the country, although there have been some positive
 develpments as well. Among the latter are the Government's
 toleration of peaceful expressions of political dissent,
 including large public rallies and demonstrations, and the
 trend toward greater press freedom. Philippine newspapers now
 freely print even very harsh criticism of the Government.
 However, there were frequent reports, many of them
 well-founded, of human rights abuses, especially in the
 countryside, by government security forces. These included
 summary executions or "salvagings" of civilians; instances of
 torture; arbitrary arrests, detentions, unlawful searches and
 seizures; and disappearances. In 1985 the Communist-led
 insurgents stepped up significantly their use of terror,
 including summary executions, as a tactic in furtherance of
 their political objectives.
 The accuracy of statistics on human rights abuses in the
 Philippines, which are collected only by the Government and by
 Task Force Detainees (TFD), is highly questionable. The TFD
 is a politically active, antigovernment, Catholic
 church-related group which investigates and compiles
 statistics only on alleged government violations of human
 rights. TFD does not document atrocities and murders
 committed by the NPA, a policy which reinforces reports that
 TFD has significant links to leftist elements. Also, TFD
 ascribes responsibility to the Government for some killings
 for which the motivation is unclear but probably not political.
 Although the number of political detainees reportedly declined
 in 1985, there was an increase in alleged political killings,
 and in the number of disappearances. In December the verdict
 acquitting General Ver, the Chief of Staff of the Armed
 Forces, and his fellow military defendants, after an 8-month
 trial for the assassination of Benigno Aquino, was not viewed
 as credible by most Filipinos.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 As noted above, statistics on human rights violations,
 including political killings, are not reliable. Accurate
 assessment of violations committed in areas heavily influenced
 by the NPA is particularly difficult. Furthermore, because
 the use of violence for both personal and political purposes
 has been common historically, distinctions between common
 criminal activity, personal vendettas, unauthorized reprisals
 by individual military or constabulary units, and legitimate
 counterinsurgency operations are sometimes blurred.
 Government forces and insurgents are responsible for killings,
 as are common criminals, extremist religious sects, private
 security forces, and vigilante groups. Clashes between
 insurgents and government forces occur frequently and often
 result in fatalities.
 Military engagements are but one facet of the use by the
 Communists of violence to further their political goals. The
 Communists wage an intense campaign for control of local
 government mechanisms, utilizing intimidation, kidnaping, and
 assassination directed against government and military
 
 
 850
 THE PHILIPPINES
 officials, businessmen, clergy, teachers, and others who
 resist. The most obvious sign of Communist influence in any
 locality of the country is the assassination of local
 officials. Corrupt or disliked officials are often the first
 to be murdered. Opponents of the Communist efforts to
 establish political control, or anyone suspected of being
 informers for the government, are also in danger of being
 killed.
 Government statistics allege that over 400 civilians were
 killed by the NPA from the beginning of 1985 to the end of
 August. Increasingly thoughout 1985,. there were verified
 reports of NPA intimidation and even killings of civilians who
 refused to pay "revolutionary" taxes. For example, in
 February, a 35-year old housewife was murdered in Davao City,
 reportedly for refusing to give a contribution to the NPA. In
 late August, the murder of an elementary school teacher in
 western Samar received wide coverage. He was stabbed to death
 by a female member of an insurgent band reportedly because of
 his outspoken anti-Communism. NPA political assassination
 teams ("sparrow units") reportedly killed numerous local
 government officials, policemen, and Philippine military in
 1985. Their victims included the Governor of Surigao del Sur
 province, who was murdered'in October. The Australian
 Government was forced to withdraw its consultants and aid to
 an integrated development program on Samar in mid-August after
 a series of NPA incidents and threats.
 Numerous reports of summary executions or "salvagings" by
 government forces occurred throughout the Philippines during
 1985. TFD alleged in September 1985 that a total of 238
 salvagings had taken place throughout the Philippines by
 mid-year. (TFD alleged a total of 538 salvagings nationwide
 for 1984.) According to TFD reports, most of these killings
 were of farmers in areas of insurgent activity, although some
 killings did occur in urban settings. As stated above, TFD
 does not document atrocities and murders committed by NPA
 insurgents. Additionally, it has a tendency to categorize any
 murder by persons unknown as a political "salvaging."
 Killings of civilians by auxiliary Civilian Home Defense
 Forces (CHDF) units and other paramilitary forces were
 numerous throughout 1985. These forces are heavily deployed
 in insurgency-affected areas, and sometimes operate
 independently of direct government or military control. The
 most notorious among them appear to be armed religious cults
 which operate mostly in Mindanao and other parts of the
 southern Philippines. Human rights organizations and the
 Catholic Bishops' Conference of the Philippines have called on
 the Government to reorganize the CHDF or to dismantle it
 outright. President Marcos announced in late October that the
 CHDF program would be overhauled to ensure better screening
 and training of CHDF personnel.
 The Government reported in October that in 1985 it received 91
 complaints of salvagings attributed to military personnel,
 CHDF units, and members of the National Police: It found ten
 to have no factual basis, 21 to be valid, and 60 were sent
 under investigation.
 In April, an Italian missionary priest, Father Tullio Favali,
 was murdered in the town of Tulunan, North Cotabato, Mindanao,
 allegedly by members of a renegade paramilitary group. Public
 assertions were made in the wake of Father Favali's killing
 
 
 851
 THE PHILIPPINES
 that this group, wanted on previous charges dating back to
 1979 and suspected of cannibalistic acts, had been protected
 by the local military establishment. Nevertheless, at the
 personal order of President Marcos, the two principal suspects
 in the killing were eventually captured and are standing trial
 for the murder of Father Favali.
 Another case involving the CHDF which attracted wide publicity
 was an alleged massacre on September 20 of antigovernment
 demonstrators in Escalante, Negros Occidental, in the Western
 Visayas region. Over 20 demonstrators were killed and upwards
 of 50 seriously wounded when CHDF elements reportedly fired
 indiscriminately into the ranks of the unarmed protestors. In
 mid-October Defense Minister Juan Ponce Enrile created a
 multisectoral factfinding board to inquire into the
 circumstances surrounding the Escalante killings.
 Government officials state that mistakes have been made by
 security forces fighting in insurgency-affected areas. The
 Government has carried out investigations and stated that
 military personnel have been disciplined for abusive
 behavior. In fact, abusive personnel are seldom seriously
 punished. Only 5, of a total of 123 military and National
 Police personnel whom the Government as of October reported as
 having been -charged before courts martial for abusing
 civilians, were convicted and sentenced.
 As of October, according to government reports, a total of
 1,153 military personnel had been given administrative
 disciplinary action, including reprimands, demotions, and
 discharges for abuse of authority. In late 1984 the Ministry
 of National Defense formed a social action committee to
 improve its responsiveness to complaints against military
 personnel of abuse. In addition, ten retraining centers, or
 disciplinary barracks, were established throughout the country
 to rehabilitate soldiers guilty of human rights violations.
 For the third year in a row, the Government in May deployed in
 Metro Manila a controversial "secret marshal" corps of some
 350 armed law enforcement officers. The marshals, renamed
 "special operations teams," or "crimebusters," were assigned
 to ride as plainclothesmen aboard Metro Manila public transit
 vehicles in an effort to curb a chronic problem of robberies
 and assaults on these vehicles. They had summary arrest
 powers, as well as authority to shoot to kill offenders who
 refused to submit to arrest. Marshals reportedly killed as
 many as 25 alleged criminals in May. As in previous years,
 the program was viewed positively by some Metro Manila
 residents. In other quarters, however, it drew sharpI
 criticism as a violation of due process. Although the secret
 marshal program was not officially ended, its activities
 appeared to have come to a halt in early June.
 b. Disappearance
 TFD claimed 117 persons as having disappeared from January to
 June 1985. (TFD claimed a total of 150 disappearances for all
 of 1984.) The International Labor Organization (ILO) wrote to
 the Government about the disappearance of three labor
 leaders. (See also references to ILO communication in Section
 2.b. and Section 4.) The Government maintains that its forces
 were not responsible for these disappearances. However, the
 Government as a frequent practice has held persons suspected
 of national security offenses incommunicado in order to
 
 
 852
 THE PHILIPPINES
 complete interrogation before revealing their capture.
 On February 4, Tim Olivarez, a correspondent for a Manila
 daily and editor of a provincial newsweekly, disappeared
 shortly after publishing an expose on a smuggling syndicate
 which allegedly enjoyed protection by government and military
 officials. Both the acting Armed Forces Chief of Staff and
 President Marcos ordered full-scale investigations, resulting
 in the arrest in mid-November of nine persons, including the
 alleged head of the syndicate.
 On July 11, Father Rudy Romano, a Redemptorist priest and
 political activist, was abducted in Cebu City. A witness
 appearing on behalf of the Redemptorist priest at an August
 Supreme Court habeas corpus hearing identified a military
 intelligence agent as among his abductors. Although the
 military has denied having abducted Father Romano, the acting
 Armed Forces Chief of Staff ordered the "technical arrest" of
 the agent identified by the eyewitness. As of late 1985,
 formal charges of kidnaping were reportedly being prepared
 against the agents and other military men, subsequently
 identified. Father Romano's fate remains unknown.
 The Aquino assassination trial was tainted in many eyes by the
 disappearance of key eyewitnesses, including some whose
 testimony before the factfinding board in 1984 helped to
 establish the finding of a military conspiracy behind the
 crime. The common-law wife and two female acquaintances of
 the man whom the military alleges shot Aquino disappeared in
 early 1984 and were not located in 1985.
 Hostage-taking for ransom has been a common practice by
 Filipino Muslim rebels of the MNLF. For example, an American
 and a German taken hostage by an MNLF group in November, 1984,
 on the island of Jolo, south of Mindanao, were held for more
 than a year and released only in early December. A Japanese
 citizen is still being held. There is some evidence as well
 that the NPA has engaged in abductions.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 Although torture is prohibited under the Constitution, a
 number of persons arrested for alleged national security
 offenses have reportedly been tortured. TFD alleged that 383
 instances of torture took place in the first half of 1985, as
 compared with 504 for all of 1984. The Ministry of National
 Defense admits that abuses occur. It also claims that some
 charges of torture are false and are used as a legal tactic by
 arrested subversives to gain release. Most complaints of
 torture or other abuse center on the period immediately after
 arrest, when suspects are reportedly detained in "safe houses."
 There are also reports that the NPA engages in torture,
 particularly against persons suspected of being informers for
 the government.
 In areas of military activity against insurgents, there have
 been allegations of military abuse ranging from harassment and
 extortion to rape and murder. These reports have appeared in
 the press and have also come from numerous human rights
 organizations which support the widely-held belief that the
 Government is not doing enough to curb abuses and punish
 abusive military personnel. Although the Ministry of National
 Defense has investigated some reported abuses, it states that
 it frequently fails to find evidence, and few personnel
 receive serious punishment.
 
 
 853
 THE PHILIPPINES
 Although physical punishment is not officially part of the
 Philippine penal system, prison conditions are often harsh,
 and reports of abuse frequent. While in confinement, national
 security detainees are usually allowed visits by family
 members, lawyers, and others, and are also permitted food
 supplements from outside sources. The use of prolonged
 solitary confinement for national security detainees appears
 to be uncommon and limited for the most part to persons whom
 the Government regards as key figures in the underground
 Communist movement. Persons held without bail pending
 completion of their trials for national security offenses are
 usually segregated from and have better accommodations than
 those held without bail for common crimes and those already
 convicted by the courts.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Arrested persons are generally charged promptly, although this
 is not always the case, particularly with regard to alleged
 "national security" offenders. Such persons are sometimes
 held incommunicado by military intelligence units for days or
 weeks before the Government presents charges or acknowledges
 that it is holding them.
 The Government asserts that no one is arrested for his
 political beliefs, but that it arrests "public order
 violators" who commit specific criminal acts relating to the
 violent overthrow of the Government. Generally, such persons
 are charged with subversion and rebellion, possession of
 firearms and subversive documents, or, occasionally, with
 crimes such as arson and murder.
 Arrests in national security cases are frequently made under
 "Preventive Detention Actions," (PDA's) which authorize
 arrests by Presidential Order without court warrant, and which
 allow persons to be held without bail until the President
 authorizes their release. The 1983 Presidential Decree which
 created the Preventive Detention Action system, however,
 provides for a yearly review of the case of each detainee or
 accused person held without bail. Despite this provision,
 President Marcos still retains the power to order anyone's
 detention for an indefinite period of time. The Supreme Court
 has ruled that PDA's issued by the President are
 constitutional.
 TFD alleged that a total of 2,371 of what it terms "political
 arrests" took place in the first half of 1985, compared with
 4,168 for all of 1984. This figure includes an unknown number
 of persons arrested for activities in support of the Communist
 insurgents. Many of those arrested in 1985 were picked up in
 mass arrests during rallies and demonstrations and were
 subsequently released. Two Presidential Decrees promulgated
 in 1985 eliminated capital punishment for crimes against
 national security and public order, making defendants accused
 of such crimes eligible for bail.
 A grey area of legal uncertainty exists in cases where a
 civilian court authorizes the temporary release on bail of
 defendants held under a PDA. In some instances, as in the
 case of two Manila student leaders arrested in February,
 President Marcos has rescinded the PDA, thus allowing the
 civilian court's release order to prevail. In other
 instances, however, the military has refused court orders to
 release defendants where the President has not withdrawn the
 
 
 854
 THE PHILIPPINES
 PDA against them. For example, the Supreme Court ordered the
 temporary release in May of three activist lawyers from Davao
 City because the PDA's issued against them were of
 questionable validity. The military refused to heed this
 order in the absence of a presidential directive to do so.
 The Supreme Court subsequently reversed itself and ruled that
 the lawyers' detention was legal after subversion charges were
 filed against them in Davao.
 Habeas corpus is generally available, but remains suspended
 throughout the country for persons charged with subversion or
 rebellion and for those charged with any crime in the two
 regions in Mindanao where the MNLF rebellion is active.
 Defendants in subversion and rebellion cases or their
 relatives frequently petition the Supreme Court for habeas
 corpus. In some instances the Court has granted hearings and
 compelled the Government to present persons specified in
 petitions before it. In other cases, however, the Supreme
 Court has been slow to act on such petitions.
 Two prominent opposition leaders, Jovito Salonga and Raul
 Daza, returned voluntarily from self-exile in the United
 States in 1985. Both have engaged freely in political
 activities since their return. Subversion charges against
 Salonga were dropped three days before his return in January.
 Daza continues to face a subversion charge dating from 1982
 but is now free on bail and has been allowed to return to the
 United States. In July President Marcos lifted a PDA against
 Cebu City opposition leader Ribomapil Holganza following a
 bail release granted by the presiding judge in his subversion
 trial. In a related case, the Government in January filed
 rebellion charges against national opposition figure Aquilino
 Pimentel. Pimentel, who is free on bail, resumed his place in
 the National Assembly in November, when the Supreme Court
 overturned a decision by the Commission on Elections
 invalidating his 1984 election.
 There is no evidence of the practice of compulsory or forced
 labor.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Persons currently charged with crimes are legally presumed
 innocent until proven guilty and, if arrested after martial
 law was lifted in 1981, receive public trials in civilian
 courts.
 The right to counsel is guaranteed by law and in general
 honored from the time a person is presented in court for the
 reading of charges. However, there have been instances in
 which defendants in subversion and rebellion cases have been
 held incommunicado without access to counsel for significant
 periods of time. Once their detention was acknowledged, these
 defendants were normally permitted visits by lawyers and
 family members.
 If a defendant cannot afford counsel, the court will appoint a
 lawyer. Private and government legal assistance is available
 to indigents, and there are lawyers' organizations which
 provide assistance to alleged national security offenders.
 Because of case backlogs, a shortage of judges, and the
 practice of hearing cases concurrently, trials in civilian
 courts often take 2 to 3 years. Subversion and rebellion
 trials have frequently lasted longer. Trial by jury is not a
 
 
 855
 THE PHILIPPINES
 part of Philippine jurisprudence. Questions of law and fact,
 including determinations of guilt or innocence, are all
 resolved by the presiding judge.
 Latest available government figures (September 1985) showed
 490 persons accused of national security offenses being held
 without bail. TFD, which compiles statistics on "political
 detainees," reported as of June that there were 556 "political
 prisoners," as compared with 851 at the end of 1984.
 The Supreme Court continued to show some signs of assertiveness
 in sensitive areas. In late December 1984 the Court ruled
 that a 1982 raid by military authorities on the offices of we
 Forum, an opposition newspaper, was illegal and
 unconstitutional because the warrants upon which the raid was
 based were issued without probable cause. In February, the
 Supreme Court dismissed all outstanding subversion charges
 against former Senator Jovito Salonga when a prosecutor
 threatened to reopen his case after previously dropping the
 charges. The Court asserted that the original indictment
 against Salonga was filed with undue haste and was based on
 hearsay testimony.
 There remains, however, widespread Philippine cynicism
 regarding the fairness and independence of the judiciary, and
 there is frequent criticism that political influence or
 bribery of individual judges plays a part in judicial
 decisions. In August, the Supreme Court ruled that previous
 testimony by armed forces Chief of Staff General Fabian Ver
 and seven other defendants could not be used against them at
 the Aquino assassination trial. General Ver and the other
 military defendants have since been acquitted and General Ver
 reinstated as Chief of Staff. The 8-month trial included
 intimidation, disappearances and recantations of prosecution
 witnesses, charges of judicial favoritism towards the accused,
 and a lack of prosecution vigor. At the acquittal in
 December, the Court reaffirmed the Government's contention
 that Aquino was murdered by a Communist hit man. That
 conclusion lacks credibility in the Philippines, inasmuch as
 it is inconsistent with the 1984 finding of an independent
 investigative board which implicated elements of the military
 in the assassination.
 Charges in subversion and rebellion cases are often vague.
 There have been some cases with multiple defendants where
 conspiracy to overthrow the Government was alleged but little
 detail was provided in the charges. Members of the opposition
 have sometimes been linked to alleged conspiracies with
 subversive elements, and some have left the country to avoid
 lengthy trials, restriction of movement, or possible
 imprisonment. The line between national security offenses and
 common crimes is frequently blurred, and lengthy legal
 proceedings often result.
 In practice there have been few convictions for subversion and
 rebellion. Trials, including those of better known
 defendants, tend to continue indefinitely. In many instances,
 defendants held under preventive detention regulations and
 charged with subversion are given "temporary release" while
 their trials continue. Others have been released outright
 after a few weeks or months.
 
 
 856
 THE PHILIPPINES
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home
 or Correspondence
 The state intrudes little into the family life of most
 Filipinos. Parents are free to raise their children as they
 see fit. Religious practices are a personal matter, as is the
 decision to join a political party. The Constitution's Bill
 of Rights specifies that persons shall be secure in their
 homes and guarantees the privacy of communications and
 correspondence. These rights are generally respected by the
 authorities.
 A search warrant may be issued by a judge upon a finding of
 probable cause. The President may also order a search. There
 have been allegations that the property of some persons
 accused of subversion or rebellion has sometimes been searched
 without a warrant, but in most instances the authorities
 obtain warrants before acting.
 Reports persist that in some rural areas in Mindanao forcible
 resettlement continued throughout 1985, notwithstanding the
 1982 government ban on the practice. According to the
 Government, higher levels of combat between government forces
 and Communist insurgents ,have led some people in scattered
 rural areas to relocate their homes of their own volition,
 often for limited periods, to avoid danger. There have been
 reports of such population movements from different parts of
 the country.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Constitutional guarantees of freedom of speech and press are
 abridged in practice. Media restrictions are usually
 political and economic in nature, rather than in the form of
 direct government censorship. Nevertheless, Philippine media
 now operate with a degree of freedom greater than at any time
 since the imposition of martial law in 1972. Overall, the
 Philippine print media are among the most free in the region.
 Newspapers in the Philippines are generally divided into two
 categories: those considered "government-influenced" and those
 which assume an "oppositionist/independent" editorial line.
 Three of the country's largest nationally circulated
 newspapers are owned or controlled by relatives or close
 associates of the Marcos family. Direct criticism of the
 Marcos family in these papers is rare, but they do provide
 coverage, in news reporting, editorials, and in columns, which
 is occasionally critical of specific government policies and
 personalities. The progovernment papers have made it a
 practice since the 1983 Aquino assassination to provide
 regular coverage of opposition political activities.
 Outspoken antiestablishment commentary is a common feature of
 independent newspapers and magazines.
 The Philippine public has access to several major
 international news publications even though these publications
 sometimes contain articles and editorials sharply critical of
 the Government. Foreign journalists regularly travel in the
 Philippines and file stories without hindrance. The
 Government announced in October a new policy permitting
 domestic and foreign reporters to cover operations of the
 Philippine military against the Communist insurgency. The new
 
 
 857
 THE PHILIPPINES
 guidelines were intended to expand coverage as a means of
 informing the public of the actual dimensions of the
 insurgency problem.
 The Government maintains a significant degree of influence
 over the electronic media, particularly television. Manila
 has one government-owned television station and four
 privately-owned stations controlled by persons with close
 links to the Marcos administration. They produce programs for
 distribution in Manila and other major cities. All television
 stations appear to accept government guidance on their.
 editorial policy and often ignore or downplay opposition
 political activities. A group seeking to obtain a license to
 operate a Catholic lay television station reported that its
 application remained stalled throughout 1985.
 Radio remains an especially important source of news and
 information in provincial areas. Ownership is dominated by
 government loyalists, although there are significant
 exceptions, such as Radio Veritas, a Catholic church-linked
 station which provides the only "independent" coverage of
 local and national issues.
 Much attention was focused on the reported killings of 12
 journalists in the first 9 months of 1985, bringing the total
 of newsmen killed to 22 since 1979. Human rights
 organizations allege government involvement in some of the
 attacks; the military blames the NPA for some of the deaths;
 and some of the killings apparently involved purely personal
 motives. In at least three instances in 1985, the murdered
 journalists had been actively pursuing stories on alleged
 corruption in Government or abuses by security forces.
 Libel suits are frequently filed in the Philippines, sometimes
 as a pressure tactic against reporters, with varying degrees
 of success. A conviction for libel can result in up to 3
 years' imprisonment. During the course of the Aquino murder
 trial, contempt of court charges were filed against two organs
 of the independent press for casting doubt on the impartiality
 and integrity of the court hearing the case. In one instance,
 the charges were quickly dropped; the other case is under
 court review.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 A broad range of private professional, religious, social,
 charitable, and political organizations flourishes in the
 Philippines. The right of peaceful assembly is guaranteed by
 the Constitution, and this right was generally exercised
 freely by numerous groups protesting government policies or
 other issues in 1985. An estimated 100,000 persons joined
 rallies and marches throughout the Philippines on May 1, Labor
 Day, with upwards of 50,000 marchers participating in Manila
 alone. On August 21, 1985, about 70,000 persons were involved
 in two separate antigovernment demonstrations in Manila to
 commemorate the second anniversary of Benigno Aquino's death.
 Thousands of others marched in provincial towns and cities.
 Opposition rallies are frequently held on a nation-wide basis.
 Permits from local authorities are required for outdoor
 demonstrations in public places. The Government usually
 complied with requests for rally permits, but some were denied
 on the grounds of alleged involvement by subversive elements.
 In some instances, local officials later agreed to issue the
 
 
 858
 THE PHILIPPINES
 permits. Rallies and marches are often held without permits.
 Although the Government advocates a policy of "maximum
 tolerance" for handling street demonstrations, excessive force
 was used to disperse otherwise peaceful but permitless
 demonstrations in some towns and major cities. In addition to
 the Escalante shootings in September discussed in Section
 l.a., police reportedly shot and killed 2 persons and wounded
 14 others during a farmers' rally in Manila in October.
 A variety of trade unions claim slightly more than 2 million
 workers out of a total labor force of 20 million. There are
 also about 2.7 million workers in the National Congress of
 Farmers Organizations. Union membership in the Philippines
 tends to be nominal, rather than being composed of active,
 dues-paying members. However, there are no government
 restrictions on the right to organize and to affiliate with
 federations, confederations, or international organizations,
 or on the right to strike, except for public servants and
 employees of certain government corporations. National labor
 organizations are affiliated to the International
 Confederation of Free Trade Unions (ICFTU), and to the
 Communist-dominated World Federation of Trade Unions (WFTU).
 The nation has 1,954 registered labor groups; none has been
 canceled or "deregistered" during the past 2 years. Union
 certification elections are generally considered to be fairly
 run.
 Unions continue to negotiate collective bargaining agreements
 and to strike. In October, the Ministry of Labor and
 Employment (MOLE) reported 2,007 collective bargaining
 agreements covering 266,000 workers as "active."
 Compulsory arbitration was exercised in 12 of 937 strike
 notice instances in 1984, and in 7 of 275 instances through
 August 1985. The incidence of strikes in the garment
 industry, in semi-conductor firms, and at export processing
 zones increased in 1985. Even some public sectors "exempted"
 from strikes have experienced stoppages. Although a penalty
 of 6 months' imprisonment for illegal acts by strikers exists,
 the Labor Ministry asserts that there have been no
 convictions. However, a Presidential Letter of Instruction
 was issued in 1985 allowing police to serve injunctions on the
 picket line in order to halt strikes which the Ministry has
 not authorized. The use of violence is endemic in the
 Philippines among management and labor. There have been
 numerous assassinations of labor leaders and trade union
 members. The military charges that some leftist labor leaders
 have engaged in assassination.
 The Trade Union Congress of the Philippines (TUCP),
 established in 1975, claims 1.3 million non-agricultural
 workers and is the only officially recognized trade union
 umbrella organization in the country. As a result of this
 official status, TUCP officials are appointed as
 representatives of labor on tripartite boards such as the
 Social Security Commission and the National Council on Wages.
 Because of these links, the TUCP is often criticized by
 non-TUCP union leaders as being government controlled.
 However, the TUCP frequently criticizes the Goverment about
 poor wages and bad working conditions as well as on issues
 affecting trade union autonomy from government controls.
 Most government-owned and controlled organizations (a
 different category from public servants), are unionized and
 
 
 859
 THE PHILIPPINES
 negotiate collective bargaining agreements. Public service
 associations, such as public school teachers, cannot legally
 form recognized unions nor can they legally go on strike.
 Nonetheless, the Manila Public School Teachers Association
 struck several times during the past year. The Government is
 considering a bill to permit public sector employees to
 organize and bargain but with limitations on their right to
 strike.
 The ILO has communicated with the Government to criticize
 aspects of the Filipino labor situation, including the
 requirement of approval by 30 percent of the work force before
 union recognition is granted; restrictions on the right to
 establish federations; compulsory arbitration in certain
 instances; a 1982 law banning strikes in industries that
 affect the national interest (including export-oriented ones
 in export processing zones); advance approval of strikes by
 two-thirds of union members; decrees threatening imprisonment
 of picketers propagandizing against the Government; and denial
 of the right to organize unions for teachers, public health
 personnel, and other public servants. The Government has
 replied in some detail to ILO criticisms; its reply appeared
 in the report of the Committee on the Application of
 Conventions and Recommendations. The ILO has noted that a
 review of labor legislation is under way and that a draft bill
 is before the National Assembly incorporating some of the
 provisions referred to by ILO supervisory bodies.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 There is no established state religion in the Philippines, and
 the right to practice one's religion is fully respected. Over
 80 percent of the population is Roman Catholic. There are
 several Protestant and independent Christian groups, and a
 sizeable Muslim minority. In the Sulu Archipelago in the
 southwest portion of the country and in parts of Mindanao,
 Muslims comprise the majority. The Government is assisting
 efforts to preserve the Filipino Muslim identity and cultural
 heritage. It has established an institute to train Filipino,
 Muslim religious and legal leaders for positions in the Sharia
 court system, which is based on Muslim personal law. The
 Government also provides assistance to Islamic schools and
 centers and facilitates the travel of Muslim pilgrims to
 Mecca. Foreign clergymen and missionaries of various faiths
 normally perform their duties without difficulty.
 Major political parties and groupings in the Philippines have
 members and leaders from different religions. Government
 service is open to all on a nondiscriminatory basis, and
 several senior civil and military officials belong to minority
 religious groups.
 Throughout 1985, the hierarchy of the Philippine Catholic
 Church, including Jaime Cardinal Sin, the Roman Catholic
 Archbishop of Manila, continued to criticize the Government on
 various issues, human rights being prominent among them.
 Pastoral letters critical of the administration were read from
 pulpits in Catholic churches throughout the Philippines. Many
 Catholic priests and nuns are actively involved in calling
 public attention to cases of human rights abuses. Such
 criticism has at times evoked a negative reaction from
 high-level authorities, including the President, who claim
 that the Church has intruded in politics and violates the
 constitutional doctrine of separation of church and state.
 
 
 860
 THE PHILIPPINES
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 There is freedom to change one's place of residence and
 employment. Emigration is generally permitted, but former
 detainees on "temporary release" status need government
 permission to leave the country, as do persons subject to
 pending criminal (including national security related)
 charges. Thousands of Filipinos travel to the United States
 and elsewhere as temporary visitors each year. Many Filipinos
 are employed as overseas workers, particularly in the Middle
 East. Foreign travel for this purpose is encouraged by the
 Government.
 A 1980 Presidential Decree provides that persons convicted of
 subversion, rebellion, or sedition shall forfeit their rights
 as citizens, whether such acts are committed inside or outside
 the country. The decree also provides that judgments may be
 rendered in absentia. No instance of enforcement of this
 decree is known.
 At the end of October, there were 2,962 Indochinese in a first
 asylum camp in the Philippines. In addition to providing
 first asylum to "boat people," the Government, in cooperation
 with the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
 operates a major refugee processing center in Bataan Province
 where refugees and displaced persons from camps in the
 Philippines and other Southeast Asian countries receive
 English language instruction, cultural orientation, and
 vocational training before being resettled elsewhere. There
 were 15,023 refugees and displaced persons in the processing
 center as of the end of October.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 President Ferdinand Marcos, Chief Executive since 1965, wields
 preeminent power under the country's 1973 Constitution, which
 provides for a strong president in a presidential-
 parliamentary system. The President is elected by direct
 popular vote. President Marcos is currently serving a 6-year
 term to which he was elected in 1981. In view of
 questions raised during the year about the Government's
 mandate, President Marcos, with the concurrence of the
 opposition, called in November for a presidential election in
 early 1986, slightly more than 1 year earlier than had been
 scheduled.
 In December, active campaigning began by both President
 Marcos, the candidate of the ruling KBL Party, and the
 opposition candidate, Corazon Aquino, widow of the murdered
 Benigno Aquino. Mrs. Aquino's candidacy was encouraged by
 broad popular support as indicated, for example, by a petition
 urging her to run reportedly signed by more than 1.2 million
 Filipinos. Her "unity ticket" with Vice Presidential
 candidate Salvador Laurel was created under the banner of his
 United Nationalist Democratic Organization. Marcos chose as
 his running mate National Assembly member and former Foreign
 Minister Arturo Tolentino.
 The President possesses extraordinary powers to issue decrees
 which have the force of law unless overturned by the National
 Assembly. While described in the Constitution as being
 subject to exercise only in emergency situations or in
 
 
 861
 THE PHILIPPINES
 instances where the National Assembly is unable to act
 promptly, these powers, in practice, frequently have been used
 by the President to legislate widely, particularly in the
 economic sphere. In combination with his constitutional
 authority, the President uses his control of the ruling KBL
 Party (New Society Movement) to dominate the political arena.
 Within the ruling party, issues are often discussed in caucus,
 and accommodation on key issues is sometimes reflected in the
 President's final decisions.
 As a result of the 1984 elections to the National Assembly,
 members of various opposition parties and independents now
 hold about one-third of the seats in that body, as contrasted
 to the preceding 190-seat assembly, which had fewer than 10
 active opposition members when its term ended in June 1984.
 The ruling KBL party, by force of numbers, still wields
 preeminent power in the legislature. This fact, together with
 the President's independent law-making powers, have made it
 impossible for opposition members to shape a legislative
 agenda of their own. Nevertheless, the Assembly was a forum
 for lively political debate and sharp criticism of the
 Government throughout 1985 and provided a new degree of public
 accountability and transparency to the system. Among the
 issues aired prominently in the Assembly was alleged improper
 foreign investments ("hidden wealth") of Philippine leaders,
 including President and Mrs. Marcos.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The Philippines is a signatory of all principal U.N. human
 rights and refugee conventions and is currently a member of
 the U.N. Human Rights Commission. Representatives of various
 international human rights groups visited the Philippines in
 1985 and traveled throughout the country, meeting both
 Philippine government officials and private citizens involved
 in human rights matters.
 In its communication with the Government noted in Section
 2.b., the ILO also expressed concern about trials of labor
 leaders, the disappearance of three others, the seizure in
 August and September 1982 of union property, and restrictions
 on travel of labor leader Bonifacio Tupaz. (However, Mr.
 Tupaz traveled to New Delhi, Moscow, and Los Angeles in
 1985.) The Government informed the ILO in January that the
 trials noted by the ILO had been postponed. The unionists
 involved are under a technical "house arrest" but have resumed
 normal activities.
 Several Catholic and Protestant church groups are active in
 the human rights field. Task Force Detainees (TFD) of the
 Philippines was established in 1974 by the Association of
 Major Religious Superiors of the Catholic Church.
 Headquartered in Manila and with regional field offices, it
 investigates allegations only of government human rights
 abuses and publishes reports on its findings. A politically
 active organization, reportedly with ties to leftist elements,
 it is an outspoken critic of the Marcos Government and its
 human rights practices. TFD operates with relative freedom
 although a few of its members have been arrested on charges of
 subversion and rebellion.
 
 
 862
 THE PHILIPPINES
 The Integrated Bar of the Philippines, a national organization
 to which all practicing lawyers must belong, has an active
 human rights committee which has investigated specific alleged
 abuses and issues reports. The Free Legal Assistance Group
 (FLAG), and the Movement of Attorneys for Brotherhood,
 Integrity and Nationalism, Inc. (MABINI) also assist detainees
 in preparing defenses against charges brought against them.
 The Ministry of National Defense has a special committee for
 investigating reported human rights violations involving
 military personnel. The committee's influence has been
 limited, but its investigations have on occasion led to legal
 proceedings against servicemen for abusive behavior. The
 Ministry reported that it cooperates on human rights cases
 with civilian groups, including the Catholic Bishops'.
 Conference of the Philippines and the National Council of
 Churches of the Philippines, as well as international
 organizations such as the International Committee of the Red
 Cross and Amnesty International.
 In its 1985 Report, Amnesty International expressed concern
 about continuing reports of human rights violations by members
 of the armed forces and paramilitary units under their command
 and alleges that the Government rarely initiated impartial
 investigations into such alleged violations. Freedom House
 rates the Philippines "partly free."
 ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND CULTURAL SITUATION
 The Philippines, with a population of 56.8 million (mid-1985
 estimate) and a population growth rate of 2.4 percent, is
 predominantly an agricultural country ranking in the lower
 middle range of developing countries.
 The economy was seriously affected by the recent worldwide
 recession, and by domestic mismanagement, including
 government-created monopolies. This led to a financial crisis
 in the last quarter of 1983, precipitated by substantial
 capital flight and reduced credit availability following the
 Aquino assassination. In 1984, per capita gross national
 product (GNP) was estimated at $603, a decline of 7 percent,
 and it is expected to decline again in 1985 by an estimated 5
 to 7 percent. The poorest 60 percent of the population
 received 25 percent of total income in 1971 but only 21.4
 percent 10 years later. The upper 10 percent moved
 from 37.1 percent of national income in 1972 to 42 percent in
 1981. In May 1985, unemployment was about 14.7 percent
 nationally and 23.5 percent in Metro Manila. Real wages have
 fallen by 27 percent in the last 4 years, and an already
 difficult economic situation for workers is worsening. With
 much of the population under the age of 15 and a high
 population growth rate, the Philippines can expect a continued
 growth of job entrants in coming years.
 In recent years the Government has emphasized rural
 development with programs aimed at increasing production of
 foodgrains, meat, poultry, and fish. The thrust of these
 programs has been dulled by excessive intervention in pricing
 and marketing, resulting in reduced incentives for
 agricultural producers. The Philippines has for several years
 been marginally self-sufficient in rice, the staple food, but
 some rice was imported in 1984 because of drought in 1983.
 Land reform in rice and corn holdings has contributed to
 security of tenure or lowered rents for some of the rural
 
 
 863
 THE PHILIPPINES
 population, but significant land tenure problems still exist
 in several areas of the country. At present, agriculture
 provides employment for slightly over half the work force, and
 generates about one-quarter of the GNP. The Government has
 formulated a plan to promote export-oriented industries and
 agribusiness to spur economic growth, increase foreign
 exchange earnings, and provide employment. Traditionally, the
 Philippines has depended heavily on coconut products and other
 commodity exports that are subject to international price
 fluctuations. The Government has also facilitated overseas
 employment for Filipinos, with the largest number concentrated
 in the Middle East.
 In 1985, life expectancy at birth was 65.4 years and infant
 mortality was 52.5 per 1,000 live births. It was estimated
 that about 50 percent of the population had access to safe
 drinking water, with 35 percent of residents in highly
 urbanized areas drawing their daily water needs from unsafe
 sources. In 1980, 41 percent of Filipinos in rural areas
 lived below a government-defined absolute poverty level, with
 32 percent below that level in urban areas. It was estimated
 in 1980 that the ratio of calorie supply relative to
 nutritional requirements reached 118.1 percent for all
 Filipinos. However, there were frequent reports in 1985 of
 serious malnutrition in areas of the country heavily dependent
 on the depressed sugar-export sector.
 Free education in the primary grades is available to all
 Filipinos. However recent government data indicate that of
 the children who begin primary school, only about 70 percent
 complete it. The adult literacy rate approaches 90 percent.
 Children under 15 may not legally be employed except when
 working directly under the sole responsibility of parents or
 guardians. However, with parental assent and under the rules
 laid down by the Ministry of Labor and Employment (MOLE),
 apprentice programs are allowed for children 14 years and
 over. The Labor Code also places responsibility on the
 Minister of Labor for conditions of employment of all persons
 aged 15 to 18 but prohibits employment in hazardous
 occupations of those younger than 18. There are credible
 reports of many violations of these provisions of the Labor
 Code.
 The 8-hour day, 48-hour week and a rest day after each 6
 working days are mandated by law. With exceptions, women are
 prohibited from working between 10 p.m. and 6 a.m. The Labor
 Ministry plays a key role in the setting of legislated minimum
 daily wages rates. The minimum daily rate for nonagricultural
 workers in Metro Manila was $57.08 per day as of November 1,
 1984, Outside of Metro Manila the rate was $56.00. In the
 agricultural sector, and for nonplantation workers, it is
 $35.67. (The peso in December was valued at 18.6 to $1.00.)
 The Ministry of Labor conducts inspections to ensure
 compliance with minimum wage standards and working conditions
 but admits that it faces a difficult task. It cites a study
 claiming that of the Manila "sweatshops" it surveyed half paid
 substandard wages. The Ministry concludes that the 8-hour day
 requirement is more apt to be respected but notes that firms
 in the Bataan export processing zone usually report
 considerable overtime. There are reports of compulsory
 overtime. All workplace laws apply equally to export zones.
 Inspections between January-October 1984 of 923 establishments
 
 
 864
 THE PHILIPPINES
 revealed 1,980 violations of wage rules involving cost of
 living allowances, 13th-month payments, overtime, and related
 matters.
 Philippine occupational health safety standards were codified
 in 1978. The Labor Ministry has stated that the number of
 inspections it can perform is still far too low. Of the 5,361
 establishments inspected in January-October 1984, 707 (or 13.2
 percent) had violations. Violations are most common in small
 nonunion shops according to a recent survey. The Ministry is
 trying to upgrade and increase its inspection corps as well as
 to disseminate more information through academic and other
 training programs and in the tripartite forums.
 Women enjoy full voting privileges and have the right to own
 and inherit property. They are prominent in Philippine
 society and represented in large numbers in business and in
 professions such as law, medicine, education, and journalism.
 They are also active in politics, being well represented in
 both national and local governments and within the political
 opposition. There are 2 women members of the Cabinet and 10
 in the current National Assembly, and numerous posts within
 the judicial and executive branches of the Government are held
 by women. As mentioned earlier, Corazon Aquino, widow of the
 murdered Benigno Aquino, is running against President Marcos
 in the scheduled February 7 presidential election. Imelda
 Marcos, wife of the President, holds the office of Minister of
 Human Settlements and exercises considerable influence. Women
 also occupy posts in local government as governors and mayors.
 
 
 865
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: PHILIPPINES
 1983     1984     1985
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL...       102.8    106.3    234.4
 LOANS ..............  ... 24.3     23.1     60.8
 GRANTS .............   ...78.5     83.2    173.6
 A.AID ....................... 86.8     84.3    182.9
 LOANS ..............  .... 24.3     23.1     20.8
 GRANTS .............   ... 62.5     61.2    162.1
 (SEC.SUPP.ASSST.)...        50.0     50.0    140.0
 B.FOOO FOR PEACE .......       10.7     17.1     51.5
 LOANS ..............    ... 0.0      0.0     40.0
 GRANTS .............   ...  10.7    17.1     11.5
 TITLE I-TOTAL ..........        0.0      0.0     40.0
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS .....        0.0      0.0     40.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR .....        0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE  II-TOTAL .........      10.7     17.1     11.5
 E.RELIEF.EC.OEV & WFP.         1.2      0.1      0.0
 VOL.RELIEF  AGENCY .....       9.5     17.0     11.5
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST...         5.3      4.9      0.0
 LOANS ..............    ... 0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ...............     5.3      4.9      0.0
 PEACE  CORPS ......       5.3      4.9      0.0
 NARCOTICS ........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 OTHER .............       0.0     0.0      0.0
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL...        51.4     51.5     42.2
 LOANS ..............  .... 50.0     50.0     15.0
 GRANTS ................    1.4      1.5     27.2
 A.MAP  GRANTS ..........       0.0      0.0     25.0
 8.CREDIT FINANCING ....       50.0     50.0     15.0
 C.INTL MIL.E.TRNG ....        1.4      1.5      2.2
 O.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK...         0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS ........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 IIIOTAL ECON. & MIL...        154.2    157.8    276.6
 LOANS ..............  .... 74.3     73.1     75.8
 GRANTS .............   ... 79.9     84.7    200.8
 OTHER US LOANS ..........        0.0     78.8      0.0
 EX-IM BANK LOANS .......        0.0     78.8      0.0
 ALL OTHER ..............    ... 0.0      0.0      0.0
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1983     1984     1985     1946-85
 TOTAL ........   757.3    523.8    448.0   6883.2
 IaRD             02.7    183.2    254.0   430S.8
 IFC                5.6      0.0     48.1    218.1
 IDA                0.0      0.0      0.0    122.2
 IDS                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 ADS              235.2    337.8    145.9   2120.2
 AFOB               0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 UNOP               3.0      2.8      0.0     68.4
 OTHER-UN          10.8      0.0      0.0     45.5
 EEC                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 
 
 866
