PHILIPPINES
The State Department's 1993 report on human rights practices in the Phihppines provides a relatively accurate assessment of continuing human rights violations in that country. The report correctly details examples of the most egregious abuses, including extrajudicial killings and "disappearances," torture and arbitrary arrests by police and military personnel. These specific examples properly illustrate the continuing abuses as well as the continuing inability or unwillingness of the Philippine government to punish the perpetrators of human rights violations.
However, there is a lack of similar detail in the report's examination of other issues arising from the perpetration of violent abuses. For instance, the report ignores the issue of whether the Philippine judiciary is truly independent in the prosecution of both political and common crimes. The report also fails to discuss the shortcomings in the actual prosecution of those accused of human rights violations.
As in previous years, the report is particularly thorough in its discussion of the problem of extrajudicial killings and other violent acts by military and police forces. As the perpetrators of the most serious violations, the report cites the Philippine National Police, military forces, civilian militia units, the New People's Army (the armed wing of the Communist Party of the Philippines), Muslim insurgent groups and private security forces maintained by wealthy landowners and the political elite. Comprehensive though this reporting is, it makes the mistake of conflating governmental abuses with the violent acts of non-government groups. The inclusion of guerrilla abuses in the discussion of extrajudicial killings serves to undemme the unique character of human rights law, which is exclusively concerned with government violations. Guerrilla abuses belong more properly in the section devoted to violations of humanitarian law. The Philippines report is one of several 1993 Country Reports that repeat this unfortunate error.
As the report correctly notes, the continued role of Citizens Armed Forces Geographical Units (CAFGUs) in controlling "insurgent activity" in various regions continues to threaten the safety of citizens. In addition to the killing of Chris Batan, a human rights worker with the non-governmental Task Force Detainees of the Philippines (TFDP), CAFGUs have also been linked to other extrajudicial executions as well as physical and psychological intimidation designed to recruit forcibly new CAFGU members. Despite such violence, the Philippine government has been reluctant to disband the CAFGUs. The State Department cites the observation of critics that this reluctance stems from the government's fear of resistance from militias as well as the possible sudden rise in unemployment that might result from their disbanding. The report does well to identify these possible reasons behind the Philippine government's foot-dragging.
276
PHILIPPINES
The report appropriately notes the government's failure to prosecute human rights abuses, commenting that, "Although there were a few cases of successful prosecutions, there still was very little observable progress in trying, convicting, and appropriately punishing the perpetrators of human rights abuses, most of whom continue to go unpunished." Even with respect to the highly publicized killing of Chris Batan by two CAFGU members, the report points out that only one suspect was arrested. That suspect was apparently released from jail temporarily in late 1993, and by the end of the year had not been tried. The report fails, however, to suggest concrete reasons for the government's inability to punish the perpetrators of human rights violations, including the CAFGU members responsible for Batan's death. It should have cited the fmding of the Commission on Human Rights (a constitutionally mandated agency of the Philippine government), echoed by the UN Special Rapporteur on Extrajudicial, Sumraaiy or Arbitrary Executions, that one reason for the impunity enjoyed by human rights offenders has been the unwillingness of fearful witnesses and surviving victims to come forward and provide necessary testimony. The perpetrators of violence will not be punished unless the Philippine government takes action to ensure the safety of victims, families and witnesses.
As in previous years, the report condemns the arbitrary arrest and detention of political prisoners, as well as the prevalence of torture as a means of securing ccaifessions. The State Department's apparent opposition to such practices, however, is contradicted in part by the position that the US government has taken in the case of the murder of US Army Colonel James Rowe. The United States actively pressured the Philippine government not to grant amnesty to two prisoners convicted of Col. Rowe's murder, even though both men had been arrested without warrants in 1989 and there was evidence ihaX their confessions might have been extracted under torture. One of the two alleged murderers was unable to select his own counsel but was provided with a lawyer chosen by the Philippines Constabulary Investigation Service. It was also established during the trial that this defendant was not present at the scene of the murder. Moreover, the NPA has claimed responsibility for Col. Rowe's murder. Nevertheless, the United States insisted that the two defendants be excluded from an amnesty granted to other political prisoners, arguing that justice had to be served in this "international" crime. The US government steadfastly ignored pleas from human rights groups, as well as the recommendation of the National Unification Commission (a national government body that drew up an amnesty program and peace process), that executive clemency or amnesty be granted to all political prisoners, including the two men accused of Col. Rowe's murder.
Efforts to secure the release of other political prisoners have had only marginal success, since many prisoners have been accused of common crimes rather than political offenses such as rebellion or subversion. Citing the TFDP's
277
CRITIQUE 1993
estimate that 350 poHtical prisoners still remained in custody, the report comments that, "It is likely that some of the 350 prisoners in question may have committed common crimes in pursuit of their political beliefs" and notes the possibility that "a few [prisoners] are actual or suspected Communists who were framed for common crimes." It properly points out the difficulty that this poses for political prisoners, given that the burden of proving political involvement rests with them. It would have been helpfijl if the report had explained at least generally the types of common crimes that were allegedly committed by these "political prisoners," as well as the State Department's best assessment of the volume of fabricated criminal charges.
A continuing weakness of the 1993 report, as in previous years, is its failure to recognize the potential and actual threats to an independent judiciary in the Philippines. The report assumes for the most part that the judiciary acts independently from the corrupt political and military forces that foster continuing human rights abuses. In fact, as the UN Special Rapporteur on the Independence of the Judiciary and the Protection of Lawyers observed in his 1993 report, the independence of the Philippine judiciary faces very real threats. Prosecutors and military intelligence officers sometimes meet with judges under the guise of prosecutorial cooperation, as do members of the Joint Department of National Defense and Department of Justice Action Committee for the Investigation and Prosecution of Insurgency Cases. If such meetings are allowed to continue unchecked, there is considerable risk that these individuals and agencies may improperly influence judges, especially in political cases.
Additionally, as the report notes, the bribery of judges and other court officials may result in the indefinite postponement of trials and even, in some cases, the complete dismissal of cases. The report also notes, as it did last year, that some offenders avoid prosecution by reaching out-of-court settlement with victims or their families. However, it fails to discuss the fact that this practice of settling criminal cases out of court is directly confrary to Philippine law, yet widely accepted as general practice. This is an additional reason why many human rights violations go unaddressed, and the report would do well in the future to identify such areas for possible government action. Last year's Critique drew attention to this deficiency in the State Department's reporting, yet it remains uncorrected.
The section on the Philippine government's attitude to investigations of human rights violations by international and non-governmental bodies correctly points out that, although most representatives of human rights groups are free to travel about the country, some continue to experience harassment and even death. However, the report omits any discussion of harassment and threats faced by lawyers representing "subversive" clients. As the UN Special Rapporteur found, such lawyers may themselves face accusations of "subversion," and be charged with the cause of those whom they represent.
278
PHILIPPINES
The sections on discrimination against women, children, indigenous people, the disabled and ethnic and religious minorities provide an adequate summary of the issues facing these groups. The section on discrimination against women is especially thorough, and remarks on the government's lack of initiative in resolving the problems faced by women in the Philippines. With respect to the hardships faced by children, the report could have provided more details on the specific consequences for children of widespread poverty. The report appears somewhat inconsistent in listing the government agencies devoted to the welfare and development of children, while at the same time stating that the government has been unable to alleviate the problems facing children. Future reports might usefully describe, at least in general terms, the types of programs that government agencies offer in the area of children's welfare, and identify the shortcomings of such programs, such as the lack of adequate fiinding.
One area deserving future attention is the discussion of religion and religious minorities in the Philippines. The report states that, "Freedom of religion is fully respected, and no official discrimination is practiced against any religious group or its members." At the same time, however, it notes the alienation of the Muslim minority from the dominant Christian majority, and comments that, "Efforts to integrate Muslims into the political and economic fabric of the country have met with only limited success." It would be helpftil if the report could more thoroughly examine the causes behind the continuing alienation of Muslims. The importance of such an evaluation is underscored by the events of 1993, when political violence initiated by elements identified with the Moro National Liberation Front (MNLF), the largest Muslim insurgent group, caused the deaths of many innocent civilians.
As in previous years, the section on worker rights is quite sound. The report provides statistics and examples to illustrate the status of worker rights, as well as impediments to unionization and collective bargaining. One minor problem is the report's curious insistence that there is no "formal" government interference with the right of workers to form unions. The report contradicts itself in the paragraphs that follow, by describing the International Labor Organization's criticism of Philippine labor laws that give the Secretary of Labor the power of compulsory arbitration to thwart strikes in industries deemed "essential to the national interest," as contrary to the ILO Convention on Freedom of Association. The report should simply describe the laws, any criticisms of those laws, the increase or decrease in worker arrests, and violence committed against labor activists, without attempting to draw a distinction between "formal" and "informal" types of governmental interference.
A number of other, minor criticisms of the 1993 report may also be in order. First, in the section on "disappearances," the report should try to avoid confusion between "disappearances" for political motives and kidnapping for
279
CRITIQUE 1993
ransom. Second, in its discussion of the investigation by non-govemmental groups of human rights violations, the report should repeat clearly here that the Commission on Human Rights (CHR) is a government body. As written, this section may create the mistaken impression that the CHR is an NGO. Third, in the discussion of children's rights, the report notes that there are no truancy laws in the Phihppines. While this is correct, the report should also note that vagrancy laws are often used to arrest street children.
280
