PHILIPPINES
This year's report on the Philippines gained headlines in the Manila dailies for citing "signs of deterioration" in the country's human rights situation. Coming from the U.S. State Department, this was considered harsh criticism. But, in fact, the report consistendy downplays the severity of the human rights situation, overestimates the effectiveness of government measures to address it, casts doubt on the integrity of human rights organizations and their information, and, worst of all, appears to regard human rights violations by military and paramilitary groups as somehow justified by the violence perpetrated by the insurgent New People's Army (NPA). To call the high inddence of disappearances and killings "s^ns of deterioration" is ludicrous, particularly when the pattern of these abuses was well established as early as mid-1987.
The discussion of disappearances is particularly disturbing. The report states: "Despite allegations to the contrary, no conclusive evidence links government officials with involvement in politically-motivated disappearances." Either the State Department does not consider members of the military to be agents of the government or it has unusually high standards of "conclusive evidence." In the case of Virgilio Tundag, who disappeared in Agusan de Norte on September 30,1988, he was last seen being taken away by a soldier from the 30th Infantry Battalion. When his mother went to the army camp where he had been taken, officers admitted arresting her son but said he had been released. No release papers were ever issued, and Tundag has not been seen since. In another case, Bernabe Aguirre, 24, an activist with a leftist youth organization, was arrested on June 29,1988 with a friend and taken to the office of the Military Intelligence Group at the Regional Command Headquarters of Region 2 in Tuguegarao, Cagayan. The friend was released that night; Aguirre has not been seen since. Numerous other such instances could be cited.
The report concedes that there is "credible evidence that some members of the poUce and military have resorted to extralegal killing to combat the
139
Critique
insurgents and their perceived sympathizers," then states that "this is in violation of government policies." No mention is made of the military's role in fostering an atmosphere of violence. High-ranking members of the Philippine military have made members of human-rights and social-activist groups fair targets of right-wing violence by making broad and unsubstantiated statements linking these groups to the Communist insurgency.
Human rights lawyers were among those killed in 1988, but the report ^ain imphes a lack of evidence to suggest that their deaths were human rights violations. It observes: "The deaths of four human rights lawyers durii^ 1988 attracted considerable attention; in at least two cases, involvement of government security persons is alleged." One of those cases is the murder of Alfonso Sur^ao. The report notes that charges against a military officer were dropped, but does not mention any of the evidence -- circumstantial but strong — linking the man to Surigao's murder. Nor is there any mention of the pattern of killings that suggests military involvement even when the gunmen remain unidentified.
The report also appears to cast doubt on allegations of torture by citing one highly publicized case, that of Noel Villalba, in which the victim dropped charges against his captors. The fact that no charges are pressed does not mean that no torture occurred. Moreover, the report could have cited numerous other instances in which medical evidence substantiating charges of torture by military personnel was available. In one such case, 11 activists from a left-wing farmers' organization were arrested on June 21,1988 in Baguio City and taken to military intelligence headquarters. Medical exams showed marks consistent with their allegations that they suffered beatings, cigarette burns and electrocution.
The report's description of abuses by "anti-Communist citizens' groups, widely termed 'vi^antes' and formed in reaction to the NPA" is distorted. By highlighting the NPA's "campaigns of urban terrorism, rural insurrection, poUtical a^tation, and prop£^anda activities" immediately before mention of the vigilante groups and then noting that increased allegations of himian rights violations by such groups have been "in step with this growth," the report seems to excuse the abuses by suggesting that they are an inevitable outgrowth of fighting the insurgency. The report notes that the vigilantes have been responsible for political killings, but the only case dted is one in which the politi-
140
Philippines
cal motivation of the murderer is open to question. In contrast, the report cites three specific examples of political killing by the NPA.
The report implies that abuses will stop with the establishment of a new, carefully recruited and trained civilian militia, the Citizen's Armed Forces Gec^aphical Units (CAFGU), to replace the Marcos-era Civilian Home Defense Forces (CHDF) and other armed dvilian groups, which President Corazon Aquino ordered disbanded. It ignores that "unarmed" civilian groups will continue to receive government support, even though the distinction between "armed" and "unarmed" has never held in the Philippines. Implementation of the government's guidelines on civiUan groups has not been "uneven," as the report states, but virtually non-existent. And it fails to mention that by December 1988, there were reports that guidelines on recruitment and training of CAFGU members were already being violated in some areas and that abusive members of the CHDF and c^her groups were being incorporated into the new militia.
The discussion on fair trials accurately describes some of the shortcomings of the judicial system, including noncontinuous trials that can take years to conclude. But there is almost no discussion of the special problems related to the prosecution of himian rights cases. The introduction to the report states that few major human rights cases were successfully concluded. In fact, there were none. A political case dted in the report as evidence of a successful human rights prosecution actually involved convictions of pro-Marcos opponents of the government, not government officials.
There is little attempt to explain the reasons that prosecutions in human r^ts cases are so often stymied. A major problem is that military personnel and \i^ante-group members have harassed, threatened and killed witnesses and legal counsel; torture allegations are dropped in exchange for a detainee's release; and military personnel provide protection for abusive recruits or local vigilantes. The report's assertion that one case involving "displaced persons" was moved to protect the "witnesses and ensure a fair hearing" is a serious distortion. The case, involving the so-called Leyte refugees, was moved to protect the defendants (not the witnesses, many of whom are military personnel). The Leyte refugees were arrested without warrant in Manila and
141
Critique
charged en masse after complaining of abuses in Leyte by vigilantes and the military. The case was moved because of reasonable fears that their lives were endangered by the military in Leyte. Instead of investigating allegations of military abuse, the justice system has turned on those bringing the charges. (The report notes the dreadful conditions in which they have been incarcerated.)
Under Presidential Deo'ee 1850, a Marcos-era executive order, military and police personnel can be tried only in military courts, even for non-service-related offenses. The State Department asserts that President Aquino "has waived military jurisdiction in cases involving hiunan rights abuses," but she has done this only rarely. More important, the President has not publicly asked Congress to repeal P.D. 1850, nor oiticized the military's failure to prosecute Us own for serious human rights abuses.
As in previous years, the State Department seeks to discredit the work of some Philippine human rights organizations by attacking their methodology. The report repeats a claim by the Philippine government that investigations conducted by non-governmental organizations (NGOs) do not produce sufficient evidence to prosecute cases successfully. This assertion represents a basic misunderstanding of the work of hiunan rights NGOs; their role is not to replace or replicate the work of state investigators, but to provide basic evidence to initiate a government investigation. The report states that Task Force Detainees of the Philippines (TDF), "considered by many to have links to the CPP [Communist Party of the Philippines], collects information only on alleged government abuses." But many human rights organizations worldwide report only on state violations of international human rights, so TDFs practices are not exceptional. Moreover, repeating the allegations of Communist links is precisely the kind of unsubstantiated labeling that has made human rights activists the target of right-wing violence. That is a wholly inappropriate use of the State Department's human rights report.
The section on government attitudes toward outside investigation of alleged human rights violations is essentially correct. However, the State Department asserts that during invest^ations, local military and civilian officials have "reportedly been uncooperative in some instances." This greatly understates the dangers faced by members of NGO's, because even with
142
Philippines
safe-conduct letters from the Department of Defense, they often face harassment, arrest and physical injury from local military personnel and vigilante-group members.
The discussion of freedom of association ignores the effect of military statements labeling legal activist organizations as NPA "fronts." In only one instance has the government censured a military officer for making such a statement. Harassment and surveillance by the military have also made it difficult for some groups to function.
Similarly, the section on freedom of religion should have stated that a number of victims of military and vivante abuses in Negros and Mindanao have been leaders and members of the Catholic Church's Basic Christian Communities (BCC). BCC groups, which sponsor litur^es in which the Bible is interpreted in light of current social conditions, have been accused by the military of being fronts for the Communist Party.
143
'-SfiilÄiiiÄ

viot«f»(». ThAt h Sí WJ^	tv BCOV» Cffl
ltd cmtskk ievmlif/tim et
. Howmai^ SMe:
