 THE PHILIPPINES
 Tumultuous events in February 1986 led to a peaceful transfer
 of power from the authoritarian regime of former President
 Marcos to a new democratic Government dedicated to political
 and economic reform. Assuming office in the aftermath of
 elections marked by widespread fraud and intimidation,
 President Corazon Aquino has moved to restore the rule of law
 and respect for human rights.
 The Aquino Government has ruled by executive decree since its
 suspension of the nation's 1973 Constitution and appointment
 of a Constitutional Commission to draft a new charter. The
 proposed constitution, including due process safeguards
 designed to prevent the recurrence of abuses perpetrated
 during 14 years of martial law, will be the subject of a
 national plebiscite scheduled for February 2, 1987.
 During 1986 the Aquino Government promulgated executive orders
 recognizing key civil rights, including the restoration of the
 writ of habeas corpus and reinstatement of protections against
 unreasonable search and seizure. Its commitment to human
 rights was dramatically demonstrated by the release of over
 600 political detainees and the establishment of a
 Presidential Commission on Human Rights. Freedom of speech
 and association were reaffirmed as an uncensored press
 contributed to revitalized political activity.
 Restoration of civil rights occurred in the shadow of an armed
 Communist insurgency active in most of the country's 73
 provinces. The signing of a 60-day ceasefire and commencement
 of substantive talks at year's end raised modest hopes for an
 end to 18 years of civil war. Complementing its success in
 negotiating a ceasefire with the Communists, the Government
 also began negotiations with armed Muslim separatists in the
 Sulu Archipelago and parts of Mindanao.
 Economic revitalization was a chief priority during the Aquino
 Government's first year in office. Reform of wasteful,
 corrupt, and inefficient practices indulged in during the
 Marcos years contributed to reversing three successive years
 of economic decline. Government statistics indicate that
 inflation has been reduced, capital flight stemmed, and modest
 economic growth restored. Nevertheless, much remains to be
 done to foster business confidence and attract the investment
 needed to restore high levels of economic growth.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 Political killings are alleged to occur regularly in areas
 where the Communist New People's Army (NPA) is actively
 engaged in combat with government forces.  Confrontations
 between armed forces occur frequently and an accurate estimate
 of fatalities is difficult. The gathering of reliable
 statistics on the incidence of politically motivated killing
 is further complicated by the common use of violence for both
 personal and political purposes. Distinctions between common
 criminal activity, personal vendettas, unauthorized reprisals,
 and legitimate counterinsurgency operations are often blurred.
 
 
 794
 THE PHILIPPINES
 Several human rights groups regularly report politically
 inspired killings by military security forces. One of these,
 Task Force Detainees (TFD), is a politically active, Catholic
 church-related group which investigates and compiles
 statistics only on alleged government violations of human
 rights. TFD does not document alleged atrocities committed by
 the NPA, a policy which reinforces reports that TFD has
 significant links to Communist elements.
 A ceasefire agreement between the Government and the NPA which
 took effect December 10 raised hopes for a significant
 reduction in killings by both sides. The stated purpose of
 this agreement was to establish a positive atmosphere for
 substantive peace talks. Work on an agenda for future
 negotiations began December 23.
 The Presidential Commission on Human Rights (PCHR) received
 complaints of 69 "salvagings" or summary executions by
 Government officials during the first 11 months of 1986.
 However, only one of the resulting investigations has been
 completed. The Ministry of National Defense (MND) reported
 that it had received 19 reports of "salvagings" committed by
 military personnel during the first 10 months of the year.
 These allegations are currently under investigation.
 In the 9 months ending September 30, TFD cites 88
 "salvagings."  Fifty-four deaths are attributed to military
 personnel, including Civil Home Defense Forces (CHDF), while
 the remainder are alleged to have resulted from the activities
 of private armies, religious fanatics, and other unidentified
 persons. TFD alleged a total of 238 salvagings during the
 same period in 1985.
 TFD also reports that 138 persons were killed in massacres,
 defined as "politically motivated killing of three or more
 persons within the same span by police/military/paramilitary
 authorities by means of strafing, bombing, and other related
 acts." The characterization of this latter category of
 killings as human rights violations is debatable, however,
 because the TFD's definition of "massacre" appears to
 encompass situations where civilians are caught in the cross
 fire of counterinsurgency operations.
 Politically motivated killings by CHDF and other paramilitary
 forces, including armed religious cults and private armies,
 continued in 1986. These forces operate in the local
 community, often without direct control or supervision from
 the New Armed Forces of the Philippines (NAFP). They are
 concentrated in areas where insurgents are active. The
 Government acknowledges abuses by the CHDF during the Marcos
 era and has undertaken to reform recruitment, training, and
 control of the CHDF, including discipline and replacement of
 abusive personnel. Human rights organizations have joined the
 PCHR in urging the abolition of the CHDF on grounds that they
 constitute extralegal vigilante groups used to perpetuate
 social and economic inequities. In Negros, for example, sugar
 plantation owners allegedly use private armed forces to
 control restless sugar workers. Most segments of the
 Government, including the military, nonetheless believe that
 the CHDF play an important role in the counterinsurgency
 effort and supplement the regular military's limited resources
 for affording protection to local residents. For their part,
 the insurgents use many forms of violence to further their
 political goals. To attain control of an area and substitute
 its own "revolutionary" government, the NPA uses intimidation,
 
 
 795
 THE PHILIPPINES
 kidnaping, and assassination against government officials,
 businessmen, and other civilians who resist. Communist
 presence and/or influence in a village is frequently evidenced
 by the assassination of local government officials and
 police. Corrupt and abusive officials are often killed first,
 both as an example and as a method to win support of the
 people. Those who resist Communist efforts to assert control,
 any person suspected of informing for the Government, and NPA
 defectors run the risk of assassination.
 The MND reports that the NPA was involved in 2,382 violent
 activities, including raids, ambushes, liquidations,
 kidnapings, bombings, and arson during the first 10 months of
 1986. These incidents resulted in the killing of 842
 military, police, and paramilitary personnel as well as the
 deaths of 756 civilians. These insurgent operations further
 resulted in 1,123 injuries overall. Muslim rebel groups were
 involved in 276 violent incidents which resulted in 224 deaths
 and 340 injuries.
 The presidential elections held in February were marred by
 violence and killings, some allegedly perpetrated by
 government security forces and private armies under the
 control of local officials. The most publicized incident was
 the February 11 assassination of Evelio B. Javier, former
 governor of Antique. The National Citizens Movement for Free
 Elections (NAMFREL), accredited by the Government as a
 pollwatcher, documented 750 cases of intimidation and violence
 perpetrated mostly against NAMFREL volunteers, opposition
 supporters, board of election inspectors, and the voting
 public. Four NAMFREL volunteers died in election-related
 incidents and 160 others sustained physical injuries.
 In November prominent labor leader and political activist
 Rolando Olalia was murdered in Manila. Olalia's outspoken
 advocacy of leftist causes raised suspicions that his murder
 was politically motivated. President Aquino has publicly
 condemned those responsible for the killing and authorized an
 intensive investigation to locate his assassins. A
 noncommissioned officer in the Military Intelligence Group was
 apprehended on December 16 and has been placed in pretrial
 confinement.
 b. Disappearance
 The PCHR has received 19 complaints of politically motivated
 disappearance through December 8. This figure compares with
 TFD's claim that 43 disappearances occurred in the 9 months
 ending September 30. Both statistics suggest that the
 incidence of politically motivated disappearances has abated
 substantially since the accession of the Aquino Government.
 TFD reported 189 disappearances in 1985.
 Altogether, TFD claims that 619 persons disappeared during the
 Marcos years. Only a fraction of these cases have as yet been
 made the subject of an investigation by the PCHR. An
 independent organization, Families of Victims of Involuntary
 Disappearances (FIND), has been created to investigate the
 disappearance of family members, but it has made little
 progress to date.
 Hostage-taking for ransom or publicity is a common practice
 among armed Muslim groups in Mindanao. During 1986 a French
 priest, 10 Filipino Carmelite nuns, and an American missionary
 were abducted in the vicinity of Marawi by captors believed to
 
 
 796
 THE PHILIPPINES
 be connected to one of the region's rival Muslim political
 factions. A Swiss tourist was kidnaped in Zamboanga City and
 held for 3 months before his release. In all cases, the
 victims were released unharmed with no ransom paid.
 Philippine law enforcement agencies currently are
 investigating the unresolved November 1986 kidnaping of a
 prominent Japanese businessman. The Aquino Government has
 been unsuccessful in ascertaining the fate of the leftist
 priest Father Rudy Romano, whose July 1985 disappearance in
 Cebu continues to elicit considerable international concern.
 Nonetheless, a military tribunal has been convened and
 preliminary hearings held to try armed forces intelligence
 agents alleged to have participated in his kidnaping.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 Twenty-seven allegations of torture have been filed with the
 PCHR through December 8. TFD, however, claims to have
 documented 238 incidents of torture during the first 9 months
 of the year. The TFD figure is still much less than the
 approximately 780 cases alleged by TFD in 1985--a reduction
 largely attributable to President Aquino's outspoken
 opposition to the use of torture by government security
 forces. The use of "safe houses" as sites for torture of
 detainees by government intelligence personnel has reportedly
 ended, although some military personnel associated with the
 perpetration of such abuse remain on active duty.
 Philippine human rights groups nonetheless continue to allege
 that torture and related abuses by the military are prevalent
 in areas where government forces are actively engaged in
 counterinsurgency operations. They claim that innocent
 farmers in insurgent-influenced areas are detained and
 tortured by military officials seeking information on rebel
 activity.
 Such claims notwithstanding, there is no evidence to suggest
 that such occurrences are presently widespread, systematic, or
 condoned at senior military levels. While abuses may still
 occur sporadically in the field, the MND is engaged in an
 educational campaign to improve military treatment of
 civilians. Officers have attended seminars and workshops
 stressing human rights and their role in communicating respect
 for those values to soldiers under their command. Commanding
 officers are held responsible for the behavior of their troops
 and have been granted increased discretion to discipline their
 men for infractions. In an effort to deter abusive behavior,
 the Aquino Government has focused attention, albeit with
 severely limited resources, on improved living conditions for
 the common soldier. Some human rights advocates credit the
 military for an increased responsiveness to allegations of
 abuse. They report that many complaints to the MND have
 resulted in prompt investigation and action.
 Although physical punishment is not officially allowed under
 the Philippine penal system, there are reports that it
 frequently occurs in jails and prisons. Philippine prison
 conditions are harsh and charges of police brutality common.
 Despite administrative controls, persons in police custody are
 often beaten, either to extract confessions or in retaliation
 for perceived actions against the police.
 
 
 797
 THE PHILIPPINES
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Among the most commonly alleged human rights violations under
 the Marcos regime were arbitrary arrests and so-called
 "preventive" detention in purported defense of national
 security. Upon assuming power, President Aquino quickly
 repealed the grant of authority under which these detentions
 occurred, restored the writ of habeas corpus, and released
 over 600 political prisoners detained under the previous
 regime. The release of these prisoners, including several
 prominent Communist leaders, did not, however, constitute a
 pardon for any crimes they may have committed, and a decision
 whether to prosecute some of them is currently pending.
 Despite its decision to release detainees held for political
 offenses, the Aquino Government has been criticized by the TFD
 for the continued detention of some 400 persons whose
 convictions for crimes such as unlawful possession of
 firearms, arson, and kidnaping purportedly are associated with
 the furtherance of political objectives. A committee
 established to review this issue has recommended that
 President Aquino pardon prisoners convicted of such crimes
 committed before February 25, 1986. Local prosecutors and
 judges presently are reviewing disputed cases.
 The PCHR received eight complaints of illegal arrest or
 detention in the first 11 months of 1986. TFD reported a
 total of 603 politically motivated arrests in the 9 months
 ending September 30, down from 5,967 in 1985. Since TFD
 defines arrest as "the taking or seizing of a person with or
 without warrant," this figure is not restricted to illegal
 arrests. The MND reports that, as of October 15, there were
 15 detainees held on charges of rebellion. No persons are in
 detention who were arrested under a presidential commitment
 order or a preventive detention action. In October 1986,
 police arrested Rodolfo Salas, the alleged former leader of
 the Communist Party of the Philippines (CPP). The Government
 promptly filed rebellion charges against him, stemming from
 his activities both before and after the fall of the Marcos
 regime. Salas is presently being held in military custody
 pending trial on any or all of these charges. His wife and
 security guard, who were arrested at the same time, were
 released on their own recognizance.
 The current policy of the Philippine Constabulary requires
 charges to be filed within 6 to 18 hours after a person is
 taken into police custody, depending on the seriousness of the
 crime. While Philippine law contains procedural safeguards
 protecting the rights of accused criminals, including
 provisions for bail, persons are often denied access to legal
 counsel and frequently detained on false charges.
 With the repeal of authority to detain suspects preventively
 and the restoration of the writ of habeas corpus, persons are
 generally now charged promptly after their arrest. Persons
 suspected of being rebels constitute a prominent exception to
 the rule and commonly are detained without charge and
 questioned for a period of up to several days. This practice
 has gained currency because military officials believe that it
 is futile to arrest rebels who would flee the area after being
 released on bail. Usually, suspected NPA partisans are
 released without arrest. Human rights lawyers criticize this
 military practice, arguing that law enforcement officials grew
 unaccustomed to observing due process during martial law and
 no longer know how to gather sufficient evidence to make a
 legal arrest and to convince a judge to deny bail.
 
 
 798
 THE PHILIPPINES
 The new Supreme Court has signaled its intent that the police
 adhere to procedural safeguards. In September it issued a
 decision resulting in the acquittal of a suspected rebel
 arrested without a warrant. The Court strongly warned law
 enforcement agencies to observe proscriptions against unlawful
 arrests and illegal search and seizure.
 There is no evidence that Philippine authorities systematically
 use internal or foreign exile of undesired persons for
 political purposes. Nor is there evidence of compulsory or
 forced labor.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 During the Marcos administration, the Philippine judiciary was
 widely perceived to be subject to political influence and
 corruption. The Aquino Government has overhauled judicial
 institutions and established a committee to review judges,
 recommending those who should be replaced for reasons of
 incompetence or corruption and proposing replacements. As of
 October 1, the Government had reviewed and reformed the
 Supreme Court, Appellate Court, and Sandiganbayan (or
 antigraft) Court, relieving and replacing judges suborned in
 the administration of martial law. These dislocations have
 aggravated chronic docketing delays which regularly prolong
 judicial proceedings for years. Human rights organizations
 have criticized the practice of trying military personnel,
 police, and firefighters in military courts rather than before
 civilian tribunals, regardless of whether the offense is or is
 not service related. These groups claim that such special
 judicial treatment insulates military personnel and encourages
 a more lenient standard of justice. Responding to these
 concerns, the Government has proposed that the civilian court
 system be given jurisdiction over all offenses committed by
 police and nonservice-related offenses committed by members of
 the armed forces.
 On the petition of lawyers representing the family of the
 convicted assassin, the Supreme Court has ordered a new trial
 in the controversial acquittal of Fabian Ver, former Chief of
 Staff, and others accused in the 1983 slaying of opposition
 leader Benigno Aquino. The Court acted on the recommendation
 of a government commission, which found the earlier proceeding
 flawed by the denial of due process, and concurred in its
 finding that a new trial would not violate protections against
 double jeopardy.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Overt government interference with family life is minimal.
 Parents are free to raise their children as they see fit.
 Religious practices and political affiliation, with the
 notable exception of membership in the outlawed CPP, is
 unregulated. The Government does not interfere with free
 personal use of the mails or other public communication
 systems. A newly reconstituted Supreme Court hasrecently
 upheld the prohibition against unlawful searches and seizures.
 Shortly after assuming office, President Aquino established a
 Presidential Commission on Good Government (PCGG) to
 investigate alleged misappropriation of government funds by
 former President Marcos and his close associates. Critics
 argue that the PCGG's subsequent sequestration of properties
 pending a disposition of charges constitutes a violation of
 
 
 799
 THE PHILIPPINES
 due process. The proposed constitution provides that property
 under sequestration, or subsequently sequestered within a
 period of 6 months after ratification, must be returned to its
 owners' control if no judicial disposition to the contrary is
 made within 18 months.
 Military engagements between government forces and insurgent
 elements have resulted in the widespread displacement of
 civilians. While some of these movements are of long
 duration, such as the resettlement of Muslim communities in
 the southern Philippines, brief displacements lasting only a
 few days are more common. The Philippine Red Cross and the
 International Committee of the Red Cross have programs to
 assist persons forced to evacuate combat zones.
 Human rights groups allege that military units have sought to
 isolate insurgent forces from their rural support base by
 imposing food blockades and forcibly resettling, or
 "hamletting," entire communities against their will.
 Communist-influenced areas of the Cagayan Valley, the Bicol
 area of Luzon, Samar, Negros Islands in the Visayas, and
 troubled areas of Mindanao are frequently cited as affected
 regions. While the displacement of rural populations is an
 irrefutable phenomenon, there is no reliable evidence that the
 Government is pursuing any concerted resettlement policy.
 Furthermore, it is unclear whether people are leaving combat
 areas against their will or, if so, whether these movements
 are occasioned by government or insurgent forces.
 The PCHR has received three complaints of forced evacuation
 and three complaints of hamletting. TFD alleges seven
 incidents of hamletting, defined as "forcible transfer of
 communities which the military consider as dissidents'
 sanctuaries." TFD further claims 34 incidents of mass
 evacuation, liberally defined as the "massive transfer of
 people from [their place of] residence to another area because
 of direct military orders or [from] fear caused by military
 operations." Armed Forces Chief of Staff Ramos has ordered an
 investigation of such allegations.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Restrictions on freedom of expression in the Philippines were
 lifted in 1986 for the first time in nearly 14 years. The
 Aquino Government tolerates criticism of its policies,
 permitting the expression of dissent on government-owned
 televison and radio stations. While allowing their continued
 operation, the Government has sequestered the assets of
 several newspapers, radio, and television stations directly or
 indirectly owned by relatives and close associates of former
 President Marcos.
 Radio is an important news source throughout the Philippines,
 reaching more than 70 percent of all households. Independent
 radio operators have multiplied under the Aquino Government.
 Several provincial stations, influenced by Marcos associates
 from overseas, engage in frequent criticism of the Government,
 while other stations reflect a leftist political orientation.
 Radio Veritas, a church-owned radio station, was one of the
 few sources of independent news coverage under the Marcos
 regime and played a prominent role in informing public opinion
 during the change in government.
 
 
 800
 THE PHILIPPINES
 The Philippine public has access to many major uncensored
 international news publications, as well as some foreign radio
 and-television broadcasting. Foreign journalists were largely
 unhinder9d in reporting events. Several major U.S. newspapers
 and one television network have bureaus in Manila.
 'b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Freedom of peaceful assembly and association was widely
 observed in 1986. A broad range of private, professional,
 religious, social, charitable, and political organizations
 flourish in the Philippines. Countless popular and civic
 organizations exist and meet regularly.
 Permits from local authorities are required for outdoor
 demonstrations in public places, but rallies and marches often
 are held without permits. The Aquino Government, itself the
 product of public sentiment popularized as "People Power," has
 observed a liberal policy allowing demonstrations in all but
 the most provocative circumstances. Adroitly defusing a
 political challenge by supporters of former President Marcos
 at the Manila Hotel in July, the Aquino Government has
 nonetheless permitted continued criticism of its policies by
 Marcos loyalists in regularly scheduled rallies throughout the
 country.
 The Aquino Government respects the right of labor to organize,
 to elect representatives, and call strikes in pursuit of
 improved conditions of labor. Work stoppages were common
 during 1986. The Government regularly enjoined the police and
 military from interfering with pickets. The Aquino Government
 has neither dissolved, suspended, nor threatened such action
 against any trade union. Indeed, the Government offered its
 assistance to trade unions through a labor conciliation office
 operated by the Ministry of Labor and Employment (MOLE).
 Trade unions claim nearly 5 million members, including
 2.7 million members in the National Congress of Farmers
 (NCFO). Membership in the NCFO is often nominal, and its
 nonrural membership of approximately 2 million is probably
 exaggerated. Union membership as a percent of the urban work
 force probably ranges from 10 to 12 percent.
 Through August 1986, 243 new unions were registered, up from
 192 for all of 1985. The Trade Union Congress of the
 Philippines (TUCP) is affiliated with the International
 Confederation of Free Trade Unions (ICFTU) while the smaller
 Federation of Free Workers (FFW-Tan Wing) is affiliated with
 the World Confederation of Labor. Three national union bodies
 in the Philippines are affiliated with the World Federation of
 Trade Unions (WFTU). Independent unions are affiliated with
 their respective international trade secretariats.
 The Communist-influenced Kilusang Mayo Uno (May First Movement
 or KMU) is the only significant labor organization tied to a
 political party. Under recently assassinated Rolando Olalia,
 the KMU helped found the Communist-controlled Partido ng Bayan
 (PNB) or People's Party. Even though many of its affiliates
 are led by non-Communists, the KMU followed the Communist lead
 in boycotting the February elections. The TUCP, however,
 endorsed the citizens' watchdog group, NAMFREL, during the
 February presidential election campaign, and fielded 7,000
 volunteers for it. Trade unions in the Philippines are
 relatively independent of government influence. They and
 their properties enjoy tax exempt status.
 
 
 801
 THE PHILIPPINES
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Although over 80 percent of the population is Roman Catholic,
 there is no established state religion. Freedom of religion
 is fully respected, and no official discrimination is
 practiced against any religious group.
 The country's sizable Muslim minority, a number of Protestant
 groups, and the indigenous Iglesia ni Kristo (a sect unique to
 the Philippines) enjoy full religious freedom. Members of the
 Philippine Chinese community follow their traditional faiths
 while many smaller cultural groups follow animistic religious
 practices. Foreign clergymen and missionaries of various
 faiths regularly discharge their duties without difficulty.
 Religious minorities are represented among the leadership and
 rank and file of broad-based political parties. Government
 service is open to all on a nondiscriminatory basis, and
 senior civil and military officials belong to minority
 religious and cultural groups.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Filipinos enjoy freedom to change their place of residence and
 employment. They regularly travel abroad and emigration is
 freely permitted. Philippine nationals are frequently
 employed overseas, particularly in the Middle Fast. Many
 political exiles who fled the country during the Marcos years
 in power have returned to the Philippines. In a notable
 exception to its general practice, the Aquino Government has
 revoked the passports, and thus prevented the repatriation, of
 former President Marcos, his family, and close associates. In
 addition, several hundred people closely connected with the
 Marcos Government are presently barred from leaving the
 country on account of ongoing investigations into their
 alleged misconduct under the former regime.
 While not accepting refugees for resettlement, the Philippines
 does not turn away refugees who may arrive on its shores. As
 of September 30, there were 2,993 Indochinese in a first
 asylum camp in Palawan. In addition to providing first asylum
 for "boat people," the Government is cooperating with the
 United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees by permitting
 the operation of a major refugee processing center in Bataan
 province. Here nearly 10,000 refugees and other displaced
 persons receive language instruction, cultural orientation,
 and vocational training before being resettled elsewhere.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 President Corazon Aquino assumed power on February 25, 1986,
 capping a remarkable succession of events forcing former
 President Marcos to flee the country after 20 years of
 autocratic rule. The "People's Power" revolution which
 toppled the Marcos regime followed a presidential election
 February 7 that many Filipinos and foreign observers claimed
 to have been marred by fraud perpetrated by supporters of
 former President Marcos. NAMFREL estimated that 4.8 million
 voters were disenfranchised or prevented from voting. A U.S.
 observer delegation witnessed "disturbing ... efforts to
 undermine the integrity of (the) process, both during the
 voting and vote counting process." After the National
 Assembly declared President Marcos the winner, the Minister of
 
 
 802
 THE PHILIPPINES
 Defense joined forces with the acting Chief of Staff to
 initiate a military revolt joined by thousands of civilians
 supporting Corazon Aquino.
 The Aquino Government derives its legitimacy from its triumph
 in the February election and from manifestations of popular
 support immediately thereafter. On March 25, President Aquino
 issued Proclamation No. 3, known as the "Freedom
 Constitution," which remains the legal basis for her
 administration. The decree establishes an interim charter
 retaining most of the 1973 Constitution and existing laws,
 while abolishing the National Assembly. The Aquino Government
 substituted officers-in-charge for local officials appointed
 by President Marcos to terms of office expiring in March 1986.
 President Aquino has made substantial progress toward her goal
 of restorinq constitutional democratic rule to the Philippines
 during her first year in office. A Presidential Commission
 has completed work on the proposed text of a new constitution
 which will be submitted for ratification by popular vote on
 February 2, 1987. In accordance with provisions of that
 charter, elections for a new bicameral congress are scheduled
 for May 11, 1987 with balloting for local officials to follow.
 Pending adoption of the new constitution, President Aquino
 continues to legislate by executive order subject to
 observance of civil rights guaranteed by the 1973
 Constitution. She prefers to wait until the congress is in
 place to consider major legislative initiatives, and argued
 against addressing legislative matters in the proposed
 constitution.
 The proposed constitution establishes a presidential system of
 government similar to that in existence before the 1972
 declaration of martial law. The framers have carefully
 limited the power of the president and established a strong
 bicameral legislature and independent local governments to
 discourage the assumption of extraordinary powers as exercised
 by former President Marcos. The constitution recognizes
 minority demands by establishing autonomous regions in Muslim
 areas of Sulu and Mindanao and in indigenous regions of
 northern Luzon. Institutions of autonomous government will be
 implemented by the new national legislature.
 Political party organization is proceeding rapidly as
 political entities adjust to a newly democratized
 environment. Numerous parties representing a broad cross
 section of political opinion operate both regionally and
 nationally throughout the Philippines. President Aquino has
 reconstituted the Commission on Elections and led the campaign
 for new nationwide voter registration in December. Although
 the Communist Party of the Philippines is outlawed, party
 members have been instrumental in organizing the Partido ng
 Bayan (PNB), a leftist organization created to contest
 upcoming local and legislative elections. The December 10
 cessation of hostilities agreement between the Government and
 the NPA/CCP and their holding of preliminary talks on
 outstanding political differences has raised hopes for further
 reducing bloodshed. A shifting of competition from armed
 conflict to political dialogue has been illustrated by the
 emergence of prominent Communist leaders and the widespread
 coverage of their activities in national and local media.
 The Catholic Church, or at least many of its leading local
 clerics, priests and nuns, plays an important political role
 
 
 803
 THE PHILIPPINES
 in the Philippines. The church hierarchy, including the
 outspoken Cardinal Sin, regularly criticized excesses under
 Marcos and contributed significantly to his fall. The
 Church-owned Radio Veritas called on citizens to protect
 military rebels during a crucial moment in events leading to a
 peaceful change of government.
 While less active in the day-to-day affairs of the Aquino
 Government, the Church continues to champion social reform and
 economic development benefiting the poor. Clerics are active
 in promoting a reconciliatory approach toward the ongoing
 Communist insurgency and, in at least one region, have been
 instrumental in organizing a program designed to reintegrate
 rebel defectors into Philippine society.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The Philippines is party to all principal U.N. human rights
 and refugee conventions. In 1986 the Philippines participated
 in the U.N. Human Rights Commission. Representatives from
 various international human rights groups, including Amnesty
 International and the World Council of Churches, visited the
 Philippines in 1986 and met with both government officials and
 private citizens involved with human rights matters. On her
 visit to the United States in September 1986, President Aquino
 spoke to the Lawyer's Committee on Human Rights in New York.
 Within a month after assuming office, President Aquino
 established the Presidential Commission on Human Rights
 (PCHR). Its task is to investigate alleged violations of
 human rights committed during both past and present
 administrations, and to advise the President on appropriate
 action. As of December 8, the PCHR had accepted 694
 complaints and referred 235 complaints to other agencies,
 including the Judge Advocate General's Office, the Board of
 Pardons and Appeals, and the Ministry of Justice, for lack of
 jurisdiction. Investigations were terminated in 21 cases and
 recommended to other agencies for prosecution. Of the 694
 complaints filed, 214 relate to incidents alleged to have
 occurred during 1986. When a complaint is filed, the PCHR
 conducts an investigation, including a closed hearing with
 testimony by the complainant and the accused. The PCHR or its
 staff will occasionally travel to the site of the alleged
 infraction to conduct its own investigation. If the PCHR
 determines that a prima facie case is made, it will either
 refer the case for judicial review or expedite a case already
 before the courts. To date, no complaints filed with the PCHR
 have resulted in a final court decision. The proposed
 constitution would remove the PCHR from the Office of the
 President, expand its scope to include nongovernmental human
 rights violations, and grant it quasi-judicial powers.
 The PCHR interprets its charter to permit investigation of
 government human rights violations. Its failure to
 investigate purported violations by armed insurgents has
 elicited concern among military elements. At the urging of
 the New Armed Forces of the Philippines, President Aquino has
 agreed to create a new commission to investigate allegations
 of atrocities committed by the NPA, but has yet to implement
 her decision. The Aquino Government has mandated compulsory
 study of human rights in the nation's schools.
 
 
 804
 THE PHILIPPINES
 The Ministry of National Defense was active during 1986 in
 disciplining military personnel for involvement in human
 rights violations. In the 7 and 1/2 months ending on October
 15, 131 Integrated National Police personnel and 469 NAFP
 officers and enlisted men were discharged or separated for
 human rights violations. During this period, 2,975 complaints
 of human rights abuse were filed, resulting in 858 referrals
 to courts-martial.
 Many Philippine religious groups are active in the human
 rights field. These groups are almost exclusively concerned
 with abuses committed by government officials and to date have
 not addressed nongovernmental violations of human rights,
 particularly those committed by Communist NPA rebels. These
 groups are unhindered in conducting investigations throughout
 the country.
 Task Force Detainees (TFD), established in 1974 by the
 association of major religious superiors of the Catholic
 Church and presently headed by a member of the PCHR, is the
 foremost independent investigatory organization.
 Headquartered in Manila, with unit offices in most provinces,
 it investigates alleged human rights violations and publishes
 its findings. Long an outspoken critic of the Marcos regime
 and its military establishment, TFD focuses on official
 violations of human rights and does not document abuses
 reportedly perpetrated by the NPA, Muslim separatists, or
 other nongovernmental organizations. With the release of
 hundreds of political detainees in 1986, TFD has joined other
 groups in setting up programs to provide support and
 assistance to former political prisoners.
 Violations alleged by TFD are documented by name of the
 victim, the date and place of the incident. While
 uncorroborated by other human rights organizations, TFD's own
 statistics reflect a dramatic decline in the incidence of
 government-sponsored human rights abuse, especially in the
 frequency of politically motivated arrest. Another group,
 Samahan ng mga Ex-Detainees Laban sa Detensyion et para sa
 Amnestiya (SELDA), is attempting to obtain indemnification and
 justice for persons detained by the Marcos government. SELDA
 has filed a class action suit for monetary damages in a U.S.
 court against former President Marcos and former Chief of
 Staff General Ver, alleging torture, illegal detention, and
 arrest. Many human rights groups are also active at the
 provincial level. The Philippine Alliance of Human Rights
 Advocates (PAHRA), a coalition of 60 organizations with
 overlapping membership, was founded in May 1986. Like TFD,
 PAHRA comments only on abuses committed by government forces.
 The Free Legal Assistance Group (FLAG), the Mabini Lawyers'
 Group, and the Protestant Lawyers' League have taken the lead
 in providing legal assistance for the victims of human rights
 abuse. President Aquino has appointed many human rights
 lawyers to key positions in her Government, including the
 chairmanship of the PCHR. Over 20 former Mabini lawyers hold
 government positions. The Integrated Bar of the Philippines,
 a national bar association to which all lawyers in the
 Philippines belong, takes positions on human rights issues and
 has organized human rights committees active at the provincial
 level.
 
 
 805
 THE PHILIPPINES
 Section 5   Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 Muslims in the southern Philippines constitute the most
 numerous national minority. While not targeted as part of any
 concerted governmental discrimination, they and indigenous
 groups have historically received less than their fair share
 of governmental services. The Aquino Government has committed
 resources to correcting this inequity and is pushing for the
 adoption of a new constitution recognizing the rights of
 cultural minorities within the framework of national unity and
 development.
 Under the Marcos regime, two regional autonomous governments
 were established in the Muslim region and since 1977 religious
 courts have been given authority to apply Muslim personal law
 to the adjudication of civil disputes. Notwithstanding these
 government concessions, Muslim groups continue to press for
 greater autonomy or outright secession. The Moro National
 Liberation Front (MNLF) and the Moro Islamic Liberation Front
 (MILF) figure prominently among separatist groups with widely
 varying political agendas. Muslim demands for greater
 autonomy raise the prospect of serious sectarian strife
 because Christians constitute a majority in many Muslim areas.
 Women enjoy full voting privileges and have the right to own
 and inherit property. They are prominent in Philippine
 society and well-represented in business and professions such
 as law, medicine, education, and journalism. President Aquino
 heads a large roster of women active and influential at all
 levels of government. Nonetheless, Philippine law continues
 to discriminate against women. Prominent examples of
 discrimination include limitations on a woman's right to buy
 and sell property and more exacting standards in criminal
 prosecutions for adultery.
 CONDITIONS OF LABOR
 The legally prescribed minimum wage of $2.75 per day for urban
 workers and as little as $1.75 per day for nonplantation
 agricultural laborers is generally considered inadequate to
 support a single adult wage-earner. Nonetheless, because of
 widespread disregard for paying the minimum wage to the least
 experienced laborers, the figure represents the average for
 all workers, including the most highly paid. Thirteen-month
 bonus pay is standard for most businesses and enterprises.
 Philippine law mandates a 48-hour work week and a full day of
 rest per week. Every employee with more than 1 year on the
 job is entitled to 5 days' paid leave. The minimum age of
 employment is 15. The Government has special authority to
 determine hours and working conditions among youths aged 15 to
 18 years. Discrimination in payment of such persons is
 prohibited. A comprehensive set of enforceable occupational
 safety and health standards is in effect and provisions
 prohibiting child labor, protecting younger workers and women,
 and regulating hazardous or harmful working conditions are
 relatively advanced. However, funding to field an appropriate
 number of professional labor inspectors to enforce payment of
 the minimum wage and provision of adequate working conditions
 is limited.
 
 
 806
 U.S.OVfRSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.PISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: PHILIPPINES
 1984     1985     1986
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL...        106.3    239.7    355.8
 LOANS ..............    ... 23.1     60.8      6.9
 GRANTS .............        83.2    178.9    348.9
 A.AID ....................     84.3    182.9    351.4
 LOANS ..............    ... 23.1     20.8      6.9
 GRANTS ................    61.2    162.1    344.5
 (SEC.SUPP.ASSIST.)...        50.0     140.0    300.3
 B.FOOD FOR PEACE .......        17.1     51.5      0.0
 LOANS ..............         0.0     40.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................    17.1     11.5      0.0
 TITLE I-TOTAL ..........0.0              40.0      0.0
 REPAY. IN $-LOANS .....         0.0     40.0      0.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR .....         0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE  II-TOTAL .........       17.1     11.5      0.0
 E.RELIEF.EC.OEV & WFP.          0.1      0.0      0.0
 VOL.RELIEF  AGENCY .....       17.0     11.5      0.0
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST...          4.9      5.3      4.4
 LOANS ..............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ..............        4.9      5.3      4.4
 PEACE  CORPS ......       4.9       5.3      4.4
 NARCOTICS ........        0.0       0.0      0.0
 OTHER ...............    0.0      0.0      0.0
 II.MIL.  ASSIST.-TOTAL...        51.5     42.2    105.1
 LOANS ..............  .... 50.0      15.0     14.4
 GRANTS ................     1.5     27.2     90.7
 A.MAP  GRANTS ..........        0.0     25.0     88.3
 3.CREDIT FINANCING ....        50.0     15.0     14.4
 C.INTL MIL.E.TRNG ....         1.5      2.2      2.4
 D.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK...          0.0      0.0      0.0
 =.OTHER  GRANTS ........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. & MIL...        157.8    281.9    460.9
 LOANS ..............    ... 73.1     75.8     21.3
 GRANTS ................    84.7    206.1    439.6
 OTHER  US  LOANS ..........      78.8      3.3      0.0
 EX-IM BANK LOANS .......        78.8      0.0      0.0
 ALL  OTHER ..............        0.0      0.3      0.0
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1984     1985     1986     1946-86
 TOTAL ........   523.8     450.2    288,0   7173.5
 IBRO             183.2     254.0    151.0   4459.8
 IFC                0.0      48.1     37.0    255.2
 IO                 0.0     0.0       0.0    122,2
 103                0.0       0.0      0.0      0.0
 A03              337.8     145.9    100.0   2220.2
 AFOB               0.0       0.0      0.0      0.0
 UNDP                2.8      2.2      0.0     70.6
 OTIER-UN           0.0       0.0      0.0     45.5
 EEC                0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 
 
 807
