 THE PHIL"PINES
 The Philippines is a democratic republic with an elected President, a fully func-
 tioning political party system, a bicameral legislature, a free press, and an inde-
 pendent judiciary. Fidel Ramen was elected President in a closely contested but gen-
 erally fair election in May 1992. This was the first constitutional transfer of power
 since 1965.
 In 1993 the Government continued a program of national reconciliation that in-
 cluded peace talks with the three main insurgent groups. In 1994 it promulgated
 regulations governing implementation of an amnesty to those who applied for it.
 The program was an important factor in reducing the level of violence, although
 fighting continues on a reduced scale.
 T1e Department of National Defense controls the Armed Forces of the Philippines
 (AFP) and the Department of Interior and Local Government supervises the civilian
 Philippine National Police (PNP). The two fores _share responsibility for fighting a
 decining Communist insurgency and radical Muslim separatists. According to te
 Commission on Human Rights (CuR), an independent government agency, the po-
 lice continued to be the leading abusers of human rights. Military forces, including
 local civilian militias, the Communist New People's Army (NPA) and Muslim insur-
 gent groups also committed human rights abuses (see Section l.a.).
 The Government is implementing a far-reaching reform program ("Philippines
 200) to convert its agrarian-based paternalistic economy into an industrial mar-
 ket-driven one, with key reforms already underway in foreign investment, banking
 and trade. Export-led growth (dominated by textiles, electronics, agriculturai prod-
 ucts, and copper) and foreign investment contributed to the 5 percent increase in
 gross national product in 1994, up strongly from the 2.2 percent increase of the year
 before. While the Government has accelerated market reforms, glaring income dis-
 parities and widespread poverty remain, the result of years of mismanagement
 under previous governments. In addition, an entrenched oligarchical elite continues
 to dominate the economy and politics and, at times, thwart reformist efforts.
 Human rights abuses continued in 1994, although the number of violations re-
 ported in the first half of the year decreased significantly in most categories. The
 decline in abuses primarily reflected a reduction in the number of military encoun-
 ters between government and insurgent forces, at a time when the Government has
 been discussing a limited accommodation with, Communist insurgents and Muslim
 espite greater government and nongovernmental organization (NGO) commit-
 ment to improving human rights, human rights violations continue. These included
 extrajudicial killings, disappearances, arbitrary arrests, torture, and harassment of
 civil rights activists and suspected insurgents and their supporters. Many of these
 abuses, which were widely reported in the press, are perpetuated within the context
 of police and  itinvolvement in illegal activities such as protection rackets, po-
 litical gangsterism, kdap for ransom syndicates and assistance to illegal loggers.
 The Government has taken some steps to curb these abuses, although not always
 successfully.
 Violence and discrimination against women and children continue to be serious
 problems. Legislation enacted to dl with these problems has been well intentioned
 
 
 670
 but largely ineffective due to budget constraints and the Government's failure to set
 implementing guidelines. The justice system remains largely ineffective in dealing
 with human rights abuses. There was little observable progress in trying, convict-
 ing, and punishing perpetrators of these abuses.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extra judicial Killing.-The CHR reported 57 incidents of
 political or extrajudicial killing during the fiat half of 1994. It reported 254 such
 killings for 1993. Task Force Detainees of the Philippines (TFDP), a prominent NGO
 (see Secion 4), reported 27 people killed extrajudicially in the first half of 1994 as
 compared to 75 for all of 1993. The numbers given by CUR are higher, in part, be-
 cause the CUR includes violations by both the Government and insurnt groups,
 including the Communist Party of the Philippines and its armed win,  e New Peo-
 ple's Army (CPP/NPA), while the TFDP lists only offenses attributed to government
 authorities.
 Both CUR and TFDP attribute the majority of human rights abuses, including
 extrajudicial killings, to the police and military forces, including civilian militia
 units. The CUR reported that in the first half of 1994 the PNP was the target of
 complaints in 251 out of 586 cases it received. In April two Manila policemen were
 implicated in the case of a suspected thief who was taken at night from his cell and
 found dead the next morning. In December a Manila policeman was charged with
 murder for killing a tricycle driver who reportedly refused to come inside the police
 station for questioin.
 Police sometimes kill alleged criminals in staged shootouts. This may have been
 the case in the death of Abundio Lagunday, a suspect in the particularly brutal rape
 and killing of a 7-year-old girl, Angel Alquiza, a few days after his arrest. Police
 alleged that enroute to the scene of the crime, Lagunday, in handcuffs, grabbed the
 gun of one of his escorts. In the ensuing scuffle, the police fatally shot Lagunday.
 The authorities promised an investigatlon, but there was no report released by
 year's end. The public and private consensus was that Lagunday was executed.
 In a September encounter with members of the Red Scorpion Group kidnap gang,
 police operatives shot dead six alleged members of the gang. Although one police
 officer suffered a gunshot wound, questions were raised as to whether the deaths
 were executions. In February a leadig member of the Presidential Anticrime Com-
 mission (PACC) reported that it regularly receives requests from relatives of victims
 of heinous crimes to kill the suspects extrajudicialy.
 In late February, approximately 10 victims of"salvaging" (the local term for
 extrajudicial killing) were found in Manila. Most of the victims were alleged drug
 dealers or misfits. Public sentiment pointed to police or local citizens (vigilantes) as
 the perpetrators. Real or suspected police involvement also discouraged potential
 witnesses from testifying about the kilings.
 In an effort reform the police force, President Ramos and the PNP leadership in
 March dismissed 1,145 police officers and suspended another 1,020.
 Civilian militia units or citizens armed forces geographical units (CAFGs) also
 committed extrajudicial killings. Organized by the police and the AEP to secure
 areas cleared of insurgents, these nonprofessional units are often inadequately
 trained, poorly supervised, and prone to violence. However, reflecting the further re-
 duction im antrinsurgency activity, beth the TFDP and CuR attribute only about 5
 percent of human rights violations in the first half of 1994 to CAFGU's.
 In a case that attracted wide attention in February 1993, two CAFGU personnel
 were charged with killing Chris Batan, a TFDP worker, in Mountain province. The
 authorities arrested one suspect, who remains in jail. Police have not arrested the
 second suspect even though he has reportedly been seen regularly in public. In a
 case of a successful prosecution, in September the Supreme Court upheldthe convic-
 tion of two CAFGU members for the 1990 killing of a policeman and two other peo-
 ple.
 As part of its continuing effort to disband CAFGs, the military reduced the
 72,000-member CAFGU'S by about 6,000 men in 1994. The military announced that
 in 1995 CAFGU forces would be reduced further to about 58,000. The Government
 plans to cut the CAFGU budget by around 10 percent in 1995. However, the Gov-
 ernment is hesitant to reduce CAFGU levels more rapidly because it fears that dis-
 missed CAFGU members without employment prospects will resort to banditry and
 other criminal activities.
 AFP violations of human rights continue to decline, reflecting the overall decline
 in counterinsurgeny activities. The ChR reported that in the first half of 1994, 12
 percent of all violations were committed by military forces. The TFDP, which does
 
 
 671
 not include nongovernment abuses, attributes 45 percent of violations in the same
 period to the military. In March the Department of National Defense relieved sev-
 eral members of a special forces unit for allegedly killin a policeman in Laguna.
 In September two soldiers were sentenced to 14 years in prison for the attempted
 murder of a state prosecutor in November 1993.
 The NPA too was responsible for extr*-udicial killings throughout the country.
 The most notable case was that of HectorMabilangan, a formerNPAleaderinthe
 Central Luzon region. Mabilangan, who had given up his rebel status, was shot by
 nmen believed to be part of his old command in retaliation for what the mur-
 derer said were his "criminal and antirevolutionary activities." In January the Alex
 Boncayao Brigade (ABB), a notorious Communist hit squad controlled by the Ma-
 nila-Rizal Regional Committee of the CPP (MRRC), publicly threatened to kill over
 300 of the "most notorious elements of crime syndicates and corrupt government of-
 ficials." The ABB released a hit list which included numerous high-ranking  lice,
 milir, and political figures. In May one person on the list, Timoteo Zareal, was
 killed for "crimes against society." In December another person on the list, Jose
  , skilled. Zacal and Pring, bth former polie chief inspetors (major rank),
 habeen relieved of duty because of their alleged involvement in kidnap-for-ransom
 activities. Members of their families, however, doubted the APB's claim of respon-
 sibility for the two killings and pointed instead to the police as the perpetrators.
 In Octoberfor suspected AB members shot and critically wounded a traffic police-
 man as he was issuing a citation to a jeepney driver. The ABB also renewed threats
 to impose the death penalty on policemen who do not observe the law.
 Muslim extremists such as the Abu Saysf Group (ASG) carried out other politi-
 cally motivated murders. On June 8, for example, ASG members abducted 72 civil-
 ian bus passengers on the outskirts of a town in Basilan province. The group set
 free 37 known Muslims and killed 15 Christians. Other hostages were subsequently
 released. Muslim extremists were also implicated in a series of terrorist bomfbings,
 in Zamboanga and General Santos cities, which injured or killed innocent bystand-
 ers.
 Private security forces maintained by local landowners and other influential fig-
 ures also committed extrajudicial killings. In 1993 the arrest of the mayor of a town
 near Manila and a number of his associates (some of whom were policemen) on
 charges of raping and murdering a University of the Philippines coed and killing
 her boyfriend focused national attention on this longstanding problem. The trial con-
 tinued through the fall, with no end in sight. The publicit generated by the case
 inspired the Ramos administration to undertake a nationwide campaign to disman-
 tle 'private armies." Although some arms were confiscated, critics charge that most
 of these were old and of little practical use, and that the campaign did not target
 private armies controlled by politically powerful individuals. In August the PNP
 leadership admitted the campaign had so far failed and promised to renew the drive
 in an effort to disband these groups before the May 1995 elections.
 Poll violence was a problem in the May barangay (the smallest local political unit)
 elections. The Department of Interior and Local Government (DILG) reported over
 40 deaths in election-related violence mostly attributable to clan and ethnic rival-
 ries. Most of the victims were incumbent barangay officials, candidates, and their
 active supporters. The number of deaths represented a decrease from previous elec-
 tions.
 b. Disappearance.-The CHR cited 5 cases of disappearance in the first half of
 1994 compared with 16 cases for all of 1993. The TFDP reported no disappearances
 for the first half of 1994 compared with 12 cases for all of 1993. Because disappear-
 ances most commonly involve alleged insurgents or informants, the decline is largely
 attributable to the continued decrease in insurgent activity.
 Active duty military and police officers are often implicated in kidnapings, espe-
 cially of wealthy Filipino-Chinese, for ransom. As a result, many victims paid the
 ransoms quietly and did not report the cases. Kidnap victims have also refused to
 identify their captors for fear of retribution.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution prohibits torture, and evidence obtained through its use is inad-
 missible in court. Guidelines issued by the CHR in 1988 direct all law enforcement
 agncies and military elements to avoid unnecessary force during investigation, ar-
 rest, detention, interrogation, and other activities. Nonetheless, a uses continued.
 The CHR reported two cases of torture in the first half of 1994, compared with
 five cases in 1993. The TFDP cites 25 cases in the first half of 1994, compared to
 39 for all of 1993. The CHR also cites an improved human rights awareness in the
 military, which it attributes to its human rights training pro  for military offi-
 e its practie of providing APP promotion panels with "certificates of clear-
 ance" on officers' human rights performance. However, the statistics generally ex-
 
 
 672
 
 clude incidents of torture involving common criminals or others outside the context
 of counterinsurgency activities. In addition, many cases go unreported because the
 victims fear reprisal if they seek redress.
 Although prohibited by law, physical punishment continues to occur in jails and
 prisons. Police forces commit most such offenses, and abuse of prisoners most com-
 monly occurs during arrest and int~rrogation. A CHR report on jail facilities
 throughout the country indicates that of 613 jails visited, only 64 were found to have
 adequate facilities and be in good condition. Prisoners at some 410 jails were kept
 in substandard conditions and subjected to human rights abuses, including physical
 and sexual harassment.
 International monitoring groups, including the International Committee of the
 Red Cross and foreign embassy officials, are allowed free access to ,jails and prisons.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Enile.-Although the Constitution requires a ju-
 dicial determination of probable cause before issuance of an arrest warrant, and pro-
 hibits holding prisoners incommunicado or in secret p laces of detention, the authori-
 ties continue to make illegal arrests and hold people in detention. Detainees have
 the right to a* jdicial review of the legality of their detention and, except for of-
 fenses punishable by a life sentence or death, a right to bail. Authorities are re-
 quired to file charges within 12 to 36 hours of arrest, depending on the seriousness
 of the crime. The CHR listed 54 cases of illegal arrest and detention for the first
 half of 1994 compared with 139 for all of 1993. The TFDP found that 362 persons
 were arrested illegally in the first half of 1994 compared with 882 such arrests in
 the previous year.
 This decline is attributable in p art to the Governments effort to promote the do-
 mestic peace process involving talks with Communist, Muslim, and military rebels.
 The Government declared an amnesty proam which offered former rebels and gov-
 ernment security forces a chance to appy for amnesty, in the case of rebels for
 crimes they had committed in pursuit of political beliefs, and, in the case of govern-
 ment forces, for crimes they committed in the performance of their duties. Govern-
 ment security forces who committed serious human rights violations (arson, torture,
 extrajudicial killings, massacres, rape and robbery) were excluded from the amnesty
 proam. Under the progra, the National Amnesty Commission (NAC), a quasi-
 judicial body whose decisions are final, subject to a review by the Court of Appals,
 reviews all amnesty applications. Most rebel groups rejected the amnesty offer, not-
 ing that it should have resulted from peace negoti~ations and not by arbitrary action
 of the Government.
 Despite the overall decline in illegal arrests and detentions, the Philippine Alli-
 ance of Human Rights Advocates (PAHRA), a leading NGO net work, conftends that
 such violations against human rights workers are increasing. The PalHRA cites the
 case of Wilfredo and Mila Sibayan, beth NGO human rights workers, the former
 with PAHRA's Manila office. Accused by military intelligence of being a leader of
 the NPA, Mr. Sibayan was arrested without a warrant outside his Manila home on
 March 28; no one was informed of his arrest. He was transferred several times,
 eventually to the northern town of Abra, where he was charged with murdering a
 government soldier in an earlier shootout, despite his claim that he was in Manila
 at the time of the encounter. He was refused legal counsel during his interrogation.
 When Mrs. Sibayan finally located him in Abra, she too was arrested and detained.
 Local church leaders were able to secure the Sibayans' release, and charges are
 pending.
 The Sibayans' experience is echoed in a study on administrative detention by the
 Human Rights Committee of the NG       LAWASIA. A majority of the detainees
 LAWASIA interviewed were arrested without warrant; they were merely "invited"
 for questioning and subsequently held. The study cited numerous violations of con-
 stitutional and human rights, such as lack of access to counsel during investigation
 and interrogation and physical maltreatment during detention.
 The TFDP claims that there re still about 276 political prisoners being held ioe-
 galy, two-thirds of whom have yet to be convicted of any offense. The Government
 disputes this char, contending that it has released all political prisoners and that
 all of the alleged  political" prisoners are actually being held for common crimes.
 It is likely that some of the 300 prisoners in question have committed common
 crimes, the most common charge being illegal possession of firearms, in the pursuit
 of their political beliefs. It as ao possible that a few are actual or suspected Com-
 munists who were framed for common crimes. Proving ths   difficult, however, and
 the onus of proof is placed on the prisoner.
 The NPA is responsible for some extrajudicial arrests and detentions, often in con-
 ncion with "courts se  p ttry civilian and local politicians fo r "crimes against
 the people." Many defendants in such trials are tortured andfor summarily executed.
 In April a spokesman for the Melit Glor Command of the NPA announced that four
 
 
 673
 former breakaway leaders of the CPP, including former NPA Chieftan Romulo
 Kintanar, would stand trial before a "people's court' for criminal and "antipeople's
 activities committed while they were still active party leaders.
 Forced exile is not legal and not practiced.
 e. Denial of Fair Public 7.-The Constitution calls for an independent judici-
 ary and provides that those accused of crimes shall be informed of charges against
 them and have the right to counsel. Trials are public. Defendants are presumed in-
 nocent and have the right to confront witnesses against them, to present evidence,
 and to appeal their convictions. The authorities generally respect the right of de-
 fendants to be represented by a lawyer. There is no pry system under Philippine
 law;, all cases are heard by judges. Despite these safeguards and quarantees, the
 pace of ustice continues to beslow. Moreover, the Philippine judicary is plagued
 withproblems, susceptible to corruption, and biased in favor ofthe rich and ifluen-
 tial. Corruption also reaches into the jails and prisons, allowing suspects to escape.
 While the Government, in particular the Justice Department, acknowledged the sys-
 tem's weaknesses and pledged to clean it up, there was little visible progress.
 A study by ALTERLAW, a coalition of alternative law organizations, comprising
 various legal groups, identified personal connections, patronage, influence peddling,
 and bribery as some of the most common "unorthodox" methods used in the practice
 of law in the Philippines. Legal experts in and outside of the justice system make
 the same observations as the ALTERIAW, pointing to the personal and professional
 relationships between judges and the individuals and corporations whose cases they
 are assigned. The poor can languish in jails for years without formal charges being
 f.led wh&le the wealthy and powerful can use money and influence to affect their
 cases. Many leading law firms, known in the trade as case fixers, gain the favor
 of judges and other court officials. Witnesses are easily paid off. While it is tech-
 nicaly illegal to settle criminal cases out of court, the practice of reaching an "ami-
 cable settlement" is routine; without key victims or witnesses to testify, the authori-
 ties are forced to abandon their case. The Government has been unable, for the most
 part, to take effective action to intervene in these situations.
 There is a widely recogzed need for mere prosecutors, judges, and courtrooms.
 The limit for hearing a trial is 90 days and that for deciding of cases is 45. However,
 the period only begins after a case is brought to trial. As a result, suspects can wait
 in jail foryears before their cases are brought to trial and the countdown begun.
 Because of numerous technical delays and frequent failures of judges and prosecu-
 tors to appear, even the 90-day limit is often not met. In June the Justice Depart-
 ment reported that during the first quarter of the year, the prosecution was able
 to resolve only 4 percent of the criminal cases it had pending.
 At times there are flagrant violations of the right to an expeditious trial. For ex-
 ample, in February a Manila court sentenced three men to 17 years in prison for
 the 1975 murder and robbery of a priest. The prisoners were immediately released
 because they had already spent 18 years in jail. In June and August the CHR was
 able to secure the release of eight civilian prisoners who were sentenced by military
 courts when martial law was m place. The prisoners had remained in custody de-
 spite a 1988 Supreme Court decision nullifying convictions of civilians by military
 courts.
 Some human rights cases never go to trial because victims do not pursue their
 cases or crucial witnesses remain silent. Lawyers representing victims of human
 rights violations are also harassed and are labeled as leftist sympathizers if the ac-
 cused is assumed to be a leftist rebel. Human rights groups report that the many
 former military officers serving as judges at the municipal and local level greatly
 diminish the chance of a fair trial for human rights victims. The case of the accused
 killers of Chris Batan (see Section l.a.) is typical of the problems involved in at-
 tempting to identify and convict perpetrators of human rights violations.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Constitution provides that search warrants may be issued by a judge on a finding
 of probable cause. Restrictions on search and seizure are generally observed, al-
 though raids without search warrants on private homes are occasionally reported.
 In the past, judges have thrown out evidence obtained illegally.
 The Government does not interfere with the free personal use of the mails or
 other public communications except upon issuance of a court order in the course of
 an investigation.
 Some human rights NGO's are increasingly concerned about the Government's
 forced resettlement of tenant farmers to make way for development projects. These
 resettlement schemes are designed to clear the land for industrial, agroindustrial,
 and tourism projects. In urban settings, squatters are moved to make way for infra-
 structure, commercial, and housing projects. The Government has made efforts to
 resettle squatters, as required by law, but NGO's contend that in both rural and
 
 
 674
 urban settings, those being relocated are sometimes given little or no notice and are
 violently ejected. Land rights issues are made more difficult by the slow process of
 the Government's exercise of eminent domain and complex zoning regulations.
 g. Use of Excessive Force and Violations of Humanitarian Law in Internal Con-
 fiict.-Although the frequency of clashes between government and insurgent forces
 declined, they ontinued to inflict hardships on civilians, particularly in remote
 areas which were the scene of moat fighting. According to'1TFDP figures, in the first
 half of 1994 there were 7 forced evacuations, 1 food blockad, 9 "violent dispersals*
 (i.e., forced evacuations in which violence was used), and 54 houses demolished.
 Most of thes categories showed declines over 1993.
 In June the military launched a major campaign against the Muslim Abu Sayaf
 Group in Sulu and Basilian provinces. The local office of the Department of Social
 Welfae and Development (DSWD) reported that over 22,000 civilians were dis-
 placed in the two provinces. Over 20 evacuation centers were set up to assist the
 families. A factfinding report by a group of human rights NGOs and church groups
 reported the military operation resulted in several civilian deaths as well as in ex-
 tensive looting and destruction of property.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-There are virtually no legal restrictions on free-
 dom of expression or speech. The Government generally respects freedom of the
 press, and courts are consistent in their protection of the media. There are some
 25 privately owned newspapers in Manila and many more in the provinces that
 cover the political spectrum and freely criticize the Government. (Most are owned
 or controlled by politicians and prominent businessmen.) Radio and television also
 enjoy considerable freedom. Communist publications became legal with the repeal
 of the Antisubversion Law in 1992. Journalists were able without legal penalty to
 meet and interview both Communist insurgents and military rebels.
 The press, however, continues to face hazards in reporting on gambling, illegal
 logging, governmental corruption, and the drug trade. The dangers are greatest out-
 side Manila where powerful vested interests involved in such activities sometimes
 employ violence to discourage media exposes. The journalists at risk are primarily
 radio broadcasters whose public affairs proas reach a much wider audience than
 either newspaprs or televisions. The Philippine Movement for Press Freedom
 (PMPF), an NGO, reported that in the first 8 months of 1994 three journalists, two
 of them radio broadcasters, were killed. The PMPF also reported several cases of
 journalists being assaulted or harassed, usually by local police or employees of local
 politicians.
 The Government respects academic freedom in theory and practice. It does not
 censor subject matter in classes, university publications, or conferences.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The law requires permits from
 local authorities for outdoor demonstrations in public places and these are routinely
 issued. Nevertheless, rallies and marches are often held without permits. Some of
 them are forcefully broken up when they interfere with traffic or are otherwise dis-
 ruptive. Private, professional, religious, social, charitable, labor, and political organi-
 zations are permitted to affliate with recognized international bodies in their fields.
 An exception to this rule was the Asia Pacific Conference on East Timor held in
 late May at the University of the Philippines. In an unsuccess fl effort to lower the
 prfile of the Conference, particularly after Indonesian expressions of concern, the
 Government banned over 30 conference delegates from entering the country, includ-
 ing a Nobel laureate and the wife of the French President. The conference was near-
 ly canceled when a trial court ruling by a military judge banned it. However, the
 Conference, minus the banned delegates, was held after a last minute decision by
 the Supreme Court that cited constitutional guarantees of freedom of speech arid as-
 sembl~y.
 c. Freedom ct Religion.-dThe Government respects freedom of religion and does
 not discriminate against any_religious grup or its members.
 d. Freedom     ovement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-Filipinos enjoy the freedom to change their p1ace of residence and em-
 ployment within   the Philippines. Movement within      the country  is largely
 umimpded. With rare exceptions, such as pending court cases, Filipinos are allowed
 to travel and work abroad.
 The Government for years provided first asylum to Indochines bat people, al-
 lowed the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHOR) immediate ac-
 css, and manad the refugee status determination process (screening) in accord-
 ance with the Comprehensive Plan of Action (CPA) agreed on in Gwneva in 1989.
 As a result of completion of the screening process and the June CPA steering corn
 mittee meeting held in Bangkok, the Government announced the closure of      e
 
 
 675
 gee and asylum seeker camps in the Philippines by the end of 1994. This decision
 was made in compliance with a resolution of the CPA meeting calling for termi-
 nation of the CPA and repatriation of the estimated 48,000 nonrefugees in the re-
 gion by the end of 1995.
 By October 1, there were approximately 4,500 Vietnamese asylum seekers re-
 maining in the Philippines, of whom only about 1,500 had been determined to be
 "refugees' pending resettlement in third countries. The Government stated that it
 screened out individuals (nonrefugees) who did not choose to accept voluntary repa-
 triation and would be considered for "nonobjector orderly return (the repatriation
 of individuals who have not previously volunteered but who will not necessarily ob-
 ject if notified that they must return to Vietnam) beginning October 1.
 The Government does not practice forcible repatriation.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights:- The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens have this right and exercised it in 1992. The Philippines has a multiparty
 political system with periodic free elections based on universal suffrage for citizens.
 In the legislature, both the House of Representatives and the Senate are controlled
 by a loose progovernment coalition, which does not always vote en bloc on conten-
 tious issues.
 Many irregularities in the voting and election process mar political freedoms. Mul-
 tiple registrations of the same voter,nonexistent or dead voters, intimidation of vot-
 ers, and extrajudicial killings of candidates and their supporters (see Section L.a.),
 as well as vote-buying, all occur. These problems are more acute at the local level,
 as are political dynasties, which use some or all of the above methods to maintain
 their grip on power.
 The estimated 2 to 3 million overseas contract workers (OCW's) represent a sig-
 nificant block of voters that is effectively disenfranchised. Advocates of the rights
 of OCW's in 1994 began an effort to institute an absentee balloting program.
 There are no restrictions in law or practice on participation by women and minori-
 ties in politics. Twenty-three women serve in the 215-seat House, 4 in the 24-mem-
 ber Senate, and 3 in the Cabinet.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 The Philippines has an active and effective nongovernment organization commu-
 nity. There are many domestic human rights NGO's, including the Task Force De-
 tainees of the Philippines (TFDP), the Free Legal Assistance Group (FLAG) and the
 Philippine Alliance of Human Rights Advocates (PAHRA). The latter organization
 represents numerous NGO's that monitor human rights conditions among various
 social and occupational groups. While these groups operate without government re-
 striction, they are often viewed with suspicion by the military and police. Some local
 civilian officials also have been uncooperative. Employees of human rights groups
 in the field have encountered harassment (see Section 1.d.). A few have been killed
 in, revious years, but there were no such killings reported in 1994.
 The Commission on Human Rights (CHR) is an independent government organi-
 zation and the largest human rights organization in the Philippines. In 1994 the
 CHR chaired 747 public information and education activities, many of which were
 designed for audiences of military, police, and other public officials. Although it
 lacks prosecutory powers, it is constitutionally mandated to investigate all alleged
 violations of human rights. However, a January Supreme Court decision limited the
 CHR's powers to investigate civil and political rights. The CHR itself recognizes that
 it has an outdated organizational structure, budgetary constraints, and a need for
 more field offices. The CHR has been criticized for its lengthy and cumbersome pro-
 cedures, its inefficiency, and its practice of placing the burden of proof on complain-
 ants, despite the risk they may face of reprisals or their lack of resources.
 Representatives of international human rights groups are free to travel in the
 Philippines and investigate alleged abuses. Government officials routinely meet and
 discuss human rights problems with foreign governmental and nongovernment orga-
 nizations.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution prohibits discrimination against women, children and minority
 groups. Implementation of all constitutional guarantees is at times hindered by lack
 of implementing legislation and by budgetary constraints.
 Woen.-In law but not in practice, women have most of the rights and protec-
 tions accorded men. The Women in Development and Nation Building Act in 1992
 
 
 676
 terminated previous restrictions on women's rights to buy and sell property. How-
 ever, the Government does not fully enforce this legislation.
 The Filipino people are overwhehminily Roman Catholic. The law does not allow
 divorce an women's rights advocates view this as a major barrier to achieving the
 empowerment of women. Annulment of marriages is now fairly easy to achieve due
 to changes in the Legal Code, and the practice has become more common. However,
 the cost of hiring a lawyer familiar with the new Code precludes this option for
 many women. The practice of "unofficial divorce" (permanent separation) is common
 among the lower classes; in these cases, the wife is usually left with the children,
 but the husband provides little or no support for them.
 Women and girls in the lower economic strata are particularly vulnerable to ex-
 ploitation by unethical operators whopromise employment overseas or arranged
 marriages with foreign men. Some of these women end up working as prostitutes
 or suffering abuse at the hands of their foreign employers or husbands. While in
 years past the focus of attention was on abused Filipino maids in Kuwait and other
 Gulf states, in 1994 the condition of Filipino "entertainers" in Japan and the Com-
 monwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands generated considerable press attention.
 Either through international trafficking syndicates or individual employers, Filipino
 women were often recruited to work abroad as maids, entertainers, or models and
 required to participate in public shows or dances where nudity and the prospect of
 sex was the principal attraction. Others, facing bleak employment prospects at
 home, accepted questionable jobs in the knowledge that they would be required to
 engage in prostitution. In order to curb such abuses, the Government campaigned
 to end illegal recruiting and raised the minimum age and educational standards for
 young women seeking jobs abroad. It also expanded its labor attache corps in coun-
 tries with large overseas contract worker communities and worked with foreign gov-
 ernments and NGO's to provide more effective protection for Filipino workers at risk
 for sexual or economic exploitation.
 Violence against women, particularly domestic violence, is a serious problem. The
 Women's Crisis Center, an NGO assisting abused and battered women, reported
 that it receives over 100 calls a week from battered women in the metropolitan Ma-
 nila area. Women's advocates point to poverty, double standards of morality, lack
 of laws on domestic violence, and a traditional societal reluctance to discuss private
 family affairs, as some of the reasons for the prevalence of domestic violence. No
 divorce rights and the lack of job opportunities combine to limit the ability of women
 to escape destructive relationships.
 Rape continues to be a major problem; its frequency is estimated as high as one
 every 6 minutes. The incidence of reported rape, however, is estimated by the Phil-
 ippine National Police to be 20 percent or lower. Police said that reported rape cases
 in the first quarter of 1994 increased 17 percent over the same period m 1993.
 Women  s  ups charge that accused rapists are dealt with leniently by the mae-
 dominated law enforcement and judicial systems. According to women'a groups,
 many women accept rape as part of the culture. Many rape victims are minors, who
 accept incestuous relationships, rather than subject the family to public embarrass-
 ment.
 Proposed House legislation seeks to change the definition of rape (classifying it
 as a crime against a person, i.e., a public offense, rather than a crime against chas-
 tity, i.e., a private offense) and to expand the circumstances and conditions in which
 rape is considered to have been committed. The proposed laws, which face resistance
 in the House, would make marital rape a crime. They would also allow a rape vic-
 tim's family or the state to ifie a complaint on her behalf. The laws do not, however,
 seek to increase the severity of the penalties for this crime.
 In response to these problems, the PNP started the PNP Women's Desk program
 designed to protect women against, and encourage the reporting of, crimes against
 women. PNP stations include female officers trained in dealing with victims of sex-
 ua crimes and domestic violence.
 In June a high proffAe case of sexual harassment involving two senior government
 officials focused attention on sexual harassment in the workplace. A 1993 survey by
 the Institute of Labor Studies found workplace sexual harassment to be widespread,
 yet the problem is underreprted due to victims' reticence and fears of losing their
 jobs. In September the Supreme Court upheld a decision that found sexual harass-
 ment was valid cause ffrom service."
 Prostitution is illegal but widespread and a fact of life for many poorer Filipinos
 with limited access to a more acceptable career or standard of living. Penalties for
 prostitution are light.
 Women also face discrimination in employment. Among administrative, executive,
 and managerial workers, the average woman's salary was only one-third of that of
 her male counterparts.
 
 
 677
 Children.--Several government agencies have programs devoted to the education,
 welfare, and development of children.
 In 1994 the Commission on Human Rights opned its Child Rights Center de.
 signed to monitor and investigate violations of childrn's rights. Sweeping legisla-
 tion was passed in 1992 to protect children's rights, but the Government has not
 implemented it due to lack of funding and its failure to coordinate enforcement
 among the many agencies involved.
 Societal values that define children as extensions and property of the parents are
 a key factor in limiting children's rights. Courts tend to give precedence to parental
 authority over the rights of a child.
 Many Filipino children face serious problems stemming from widespread poverty
 and the Government's inability to eradicate organized abuses involving child labor
 and child prostitution. One children's rights organization estimates that there are
 up to 100,000 child prostitutes in the Philippines. Although the authorities have
 staged some successful raids on brothels andmassage pariors, freeing underaged
 girl1 forced to work as prostitutes, the problem  a      e scale one.
 Street begging and truancy are common in large cities. The CHR estimates the
 number of street orphans in metropolitan Manila at fewer than 1,000, but up to
 100,000 destitute children spend most of their waking hours on the streets.
 The rates of child abuse and beatings and child rape alarm the authorities; sev-
 eral men have been sentenced to deat for   e rape of their daughters. Many chil-
 dren have been orphaned or otherwise adversely affected by the ongoing
 nsurgencis.
 Indigenous People.-Indigenous peoples live throughout the Philippines but pri.
 marily in the mountainous areas of Notemn     zon and Mindanao. They account
 for 10 to 15 percent of the population. Although no specific laws discriminate
 against indigenous peoples, the remoteness of the areas they inhabit and a cultural
 bias against them tend to prevent their full integration into Philippine society. Their
 ability tparticipate meaningfully in decisions affecting their lands, cultures, tradi-
 tions, and the allocation of natural resources is minimal. Because they inhabit
 mountainous areas favored by guerrillas, indigenous peoplea suffer disproportion-
 ately from counterinsurgency operations. Indigenous children suffer dispro
 ately from lack of basic services, such as health and education facilities.  p
 Although the 1987 Constitution calls for the protection of the ancestral lands and
 culture o inaigenous peoples, the Government as not pushed for legislation to en-
 force these rgt.Wat indigenous peoplea regard as "development aggression'--
 the utilization of their lands for hydroelectric dams, mining operations, and other
 large-scale development projects-ren forces their relocation and the destruction of
 fa    g and hunting lands they have used for enturies. The Government does little
 to secure indigenous peoples' claims to such lands. Nonetheless, in June the Govern-
 ment granted land rights for 108,000 hectares of land to 3,000 Bugkalot families in
 Quirmno province. In addition, a Philippine Senator has proposed the creation of a
 commission on ancestral domains to conserve the lands for the benefit of cultural
 minorities.
 Nationusl RacialEthnic Minorities.-Although people of Chinese ancestry have
 extensively intermarried with other Filipinos n and M relatively we  assimilated,
 there is a distinct Filipino-Chinese community numbering perhaps 1 to 2 percent
 of the population. This minority plays a prominent role in the national economy and
 is the object of some resentment by the general population. As noted in Section 1.b.,
 the Chinese have been a primary target of kidnaping for ransom. In 1994 Filipino-
 Chinese businessmen were also the   ta   of an extortion scheme involving judges
 and customs officials. The judges isne false search warrants to the customs offi-
 cials who, upon serving the warrants, offered to accept bribes to fix the matter.
 .    nReligious Minorities.-Musims, who omprise about 5 percent of the total popu-
 lation and are reside principally in Mi ndns   adjacent islands, constitute the
 largest minority group in the country. They historically have been alienated from
 the dominant Christian majority, and efforts to intecate Muslims into the political
 and economic fabric of the country have met with only limited success.
 Pnhilippine culture, with its emphasis on familial, tribal, and regional loyalties,
 creates informal barriers whereby access to jobs or resources is provided first to
 those of one's own family or group. Many Muslims claim that they continue to be
 under represented in senior civilian and military positions.
 There are one Muslim Supreme Court justice, one Muslim Senator (a woman),
 and eight Muslim Congressmen.
 The Government inaugurated the Autonomous Region of Muslim        Mindanao
 (ARiM) in November 1990 to meet the demands of Muslims for local autonomy in
 areas where they hold a majority or are a substantial minority. However, the
 ARMM is limited to the four provinces which elected to join;t is regarded as an
 
 
 678
 arbitrary creation of the Government and as falling short of representing the as pira-
 tions of all Muslims in the region, including the More National Liberation Front
 (MNLF) and the Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC). The ARMM Govern-
 ment is hobbledby an inadequate tax base, poor performance, and a continued short-
 fall in promised central government assistance.
 Peaple With Disabilites.-A 1983 law provides for equal physical access for the
 disabled to all public buildings and establishments, and a law passed in 1992 pro-
 vides for "the rehabilitation, self-development, and self-reliance of disabled persons
 and their integration into the mainstream of society." Advocates of the handicapped
 maintain that these laws are not enforced fully, citing inadequate government fund-
 ing, widespread evasion, and lingering prejudice against the handicapped among
 many Filipinos.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The Constitution and legislation provide for the
 right of workers, including public employees, to form and join trade unions and this
 right is exercised in practice. Trade unions are independent of the Government and
 generally free of political party control. Unions have the right to form or join federa-
 tions or other labor groupings, and several have affiliated with international trade
 union confederations and trade secretariats. The largest federation, the Trade Union
 Congress of the Philippines is affiliated with the International Confederation of Free
 Trade Unions. Unions oppose government efforts to loosen prohibitions against
 "labor only" subcontracting, which they claim allows employers to evade obligations
 to their employees and helps them to break unions.
 Subject to certain procedural restrictions, strikes in the private sector are legal.
 However, a 1989 law stipulates that all means of reconciliation must be exhausted
 and that the strike issue has to be relevant to the labor contract or the law.
 The Committee of Experts of the International Labor Organization (ILO) has ex-
 pressed concern that certain provisions of the Labor Code (authorizing the Secretary
 of Labor to order compulsory arbitration to avert strikes in industries deemed indis-
 pensable to the national interest) are not in conformity with the ILO Convention
 on Freedom of Association. In 1994, however, the ILO noted that the Government
 sought its assistance in reforming the Labor Code. International criticism also has
 focused on the Code's ban on unfair practices' strikes during the term of a collective
 bargaining agreement.
 According to the Center for Trade Union and Human Rights (CTUHR), an organi-
 zation which publicizes security force violations, the rights of striking workers con-
 tinued to be a problem in 1994. The CTUHR counted some 70 incidents by Septem-
 ber, involving over 900 alleged victims. The CTUHR said police were involved in
 nearly all these cases, and there also were instances in which military personnel
 were involved in dispersing strikers and dismantling picket lines in their area of
 jurisdiction.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The Constitution provides for
 the right to organize and bargain collectively. The Labor Code provides for this right
 for private sector employees and for employees of government-owned or controlled
 corporations, but it provided only limited rights for certain government workers. Al-
 though unions claim to have organized almost 11 percent of the total work force of
 27 million, only 600,000 workers (2 percent) are covered by collective bargaining
 agreements.
 Under the law, dismissal of a union official or worker trying to organize a union
 is considered an unfair labor practice. Nevertheless, employers sometimes attempt
 to intimidate workers with threats of firing or factory closure. Allegations of intimi-
 dation and discrimination in connection with union activities are grounds for review
 as possible unfair labor practices before the National Labor Relations Commission
 (NLRC). The CTUHR and many trade unions have filed complaints before the
 NLRC alleging workers were dismissed solely to get rid of union members. The
 NLRC and the National Conciliation and Mediation Board (NCMB) provide the De-
 partment of Labor and Employment (DOLE) with quasi-judicial mechanisms for
 earing and adjudicating workers' claims. The process has been slow.
 There were several dozen strikes during the year, fewer than in previous years.
 Labor law and practice are uniform throughout the country, including in export
 processing zones (EPZ's). Except for the Bataan EPZ, unions have not been able to
 organize zoneworkers-some labor sources attribute this failure to employer resist-
 ance and antiunion discrimination by EPZ authorities.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-Forced labor is prohibited, and the
 Government effectively enforces this prohibition. The Government investigates and
 attempts to act upon reports of abuse of Philippine workers overseas.
 
 
 679
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The Child Protection Act of 1992
 prohibits the employment of children below age 15, except under the direct and sole
 resjponsiility of parents or guardians or where employment in cinema, theater,
 rado or te evision is essential. The Labor Code allows employment for those be-
 tween the ages of 15 and 18 for such hours and periods of the day as are determined
 by the Secretary of Labor but forbids employment of persons under 18 years of age
 in hazardous or deleterious work. However, a significant number of children are em-
 ployed in the informal sector of the urban economy or as field laborers in rural
 areas. The most serious, industrywide violaions of child labor law occur in clothing
 related production, much of which is exported
 Childen continue tobeemployed ina dangerous form of oral reef fin, which
 exposes them to shark and needlefish attacks and increases their vulnerability to
 disease. The Government has investigated and attempted to reduce violations of
 child labor laws outside the agricultural sector thrughi well-publiied raids on re-
 ported violators. Relying on tips provided by concerned NGO's (especially the
 Kamaayan Development Center), oicials of the DOLE and the National Bureau
 of Investigation carried out a number of successful raids on factories and farms. The
 DOLE succeeded in forcing employers to pay ack wages, but court prosecutions en-
 countered well-known delays. Secretary of Labor Confesor used radio programs to
 warn parents in rural provinces of the danger of allowing recruiters to lure their
 children withpromises of "good jobs" in Manila.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.Under the Minimum Wage Act of 1989, tri-
 partite regional wage boards set minimum wages. Rates were last revised in late
 1993, with the highest in Manila and lowest in rural regions. The minimum wage
 for workers in the national capital region (NCR) was approximately $5.60 (P145) per
 day. This amount is insufficient to provide a worker and his familys in the NCR with
 a decent standard of living. Unless at least two faly members are working, this
 minimum wage will not raise a family's income above the Government's "poverty
 threshold." Wage boards outside the NCR, in addition to establishing lower mini-
 mum levels, also exempted employers according to such factors as establishment
 size industry sector, involvement with exports, and level of capitalization. This ex-
 cludes substantial numbers of workers (especially in agriculture, domestics, labor-
 ers, janitors, messengers, and drivers) from coverage under the law. Although
 unions have called for a nation-wid increase, the Ramos administration favors leav-
 ing responsibility for minimum wage adjustments with the regional wage bards.
 DOLE surveys showed that in the first half of 1994,25 percent of the inspected es-
 tablishments violated the minimum wage law. Given the difficulty of prosecuting
 cases through the courts, the DOLE relies on administrative procedures and moral
 suasion to encourage voluntary em loyer correction of violations (see Section 1i.e.)
 The standard legal workwee    t beore overtime is 48 hours for most categories of
 industrial workers and 40 hours for government workers, with an 8 hour per day
 limit. An overtime rate of 125 percent of the hourly rate is mandated. The law man-
 dates a full day of rest weekly. The enforcement of workweek hours is managed
 through periodic standards inspections by the DOLE.
 A comprehensive set o occupational safety and health (OSH) standards exists in
 law. Although policy formulation and review of these standards is the responsibility
 of the DOLE, actual enforcement is carried out by 14 regional offices. Statistics on
 actual work-related accidents and illnesses are incomplete, as incidents (especially
 in hregard to agriculture) are underreported. Workers do not have a legally protected
 right to remove themselves from dangerous work situations without jeopardy to con-
 DtLEn u  e ys shpoedntha. ntefrthl f19,25preto h               npce     s
