 PHILIPPINES
 The Philippine Government is a mixed presidential-parliamentary
 system which reserves strong powers for the chief executive.
 Ferdinand Marcos, who has been President since 1965, dominates
 the political arena through his personal power, control of the
 ruling party, and a number of emergency executive powers
 carried over from the martial law period. The Prime Minister
 and unicameral National Assembly occupy subordinate positions.
 The margins for opposition political activity have broadened in
 1983 in political assembly and press freedom, although
 restraints remain. The opposition has charged its activities
 have been restrained by government harassment and intimidation,
 by limits on freedom of press, speech, and assembly, and by
 unfair electoral regulations.
 The Philippines is a predominantly agricultural country with a
 growing industrial sector. It ranks economically in the lower
 middle range of developing countries. The vigorous private
 sector is subject to substantial state intervention and
 favoritism in some key economic areas toward individual
 entrepreneurs with close ties to the regime.
 After nearly four centuries of Spanish rule, the Philippines
 was an American colony from 1898 until independence in 1946.
 Economic recovery from the severe damage of World War II was
 complicated by the Communist-dominated Huk insurgency which was
 suppressed by the mid-1950s. The Philippines practiced
 constitutional democracy from independence until 1972, when
 President Marcos declared martial law, citing national anarchy,
 lawlessness, and rebellion of the New People's Army, the
 military wing of the Communist Party of the Philippines.
 Democratic institutions were suppressed under martial law.
 Even after martial law was formally terminated in 1981, the
 President continued to exercise broad discretionary powers to
 limit criticism of the regime and inhibit opposition activity.
 Two insurgent groups are active. Both employ terrorist
 tactics, including murder, bombings, and extortion, to further
 their goals. Activities of the New People's Army have expanded
 over the past five years, and it now operates in more than two
 thirds of the provinces of the Philippines. In the south, the
 Moro National Liberation Front has waged a secessionist
 struggle since 1972. This conflict has its roots in inequities
 and misunderstandings dating back to early Spanish times,
 including competition with Christians over lands traditionally
 occupied by Muslims, efforts by the central government to exert
 control and expand Christian settlements, and the Muslims'
 desire to preserve their cultural identity. The level of
 fighting in predominantly Muslim areas has diminished
 considerably in recent years. The Government has mounted
 military, economic, and political efforts against both the
 insurgent groups. In the Muslim areas these have achieved some
 success. Military forces have been deployed in greater
 strength in areas where the New People's Army has increased its
 activities.
 In 1983 there were human rights abuses by Government security
 forces, particularly members of the Philippine Constabulary and
 the Civilian Home Defense Forces, including harassment of
 civilians, arbitrary arrest, detention, disappearances,
 torture, and "salvaging," or summary execution of suspected
 insurgents or sympathizers. The majority of reports of abuses
 come from areas where Government forces are engaged in
 counterinsurgency operations. The Government periodically
 conducts investigations of abuses by the military, and senior
 (M5)
 
 
 857
 officials have made public statements on the need for
 discipline and respect in military dealings with civilians.
 However, few individuals are seriously punished for abusive
 actions.
 Former Senator Benigno S. Aquino, Jr., a leading opposition
 politician, was the victim of a political assassination at
 Manila Airport on August 21, upon his return from a three-year
 exile in the U.S., under conditions which generated widespread
 suspicion of the involvement of the military or government
 security forces. The murder is under investigation by an
 independent board.
 In 1983, particularly following the Aquino assassination, there
 were increased public demonstrations and criticism of the
 Government, both in Manila and in key provincial cities, which
 the authorities tolerated to a greater extent than in the
 past. A Supreme Court ruling limited the Government's
 authority to prohibit public demonstrations.
 Although the Government continued to exert significant control
 over the media and arrested a few journalists in the period
 following the Aquino assassination, it also tolerated more
 press criticism. This was reflected both in greater critical
 coverage in the pro-Government dailies and in a proliferation
 of new newspapers with an anti-Government cast. A formerly
 obscure Catholic Church-affiliated radio station gained a
 massive audience for its extensive coverage of
 postassassination rites and political rallies when the
 Government-influenced media failed to give these adequate
 coverage. An independent Catholic Church-linked newspaper
 began publication later in the year. In contrast to the print
 media, television and radio news and commentary remained
 constrained and reflected essentially the Government's
 viewpoint.
 The number of persons detained on national security charges did
 not change appreciably from 1982, as some persons were released
 while others were arrested. The Government has implemented a
 new procedure which provides annual review of all preventive
 detention cases. The Government ordered "hamletting," the
 forcible resettlement of families in insurgency-affected areas,
 ended in 1982, and the practice has diminished, although it
 reportedly continues in some areas. Villagers in some cases
 abandon their homes to avoid being caught in combat zones.
 Military abuses, particularly in insurgency affected areas,
 continue, including  "salvagings" or summary execution and
 disappearances, which have reportedly increased since 1982.
 To encourage participation in National Assembly elections
 scheduled for May 1984 and to counteract criticism generated by
 the Aquino assassination, the Government has responded to
 popular demands by proposing two constitutional amendments to
 reform the election process and clarify the presidential
 succession. The amendments to establish provincial electoral
 constituencies and, in the event the President is unable to
 complete his present term in office, to provide for the
 Assembly Speaker to assume limited powers until the election of
 a new president and vice president will be put to a popular
 referendum in January 1984.
 The Government continues to offer asylum to Indochinese
 refugees and to assist and cooperate with international
 
 
 858
 organizations and with foreign governments which grant
 permanent resettlement to refugees.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Unlawful or Arbitrary Deprivation of Life
 Former Senator Benigno S. Aquino, Jr., a leading opposition
 figure, was assassinated on August 21, 1983, at Manila
 International Airport while being escorted through a supposedly
 secure area by members of the Philippine military. They had
 shortly before taken him into custody on board an arriving
 aircraft. The Government contended that a lone gunman, linked
 with the Communists, had killed Mr. Aquino. The alleged
 assassin was himself immediately killed by soldiers cordoning
 off the area on the airport tarmac to which Mr. Aquino was
 being led. The Government's account of the assassination did
 not find wide acceptance in the Philippines, and it was widely
 believed that individuals within the military or Government
 security forces were implicated in the killing. The first
 assassination investigatory commission appointed by the
 President resigned amid general public skepticism as to its
 impartiality. A second, independent board is currently probing
 the murder.
 The use of violence for political or personal reasons has not
 been uncommon in Philippine society. The boundaries between
 common criminal activity, personal vendettas, unauthorized
 reprisals by individual military or constabulary units, and
 legitimate counterinsurgency operations are not always clear.
 The insurgents are clearly responsible for some killings, as
 are criminals, extremist religious sects, private security
 forces, and vigilante groups, some with possible connections
 with Government units or insurgents. Clashes between
 insurgents and Government forces frequently occur, though human
 rights groups assert that some of these encounters are in fact
 summary executions of unarmed civilians.
 Task Force Detainees, a Catholic Church-related group which
 investigates and compiles statistics on human rights violations
 and is often critical of the Government, reported that 146
 persons were summarily executed by Government security force
 from January to June 1983, compared with 125 such killings for
 all of 1982. According to Task Force Detainees, most of the
 victims were farmers killed in areas of counterinsurgent
 activity, although a few also occurred in urban areas,
 including Metro Manila.
 Government officials state that mistakes have sometimes been
 made by its security forces fighting in insurgent-affected
 areas. The Government has carried out investigations and
 stated that military personnal have been disciplined for
 abusive behavior. In fact, however, they are seldom severely
 punished, although there were some cases in 1983 in which this
 happened. For example, in May a colonel and a captain were
 sentenced to life imprisonment for the brutal murder of two
 unarmed Muslims in 1978. In November, two policemen and three
 members of the Civilian Home Defense Forces were convicted of
 murdering an unarmed man in Samar in 1982, and two soldiers
 were convicted of the 1980 murder of a provincial tribal
 
 
 859
 leader. Those convicted in the last two cases were given long
 prison terms. The Government has said that it is often
 difficult to gather evidence, and many cases remain unsolved.
 However, Government investigations are often not pursued with
 vigor.
 A suspect is being tried for the murder of Dr. Remberto de la
 Paz in his Samar clinic in 1982, but the victim's family
 believes that the Government is trying the wrong man and has
 withdrawn from the case. The Government asserted that Dr. Juan
 Escandor, a member of the Communist Party, was killed in a gun
 battle with security forces in Manila on March 21, but the
 family and friends of Dr. Escandor contend that he was murdered
 by the Government.
 According to press reports, at least 52 civilians were
 summarily executed by the Communist New People's Army from
 January to October 1983. Insurgents frequently kill landlords
 and local officials in order to intimidate the population,
 extort contributions, execute vigilante justice, and
 demonstrate their strength.
 b. Disappearance
 The Task Force Detainees human rights group listed 79 persons
 as having disappeared from January to July 1983, compared with
 29 persons for all of 1982. The Government maintains that its
 forces were not responsible for the disappearances. However,
 the Government has on occasion held persons charged with
 subversion and rebellion incommunicado in order to complete its
 interrogation before revealing their capture. The increase in
 reported disappearances may, in part, reflect an increasing
 level of conflict between insurgents and security forces in
 some parts of the country and a consequent increase in the
 number of persons detained for questioning for various periods
 of time.
 Most reported disappearances occur in the countryside,
 generally in areas where security forces are deployed for
 counterinsurgency efforts. However, in April the family of
 Miss Yolanda Gordula reported that she was missing in Manila.
 The family believed that the Government was reponsible for her
 disappearance because she was last seen with a friend, Dr. Juan
 Escandor, who hours later on March 31 was killed by Government
 security forces in Manila. The Government has repeatedly
 denied that it detained Miss Gordula or had any information on
 her whereabouts, and has stated that its attempts to locate her
 have so far been unsuccessful. The Gordula family raised the
 case with several Government officials and met with the Defense
 Minister to discuss it.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 Torture is prohibited under the Philippine Constitution
 however, some individuals arrested for violating national
 security laws have said they were tortured. While the most
 reliable source of human rights statistics, Task Force
 Detainees in Manila, had no figures on the number of cases of
 torture, Amnesty International's 1983 report called torture
 during incommunicado detention of persons arrested on national
 security grounds "so prevalent as to amount to standard
 operating procedure for security and intelligence units". The
 
 
 860
 Ministry of National Defense admits that abuses occur and
 investigates complaints but asserts that some charges of
 torture are false and are being used as a legal tactic by
 arrested subversives to gain their release. Most complaints of
 torture or mistreatment center on the period immediately after
 arrest. Miss Gilda Narciso, arrested in Davao in March in
 connection with the arrest on subversion charges of Catholic
 Church worker Carlos Gaspar and released in September, stated
 that she was raped by a soldier. The Office of the Inspector
 General of the Armed Forces investigated her charge but said
 that it could find no evidence to substantiate it. Mrs. Ana
 Mae Morallos, arrested and released at the same time as Miss
 Narciso, also complained of sexual abuse.
 In areas of military activity against insurgents, there have
 been allegations of military abuse ranging from harassment and
 extortion to rape and murder. Reports of alleged abuse have
 appeared in the press and have come from Philippine human
 rights organizations, which believe that the Government is not
 doing enough to curb abuses and punish abusive military
 personnel. The Ministry of National Defense has investigated
 some reported abuses but frequently failed to find evidence. A
 combination of criminal prosecution and disciplinary
 administrative action has been used to deal with abusive
 personnel, although few receive severe punishment.
 In an official 1983 study for the Philippine National Police
 Commission, the unnecessary use of physical force was singled
 out as the most common police offense, accounting for more
 than one-quarter of all such offenses. Most of these
 violations were found to occur at the place of arrest or at
 police stations. The Commission stated that it was seeking
 fuller information on this undesirable phenomenon, with a view
 towards curbing it.
 Physical punishment is not officially part of the Philippine
 penal system, but prison conditions are harsh and reports of
 abuses are frequent. Persons held without bail pending
 completion of their trials for national security offenses are
 segregated from and have better accommodations than those held
 without bail for common crimes and those convicted by the
 courts.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Most civil liberties groups in the Philippines characterize all
 arrested persons who oppose the Government as "political
 detainees". The Government asserts that no one is arrested for
 his political beliefs, rather that it arrests only "public
 order violators" who commit specific criminal acts relating to
 the violent overthrow of the Government. Generally, they are
 charged with subversion and rebellion, possession of firearms
 and subversive documents, and, occasionally, with crimes like
 arson and murder. The line between national security offenses
 and common crimes is frequently blurred and lengthy legal
 proceedings often result in such cases.
 Arrested persons are generally promptly charged, although this
 is not always the case, particularly with regard to alleged
 "national security" offenders. Such individuals are sometimes
 held incommunicado by military intelligence units for days or
 even weeks before the Government presents charges or
 acknowledges that it is holding them. For example, the arrest
 
 
 861
 of Carlos Gaspar in Davao in March was not acknowledged by the
 Government until 11 days after it occurred. Arrests by
 military security groups are sometimes made without warrants or
 orders of any kind.
 In July 1983 a presidential decree abolished the Presidential
 Commitment Order, which had authorized arrest without bail, and
 established a new procedure, the Preventive Detention Action,
 which still authorizes arrest by presidential order without
 court warrant and allows persons to be held without bail until
 the President authorizes their release. The new procedure,
 however, provides for a yearly review of the case of each
 accused person held without bail.
 As of November 1983, Government figures showed that 565 persons
 accused of national security crimes were being held without
 bail. Task Force Detainees, which compiles statistics on
 "political detainees," asserts that there were 1,284 arbitrary
 arrests from January to June 1983. Many of those arrested were
 subsequently released, so that in July 1983 709 such persons
 were being held compared to 756 a year earlier. Among the
 reasons why the Government figures are lower than those of the
 human rights organization may be the disparity in dates, a lag
 in the Task Force's recording of releases in the provinces, and
 its inclusion of some "political detainees" whom the Government
 considers as "common criminals" and whom it has excluded from
 its statistics on national security offenders.
 Teams from the International Committee of the Red Cross have
 inspected Philippine detention centers on an almost yearly
 basis, most recently in 1983.
 From January to November 1983, 127 individuals who had been
 held without bail for national security offenses were granted
 "temporary release" for humanitarian reasons, allowing them to
 live at home and work while their trials continue. These
 included Sixto Carlos, Jr., who was arrested in ].979 and
 released in November 1983. During the same period 50 others
 held without bail for alleged national security offenses were
 granted permanent release.
 Habeas corpus is generally available, but remains suspended
 throughout the country for persons charged with subversion or
 rebellion and for those charged with any crime in two regions
 in Mindanao where the Moro National Liberation Front insurgency
 continues. Defendants in subversion and rebellion cases or
 their relatives frequently petition the Supreme Court for
 habeas corpus. The court often grants hearings and has
 compelled the Government to present persons specified in
 petitions before it. However, it ruled in 1983 that the
 President's use of preventive detention orders was
 constitutional and has declined to order the release of any
 accused held without bail for national security crimes.
 Nevertheless, defense attorneys claim that in most instances
 where a person is believed to be held incommunicado or to be a
 victim of abuse, the filing of a habeas corpus petition results
 in his being granted access to counsel, an end to abusive
 treatment, and the initiation of formal proceedings against the
 accused.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 All persons currently charged with crimes, including those
 
 
 862
 charged with subversion and rebellion, are legally presumed
 innocent until proven guilty and, if arrested after martial law
 was lifted in 1981, receive public trials in civilian courts.
 Only 13 cases in 1983 were left over from the martial law
 period (as compared to 42 the previous year), and these are
 still being tried in military courts. Of the 13 accused, eight
 persons are in detention while five are on temporary release or
 are fugitives.
 The right to counsel is guaranteed by law and in general is
 honored from the time a person is presented in court for the
 reading of charges. Prior to arraignment, there have been
 instances when some of those charged with subversion and
 rebellion have been held without access to counsel for days or
 weeks. This occurred in the case of Carlos Gaspar and others
 arrested in Davao in March 1983. Gaspar has since been charged
 and is standing trial in Davao for subversive activities.
 President Marcos ordered the release of the other defendants on
 September 18.
 If a defendant cannot afford counsel, the court will appoint a
 lawyer. The Government's civil legal assistance office and
 private groups of attorneys assist indigents. There are also
 lawyers' organizations, such as the Free Legal Assistance Group
 and the Movement of Attorneys for Brotherhood, Integrity and
 Nationalism, Inc., which provide assistance to alleged
 political offenders.
 Because of case backlogs, a shortage of judges, and the
 practice of hearing cases concurrently, trials in civilian
 courts often take two or three years. Subversion and rebellion
 trials have frequently lasted longer. Delays and postponement
 are frequent. Determinations of guilt or innocence are made by
 the presiding judge: there are no juries.
 A major reorganization of the court system designed to speed up
 the process of justice and increase the efficiency of the
 courts was carried out in 1983. Except for the Supreme Court
 and anticorruption court, existing courts were replaced by a
 new system of courts. A few incumbent judges were removed, but
 most judges were reappointed, and there was an influx of new
 judges to help deal with the case backlog.
 Cynicism is widespread in the Philippines on the subject of the
 independence of the judiciary. The courts rarely challenge the
 Government on major issues, and there is frequent criticism
 that political influence or bribery of individual judges plays
 a part in judicial decisions. The first commission appointed
 by President Marcos to oversee the investigation of the Aquino
 assassination was composed of the incumbent Chief Justice of
 the Supreme Court and some retired justices. The members all
 resigned, stating that the commission could not perform its
 assigned task because of the general public perception that it
 was not independent.
 In 1983, the Supreme Court upheld the.President's right to
 issue preventive detention orders. On the other hand, it
 overruled government attempts in late 1983 to ban an outdoor
 Manila rally by the opposition, and it has on several occasions
 succeeded through habeas corpus proceedings to produce persons
 believed held incommunicado or tortured. A provincial judge
 freed an alleged communist New People's Army assassin for
 insufficient evidence, although it was widely believed in the
 
 
 863
 community that the defendant was guilty.
 A special board of military prosecutors advises its civilian
 counterparts in the handling of important subversion and
 rebellion cases. Defense attorneys who handle these cases
 assert that the military prosecutors actually are in charge of
 the cases and have considerable influence with the trial
 judges. Government prosecutors deny these claims.
 Charges in subversion and rebellion cases are often vague.
 There have been some cases with multiple defendants, where
 conspiracy to overthrow the government was alleged but little
 detail was provided in the charges. Members of the opposition
 have sometimes been linked to alleged conspiracies with
 subversive elements, and some have left the country to avoid
 lengthy trials, restriction of movement, or possible
 imprisonment. Two previously secret presidential decrees
 dating from 1981, which were made public in 1983, substantially
 increased the punishment for subversion and rebellion,
 including a minimum penalty of life imprisonment and a maximum
 of death for certain vaguely defined offenses. No one has yet
 been convicted under these decrees, and the revised penal code
 being considered by the Parliament may modify these penalties.
 In practice there have been few, if any, convictions for
 subversion and rebellion. Trials, including those of better
 known defendants, tend to continue indefinitely. Government
 critics state this serves to harass or intimidate the
 opposition. In many instances, defendants held under
 preventive detention regulations and charged with subversion
 are given "temporary release" while their trials continue.
 Others have been released outright after a few weeks or months,
 as were 64 persons who were arrested on subversion charges
 during Manila street demonstrations in October and released the
 following month.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The state intrudes little into the family life of most
 Filipinos. Parents are free to raise their children as they
 see fit. Religious practices are a personal matter, as is the
 decision to join a political party. The Constitution's bill of
 rights specifies that persons shall be secure in their homes
 and guarantees the privacy of communications and
 correspondence. These rights are generally respected by the
 authorities.
 A search warrant may be issued by a judge upon a finding of
 probable cause. The President may also order a search. There
 have been allegations that the property of some persons accused
 of subversion or rebellion was searched without a warrant, but
 in most instances the authorities obtain warrants before
 acting. In insurgency affected areas, however, there have been
 some reports of military personnel entering premises and
 destroying private property without authorization.
 In some rural areas in Mindanao there were Government efforts
 in 1981 and 1982 to force inhabitants to relocate to new
 "hamlets" or "village centers" as part of its drive to curb the
 Communist insurgency. Following reports of these practices in
 the press and by the Integrated Bar of the Philippines, the
 Minister of Defense on March 2 1982 issued orders to halt such
 activities, declaring them "violative of the constitutional
 
 
 864
 rights of the people."
 There have nevertheless been occasional reports since March
 1982 of "hamletting" or forcible resettlement. There are
 conflicting reports from human rights groups about the extent
 to which forceable resettlement continues. An April 1983
 supplementary report by the Integrated Bar of the Philippines
 reported new hamlets in the provinces of Davao del Sur,
 Cotabato, and Agusan del Sur. At the same time, a higher level
 of combat between Government forces and Communist insurgents
 has led some people in scattered rural areas to relocate their
 homes on their own volition, often for limited periods, to
 avoid danger.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Freedom of speech and the press are guaranteed by the
 Constitution but have been subject to many restrictions in
 practice. These restrictions have not prevented
 representatives of the opposition from speaking out throughout
 1983, often in strong terms, against Government policies. Some
 observers feel, however, that the recently revealed
 presidential decree specifying heavy penalties for seditious
 utterances will limit free speech, although no one has so far
 been convicted of violating the decree and opposition political
 figures have continued to speak out against the Government
 without incident. In 1983, particularly after the Aquino
 assassination, expansion in the parameters of press freedom
 occurred with a proliferation of press organs carrying sharp
 criticism of government policy and a more balanced treatment of
 the issues in the major dailies.
 There is no direct censorship, but the Government uses other
 means to influence the media. Television and three of the
 largest nationally circulated newspapers are owned by persons
 sympathetic to the Government. While direct criticism of the
 Marcos family is rare in these papers, there is frequent
 coverage of Government policies, personalities, and
 shortcomings ranging from corruption to human rights abuses.
 These papers also carry more balanced straight reporting about
 differences among pro-government politicians. More outspoken
 commentary is found in numerous independent Manila and
 provincial tabloids. These include Malaya, a sister
 publication of We Forum, an opposition newspaper which was
 closed by the Government and its staff arrested in 1982 for
 alleged subversive activities consisting in part of publishing
 articles claiming that President Marcos' war record was
 falsified. Malaya employs former We Forum writers and now has
 a larger circulation nationwide than its former sister
 publication had. Columnists dismissed by some of the
 pro-Government papers have been hired by other papers, some of
 which have links with religious groups or the opposition.
 Although the range of press criticism of the Government
 increased in 1983, particularly during the last few months,
 such criticism led in several cases to the arrest of
 journalists, some on charges of sedition and libel. In the We
 Forum case, the trial is continuing with weekly court sessions,
 but the defendants are on "temporary release" status and living
 at home. In early 1983, Government intelligence officers
 called in for "dialogs" several widely read columnists critical
 
 
 865
 of the regime. After the journalists filed a petition with the
 Supreme Court challenging this action, the Chief of Staff of
 the Philippine Armed Forces ordered the practice halted. In
 April, journalist Antonio Nieva, active in forming a
 newspapermen's union, was arrested and charged with
 subversion. After protests by journalists, he was released.
 A Filipino reporter for Agence France Presse was arrested in
 September but released within hours. Also in September, the
 Government closed the Philippine Times and subsequently
 detained its owner-publisher, Rommel Corro, and charged him
 with sedition, now a capital offense, for publishing
 allegations of possible complicity by senior Government
 officials in the assassination of Aquino. In early 1983 a
 radio station owned by the Catholic Church in Davao del Norte
 was taken over by the military without compensation.
 The Aquino assassination has had a significant effect on press
 coverage. Pro-Government dailies, which downplayed or ignored
 the assassination aftermath, including large opposition
 rallies, lost credibility and readership. Instead, independent
 and opposition newspapers provided details and boosted
 circulation in some instances to hundreds of thousands of
 copies. A formerly obscure Catholic Church-affiliated Manila
 radio station gained a massive audience for its extensive
 coverage of post-assassination rites and political rallies. An
 independent Catholic Church-linked weekly newspaper began
 publication late in the year. In response, pro-Government
 media began to broaden their coverage of opposition activities.
 There is no censorship of foreign books or periodicals.
 Foreign newsmagazines and newspapers are widely sold. Academic
 freedom is respected. One of the newspapers most critical of
 government policies is published by the students of the state
 University of the Philippines.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 A broad range of private professional, religious, social,
 charitable, and political organizations flourishes in the
 Philippines. The right of peaceful assembly is guaranteed by
 the Constitution, and numerous indoor and outdoor meetings
 protesting Government policies and other issues were held
 throughout 1983 in Manila and the provinces. The number and
 size of such rallies increased following the August 1983 Aquino
 assassination, with some rallies in Manila and the provinces
 involving over 100,000 persons. The crowd accompanying the
 Aquino funeral cortege in Manila was estimated at 1 million or
 more.
 Permits from local authorities are required for outdoor rallies
 and demonstrations in public places; they generally, but not
 always, have been granted when applications were made. Prior
 to the Aquino assassination, opposition groups held rallies
 with or without permits. Following the assassination, however,
 the Government first denied permits for several rallies, on the
 grounds that they might be infiltrated by terrorists, and then
 prevented them from taking place. The organizers objected and
 took their case to the Supreme Court, which in October 1983
 ruled in their favor. The Government acceded to the court's
 decision and began issuing permits.
 The Constitution grants workers the right to organize, and
 
 
 866
 there are many, diverse labor unions representing about one
 seventh of the workforce. The unions associate with
 international labor organizations and trade secretariats such
 as the International Confederation of Free Trade Unions, the
 World Confederation of Labor, and the World Federation of Trade
 Unions, all of which have affiliates in the Philippines.
 The Trade Union Congress of the Philippines, which claims to
 represent 1.3 million workers, is the largest and only
 officially recognized national trade union umbrella
 organization. Critics have charged that the Congress has an
 unfair advantage over its rivals because it has been officially
 recognized and that it generally supports the Government rather
 than advocating the interests of its members. However, the
 Congress has denied the charge and countered that it is working
 with and within the Government to achieve its members'
 interests.
 More than 30 labor leaders, mostly from union locals, who were
 arrested and charged with subversion in August and September
 1982, remained in jail while their trial continued at the end
 of 1983. On Labor Day, May 1, President Marcos released to
 house arrest the two most prominent of the arrested labor
 leaders. Ten others were ordered released on January 1, 1984.
 Although the 1982 arrests and the continued detentions
 inhibited opposition labor organizations from engaging in
 direct confrontations with the Government, they have continued
 successfully to organize, bargain collectively, and conduct
 strikes.
 Organized labor objects in particular to legislation limiting
 the right to strike. Labor law requires a two-thirds vote of
 the workers prior to a strike and permits the Minister of Labor
 to designate essential industries in which strikes are
 prohibited and arbitration is mandatory. However, the
 Government continues frequently to tolerate "illegal" strikes.
 Official statistics show a decline in the number of strikes
 from January to September 1983, compared Uo the same period in
 1982.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 There is no established religion in the Philippines, and the
 right to practice one's religion is fully respected. About 86
 percent of the population is Roman Catholic. However, there
 are several Protestant and independent Christian groups and a
 sizeable Muslim minority. In the Sulu archipelago and in parts
 of Mindanao, Muslims comprise the majority. The Government,
 through its Ministry of Muslim Affairs, is assisting efforts to
 preserve the Filipino Muslim identity and cultural heritage.
 It has established an institute to train Filipino Muslim
 religious and legal leaders for positions in the Sharia court
 system which is based on Muslim personal law. The Government
 alao provides assistance to Islamic schools and centers,and it
 facilitates the travel of Muslim pilgrims to Mecca.
 Foreign clergymen and missionaries perform their duties without
 interference. Major political groupings have members and
 leaders from the different religious communities. Government
 service is open to all on a nondiscriminatory basis,and several
 senior civil and military officials belong to minority
 religious groups.
 
 
 867
 The Catholic Church hierarchy has retained its prerogative of
 criticizing the Government. Two pastoral letters critical of
 the Government were read from the pulpit in 1983, and a third
 about abuses connected with the use of the Presidential
 Commitment Order was formally withheld only after the Order was
 abolished by President Marcos. Many Catholic priests and nuns
 have become actively involved in focussing public attention on
 reported human rights abuses. Some of them have been arrested
 on charges involving national security. Jaime Cardinal Sin,
 Archbishop of Manila, has called for a dialogue of "national
 reconciliation" between the Government and its critics and has
 become increasingly outspoken against human rights abuses during
 the past year.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel,
 Emigration and Repatriation
 There is freedom to change one's place of residence and
 employment. Emigration is generally permitted, but former
 detainees in "temporary release" status need Government
 permission to leave the country. It is generally granted but
 was denied in two instances in 1983 to members of the opposition.
 A 1980 Presidential Decree provides that persons convicted of
 subversion, rebellion, or sedition shall forfeit their rights as
 citizens, whether such acts are committed inside or outside the
 country, and that judgments may be promulgated in absentia. No
 instance of enforcement of this decree is known.
 As of October 1983, there were about 2,700 Indochinese refugees
 in first asylum camps in the Philippines. The Philippines
 continues to offer asylum and to cooperate with international
 organizations and with the foreign governments which offer
 permanent resettlement to refugees. In addition to providing
 first asylum to boat people, the Philippine Government, in
 conjunction with the United Nations High Commissioner for
 Refugees, operates a major refugee processing center where
 refugees from camps in both the Philippines and other Southeast
 Asian countries are given English language training and cultural
 orientation before being resettled elsewhere.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to
 Change Their Government
 Philippine President Ferdinand Marcos, who has held the office
 since 1965, wields preeminent power under the Constitution
 proclaimed in January 1973, a few months after the imposition of
 martial law. The Constitution provides for a strong President
 in a mixed presidential-parliamentary system. Both the
 President and members of the National Assembly are elected. The
 President appoints the Prime Minister and all other major
 government officials and has an almost insurmountable veto and
 the power to dissolve the National Assembly. He has also used
 his constitutional powers, augmented by certain special
 provisions implemented during the martial law period, to issue
 decrees and instructions having the force of law. In
 combination with his authority under the 1973 Constitution,
 President Marcos uses his control of the ruling Kilusang Bagong
 Lipunan Party to dominate the political arena. Within the party
 issues are discussed and accommodation on key issues, such as
 succession and voter registration in late 1983, is reflected in
 the President's final decision.
 
 
 868
 There is considerable opposition political activity. Opposition
 parties and coalitions exist openly, and most are registered
 with the Government's Commission on Elections, a prerequisite
 for participation in elections. Members of the opposition hold
 a few elective positions as governors, mayors, and village-level
 officials. Opposition members, who comprise approximately 10
 percent of the membership of the National Assembly, have
 participated actively in debates and occasionally influence
 legislation by making suggestions acceptable to the Government
 Party.
 Elections for the entire membership of the National Assembly are
 scheduled to be held in May 1984. The last National Assembly
 elections, in 1978, took place amid widespread charges of
 fraud. Throughout 1983, and particularly after the
 assassination of former Senator Aquino, there was growing
 pressure from the opposition, non-partisan civic groups, and
 elements in the government party for electoral reforms to ensure
 fairness. Many rallies and other peaceful protests have been
 held to support proposals for reform, although some in the
 opposition contend that fair elections are impossible as long as
 President Marcos is in power and demand that he resign and that
 the Government be reconstructed.
 The Government has stated that it intends to hold fair elections
 and is in the process of implementing several reform measures,
 including amending the Constitution to permit elections based on
 provincial, rather than regional, constituencies, a measure the
 moderate opposition has long sought. In April 1983, a special
 mayoral election in Pampanga Province was called by the
 Commission on Elections after it nullified the results of a 1980
 election because of fraud by supporters of the Government party
 candidate.   Vote counting in the special election was closely
 observed by civic groups and was considered fair. The winner
 was a popular independent backed by the governor, a member of
 the Government party.
 Women and minorities participate actively in elections. There
 are assemblywomen and women governors and mayors, including the
 mayor of the national capital, Quezon City. Similarly, Muslims
 and members of ethnic minorities are active politically and hold
 office.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Non-governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The Philippines is a signatory to all principal U.N. human
 rights and refugee conventions. Representatives of the
 International Committee of the Red Cross and two U.S. human
 rights organizations visited the Philippines in 1983 and
 travelled widely in the country, meeting both Philippine
 Government officials and private citizens involved in human
 rights matters. The Lawyers Committee for International Human
 Rights had extended meetings with the Minister of Defense and
 with Imelda Marcos, wife of the President, who serves as the
 Minister for Human Settlements and Governor of Metro Manila.
 The Lawyers Committee subsequently issued a report critical of
 the human rights situation generally, the Government's
 investigation of the Aquino assassination, and its failure to
 curb military abuses. Amnesty International visited the
 
 
 869
 Philippines most recently in 1981 and issued a report critical
 of the Government in 1982. The Government has disagreed with
 the organization's findings and invited Amnesty to visit the
 Philippines again. Amnesty International in its 1983 report
 states that during 1982 it had continued to receive reports of
 illegal arrests, including those of persons believed to have
 been engaged in nonviolent political activity, as well as
 reports of illegal detention, torture, and extrajudicial
 executions. Freedom House in 1983 rated the Philippines
 "partly free."
 Several Catholic and Protestant church groups are active in the
 human rights field. Task Force Detainees of the Philippines
 was established in 1974 by the Association of Major Religious
 Superiors of the Catholic Church. Headquartered in Manila and
 with regional field offices, it investigates human rights
 abuses and publishes reports on its findings. Task Force
 Detainees operates with relative freedom, although a few of its
 members have been arrested on charges of subversion and
 rebellion, and some were still in detention at the end of 1983.
 The Integrated Bar of the Philippines, a national organization
 to which all practicing lawyers must belong, has an active
 human rights committee which has investigated alleged abuses
 and issued reports. Some local chapters carry out their own
 investigations and have talked with military commanders about
 improving the human rights environment. The Free Legal
 Assistance Group also assists detainees prepare defenses
 against charges brought against them.
 The Ministry of National Defense has a special committee for
 investigating reported human rights violations involving
 military personnel. The committee's influence has been
 limited, but its investigations have on occasion led to legal
 proceedings against servicemen for abusive behavior.
 ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND CULTURAL SITUATION
 The Philippines, with a population of 52 million (mid-1983), is
 a predominantly agricultural country ranking in the middle
 range of developing countries.
 The economy has been seriously affected by the lingering
 effects of the worldwide recession and a financial crisis in
 the last quarter of 1983. The economic situation was
 exacerbated by concerns about future instability in the
 Philippines stemming from growing criticism of the Government
 over political, including human rights, issues. In 1983 per
 capita Gross National Product (GNP) was estimated at $712 and
 grew by 1.5 percent. With much of the population under the age
 of 15 and a population growth rate of 2.4 percent (1982), the
 Philippines can expect a continued high rate of population
 growth in coming years and a consequent impact on per capita
 GNP. The inflation rate in 1983 declined until devaluations of
 the peso in June and October. As a result of the devaluations
 and other austerity measures adopted by the Government to
 control a worsening balance of payments, the annual inflation
 rate was expected to be around 12 percent.
 The Government has emphasized rural development with programs
 aimed at increasing production of foodgrains, meat, poultry,
 and fish. The Philippines is self-sufficient in rice, the
 staple food. Land reform in rice and corn holdings has
 
 
 870
 contributed to security of tenure or lowered rents for a
 substantial portion of the rural population. At present,
 agriculture provides employment for slightly over half the work
 force and generates about one-quarter of the GNP.
 The Government is promoting export-oriented industries and
 agribusiness to provide employment for the rapidly growing work
 force. Traditionally the Philippines has depended heavily on
 coconut products and other commodity exports affected by
 international price fluctuations. The Government has also
 facilitated overseas employment for Filipinos, with the largest
 number concentrated in the Middle East.
 Rural and urban poverty remains a serious problem. Housing,
 health care, and diet are inadequate for many Filipinos, and
 problems in the cities have been compounded by substantial
 migration from the countryside. Government programs have
 sought to invigorate large- as well as small-scale enterprises,
 but have been hampered by budget stringencies and changes in
 priorities.
 Life expectancy at birth in 1982 was 62.6 years for males and
 66.1 years for females. Infant mortality in 1982 was 51 per
 1,000 live births. As of 1979, about 43 percent of the
 population had access to safe drinking water. Forty-one
 percent of Filipinos in rural areas live below a
 Government-defined absolute poverty level, and 32 percent are
 below that level in urban areas.
 Free education in the primary grades is available to all
 Filipinos. The adult literacy rate approaches 90 percent.
 However, recent Government data indicate that of the children
 who begin primary school only about 70 percent complete it.
 During the past decade, the Government has focussed
 considerable attention on developing the economy of the areas
 inhabited by the Muslims in the southern Philippines and
 integrating them into national life while preserving their
 cultural heritage.
 
 
 871
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: PHILIPPINES
 1981     1982     1983
 ........... . . ..... . .. ....... ..... ......... ......�.....
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL...        97.6    107.1    102.8
 LOANS.................... 28.4     25.6     24.3
 GRANTS ............. .69.2          81.5     78.5
 A.AID .................   ..... 68.5    89.4     86.8
 LOANS.. ............... ..28.4     25.6     24.3
 GRANTS ..............      40.1     63.8     62.5
 (SEC.SUPP.ASSIST.)...        30.0     50.0     50..0
 B.FOOD FOR PEACE ......         24.1     12.6     10.7
 ,LOANS ..... I.  .*   .....  0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .......... .   .    24.1     12.6     10.7
 TZITL  I-TOTAL .......          0.0      0.0      a,(
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS...           0.0      (.a      0.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR.,...         0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE  II-TOTAL.........       24.1     12.6     10.7
 E.RELIEF.EC.DEV & WFP.         4.5      1.6      1.2
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY .....       19.6     11.0      9.5
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST...         5.0      5.1      5.3
 LOANS ........  ...... ... .0.0    0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................    5.0      5.1      5.3
 PEACE CORPS ......        5.0      5.1      5.3
 NARCOTICS ........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 OTHER ........ ....      0.0      0.0      0.0
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL...        75.6     51.2     51.4
 LOANS.. ............50.0           50.0     50.0
 GRANTS ...............     25.6      1.2      1.4
 A.MAP GRANTS ............     25.0      0.0      0.0
 B.CREDIT FINANCING ....       50.0     50.0     50.0
 C.INTL MIL.ED.TRNG ....        0.6      1.2      1.4
 D.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK...         0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS ........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. & MIL...       173.2    158.3    154.2
 LOANS ................... 78.4     75.6     74.3
 GRANTS .......... ..94.8           82.7     79.9
 OTHER US LOANS ......... I.   69.3      8.4      0.0
 EX-IM BANK LOANS .......       69.3      8.4      0.0
 ALL  OTHER .................   0.0      0.0      0.0
 ............  . .......... ............... ...........o.o.......
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1981     1982     1983     1944-83
 TOTAL ........   717.7    693.9    754.3   5908.4
 IBRD             533.0    452.9    502.7   3871.6
 IFC               40.2     21.0      5.6    170.0
 IDA                0.0      0.0      0.0    122.2
 IDB                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 ADB              135.5    213.8    235.2   1636.5
 AFDB               0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 UNDP               9.0      6.2      0.0     62.6
 OTHER-UN           0.0      0.0     10.8     45.5
 EEC                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 
 30-231 0 - 84 - 56
 
 
