 PHILIPPINES
 The Philippines has a republican form of government with a
 democratically elected president and a bicameral legislature.
 The nation continues to be troubled by a declining but still
 potent Communist insurgency, active in many of the country's 73
 provinces. The threat from rightwing military rebels has
 subsided considerably, due in part to government success in
 arresting a number of their leaders during the first half of
 the year.
 With the abolition of the 42,000-man Philippine Constabulary
 (PC) in January and its absorption into the newly created
 Philippine National Police (PNP), the Armed Forces of the
 Philippines (AFP) number some 125,000 men. Under the law
 establishing the PNP, the police in 1993 are scheduled to take
 over responsibility for the counterinsurgency effort from the
 military. A civilian militia force, the Citizen Armed Forces
 Geographic Units (CAFGUS), is paid and trained by the
 military. Augmenting the CAFGUS and providing security and
 intelligence in areas cleared of the insurgency are Civilian
 Voluntary Organizations (CVO's). They are generally unarmed.
 Elements of the security forces again committed human rights
 abuses in the course of counterinsurgency efforts.
 A significant portion of the Philippine economy remains
 agricultural, and most enterprises are family-owned. Land
 reform, a key element of the Government's economic strategy,
 remains bogged down in the face of resistance from powerful
 landholding interests. The eruption of Mount Pinatubo and the
 subsequent mud flows dealt another blow to the already weak
 economy. Overall, gross domestic product declined by 0.6
 percent in the first half of 1991, largely from a drop in
 industrial sector output and capital investment. The inflation
 rate in November 1991 rose to 16 percent on an annualized basis.
 Statistics on violations and abuses of human rights are
 collected by the Philippine government and a number of
 international and private human rights organizations. On the
 government side, the constitutionally mandated Commission on
 Human Rights (CHR) gathers information and investigates
 allegations of violation and abuse. Among the private groups,
 Task Force Detainees of the Philippines (TFDP) is the most
 prominent.
 Aggregate information from CHR, TFDP and other groups showed a
 drop in reports of violations and abuses for 1991, continuing a
 trend first seen in 1989. Many human rights violations were -
 committed in the context of the counterinsurgency. Police
 units also seriously abused human.rights in the course of
 ordinary law enforcement duties. Principal human rights abuses
 by government forces included extrajudicial killings;
 disappearances; arbitrary arrest; torture; and harassment of
 suspected insurgents and their supporters. Such labels can be
 attached very casually and have been used as a justification
 for acting, against critics of the government, labor union
 activists, civil rights attorneys, and, sometimes, innocent
 bystanders. Although the Government remains committed to the
 respect of human rights, it has not been effective in curbing
 and punishing abuses. In an effort to exert more control, it
 adopted a number of new policies, including the extension of
 the jurisdiction of civilian courts over military personnel.
 It is too early to know how effective these policies will be.
 The Communist Party of the Philippines (CPP) and its armed
 wing, the New People's Army (NPA), were also responsible for
 many abuses of human rights--although they also showed a
 
 
 962
 PHILIPPINES
 declining pattern, reflecting a general decrease in guerrilla
 activity during the period. Government supporters make the
 point that false claims by insurgents of official abuse
 weakened the credibility of all reports of human rights abuses
 and undermined administration efforts to enforce strict
 standards of accountability among the military and police.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing
 CHR reported 138 incidents of murder during the January-June
 period of 1991. It reported 386 in 1990 and 525 in 1989. TFDP
 reported 49 people murdered and 36 people killed in massacres
 through December 15, 1991. TFDP listed 223 killings for all of
 1990 and 368 for 1989. The numbers given by CHR are larger
 because it monitors violations by both the Government and
 insurgent groups, including the CPP/NPA.
 Many of the killings in which military and police involvement
 is alleged occurred in the context of counterinsurgency
 operations. For example, 10 persons were killed in separate
 incidents between November 29 and December 24 in the environs
 of Clark Air Base, apparently sparked by the November 27 murder
 of a Philippine army sergeant assigned to an intelligence unit
 of the 24th Infantry Battalion. The National Democratic Front
 (NDF), the political wing of the CPP, charged that the murders
 were connected with military efforts to root out the CPP/NPA's
 political infrastructure in the area of Clark through a program
 of assassination. A review of the evidence suggests that the
 military may have been responsible for 3 of the 10 murders.
 The 24th Infantry Battalion was subsequently transferred out of
 the area. No charges were filed in connection with the
 murders, and the military men involved were neither relieved
 nor otherwise administratively punished. Philippine Department
 of Justice (DOJ) prosecutors complain that witnesses to the
 shootings have not come forward, preventing them from pursuing
 the cases. Witnesses to human rights violations are frequently
 unwilling to testify for fear of reprisals. Senior military
 officers believe that the men of the 24th were responding
 legitimately to a provocation from the NPA.
 A more complex series of incidents running from September 1990
 through February 1991, collectively referred to as the
 Pangasinan massacres after the northern Luzon province in which
 they occurred, claimed the lives of some 27 persons. The
 incidents led to the organization of a DOJ fact-finding
 mission. The alleged perpetrators of the killings include
 elements of the military, police, CAFGUS, and armed civilian
 vigilantes. Bishop Gabriel Garol of the Ecumenical Movement
 for Justice and Peace (EMJP) decried "terror tactics through
 the use of private armies" for the purpose of "silencing
 people" viewed as potential opposition. However, a review of
 the DOJ report and one issued by the local Pangasinan diocese
 of Alaminos shows that the motivations and circumstances of the
 killings range from an encounter between military and NPA
 forces in Labrador municipality to a possible reprisal for
 cattle rustling in Malimpin, to a personal vendetta in
 Magatarem, to likely criminal activity in Peralta. The
 Government failed to prosecute these cases vigorously,
 particularly in those instances involving military, police, and
 local government officials. Too often, instances of criminal
 
 
 963
 PHILIPPINES
 activity are excused by depicting the victims as deserving
 their fate because of their alleged support for the
 insurgency. Ironically, groups on the left give credence to
 these views by linking most violations to the counterinsurgency
 effort. The result is a legal paralysis that undermines
 respect for the law and encourages an environment in which
 violations of basic human rights are tolerated.
 The CAFGUS continue to be implicated in a number of murders.
 TFDP found CAFGUS involved in 41 out of 357 (11 percent) of
 reported incidents of abuses during the first half of the
 year. Figures from CHR found involvement in 50 of 669
 incidents. One flagrant example occurred on November 22, 1990,
 when three members of Teatro Obrero, a theater group sponsored
 by the National Federation of Sugar Workers, were killed in
 Murcia, Negros Occidental, while allegedly attempting to. escape
 from the custody of a unit of CAFGUS attached to the lth
 Infantry Battalion. There is good reason to believe that the
 three were executed, but local commanders have exonerated the
 CAFGUS unit involved, presumably reasoning that the victims
 were supporters if not members of the NPA.
 Many murders were attributed to the NPA. High on the list were
 former insurgents who, had surrendered to the Government. On
 January 4, 1991, rebel returnee Esteban Domingo was executed by
 the NPA in full view of his family in Dumalneg, Ilocos Norte.
 Targeting of management in labor disputes also occurred. On
 February 18, 1991, Aurelio Reginaldo, the personnel manager at
 a leading Mindanao banana plantation, was gunned down by the
 rebels while out on a Sunday drive with his family. Innocent
 bystanders were also murdered in-the course of NPA ambushes and
 robbery attempts. On June 7, 1991 10 persons, including 4
 children, died when the guerrillas opened fire on a passenger
 jeepney bus near New Corella, Davao del Norte.
 Assassinations by NPA hit teams operating in metropolitan
 Manila declined sharply in 1991. Only two were recorded for
 the year, compared with over 60 in 1990. In response to the
 murder of 10 Americans by such NPA hit teams, and with ongoing
 threats to Philippine civilian and military officials as well
 as to official and private U.S. citizens, the Philippine
 Government intitiated a coordinated police effort to identify
 and apprehend members of these organizations. The decline in
 1991 was due less to NPA restraint than to effective police
 work, which resulted in the arrest of several key leaders of
 the Alex Boncayo Brigade and the capture of the alleged
 director behind the NPA program of urban terrorism, Romulo
 Kintanar. However, the military and police were accused of
 human rights abuses in the course of this antiterrorism drive.
 Specifically, nongovernmental organizations charged that
 government security, personnel were involved in the killings of
 alleged NPA hit men Jose Lascano on January 3 and Fernando
 Baldomar on August 8., In general, however, the operation
 achieved great success within the limits of the law.
 Violence related to Muslim groups was concentrated in the
 handful of provinces in Mindanao where they hold a majority.
 Typically, the violence was as much between rival Muslim groups
 as it was against Christians. An example is a shooting
 incident in Jolo, Sulu, on May 23, 1991, in which 6 persons
 died and at least 21 were injured. The shooting originated in
 a longstanding feud between the families of Vice Governor Kimar
 Tulawie and Jolo Mayor Soud Tan.
 
 
 964
 PHILIPPINES
 Tensions between the Muslim and Christian communities also run
 deep, as seen in the series of kidnapings in Cotabato City
 discussed in Section l.b. Another example is an April 13
 drive-by incident in Kauswagan, Lanao del Norte in which 3
 people were killed and 17 wounded. Police believe that the
 incident was triggered by a series of kidnaping-murders in
 which three Muslims were killed, possibly by Christian CAFGUS
 members.
 Two journalists died violently in 1991. Nesino Toling, editor
 and publisher of the Pangli Bay Monitor in Ozamis City,
 Mindanao, was shot and killed April 14. Toling had been active
 in exposing organized crime activities. Although his murder
 generated high-level interest and two suspects were arrested,
 the case remained unsolved at year's end. On May 5, Philippine
 Punch editor Candido Baslisco was murdered in Cebu. Police
 have made several arrests in connection with the case. His
 killing is thought to have been connected to Basilisco's
 championing of the workers' side in a local labor dispute.
 Although several arrests were made, the case was still
 unresolved at year's end.
 b. Disappearance
 CHR listed 14 cases of disappearance in the first half of
 1991. It reported figures of 46 in 1990 and 64 in 1989.
 During the period from January 1 through December 15, TFDP
 reported a total of 37 disappearacnes. This was a sharp
 decline from the 77 persons it listed as missing during all of
 1990. In 28 of the 37 cases, persons were reported as having
 disappeared after arrest and detention by the military.'
 Government counterinsurgency efforts are centered on "Special
 Operations Team" (SOT) operations aimed at uprooting the
 CPP/NPA political infrastructure at the barangay level.
 Central to the theory of the SOT process are "seminars" at
 which a dialog is established between residents and government
 and military representatives to uncover local grievances and
 persuade the people of the Government's intent to remedy them.
 However, practice often departed from theory in the field, and
 many alleged instances of disappearance occurred in the context
 of SOT operations. An example is a credible report of the
 "disappearance" between February 8 and 13 of Manuel Capitulo, a
 relative of alleged local NPA leader Alex Capitulo. One
 objective account indicated that the approach taken in SOT
 operations by the 24th Infantry Battalion outside Clark Air
 Base in late 1990 depended more on intimidation than persuasion.
 Aggressive interrogations frequently escalate into torture or
 killing. This may have happened to Olimpio Poso, whose naked,
 bound body was found on January 13 about 3 weeks after his
 arrest by soldiers from the 19th Infantry Battalion in San
 Isidro, northern Samar.'
 Despite the decline in recorded disappearances for 1991, the
 number of cases outstanding from previous years remains large.
 In organizing a special task force in January to follow up on
 disappearance cases, the Government acknowledged that 560 cases
 remain unsolved, 300 of which occurred since the bloodless
 uprising which brought Mrs. Aquino to power in 1986. According
 to one credible local human rights organization, of the more
 than 50 persons alleged to have disappeared in 1990, 15 have
 reappeared and 5 have been found dead. The whereabouts of the
 others is unknown.
 
 
 965
 PHILIPPINES
 On June 18 a memorandum'was signed between CHR, the military,
 the Department of Interior and Local Government (DILG), and the
 DOJ setting new guidelines for the release of detainees. Under
 these guidelines, release from detention must be witnessed by
 the family of the detainee, legal counsel, or CHR. The local
 prosecutor or some person of standing in the local community
 must also be present. If these procedures are not followed, it
 is the Government that bears the burden of proof for
 establishing the well-being of the detainee, should he have
 disappeaied. The agreement is a step forward but does not deal
 with the problem of "attempted escape" that has been used
 sometimes by the military and police to cover up murder and
 torture. On November 18, Elias Carullo was arrested by
 elements of the 42nd Infantry Battalion in Mulaney, Quezon.
 Carul16 has subsequently made allegations of torture. The
 military says that his bruises occurred during an escape
 attempt on November 21.
 The CPP/NPA is also implicated in many disappearances. It has
 "arrested" and killed activists in the party and front
 organizations on suspicion of being government agents. On
 October 19, 1990 the NPA seized Arvey Duane Drown, an American
 traveling in Northern Luzon. At year's end, the NPA had still
 not released Drown from captivity. On September 1, government
 troops unearthed the remains of 36 NPA members apparently
 killed by other NPA members in Calatrava, Negros Occidental.
 The bodies were reportedly those of victims of plan "Zombie,"
 an NPA internal purge designed to rid guerrilla ranks of
 alleged government informers.
 During the 6-month period between September 1990 and March
 1991, Cotabato City witnessed a series of 29 kidnapings
 engineered by a renegade Muslim National Liberation Front
 (MNLF) faction. The kidnaping on March 27 of a French priest
 finally led the Government to dispatch a Marine battalion to
 the city. The targets of the kidnapings were largely
 Chinese-Filipino businessmen and the motive ransom, but
 tensions in the city between the Christian majority and the
 Muslim minority encouraged and prolonged the violence.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment and Punishment
 The Constitution prohibits torture and makes evidence obtained
 thereby inadmissible in court. Guidelines issued by CHR in
 1988 direct all law enforcement agencies and military elements
 to avoid unnecessary force during investigation, arrest,
 detention, interrogation, and other activities. Despite these
 prohibitions, torture does occur. CHR recorded 5 cases in the
 first half of 1991 and 79 in 1990. TFDP reported 135 cases of
 torture for the period January I through December 15, 1991. In
 1990, it recorded 249 cases. The difference may be accounted
 for by the fact that victims of torture fear reprisal from the
 military or police if they approach CHR to seek redress.
 Unlike TFDP,' CHR only occasionally investigates a case if'there
 is no formal complaint from the victim.
 Mistreatment most commonly takes place during counterinsurgency
 operations in the field by the military, police, and CAFGUS.
 Beatings said to have occurred in the course of January 22-30
 operations by the 21st Infantry Battalion in-Conner,
 Kalinga-Apayao, are a typical example. During tactical
 interrogations, the soldiers allegedly boxed the ears of a,
 13-year-old boy, hit another person with the butt of an M-16
 rifle, and tied the hands and feet of two young men and left
 
 
 PHILIPPINES
 them out in the rain overnight. The boy was forced to point
 out local NPA members at a checkpoint set up by the soldiers;
 the person hit with the M-16 rifle was arrested on charges of
 illegal possession of a weapon; and the young men were forced
 to admit that they were members of the NPA and were later
 released after agreeing to "surrender." Similar violations may
 have occurred as well in July during operations conducted in
 Zambales by the military and police in the wake of the Mount
 Pinatubo eruption. The objective was probably to root out CPP
 and NPA cadre forced out of the hills and into refugee camps in
 search of food and shelter. TFDP asserts that as many as 13
 persons were arrested and beaten in the municipalities of Santa
 Cruz and Mansinloc.
 Women have not escaped such violence. TFDP reports an incident
 on June 6 in which a 6-month-pregnant woman in Bayombong, Nueva
 Vizcaya was allegedly raped and her husband beaten by a CAFGUS
 unit attached to the 17th Infantry Battalion while searching
 their home in a remote barangay for weapons. CHR reported the
 rape case of a young married woman in Tabuk, Kalinga-Apayo,
 whose father was accused of being a supplier for the NPA. The
 young woman filed charges in court against the rapists. She
 and her sister were subsequently murdered by a second armed
 trio whose camouflage-clad leader allegedly was identified as a
 member of the Cordillera People's Liberation Army (CPLA), a
 locally based paramilitary group.
 Ordinary citizens involved in common criminal cases are not
 immune to the dangers of brutality at the hands of the police.
 Rodolfo Herrera, Jr., claimed that he had been beaten by
 National Bureau of Investigation (NBI) agents after his arrest
 for a September 7 shootout with police in which his father was
 killed. Although the NBI disputes it, a CHR investigation
 confirms Herrera's account. FollQwing an earlier series of
 cases involving police brutality, CHR dispatched a letter to
 PNP Director General General Cesar Nazareno on February 5
 asserting that such incidents "demonstrate a breakdown of
 discipline in the police forces."
 Although physical punishment is prohibited by law in the
 Philippine penal system, it occurs frequently in jails and
 prisons. Most brutality in jails and prisons is committed by
 other inmates rather than by prison guards. Recognizing this,
 the DOJ agreed in September to requests that detainees held on
 subversion charges at nationally administered Muntinlupa prison
 be segregated from the criminal prison population.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 The Constitution requires a judicial determination of probable
 cause before issuance of an arrest warrant and prohibits
 holding prisoners incommunicado or in secret places of
 detention. Detainees have the right to a judicial review of
 the legality of detention and, except for offenses punishable
 by a life sentence, to bail. An executive order requires
 authorities to file charges within 12 to 36 hours of arrest,
 depending on the seriousness of the crime.
 CHR listed 69 cases of illegal detention for the January-June
 period of 1991, compared with 195 in. all of 1990 and 212 in
 1989. TFDP found that 1053 persons were arrested illegally
 during the period January 1 through December 15, 1991. Some
 884 were later released. This compares with 3,789 arrested in
 1990, of which 357 were still in custody at the year's end.
 Most of the TFDP cases involved demonstrators who were picked
 
 
 967
 PHILIPPINES
 up for illegal assembly and were released a few hours after
 their arrest.
 The Supreme Court of July 1990 decision permitting warrantless
 arrests on the basis that subversion is a "continuing offense"
 did not produce the flood of arrests feared by its critics.
 Still, Philippine security forces did frequently violate
 constitutional requirements when handling suspected Communist
 insurgents. Suspects were sometimes held and interrogated
 without legal proceedings for periods ranging from several days
 to several months. When charges were filed, they often had a
 weak evidentiary basis.
 At the heart of the Government's legal problems in combating
 the insurgency is its internal security law.  Rebellion or
 subversion is a crime punishable by a maximum sentence of 12
 years, entitling those charged to bail. The relatively light
 punishment for these crimes is an outgrowth of years of
 oppression under Marcos when opponents of the regime were
 arrested for subversion, held without bail, and sentenced to
 long prison terms. Faced with this constraint, the Aquino
 Government routinely has filed criminal charges of illegal
 possession of firearms, murder, and kidnaping that allow denial
 of bail, in order to prevent the release of captured insurgents
 who could return to the underground. This practice sometimes
 places government cases on shaky legal grounds and invites
 abuses, at times actually undermining counterinsurgency
 efforts. For example, National NDF Chairman Saturnino Ocampo
 and his wife, Carolina Malay, a prominent CPP leader, both
 imprisoned for 2 years without bail, were acquitted of
 kidnaping charges filed by the Government, although additional
 charges remain pending. Ocampo remains in custody, while Malay
 was released on bail to care for the couple's children.
 Several hundred military officers and men are still detained
 for their role in the August 1987 and December 1989 coup
 attempts and in the October 1990 Mindanao mutiny. As military
 personnel they are to be tried in courts-martial and are not
 eligible for bail. New AFP Chief of Staff Lisandro Abadia has
 since May 1991 pursued a policy of reconciliation with'the
 rebel military that has resulted in the release of many junior
 officers and enlisted personnel to the custody of their
 commanders, although they still must face the courts. The move
 has sparked demands that similar consideration be given to
 leftist detainees, such as former CPP Secretary Rafael Baylosis
 who has remained in prison since his 1987 capture. So far, the
 Government has refused to entertain this request. One
 Communist leader was released from detention and another is
 scheduled for release in 1992. Former NPA chief Juanito Rivera
 was convicted on charges of subversion and rebellion in August
 1991, and his sentence commuted to time served on humanitarian
 grounds. Rivera stated that he will not return to the
 underground movement. -Former Party Chairman Rodolfo Salas
 pleaded guilty to similar charges in May and took an oath of
 allegiance to the Government. He is scheduled to be released
 in the spring of 1992 after serving the minimum 6-year sentence.
 The Government has rarely used internal or foreign exile for
 political purposes. It ended the ban on the return of Mrs.
 Imelda Marcos and her children on July 31. The Marcoses were
 issued one-way travel documents to the Philippines. The
 remains of the late President Marcos are still banned from the
 country, because of the fear that their return might lead to
 disorder. The revocation on national security grounds of the
 
 
 968
 PHILIPPINES
 passport of NPA founder Jose Maria Sison was still in effect at
 year's end.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The Constitution calls for an independent judiciary and
 provides that those accused of crimes shall be informed of
 charges against them and have the right to counsel. Trials are
 public. Defendants are presumed innocent and have the right to
 confront witnesses against them, to present evidence, and to
 appeal their convictions. The right of defendants to a lawyer
 is generally respected. There were no convictions in a major
 human rights case in 1991. The one significant decision was
 the acquittal by a military court of the soldiers involved in
 the August 1990 Sultan Kudarat cases, in which 19 members of a
 family were massacred by a military patrol.
 Moreover, a number of particularly egregious cases from past
 years remain unresolved. Six policemen charged in the
 assassination attempt on November 10, 1987 of Polytechnic
 University of the Philippines President Nemesio Prudente are
 out on bail as their case slowly moves through the legal
 system. Arrests have yet to be made in the murder of Attorney
 Emmanuel Mendoza on July 2, 1988, despite President Aquino's
 express order to then NBI Director Antonio Carpio for speedy
 progress.
 The repeal of Presidential Directive 1850 in June 1991
 transferred jurisdiction in all criminal cases involving
 military and police defendants back to civilian courts. There
 are exceptions when the charges are "service related,"
 however. It remains to be seen, whether the civilian courts
 can be more effective. Moreover, as the Mendoza case
 demonstrates, in the absence of good police investigative work
 justice cannot be pursued effectively. Acts of harassment,
 however, impeded lawyers' defense efforts. On January 2, Free
 Legal Assistance Group (FLAG) lawyer Nerio Zamora was
 threatened by a local police official when he sought to meet
 with a client held in the stockade. On May 24, two FLAG
 lawyers were charged with subversion by another local
 policeman, angered by their defense of a human rights worker
 suspected of ties to the NPA.
 Despite the introduction of the continuous trial system, most
 trial courts remain backlogged, and only a few are in
 compliance with the 90-day limit for hearing a case. There is
 an urgent need for more judges and courtrooms.
 TFDP reports 650 political prisoners are detained in the
 Philippines. This count is derived from the number of persons
 in prison charged with subversion and rebellion. These include
 senior CPP/NPA members, but not military officers and enlisted
 personnel involved in the 1987 and 1989 coup attempts, whose
 cases are being tried in the military court system. CHR does
 not keep statistics on political prisoners and points out that
 many held on charges of subversion are also facing counts of
 murder, kidnaping, or other serious crimes.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Under the Constitution, search warrants may be issued by a
 judge on a finding of probable cause. Restrictions on search
 and seizure are generally observed, although raids on private
 homes without search warrants are occasionally reported.
 
 
 .969
 
 PHILIPPINES
 Judges have thrown out evidence obtained illegally, even in
 politically sensitive cases, such as that of former NDF
 chairman Satur Ocampo-although he still remains incarcerated
 on other charges. The Government does not interfere with the
 free personal use of the mails or other public communications
 systems, except upon issuance of a court order during the
 course of an investigation.
 g. Use of Excessive Force and Violations of Humanitarian
 Law in Internal Conflicts
 The effect on local civilian populations of fighting between
 the AFP and the NPA emerged prominently as a political issue in
 1991 in step with the AFP's implementation of a constriction
 strategy that led its units to penetrate the more remote areas
 of the country, where the guerrillas previously had held free
 rein. These incursions resulted in civilian casualties from
 aerial bombardment and indirect .artillery fire and in sickness
 and death of the young and old from the destruction of housing
 and granaries and the imposition of food and medicine blockades.
 According to figures provided by the Ecumenical Commission for
 Displaced Families and. Communities (ECDFC) for the first half
 of 1991, 10,400 families were displaced and some 22,000
 families were affected by the fighting in 1990. The Department
 of Social Welfare and Development listed 4,200 families or
 22,000 people for assistance as internal refugees from fighting
 in their localities during the first half of 1991; in 1990 the
 DSWD assisted some 34,000 families.
 The incident that brought the issue of evacuations forcefully
 into the public consciousness in 1991 was the APP's Marag
 valley campaign, which occurred during October-November 1990.
 The 10-mile-long valley is located in northern Luzon on the
 border of Cagayan and Kalinga-Apayao provinces. It has long
 been considered an NPA sanctuary, with no civilian government
 presence since 1985.
 The 2-month AFP campaign included incidents of bombing and
 strafing runs on supposed NPA camps and granaries. Human
 rights groups reaching the Marag valley in the wake of the
 fighting charged that some 88 homes were burned and rice crops
 destroyed as a result of the campaign. CHR investigations
 produced somewhat lower figures, but a senior APP official
 acknowledged that the military's attention to the needs of the
 civilian population in the area was "inadequate." An AFP
 engineering battalion is now building a road into the valley
 and civilian government agencies are carrying out relief work.
 TFDP and the EMJP have charged that the suffering inflicted on
 -civilians in the Marag valley was replicated in 1991 in
 military operations that took place in the "railroad towns" of
 Camarines Sur, in the "chicks" area of Negros, and in the
 border area of Agusan-del Sur and Surigao del Sur in
 northeastern Mindanao--all priority fronts for the AFP in
 combating the insurgency. In response to criticisms of AFP
 operational shortcomings, the administration, through the forum
 of the Presidential Human Rights Committee (PHRC) (see
 discussion of the PHRC in Section 4), issued new guidelines to
 the military on the handling of civilian evacuations and
 guaranteed access by medical teams to areas of conflict. Even
 more significantly, new rules of engagement have been drawn up
 forbidding unobserved indirect fire and requiring division
 approval of lower units' requests for air support.
 
 
 970
 PHILIPPINES
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 There are virtually no legal restrictions on freedom of
 expression or speech. Freedom of the press is generally
 respected. There are some 30 privately owned daily newspapers
 in Manila and many more in the provinces that cover the
 political spectrum and pull no punches in criticizing the
 Government. CPP publications are illegal but circulate
 clandestinely, and Communist views are expressed in other
 media. Journalists have been able without legal penalty to
 meet and interview antigovernment rebels, including the
 Communists and the rebellious rightwing military. Like the
 press, radio and television stations report views across a wide
 political spectrum. The Philippine courts have been consistent
 in their protection of the media. In February a $714,000 libel
 suit filed by senior military officers against the Philippine
 Daily Inquirer for a series of articles it ran in early 1990 on
 the origins of the rightwing military rebels was dismissed by
 the court as without merit.
 As the deaths of two journalists in 1991 evidence, however, the
 press continues to face considerable hazards in carrying out
 its responsibilities. The dangers are greatest for those
 working outside the capital, where powerful vested interests
 involved with gambling, illegal logging, or the drug trade may
 use financial inducements or pressures as well as the threat of
 violence to control the media. The memorandum of agreement
 signed in September 1990 between the Department of National
 Defense and the President of the National Press Club appears to
 have resolved at least some of the problems encountered by
 journalists in reporting on the insurgency. The National Press
 Club is satisfied that the military observed the agreement in
 1991, and TFDP reports no harassment of journalists during the
 first half of the year. Reporters who accompanied the
 nongovernmental organization (NGO) mercy missions to the Marag
 Valley encountered no apparent problem in reporting on the
 incident, and their stories played a big role in focusing
 public attention on the tragedy. Publications from abroad,
 except those considered pornographic, are not censored.
 Foreign journalists are able freely to report and move about
 the country even in areas of rebel influence. Major foreign
 newspapers and television networks have bureaus or
 representatives in Manila.
 Academic freedom is respected in theory and practice. The
 Government does not censor subject matter in classes,
 university publications, or conferences.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Permits from local authorities are required for outdoor
 demonstrations in public places and are routinely issued.
 Nevertheless, rallies and marches are often held without
 permits. Philippine law enforcers have been instructed to
 follow a policy of "maximum tolerance," i.e., not dispersing
 rallies held without permits as long as they do not disturb
 public order. To prevent conflicts on college campuses,
 government authorities and student leaders have agreed that
 soldiers and police will not disperse rallies on campus, while
 students agreed to conduct their mass actions peacefully and
 not disrupt classes. There was no breach of this understanding
 in 1991.
 
 
 971
 PHILIPPINES
 In comparison with the violence that accompanied the October
 1990 general strike, antigovernment demonstrations were
 generally orderly in 1991. Arrests were sometimes made but
 those held were quickly released and not brought to trial.
 Some controversy accompanied the large anti-U.S. base rally
 held on September 10 when police held up demonstrators heading
 for the rally site in front of the Philippine Senate because of
 an ongoing progovernment rally led by President Aquino.
 Private, professional, religious, social, charitable, and
 political organizations are permitted to affiliate with
 recognized international bodies in their fields. The CPP,
 which advocates the violent overthrow of the Government, is
 outlawed, but nonviolent Marxist parties exist.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 There is no state religion. Freedom of religion is fully
 respected, and no official discrimination is practiced against
 any religious group or its members. Although over 80 percent
 of the population is Roman Catholic, the country's sizable
 Muslim minority, the indigenous Iglesia Ni Kristo and Aglipayan
 church, Protestant congregations, and other sects enjoy full
 religious freedom. Foreign clergymen and missionaries of many
 faiths practice their profession freely.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Filipinos enjoy unhampered freedom to change their place of
 residence and employment within the Philippines. Movement
 within the country is largely unimpeded, although both military
 and rebel groups erected roadblocks in provincial areas where
 they conducted operations during 1991. Reacting to the
 practice by local law enforcement personnel of using
 checkpoints to extort money from travelers, Secretary of
 Interior and Local Government Luis Santos rescinded this
 authority just days after the police came under the purview of
 his expanded department.
 Filipinos freely travel and work abroad. The right to emigrate
 from and return to the Philippines is not restricted for
 political reasons. In a few exceptional cases, such as that of
 CPP founder Jose Maria Sison who now resides in the
 Netherlands, the Government on national security grounds has
 revoked the passports of Filipinos outside the country.
 Although the Government does not accept refugees for internal
 resettlement, it provided first asylum for 1,108 Indochinese
 boat people in 1990 and 252 in 1991 and permitted the United
 Nations to operate a major processing center for 16,000
 refugees in Bataan province. Approximately 26,000 refugees
 passed through these facilities in 1991.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Citizens .have the right to change their government through
 genuine periodic elections. The Constitution ratified in 1987
 returned the Philippines to a presidential system of government
 similar to that in existence from 1946 to 1972. It established
 a bicameral legislature and an independent judiciary as checks
 on executive power. Presidential authority to declare martial
 law was curtailed. The Philippines has a multiparty political
 system with free elections based on universal (18 years and
 
 
 972
 PHILIPPINES
 older) suffrage. Filipinos are free to organize political
 parties as long as they do not seek to overthrow the Government
 by force. Democratic opposition to the Government is widely
 tolerated and there are no restrictions in law or practice on
 participation by women and minorities in politics.
 Under the new Constitution, congressional elections were held
 in 1987, provincial and city elections in 1988, and "barangay"
 (village or ward) elections in 1989. The 23-member Senate is
 divided among four different parties and independents. In the
 House of Representatives, the progovernment party enjoys a
 solid majority. Most legislation is initiated by the members
 of Congress themselves, and the debate is lively.
 Government-sponsored legislation is often criticized, amended,
 or defeated. The next presidential, congressional, provincial,
 and city elections are scheduled for 1992, and the next
 barangay elections for 1994.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The best known human rights NGO is Task Force Detainees of the
 Philippines (TFDP), established in 1974. TFDP collects
 information on alleged human rights violations and publishes
 statistics on abuses attributed to government forces. Other
 groups active in the human rights area include the Free Legal
 Assistance Group (FLAG), the Philippine Alliance of Human
 Rights Advocates (PAHRA), the Ecumenical Movement for Justice
 and Peace (EMJP), and the Ecumenical Commission for Displaced
 Families and Communities (ECDFC).
 These groups operate without government restriction but are
 often viewed with suspicion by the military and police. Local
 officials have also been uncooperative in some instances. A
 mission headed by the EMJP to the Marag valley in December 1990
 was denied entrance to the area by the local military
 commander. A later group in January 1991 did get through.
 Even after the publication of guidelines forbidding harassment
 of medical mercy missions, problems have occurred. In August
 some members of a medical group were harassed and detained for
 nearly 2 days and their supplies and equipment seized by the
 Mayor of Pinukpuk, Kalinga-Apayao. Local field workers of
 human rights groups have also faced harassment. In June
 Cecilia Palino, a TFDP worker in Camarines Norte, was arrested
 by the local PNP on charges of "teaching human rights to the
 NPA." TFDP reports two other instances of harassment of
 private human rights workers during the first half of 1991.
 With 16 field offices and a staff of 679, the constitutionally
 mandated CHR'is charged with investigating all alleged
 violations of human rights. It has come under criticism for
 its failure in many instances to conduct field investigations,
 the quasi-judicial character of its proceedings that pose risks
 and special burdens for potential witnesses, its tendency to
 become involved in issues unrelated to fundamental human rights
 concerns, and its inability to monitor the progress of cases
 referred to the Department of Justice or the military courts.
 More serious allegations include overly close ties with the
 military and an antagonistic relationship with private human
 rights groups.
 However, because of its province-wide network and extensive
 resources, the national CHR office generally is more efficient
 in responding to human rights inquiries. CHR has also been
 
 
 973
 PHILIPPINES
 tenacious in following up on a few particularly egregious
 instances of violation, most notably the June 1988 murder of
 attorney Alfonso Surigao in Cebu.
 Still, resource constraints and the uneven quality of personnel
 below senior levels have been a problem, especially in the
 field. Given CHR's sometimes strained relationships with
 private human rights groups, the Presidential Human Rights
 Committee (PHRC) has increasingly emerged as a forum for public
 debate on human rights policy. Established by executive order
 in late 1988, primarily to address the problem of
 disappearances, the PHRC broke new ground this year when it
 sent a team to investigate the situation in the Marag valley.
 Out of this effort emerged the guidelines on evacuations and
 the us6 of air support and indirect fire cited in Section l.g.
 Membership in the PHRC includes the Justice Secretary as
 Chairman, representatives from CHR, the Departments of National
 Defense and Foreign Affairs, the Office of the President, the
 Congress, and two private human rights group, the Philippine
 Alliance of Human Rights Advocates (PAHRA) and the Free Legal
 Assistance Group (FLAG). TFDP and other groups attend as
 observers.
 Representatives of international human rights groups are free
 to travel in the Philippines and investigate alleged abuses.
 Government officials discuss human rights problems with outside
 governmental and nongovernmental organizations and the United
 Nations and routinely agree to meet with those who visit.
 Resident delegates of the International Committee of the Red
 Cross monitor prison conditions and assist persons displaced by
 the conflict.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 Women enjoy most of the legal rights men do, but Philippine law
 and custom continues to discriminate against women in some
 respects, including a limitation on their right to buy and sell
 property. Laws against abuse of women are also inadequately
 enforced. While criminal law prohibits violence against women,
 both women and girls in the lower economic strata are
 vulnerable to exploitation. Unethical operators may promise
 legitimate employment in Manila or overseas, or arrange
 marriages with foreign men. Some of these women end up working
 as prostitutes or suffering abuse at the hands of their
 employers or husbands. Late in the year, the death under
 questionable circumstances of a Filipina entertainer working in
 Japan initiated a furious public debate over the exploitation
 of female contract workers serving overseas. Immigration
 officials and the Administration moved quickly to limit exit
 permits for Filipina women entertainers seeking employment in
 Japan.
 In December the Congress approved the "Women in Development
 Act," a law setting aside development funds to promote women's
 integrati6n into the workplace. The Government designated
 March 8, 1991, as the first National Women's Day, which was the
 occasion for commemorative activities by the many women's
 organizations active in the Philippines.
 Muslim Filipinos, living principally in Mindanao, together with
 non-Muslim and non-Christian groups located mostly in the
 mountainous cordillera area of northern Luzon and in Mindanao,
 constitute approximately 10 percent of the Filipino
 population. These minorities hold public office at the local
 
 
 974
 PHILIPPINES
 and national levels and are employed in government positions.
 However, some discrimination against Muslims and other
 minorities persists. Philippine culture--with its emphasis.on
 tribal and regional loyalties--creates informal barriers
 whereby access to jobs or resources is provided first to those
 of one's own group. Another factor is that many Muslims prefer
 to educate their children in Muslim schools, which has deprived
 them of the skills required to advance in some occupations.
 Muslims and other cultural minorities have not always been
 accorded equal legal protection. Minority groups have
 sometimes been deprived of their ancestral lands by logging and
 mining operations and the arrival of farmers from other areas.
 The Autonomous Region of Muslim Mindanao (ARMM), inaugurated in
 November 1990, is the latest attempt by the Government to deal
 with the demand of Muslims for local autonomy in areas where
 they hold a majority or are a substantial minority. However,
 the newly constituted ARMM suffers from problems of identity
 and finance. Limited to four provinces, it falls short of
 representing the aspirations of all Muslims in the region.
 Additionally, an inadequate tax base and a shortfall in the
 promised subsidy from the national Government raise questions
 as to its capacity to carry out a meaningful development
 program.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 The right of workers, including public employees, to form and
 join trade unions is assured by the Constitution and
 legislation and is freely practiced without formal government
 interference throughout the country. Attempts by elements in
 the Government and the military in the aftermath of the violent
 October 1990 general strike to outlaw the leftist May First
 Movement (Kilusang Mayo Uno--KMU) union federation were
 strongly resisted by all unions, which saw in the move a threat
 against the labor movement generally. KMU head Crispin
 Beltran, who was arrested in the aftermath of the strike, was
 quickly released, and charges against him were dropped.
 Unions have and exercise freely the right to form federations
 or join federations and confederations and to affiliate with
 international trade union organizations. Subject to
 restrictions in the Labor Code and emergency executive powers,
 strikes in the private sector are legal, and take place
 frequently. According to the Herrera Act, four conditions must
 be met for a legal strike: notice must be given to the
 Department of Labor and Employment (DOLE); a 30-day cooling-off
 period must be observed; all available means of conciliation
 must be exhausted; and the issue has to be relevant to the
 labor contract or the law. Nevertheless, the Committee of.
 Experts (COE) of the International Labor Organization (ILO)
 declared in 1991 that some of the Philippine labor code
 provisions are not in conformity with ILO Convention 87 on
 freedom of association. In response to the COE's comments, the
 Government has informed the ILO that tripartite consultations
 are being undertaken with a view to revising the act.
 The right to strike and the status of employees in statutory
 government agencies, such as the Philippine National Railways
 (PNR) and the port authority, have not been clarified. Strikes
 by public sector employees occurred frequently during the
 year. The Supreme Court ruled in favor of the suspension of
 and dismissal orders against some 2,000 striking public
 
 
 975
 PHILIPPINES
 schoolteachers, issued by the Secretary of Education, Culture,
 and Sports in 1990. A complaint by the teachers was reviewed
 in 1991 by the COE which found that the suspension and
 dismissal orders are not in conformity with the principal of
 freedom of association and urged the Government to review the
 orders and reinstate the affected teachers without loss of
 pay. Most of the teachers were reinstated or exonerated of the
 charges against them. However, a small number of the remaining
 teachers staged a hunger strike to protest the Government's
 enforcement of the law. The local ILO representative publicly
 endorsed the administration's stance on this issue.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 Labor'd right to organize and bargain cbllectively is provided
 for in law. Since 1986 the number of collective bargaining
 agreements in force has increased from 3,112 to 4,982. In the
 same period, the number of registered unions increased by more
 than 10 percent.
 It is an unfair labor practice to dismiss a union official or a
 worker who is trying to organize a union. Nevertheless,
 employers sometimes attempt to intimidate workers by threats of
 firing or closure. Allegations of intimidation and
 discrimination for union activity are actionable as unfair
 labor practices before the National Labor Relations Commission
 (NLRC).
 "here is a history of industrial relations violence in the
 Philippines which has been exacerbated by the insurgency and
 the counterinsurgency. However, labor-related violence
 declined significantly in 1991. Reports indicated that two
 trade union officials and two representatives of management
 were killed during 1991 in connection with labor disputes.
 There was also no repetition of the 1990 Goldilocks bakeshop
 incident, in which security guards opened fire on demonstrating
 union members. One factor in the relative quiet on the labor
 front was the negative reaction within union circles and the
 general public to the bus burnings and killings that
 accompanied the general strike in October 1990.
 A second contributing element has been the better operation of
 DOLE conciliatory mechanisms. Through the NLRC and the
 National Conciliation and Mediation Board (NCMB), the DOLE has
 in place a quasi-judicial system for hearing and adjudicating
 workers' claims. The process has been slow, but no slower than
 other parts of the courts and the bureaucracy. Through
 September DOLE reported 147 work stoppages. There were 197 in
 all of 1989 and 183 in 1990. Through September, 1991, 850,000
 workdays were lost compared with 955,000 in 1989 and 1.3
 million in 1990. Labor law and practice are-uniform throughout
 the country, including in the several export processing zones
 (EPZ's). The rate of. unionization and the number of collective
 bargaining agreements concluded in the EPZ's is similar to that
 in the rest of the country.
 c. Prohibition of Compulsory or Forced Labor
 Compulsory labor is illegal, and there were no reports of
 forced labor being practiced.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 The Constitution prohibits the employment of children below age
 15, except under the responsibility of parents or guardians,
 
 
 976
 PHILIPPINES
 and then only if the work does not interfere with schooling.
 It allows employment for those between the ages of 15 and 18
 for such hours and periods of the day as are determined by the
 Secretary of Labor, but forbids employment of persons under 18
 years of age in hazardous or deleterious work.
 The most serious violations of child labor laws occur in
 piecework or contracting out of embroidery and other
 garment-related production. Children have also been used in
 dangerous and ecologically damaging forms of fishing that use
 dynamite. Child prostitution is another serious issue. The
 Government has attempted to investigate and reduce violations
 of child labor laws'outside of the agricultural sector, but the
 DOLE has deployed too few inspectors and other resources to
 reduce significantly the number of violations.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 The Minimum Wage Act of 1989 is the authority for minimum wage
 setting by regional wage boards. The rates were last set in
 December 1990, with the highest rate in the metropolitan Manila
 area and lower rates set by regional wage boards in rural
 areas. DOLE surveys estimate that the national average of
 firms in noncompliance with minimum wage laws is 27 percent.
 In region 5, for example, noncompliance is 80 percent, while it
 is 6 percent in region 3, and 20 percent in metropolitan
 Manila. Additionally, substantial numbers of workers (mostly
 domestics, laborers, janitors, messengers, drivers, and
 clerk-typists) are not covered by them. The average wage of
 workers in the large cities is close to the minimum wage, and
 in the industrial sector the average is considerably above it.
 In rural areas, wages often fall substantially below it. The
 minimum wage works out to a monthly equivalent that is below
 the poverty threshold figure established by the Government for
 a family of six persons. Most families have more than one wage
 earner, and the figure varies by region. Still, more than half
 of the families now live below the poverty line, reversing the
 progress seen in the first years of the Aquino administration.
 The legal maximum workweek before overtime is 40 hours for most
 industrial workers, most of whom average 48 hours per week.
 The law mandates a full day of rest weekly. The enforcement of
 workweek hours is managed through periodic DOLE labor standards
 inspections. Employees with more than 1 year on the job are
 entitled to 5 days of paid leave annually.
 A comprehensive set of occupational safety and health standards
 exists in law. However,.little or no information is available
 on industrial and occupational health hazards in the
 Philippines. The last report on industrial accidents prepared
 by the DOLE is dated 1987: it shows the number of persons
 killed or injured but gives no breakdown as to cause of
 accident or by industry sector.
 Large, successful multinational firms apply U.S., European, or
 Japanese standards of worker safety and health because of the
 requirements of their home-based insurance carriers. Beyond
 the poorly enforced Philippine safety and health laws, there is
 no comparable standard for domestic firms.
 
 
 977
