PHILIPPINES
The report on the Philippines, while generally accurate, tends to overrate human rights "progress" and the stability of the Marcos government. It pays insufficient attention to ongoing reports of illegal arrests, torture, disappearances and killings. In some instances, the Report presents information that, while technically correct, is misleading. The Report notes, for example, that since martial law was lifted in January, 1981 "there has been some gradual improvement in the civil liberties situation," and that reports of civil liberties abuses by military personnel "came mostly, but not exclusively, from insurgency areas." The Report does not say which areas these are; in fact during 1982 reports of such abuses came from every region of the country.
Respect for Integrity of the Person
We find the sections of the Report on killing and disappearances particularly inadequate. In describing government efforts to investigate abuses by the military, the Report often provides a tenative, and somewhat distorted picture of events. For example, it states that the "Government has not yet completed its investigation to determine those responsible for the killing in Sagod, Samar
-79-
of over 40 people in 1981." While it is possible that the investigation of this massacre remains officially open, it is apparent that the government has ceased to pursue the case. In an interview in February 1982 Brigadier General Salvador Mison, Commander of the Eastern Command, described the Government's investigation in the following terms:
We have not found any witnesses who can positively identify [the killers]. We have been inviting people to give to the Provincial Fiscal statements that may lead to the positive identification of the perpetrators. We have even guaranteed them the full protection of the law but you know how it is ... nobody came.
To date, there has been no public report on the Sagod massacre and none appears forthcoming.
The Report maintains it is difficult to assess responsibility for extra-judicial executions, suggesting that insurgents, vigilante groups, extremist religious sects, common criminals - including "some with possible connection to government units or insurgents" - are responsible for some killings. By citing a single instance in 1982, in which a report of artillery shelling in Samar was subsequently "found to be false," the State Department casts doubt on the vera-
-80-
city of many other allegations of abuses by the Armed Forces of the Philippines (AFP), the civilian militia and paramilitary troops closely associated with elements of the armed forces.
In fact, there is considerable evidence linking government armed forces to many of these killings, including a number of specific cases detailed by Amnesty International in its September 1982 Report. In 1981 the Associate Chief Justice of the Supreme court, Justice Teahankee, commented that since the lifting of martial law "the propensity for violence of undesirable elements of the army and police and others authorized to bear firearms has apparently not abated."
The Report suggests that many of these killings are the result of the "numerous clashes between armed rebels and government forces." By contrast, Amnesty International's 1982 Report on its mission notes: "in a high proportion of cases, killing occurred after interrogation and torture or after the victim had been taken to-a place of detention, indicating that death occurred after the victim had been taken into some form of custody." In other words, in many of these cases the deaths occurred after arrest by the government, rather than in "clashes" with government forces.
-81-
The section of the Report dealing with disappearances notes, without comment, that the issue of disappearances is "complicated by allegations that the government keeps some of the persons charged with subversion and rebellion incommunicado for a period of time for interrogation. These incommunicado detentions which often occur for long periods of time, are more than a "complication", they constitute a type of disappearance that is widespread in the Philippines to which the Report should focus greater a ttent ion.
The Report notes that a mere handful of cases remain in the military courts, as both "common criminals and those charged with subversive acts receive public trials in civilian courts." However, the Report fails to mention that many of the cases before military courts have been pending for years, with no resolution in sight. Moreover, some prisoners' cases, begun under martial law by military commissions now dismantled, are at a standstill. The government's position that conclusion of these unresolved cases in civilian courts would violate prohibitions against double jeopardy is untenable, as these cases were never fully tried before the military courts.
-82-
Moreover, in its 1982 Report Amnesty International noted that "the armed forces still did not acknowledge the jurisdiction of the civil courts over security and public order cases" despite the fact that all cases with civilian defendants are supposed to be tried in civil courts.
Incidents of searches conducted without warrants, the report states, have been "alleged" in some subversion cases. In fact, searches which use a warrant or Presidential Order of Arrest are quite rare. The Amnesty International 1982 Report cites evidence of widespread procedural violations, including illegal detention, refusal to grant access to counsel, and coerced "waivers of detention," in which the person held agrees to waive the right to a hearing within a prescribed period of time.
Several times in the Report the State Department relies on information provided by one of the principal human rights organizations in the Philippines, the Task Force Detainees of the Association of Major Religious Superiors. The Report denigrates and possibly endangers the work of the Task Force by referring to it as a "Catholic-related group" which "ofte n publicly takes political positions in opposition to the government." This characterization is unfortunate.
-83-
The Philippine Catholic Bishops' Conference recently reinforced the importance of the Task Force in a strong statement. The Bishops criticized government forces for: "the torture and murder of citizens simply because they are of a different political persuasion from that of present or would-be powerholders; the silencing of'people, the suppression of media." The Bishops went on to note that "Illegitimate dissent is all too easily construed in the government we have as rebellion and treason, as subversion in its conveniently amorphous definition."
Civil and Political Rights
The Report states that various civil and political rights are either "expanding" or improved, and claims that freedom of the press, the right to organize unions, and the existence of secret-ballot elections all exist, in modified forms. This assessment fails to give adequate weight to examples of government restrictions on press, union and electoral activities.
In describing relaxed controls over the press, the Report mentions the closing of "We Forum", an independent newspaper, without mentioning its history of criticizing the government. Fourteen of its staff members, columnists and executives were arrested and detained for alleged subversive activities. While all fourteen were released in December, criminal charges now are pending.
-84-
There is only one union sanctioned by the government, and organizers representing other labor groups are often the subject of government harassment and intimidation.. The Report's conclusion that the right to organize "is respected," and that other unions "remain free to conduct strikes...within the existing legal framework," is accurate only in theory.
In determining that the 1982 secret ballot elections were "fair", the Report fails to mention that these elections were overseen by a group staunchly loyal to the President. In addition, there were frequent reports of arrests and detentions for failure to participate.
Amnesty International Visit
The Report also describes the visit of an Amnesty International mission to the Philippines in 1981. It notes that Amnesty was "unsuccessful in its efforts to call on more senior Philippine officials" than the Deputy Minister of Defense. The report fails to explain that AI notified the government nine months in advance of its visit, at that time requesting appointments with various cabinet officials; that immediate contact was made with the Foreign Ministry upon arrival, at which time this request was repeated; that
-85-
despite more than two weeks in which to arrange such meetings, none were set up; and that the team attempted to schedule an appointment with the Minister of Defense and could not do so. Clearly, the officials the AI team wished to see were not overly anxious for a meeting.
The Report further states that the government "invited Amnesty to visit the Philippines again." This is misleading. While in the United States, what President Marcos did say was that "Amnesty International has never come to the Philippines" (Sept. 16, 1982), and later that "they came into the country surreptitiously" (Sept. 22, 1982). While Marcos expressed a willingness to discuss the AI report with its representatives, a subsequent request for a meeting made by Amnesty elicited no response. To date, after more than five months, the government has yet to reply to the conclusions and recommendations contained in Amnesty International's Mission Report.
-86-
POLAND
The Report on Poland is excellent, providing a highly informative, accurate and intelligent analysis of the way that martial law has been enforced and of the manner in which repression has affected the Polish people.
The authors of this report have been scrupulous to avoid conjecture. They stick to what is known. For example, in dealing with the numbers of detainees, the Report states: "All assessments of the total number of current political prisoners remain highly tentative, given the regime's ability to shift confinees from one category to another, its repeated revisions of the numbers involved, and its manifest refusal to cooperate with independent groups trying to count them."
This contrasts with the Report on the Soviet Union where estimates are provided despite comparable difficulties in actually ascertaining the number of political prisoners. The absence of figures does not mitigate the strength of the Report on Poland as an indictment of oppression. Indeed, the insistence on sticking to what is known enhances its effectiveness.
-87-
