 THE PHILIPPINES
 The Philippines, a former colony of the United States
 and the only predominantly Christian nation in Asia,
 has been governed by President Ferdinand Marcos
 under martial law since 1972.
 In his proclamation of martial law, President Marcos
 referred to the serious threat of insurrection and
 subversion. A Maoist-oriented insurgency has been
 active for many years in seven areas. More recently,
 the Muslim insurgency in Western Mindanao and the Sulu
 Archipelago has arisen as the more serious problem.
 Martial law was announced as a temporary measure to
 restore order, and it initially had that effect.
 However, it has resulted in the suspension of demo-
 cratic forms of government and in the severe curtail-
 ment of human rights of individual citizens. Within
 recent months, the Government has relaxed some aspects
 of martial law, released some political detainees,
 and has announced its intention to hold some form
 of parliamentary election in 1978, but no real steps
 have yet been taken toward the restoration of demo-
 cratic government or the elimination of the more
 severe intrusions on individual rights.
 1. Respect for the Integrfity of the Person, Including
 Freedom From:
 a. Torture
 Several organizations -- including Amnesty International,
 the Association of Major Religious Superiors in the
 Philippines, and the International Commission of
 Jurists -- have investigated the Philippine situation
 and reported evidence of torture, largely by special
 internal security units during pre-detention interro-
 gation. The alleged torture is reported to have
 included such methods as water treatment, electric
 shock, long isolation and physical beatings, leading
 in at least one case to death. Torture is reportedly
 not employed after the initial interrogation.
 We have no reason to doubt the authenticity of the
 conclusions of the above-mentioned reports but
 note that there is evidence that the frequency
 of the practices cited in these reports is on the
 decline.
 
 (260)
 
 
 261
 b. Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 Physical conditions in many jails are described by
 observers as poor. The House Subcommittee on Inter-
 national Organizations reported in July 1977 its con-
 clusion after "extensive testimony" that some political
 prisoners have been subject to "cruel, inhumane,
 and degrading treatment."
 c. Arbitrary Arrest or Imprisonment
 Since the institution of martial law there have been
 many instances of prisoners being detained without
 charge or trial, in some cases for more than five
 years. The great majority of persons detained for
 security reasons at the outset of martial law were
 released withiA a few months. Releases of known
 detainees have continued to the present time, the
 most recent being President Marcos' order of December
 24, 1977, for release of 858 detainees. Estimates
 of the number of persons still under detention vary
 widely. On June 3, 1977 President Marcos stated
 publicly that the total number of persons under
 military detention at that time was 4,764, of whom
 3,913 were being held for violations of the criminal
 code and 598 for security or political offenses,
 such as rebellion, treason or subversion. During
 the ensuing three months the Philippine Government
 announced that a total of 3,068 detainees had been
 ordered released. The number of those released who
 fell within the security category is unknown but
 we believe it to be small. There are probably no
 more than 500 political prisoners still in custody.
 The Philippine Government maintains that habeas
 corpus remains available. But the writ, as generally
 understoud in international practice, is not effec-
 tively available to persons detained by the regime
 for security reasons.
 d. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Most criminals continue to be tried in regular
 civilian courts and receive fair, public trials,
 but military tribunals still may have jurisdiction
 
 
 262
 in politically sensitive cases. The few such cases
 actually brought to trial have been open to the public.
 Most prisoners accused of security or political
 offenses usually have been provided access to their
 families from early in their detention. Access to
 lawyers has been considerably more restricted. How-
 ever, once such a prisoner has been charged to be
 tried by a military commission the system provides
 that a judge advocate is appointed as defense counsel
 unless the prisoner employs his own attorney.
 On June 24, 1977, President Marcos issued two general
 orders pertaining to the jurisdiction of military
 tribunals. General Order 59 transferred from military
 to civilian courts jurisdiction over all cases except
 those involving national security, illegal possession
 of firearms, or crimes committed by members of the
 armed forces. It also transferred to civil courts
 all cases in which the accused had not been arraigned
 as of June 24. It provides, however, that the presi-
 dent may still refer any case to a military tribunal
 if it is in the national interest. General Order
 60 of June 24, 1977, limited the authority of the
 Secretary of National Defense to issue arrest, search
 and seizure oiders to offenses over which military
 tribunals have exclusive jurisdiction but General
 Order 62 of October 22, 1977, returned to the Secretary
 authority to arrest and detain civilians for a number
 of non-security-related crimes.
 The President also issued decree 1165 which amends
 the appellate procedure in military tribunals and
 general court martial cases. It provides that deci-
 sions of the Court of Military Appeals may be appealed
 to the Philippine Supreme Court. Review by the Supreme
 Court shall be limited to questions of law, except
 where the accused is charged with offenses punishable
 with death or life imprisonment, in which case the
 review may be on questions of law and fact. In
 December 1977, the Supreme Court ordered a halt to
 military tribunal proceedings against Senator Benigno
 Aquino while the issue of the military tribunal's
 jurisdiction was being decided.
 All members of the judiciary submitted letters of
 resignation at the outset of martial law. The
 
 
 263
 President may accept these resignations at any time.
 The Supreme Court has upheld President Marcos'
 position in all cases challenging his martial law
 powers, although these decisions have not been unani-
 mous.
 e. Invdsion of the Home
 The Philippine Constitution of 1973 provides that the
 right of the people to be secure in their persons,
 houses, papers and effects from unreasonable searches
 and seizures shall not be violated and that search
 warrants shall be issued only upon probable cause
 as determined by a judge. Under martial law, however,
 this protection has been ignored in many instances.
 2. Governmental Policies Relating to the Fulfillment
 of Such Vital Needs as Food, Shelter, Health Care
 and Education
 The rights to food, shelter, health care and education
 in the Philippines are limited by the economy's ability
 to provide the necessary goods and services to all,
 the long-established inequitable distribution of the
 social and economic product, and traditional patterns
 of corruption. Education is widely available up to
 and including the secondary school level, and educa-
 tional opportunity is a major factor in a remarkably
 unrestrained vertical mobility within the society.
 The Philippine economy is basically agricultural with
 growing industrial capability and developing service
 industries. Governmental development programs have
 concentrated on population programs, on improving
 agricultural production and on land reform, leaving
 industry, mining and large-scale agriculture in
 corporate hands. Assistance to agricultural produc-
 tion has been reasonably effective. The government's
 land reform program has registered considerable pro-
 gress during the past five years.
 Significant gains have been made during the past five
 years in providing the rural infrastructure needed
 to support increased agricultural production and to
 
 
 264
 
 improve the quality of life in rural areas.
 Philippine Government data show per capita GNP as
 having increased from $260 in 1972 to $410 in 1976.
 Some significant benefits to Philippine labor unions
 and workers have resulted from the new labor code
 and subsequent presidential decrees, although in the
 absence of political parties the approved avenues
 for solutions to problems in the labor movement are
 limited almost entirely to government channels. In
 the October 15, 1976 referendum on continuation of
 martial law, President Marcos has the strong support
 of the Trade Union Congress of the Philippines, which
 issued a manifesto on the benefits derived from
 martial law.
 Government policy has been to encourage private
 foreign investment in most manufacturing fields,
 extractive industries, and some service and agricul-
 tural fields.
 Modest improvements in the health status of the popu-
 lation are reflected in significant increases in life
 expectancies .and declines in infant mortality rates
 between 1970 and 1976. Population pressure is a
 serious constraint on both present and future produc-
 tivity. Government efforts in the family planning
 field have been remarkably extensive and persevering.
 Corruption has been a continuing and debilitating
 aspect of the economic structure, diverting resources
 from the poor.
 3. Respect for Civil and Political Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Thought, Speech, Press, Religion
 and Assembly
 Freedom of thought,as distinct from freedom of
 expression, is not limited in the Philippines. While
 some minor pressures are directed at the population
 to demonstrate endorsement of Government policies,
 little effort is made to enforce confornity of thought.
 Freedom of expression, on the other hand, is con-
 trolled by a variety of means. "Free debate" periods
 
 
 265
 have been declared prior to the various referenda
 held during martial law, and opponents of the regime
 have used these periods to express their views,
 although little of this criticism has been carried
 in the Government-controlled media. The mass communi-
 cations media have been purged of critical or inde-
 pendent voices.
 Churches are open for worship and religious freedom
 is generally respected. Members of religious organi-
 zations have not been harrassed or imprisoned for
 either doctrinal belief or ceremonial observance,
 but the government has taken actions (including arrests)
 against some members of the clergy. for their in-
 volvement in political activities.
 The Government has not actively abridged freedom of
 assembly and association, even for many of its out-
 spoken critics. It has allowed them to hold some
 small rallies and peaceful assemblies, which receive
 little or no media coverage. However, it has often
 refused to permit meetings of its political opponents.
 Unauthorized demonstrations are regularly broken up
 by police when crowds become large or demonstrators
 stray from the few areas in which rallies are tolerated.
 b. Freedom of Movement Within the Country,
 Foreign Travel and Emigration
 Domestic freedom of movement is basically unimpaired.-
 There are some restrictions pertaining to certain
 areas of Mindanao and the Sulu Archipelago, where
 the Muslim insurgency has been most active. Travel
 restrictions are sometimes placed on former political
 prisoners released on parole. In August 1977, the
 martial law curfew (midnight to 4:00 a.m.) was lifted
 throughout the nation except for certain areas of
 insurgent activities. Also, in August 1977, the
 general restrictions on temporary travel abroad by
 Philippine citizens were lifted. However, politically
 suspect individuals must still undergo thorough,
 time-consuming security checks, whether their purpose
 in travelling is tourism, business, or emigration.
 There is no general restriction on emigration.
 
 
 266
 c. Freedom to Participate in the Political
 Process
 Since the declaration of martial law in the Philippines
 in September 1972, numerous civil rights previously
 in effect have been restricted. The legislature
 has ceased to function and has yet to be replaced
 with any effective representational institutions.
 Popular election of local government officials has
 been supplanted by presidential appointment. These
 officials have become, in effect, extensions of
 central authority.
 President Marcos assumed legislative powers and
 has ruled by decree, assisted by his civilian cabinet
 and the armed forces. Under martial law powers,
 local assemblies (called barangays) comprised of all
 voters at the precinct level were established.
 Barangay officers have been utilized at the lowest
 level of public officialdom. The former elected
 municipal, city and provincial councils have been
 replaced by councils made up of selected barangay
 officials. Political parties while not outlawed
 (except for one of two communist parties), have been
 inactive and.have effectively disappeared.
 There is universal suffrage in the Philippines.
 Since the imposition of martial law, the government
 has on five occasions held referenda on issues of
 public policy, including amendment of the constitu-
 tion, with the population voting either by Rublic
 meetings of the barangays or by (sometimes serially
 numbered) "secret ballots". During the "free debate"
 periods immediately preceding these referenda, author-
 ized oppositionist groups were allowed to hold public
 rallies, given equal time on radio and television
 to debate referendum issues, and allowed to distri-
 bute propaganda materials, provided authorship- of
 the materials was identified. All referenda, including
 one on December 17, 1977, to affirm President Marcos'
 in office, resulted in overwhelmingly affirmative
 votes. In view of the lack of alternatives in each
 balloting, it is understandable that the referenda
 were all denounced by opponents of the regime and
 viewed with skepticism by outside observers.
 
 
 267
 As a step toward the restoration of representative
 government, the Philippine Government is now making
 preparations for holding an election on April 2, 1978,
 to elect an interim national assembly. The govern-
 ment is encouraging opposition candidates to parti-
 cipate in the election campaign, although .     have
 already said they will not do so. Following the
 convening of the interim national assembly, the
 government has stated that it plans to move towards
 a modified presidential-parliamentary form of govern-
 ment in which daily executive leadership would be
 provided by a prime minister while the role of the
 president would become primarily ceremonial.
 4. Government Attitude and Record Regarding Inter-
 national and Non-Governmental Investigation of
 Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 The Philippine Government has cooperated with foreign
 visitors interested in the status of human rights
 in the Philippines. Teams from the International
 Commission of the Red Cross (ICRC) inspected Philippine
 detention centers in March 1973, November and
 December 1975, and issued a critical report in
 September 1976. Representatives of the International
 Commission of Jurists (ICJ) visited the Philippines
 in 1975 and 1977, and issued a report on August 3,
 1977 critical of the treatment of civil and political
 rights. The Philippine Government has also welcomed
 various U.S. Congressional visitors interestedn-
 human rights matters and has facilitated their con-
 tacts with oppositionists and detainees.
 
 
