 THE PHILIPPINES
 The Philippines has been governed under martial law
 since 1972. President Marcos has not indicated when
 martial law will be ended. He has virtually unrestrained
 executive authority and governs largely by decree. An
 Interim Legislative Assembly was convened in 1978, as
 part of a transition to a parliamentary system provided
 for in the 1973 constitution. Although the delegates to
 the Assembly have begun to challenge government-sponsored
 legislation, the Assembly plays a marginal role. Martial
 law greatly restricts political and civil rights, but
 more freedom is enjoyed now than at the beginning of
 martial law in Manila and in some provinces. In other
 provinces, particularly where the insurgencies are active,
 rights are much more restricted and reports of the
 incidents of military abuses of civilians in outlying
 areas have increased. The Government took steps to curb
 these abuses in 1979 by, among other things, trying and
 dismissing some military personnel, and holding hearings
 in several locations.
 The Muslim insurgency in the southern Philippines has
 cost the Government 12,000 casualties and Muslim forces
 perhaps several times that number since 1972. The
 insurgency has historical roots that go back 400 years
 and there is no prospect for an end to the fighting. The
 insurgency is fueled by negative images of Muslims held
 by Christian Filipinos, abuses of civilians by the
 Philippine military and the government's refusal to give
 local autonomy to the Muslim areas. A more widespread
 but currently less serious communist movement led by
 Maoist guerrillas in several parts of the country is
 growing slowly.
 The Government admits to holding 579 persons as public
 order violators (persons accused of subversion, sedition
 and rebellion). Most of these persons, who can be
 considered as political prisoners, are held in the Manila
 area. The clergy, which became more vocal in 1979,
 alleges that additional numbers are held in the provinces.
 Efforts to meet basic human needs are hampered by the
 pressures of the world economic situation upon a domestic
 economy marked by dependence on export commodities,
 widely disparate income levels and rural poverty. Energy
 inflation has hurt the Philippines particularly badly.
 The government has given priority to improving conditions
 in rural areas, concentrating on economic infra-structure,
 roads and power generation facilities, and agricultural
 productivity. Despite attaining self-sufficiency in
 rice, malnutrition remains a serious problem, resulting
 from low rural incomes rather than food shortages.
 Muslim areas receive a disproportionately smaller
 amount of development funds compared to other southern
 (506)
 
 
 507
 Philippine areas. In 1979 the Government offered to set
 up on its soil a United Nations refugee processing camp
 to accommodate 50,000 Indochinese refugees; it opened in
 January 1980.
 1.   Respect of the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a.   Torture
 Official Philippine Government policy opposes torture but
 officials acknowledge that isolated acts of violence have
 been committed by poorly disciplined military personnel.
 In 1979, the Association of Major Religious Superiors of
 the Philippines published unconfirmed accounts of torture
 and cases of summary execution of victims in various
 provinces. Reports of torture in Manila have decreased,
 with two torture incidents alleged in Manila in 1979.
 Reports of torture have increased during the year in
 Davao, northern Luzon, and especially Samar, all areas
 where guerilla insurgencies are active.
 Responding to a public appeal by the Archbishop of Davao,
 the Government created the three-man Barbero Commission,
 representing the Defense Ministry, the Constabulary and
 the Armed Forces, to conduct investigations into alleged
 military abuses in that area. At the Commission's public
 hearing in Davao in August, witnesses, assisted by volunteer
 lawyers from the local bar association, testified against
 Constabulary personnel in the torture of a teenager and
 the torture-deaths of two church lay leaders and in 25
 other cases of military abuse. Preliminary findings in
 one case have resulted in the transfer of two officers
 and the arrest of twelve soldiers. The Government has
 not acted on the other charges. Similar hearings have
 since been held in northern Mindanao and in Iloilo. In
 May of this year 70 officers and men were transferred
 from Samar due to complaints by civilians. Since then,
 however, while there have been additional complaints,
 the number has dropped off as the result of more rigid
 disciplinary measures.
 b.   Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 Conditions in Philippine jails are poor, especially in
 terms of diet, overcrowding, and potential for abuse by
 guards. Facilities for political detainees are comparable
 to the average jail and are sometimes better. The
 Association of Major Religious Superiors Philippines
 (AMRSP) this year publicized successful hunger strikes by
 inmates in two Mindanao cities for better prison conditions.
 Manila officials undertook measures to improve city jails
 following a media campaign on poor jail conditions.
 Also, additional Government funds have been appropriated
 for the improvement of jails nationwide. Most prisoners
 
 
 508
 have access to their families and lawyers early in the
 detention period. Some prisoners are held incommunicado
 for varying periods of time.
 President Marcos has said publicly that his Government
 will not condone abuses of civilians by military personnel.
 Complaints of abuses numbered 150 daily in early 1979,
 ranging from minor offences to alleged murder, rape,
 kidnapping and extortion. In addition to creating the
 Barbero Commission, the Government has begun to revive
 the previously moribund provincial church-military
 liaison committees. The Government has encouraged local
 bar associations to participate in these committees. New
 controls were imposed by the Ministry of Defense on the
 use of firearms by the Civilian Home Defense Force,
 militia-type units frequently accused of misconduct.
 c.   Arbitrary Arrest or Imprisonment
 The Philippine Government denies holding persons because
 of their political beliefs. Human rights groups generally
 identify political detainees as those accused of crimes
 against the public order, such as illegal assembly,
 distribution or possession of subversive materials,
 sedition, and rebellion. In February, the Government
 indicated there were 447 public order violators in
 custody. A more thorough count in October set the total
 at 579. Church sources for the last two years have
 consistently estimated 500-1000 political prisoners. The
 higher number results from the claim that, in addition to
 those held in the Manila area, persons are incarcerated
 in the provinces without charge for up to six months.
 By law, an arrested person must be informed of charges
 and arraigned before a judicial authority within 72
 hours. Access to legal counsel and the family is also
 guaranteed by law. There continued to be reports of
 arbitrary and occasional clandestine arrests in 1979.
 Some persons have been held for long periods without
 formal charges. In September, President Marcos announced
 that all detainees not formally charged would be released.
 He also granted amnesty to more than 1500 persons charged
 with various crimes, including a small proportion of
 persons charged with offenses that are political in
 nature. A number of persons in this latter category
 recently released had been held since 1974. Persons held
 have few ways of obtaining impartial review of the grounds
 for their detention. The Supreme Court has heard appeals
 for habeas corpus from political detainees; however,
 under martial law the right to petition is limited to the
 right of a detainee to be brought before the court and to
 have the legality of the arrest established. In no case
 has the Court ordered the release of an accused subversive.
 d.   Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Most criminal defendants continue to receive fair public
 
 
 509
 trials in civilian courts. The Government announced its
 intention to remand, as of November 27, 1978, all new
 cases involving civilians to civilian courts in the first
 instance, rather than to the military tribunals which
 have had jurisdiction over many public order and security
 offenses during the martial law period. So far this
 order has been implemented selectively. In the first
 half of 1979, the Judge Advocate of the Armed Forces
 transferred approximately 2,000 cases to civilian jurisdic-
 tion. A small number of these were identified as public
 order or security cases. Approximately 7,000 civilians,
 many of them free under temporary release status, still
 await resolution of pending charges in military courts.
 In September 1979, President Marcos reiterated the
 Government's desire to phase out military trials of
 civilians as soon as possible and to transfer some cases
 to civilian courts, even where proceedings have started
 before military tribunals.
 Military trials are public. Once a prisoner has been
 charged by a military commission, a judge advocate is
 appointed as defense counsel unless the prisoner retains
 private counsel. Isolated incidents.of harassment of
 defense counsel have allegedly occurred.
 All lower court judges were required to submit undated
 letters of resignation to President Marcos in 1972. The
 President has the power to appoint new judges.
 e.   Invasion of the Home
 The Philippine Constitution of 1973 provides that the
 rights of the people to be secure in their persons,
 houses, papers and effects from unreasonable searches and
 seizures shall not be violated and that search warrants
 shall be issued only upon probable cause as determined by
 a judge or such other responsible officer as may be
 authorized by law. However, under current martial law
 powers, the President may issue an arrest, search and
 seizure order on the basis of probable cause when threats
 to national security or public order are involved. These
 orders are not subject to review by the judiciary. There
 have been allegations that some arrests were made without
 presentation of the necessary warrant or order.
 2.   Governmental Policies Relating to the Fulfillment
 of Such Vital needs as Food, Shelter, Health Care
 and Education
 Over sixty percent of the national budget is earmarked
 for economic and/or social development programs. Primary
 areas of concern to the GOP include agricultural productivity,
 roads and power generation, education, population planning
 and land reform. The success record is mixed with high
 rates of achievement in some areas contrasted with little
 progress in others. As a general statement, the resources
 
 
 510
 of the government are not adequate to address the totality
 of the problems of development nor have substantial
 infusions of official development assistance been suffi-
 cient to close the gap.
 Education has been traditionally important and the
 population enjoys a literacy rate of better than 85
 percent. Of the monies programmed under Economic Support
 Funds for the Philippines, almost all of the FY 80
 allottment (U.S. $18 of $20 million) is programmed for
 construction of rural schools. Health care remains
 inadequate particularly in rural areas where high rates
 of morbidity persist. Government efforts to require
 medical and nursing graduates to devote a professional
 year to rural or impoverished areas have had little
 success. Nevertheless, despite the still large shortfall
 in available medical services, the life expectancy has
 risen from 56 years in 1970 to 60 years currently. The
 supply and quality of low income housing is poor, and
 significant percentages of existing housing do not have
 potable water, sanitary toilets or electricity. A 1976
 World Bank report (the most current study of housing)
 concluded that the financial and physical requirements to
 meet fully the nation's housing needs exceeded the
 government's capabilities.
 Population growth is considered by most observers to be
 the single greatest problem in development with concomitant
 impact on all areas of concern. Governmental family
 planning commitment is high and the current growth rate
 of 2.37 percent, while still high, is a continuation of
 the downtrend since the beginning of the decade, when
 growth rates averaged over 3 percent. Substantial
 success has also been reached in agricultural development
 with the achievement of self-sufficiency in rice production
 since 1977, and the generation of modest export earnings.
 Production of major food crops, especially rice and corn,
 continues to increase at about five percent per year.
 Nutrition remains, however, a serious problem with a
 majority of the population receiving an inadequate
 caloric intake in large part due to low rural incomes.
 Available statistics suggest that the Philippines ranks
 relatively low in regard to nutritional levels per
 capita. In part this is because the GOP collects better
 statistics than many other developing countries. The
 National Nutrition Council has recognized that there is a
 need for further refinement of the causes of malnutrition
 anc has initiated operational and developmental research
 with foreign donor agency participation.
 The land reform program has been the single most effective
 program of its kind in the Philippines, (and one of the
 few non-forced land reform programs anywhere) but it nas
 not reached the goals of the Government. At this writing,
 most rice and corn land holdings above 24 hectares (1 hectare
 equals 2.2 acres) have been distributed to tenant farmers
 and the program to provide title has been accelerated.
 Holdings between 7 and 24 hectares which also come under
 the program have not been redistributed as the Government
 now recognizes that such holdings are the primary form of
 economic security of the middle class (teachers, civil
 
 
 511
 servants, et al.,) and is reluctant to strip them of
 their assets. Instead, tenants on those lands are coming
 under the provisons of written leasehold agreements
 requiring a fixed percentage of production as a rental.
 This fixed percentage is, in general, lower than tenants
 had been paying before land reform. Plantation land
 devoted to such crops as sugar, coconut, bananas and
 pineapple is not affected by the land reform program and,
 given the importance of those crops to exports and
 foreign exchange earnings, it is unlikely that the GOP
 will expand the program to plantation lands in the
 foreseeable future.
 Overall, the Government has particularly emphasized
 agricultural and rural development and labor intensive
 industries. Its ability to turn goals into reality has
 been severely affected by the recurring oil price increases
 of the last seven years, the downturn in commodity prices
 affecting major export products such as sugar and coconut,
 high rates of world (and more recently, domestic) inflation
 and high interest rates on foreign borrowing. Despite
 these difficulties, aggregate growth rates have been
 respectable in developing country terms and, net of
 inflation and population growth, have averaged better
 than 3.0 percent per capita in recent years. The real
 purchasing power of the lower and middle income groups
 has, in fact declined and maldistribution of income
 remains a major problem with severe skewing at both
 ends of the scale. Incomplete data suggests that the
 lowest income group may have marginally improved itself
 in recent years but it is quite evident that governmental
 income distribution programs have as yet had very little
 success. Corruption persists in the Philippines. The
 extentto which it affects decision-making processes
 is not measurable.
 3.   Respect for Civil and Political'Liberties, Including:
 a.   Freedom of Speech, Press, Religion and Assembly
 Filipinos are freer to speak out in general terms regarding
 Government policies and social problems than they have
 since the imposition of martial law. Spokesmen for the
 political opposition have access to the foreign media,
 and they regularly address private civic organizations.
 Their critical statements are occasionally reported by
 the local press. The broad powers of the Government
 under martial law, however, inhibit public criticism,
 particularly attacks on leading officials. For example,
 in September, the government charged several persons with
 "rumor-mongering" in connection with the Tagalog edition
 of a book highly critical of martial law despite the fact
 the English edition has circulated in Manila since 1976
 without incident.
 There is no formal media censorship but all major news-
 papers and broadcast facilities are owned by persons
 
 
 512
 
 sympathetic to the Government. This factor effectively
 allows the Government to control the mass media, except
 for a few publications of limited circulation. Neverthe-
 less, in 1979, media have carried more material critical
 of Government malfeasance. In 1979, a weekly newspaper
 regularly covering opposition views and strongly critical
 of the Government circulated in Manila, Cebu, and Davao.
 There are numerous church publications for limited
 audiences, including the AMRSP's periodic reports on
 political detainees and human rights abuses. On the
 other hand, a radio broadcaster in Manila was removed
 from the air in September when he was suddenly jailed for
 an old criminal offense following a series of strong
 anti-Government broadcasts. In December, military
 authorities ordered a successor broadcaster off the
 air after six programs.
 Rights to practice the religion of one's choice are fully
 respected. There is constitutional separation of church
 and state. In the past, Christian clergy have been
 arrested, usually for short periods, for political or
 alleged subversive activities. One Catholic priest has
 been incarcerated for alleged subversive activities since
 1974. In 1979, one priest of the Philippine Independent
 church was detained for posssession of subversive documents.
 Public demonstrations and rallies were banned at the
 outset of martial law in 1972. Outside of announced
 "free debate" periods preceding referenda or elections,
 the Government has strictly controlled permits for public
 gatherings. Unauthorized gatherings are sometimes but
 not always broken up by police. In May, police arrested
 65 persons during an unauthorized march protesting economic
 conditions. All were released, and only one detained
 more than a few hours. In September, student demonstrations
 in Manila and Davao included open criticism of martial
 law. They passed without incident, although seventeen
 persons were arrested two weeks later on subversion
 charges. Eight students from this group were provisionally
 released in December.
 b.   Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel and Emigration
 Freedom of travel is generally respected. Travel restric-
 tions within the country apply only to the Sulu Archipelago
 and areas of Mindanao where Muslim insurgents are very
 active. These same regions remain under a midnight to
 4:00 a.m. curfew for security reasons. There is free
 emigration. Travel taxes and fees are not prohibitive.
 Some political oppositionists have experienced delays in
 the past in obtaining travel documents, but this has not
 been a problem in 1979. Former detainees in temporary
 release status need Government permission to leave the
 country but generally obtain it without difficulty.
 c.   Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 
 
 513
 Since the declaration of martial law in 1972, all effective
 political power has been concentrated under the control
 of President Marcos. The President has not scheduled an
 end to martial law. Under the Constitution adopted in
 1973, President Marcos was given full executive authority
 during a transition period of unspecified length and he
 still governs largely by decree. In 1978, an Interim
 Legislative Assembly, was elected amid widespread charges
 of fraud. It has little real authority but in 1979
 delegates showed a growing tendency to challenge legisla-
 tion sponsored by the Government in the Assembly.
 At the provincial and local level there have been no
 elections throughout the martial law period. On December
 17, however, the Government announced plans to hold local
 elections on January 30, 1980. The last local elections
 were held in 1971.
 The Government conducted elections for two regional
 assemblies in Muslim areas of Mindanao in May, 1979, as
 part of its commitment under the 1977 Tripoli Agreement
 to grant a measure of autonomy to the Muslim population.
 A coalition of the pro-government and local party candi-
 dates was elected. A majority of the Muslims boycotted
 the elections. Muslim desires for religious and cultural
 autonomy have not been satisfied by these regional
 bodies.
 Philippine women participate freely in the economic,
 political, and social life of the country, and this
 participation is expanding. A significant number of
 women occupy governor and vice governor positions, and,
 are mayors, provincial board officials, and local officials.
 There are two female cabinet members (one of whom is the
 President's wife), one minister of state, two supreme
 court justices, several members of courts of appeal.
 Social and cultural forces that have emphasized "tradi-
 tional" roles for women in Philippine society still
 exist, but are slowly breaking down. It is in the lower
 economic groups that women suffer more disadvantage
 vis-a-vis men. For example, a 1975 study of families
 where resources are inadequate to feed everyone showed
 the Filipino mother is often the least well nourished of
 family members.
 Political activity on the part of unions is strictly
 prohibited and, while strikes and lock-outs are legally
 permitted, they are banned in the "vital industries."
 For all practical purposes, this means most Philippine
 industries are not legally allowed to strike. Neverthe-
 less, there are occasional strikes of short duration.
 Government workers are not allowed to engage in collective
 bargaining.
 In the private sector both the formation of unions and
 collective bargaining are officially encouraged. Nearly
 2,000 collective bargaining agreements have been registered,
 presumably freely negotiated between parties. A Tripartite
 National Labor Relations Commission was created in 1974
 
 
 and is given broad authority to ajudicate and enforce its
 decisions in the settlement of disputes.
 The Trade Union Congress of the Philippines (TUCP) acts
 as the umbrella organization for more than twenty-eight
 labor federations, the majority of which have small
 membership and little influence. Four of these unions,
 for example, account for approximately two-thirds of the
 one million members who are affiliated with the TUCP.
 4.   Government Attitude and Record Regarding Inter-
 national and Non-Government Investigation of
 Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 The Philippine Government has cooperated with outside
 observers interested in the status of human rights and
 has facilitated their contacts with detainees. The AMRSP
 and its Task Force on Detainees, which prepares lists of
 political detainees and reports alleged abuses, operate
 with relative freedom. Teams from the International
 Committee of the Red Cross inspected Philippine detention
 centers in 1973, 1974 (twice), 1976 and 1978. Amnesty
 International issued a critical report in 1976 based on
 the findings of a mission to the Philippines a year
 earlier. Representatives of the International Commission
 of Jurists visited the country in 1975 and again in 1977
 when they issued a strongly critical report on the status
 of civil and political rights. The Philippine Government
 has discussed human rights questions with representatives
 of the U.S. Government including Congressional and
 Executive Branch visitors. It has publicly inveighed
 against what it considers to be interference in its
 internal affairs and also criticized foreign press
 coverage of abuses, although it has continued to allow
 foreign media virtually free access.
 
 
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: PHILIPPINES
 1977     1978     1979
 ---------------------------------------------------
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL,.         86.8     83.9     70.1
 LOANS..............        32.2     54.3     44.6
 GRANTS ............        54.6     29.6     25.5
 A.AIO  ........ o ..........  34.9     52.8     43.7
 LOANS..............       20.3     42.3     35.6
 GRANTS.S.....         14.6     10.5      8.1
 (SEC.SUPP.ASSIST.)..         0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.FOOD FOR PEACE,...          48.9     27.1     23.8
 LOANS.............         11.9     12.0      9.0
 GRANTS.............        37.0     15.1     14.8
 TITLE I-TOTAL..........        11.9     12.0      9.0
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS,...         11.9     12.0      9.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR.....         0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE II-TOTAL.........        37.0     15.1     14.8
 E.RELIEF.EC.DEV & WFP,        15.7      0.0      2.4
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY....         21.3     15.1     12.4
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST...         3.0      4.0      2.6
 LOANS..............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS.............         3.0      4.0      2.6
 CONTR. TO IFI...          0.0      0.0      0.0
 PEACE CORPS......         3.0      4.0      2.5
 OTHER ...........         0.0      0.0      0.1
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL,.         38.1     37.3     31.7
 LOANS...........          20.0     18.5     15.6
 GRANTS..............       18.1     18.8     16.1
 A.MAP GRANTS..........        17.0     18.1     15.5
 B.CREDIT SALES-FMS....        20.0     18.5     15.6
 C.INTL MIL.EO.TRNG ...         0.6      0.7      0.6
 D.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK...         0.5      0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS........         0.0      0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. & IL...       124.9    121.2    101.8
 LOANS.............         52.2     72.8     60.2
 GRANTS.............        72.7     48.4     41.6
 ---------------------------------------------------
 OTHER US LOANSN........        49.6     54.3     24.9
 EX-IM BANK LOANS,......         0.0      4.7     24.9
 ALL OTHER.............       49.6     49.6      0.0
 ---------------------------------------------------
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES-COMMITMENTS
 1977     1978     1979     1946-79
 ---------------------------------------------------
 TOTAL........   479.3    668.5    441.1   3098.5
 IERD             317.5    498.1    245.5   1971.9
 IFC                7.3      2.1      5.3     93.2
 IDA                0.0     28.0     62.0    122.2
 IOB                0.0      0.0     1_0       0.0
 ADB              150.0    136.5    123.7    843.5
 AFOB               0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 UNDP               0.4      3.8      2.4     45.2
 OTHER-UN           4.1      0.0      2.2     22.5
 EEC                0.0      0.0"     0.0      0.0
 
 
