The Philippines
2006 was not a good year for human rights in the Philippines. Extrajudicial
killings and “disappearances” appear to be on the rise. Armed insurgents and
militant Islamist groups continue to kill civilians, politicians, and members of the
security forces around the country.
Political tensions persist. On February 24, 2006, President Arroyo declared a
week-long state of emergency after claiming to have uncovered a coup plot by
members of the military, the political opposition, and communist rebels. Public
assembly was temporarily banned, and scores of soldiers and leftists were
detained or threatened with arrest, including five members of congress.
In June 2006 President Arroyo gave the army a two-year deadline to eradicate the
New People’s Army (NPA), the armed wing of the Communist Party of the
Philippines (CPP), which has been engaged in an armed rebellion against the government
since the 1960s.
In August 2006, groups opposed to Arroyo brought impeachment charges against
her for allegedly tampering with the results of the 2004 presidential elections.
The impeachment effort failed in congress, where a majority of representatives
continue to support the president.
In a positive development, President Arroyo and the Philippines congress
approved legislation that abolished the death penalty in June 2006. A ceasefire
with the Moro Islamic Liberation Front (MILF) remained in force throughout 2006.
Extrajudicial Killings and “Disappearances”
Human rights defenders, community activists, politically active journalists, outspoken
clergy, and members of left-wing political parties were killed or “disappeared”
throughout 2006. Although different political parties and civil society
groups produce differing estimates of the number of victims, research conducted
by Human Rights Watch confirms that scores of individuals were killed in 2006
and that military personnel played a role in many of the killings.
Suspected victims of politically motivated killings range from the young to the
old. Two such examples are 20-year-old Cris Hugo, a student leader with the
League of Filipino Students in the Bicol region of southern Luzon, who was
gunned down on March 19, 2006; and Bishop Alberto Ramento of the Philippines
Independent Church, who was stabbed to death on October 3, 2006, at age 69.
Some attacks clearly target members of legal left-wing political parties, such as
the grenade thrown at the office of the Anakpawis political party in Kidapawan
City, Cotabato, on May 7, 2006, which severely injured Roderick Abalde, a coordinator
for Anakpawis, and Jobanie Tacadao, a spokesperson for the left-wing
Bayan Muna party. But many other victims appear to be low-level community
activists—Pastor Isaias Sta. Rosa, shot behind his house on August 3, 2006, for
instance—or to have left active political life many years ago—such as Danilo
Escudero, who was gunned down in front of his six-year-old daughter on July 20,
2006. Escudero’s main political activities appear to have been during the 1970s.
To date no individual has been convicted of any of the hundreds of political
killings which local human rights groups and journalists report have been committed
since 2001. Leftist groups accuse the security forces of carrying out the
executions as part of their counter-insurgency campaign. The military has not
acknowledged any role in the killings, let alone taken steps to investigate or prosecute
any perpetrators in the ranks.
In August 2006 President Arroyo created a special police taskforce, Task Force
Usig, which she charged with solving 10 cases within 10 weeks. During its 10-
week mandate the Task Force claims that 21 cases were solved by filing cases in
court against identified suspects, all of them members of the CPP and NPA.
Twelve suspects involved in these incidents are said by the Task Force to be
under police custody. Arroyo also established a special commission, under former
Supreme Court Justice José Melo, to examine the killings. Opposition and human
rights groups criticized the Melo Commission for having little power to carry out
investigations and for being made up purely of government-picked commissioners.
The ongoing killings and the government’s failure to bring even a single perpetrator
to justice has contributed to deep public distrust in government and widespread
fear in areas where killings have occurred, particularly among witnesses and victims’ families. The latter groups often are afraid to cooperate with police
for fear of reprisals.
Vigilante killings of individuals suspected of involvement in criminal activities
also appear to continue in some provincial cities, with little or no condemnation
or prosecution by local officials.
Abuses by Armed Groups
Filipino civilians continue to be purposefully targeted by militant groups such as
Abu Sayyaf that the government denounces as terrorist organizations. Various
bomb blasts on the southern islands of Mindanao and Jolo killed at least 21 people
and injured at least 80, and caused serious economic damage to local communities.
The Philippines government has arrested numerous suspects in these
and earlier bombings, but has prosecuted almost none of them.
The NPA and CPP continue to enact “revolutionary justice” against civilians in
areas under their control, including the killing of individuals they consider to be
criminals, despotic landlords, or business owners.
Many in the MILF grew increasingly frustrated with the peace process in 2006,
and some MILF hardliners reportedly have questioned the wisdom of continuing
negotiations. The current MILF leadership, widely viewed as moderate, may be
put increasingly under fire if it cannot deliver results in 2007. Some commanders
in MILF have become increasingly independent and are now referred to as “lost
commands” which are no longer under the authority of MILF leadership.
The Philippines military launched new operations on the island of Jolo in late July
and early August 2006, after it was reported that several senior members of
Jemaah Islamiyah had taken refuge with the Abu Sayyaf forces there. Observers
believe that senior Jemaah Islamiyah operatives linked to the 2002 bombing in
Bali, Indonesia and the August 2003 bombing in Jakarta may be in hiding in the
southern Philippines.
Military Abuses
Civilians living in militarized zones or areas targeted for counter-insurgency operations
are susceptible to harassment, physical assaults, arbitrary arrest, and even
torture by the military. Individuals considered to have assisted or to sympathize
with the NPA are at particular risk. Harassment by local security forces of human
rights groups and activists affiliated with leftist causes, also continues to be of
concern.
Migrant Workers
Remittances sent by Filipinos working overseas form a vital part of the nation’s
economy, contributing around 18 percent of the country’s GNP. Many Filipinos,
however, find work abroad through unlicensed agents or while on tourist visas,
making them more vulnerable to abusive employers in many countries where they
work. While not all such workers face problems, few receiving countries closely
regulate domestic work and problems such as physical and sexual abuse, forced
confinement, non-payment of wages, denial of food and health care, and excessive
working hours with no rest days are all too common.
The Philippines, which has ratified the International Convention on the Protection
of Migrant Workers, has done more than many sending countries to protect
migrant workers, including through pre-departure awareness programs, services
provided by diplomatic missions in receiving countries, and the oversight provided
by the Philippines Overseas Employment Administration. The government
could do more to improve existing services at embassies abroad, particularly by
ensuring adequate staffing levels and access to trauma counseling. It could also
improve programs to help integrate returning workers back to the Philippines, and
do more to promote regional minimum standards through cooperation with other
sending countries.
Key International Actors
The United States remains the closest ally of the Philippines, and military relations
are strong. The two countries conduct regular combined military trainings
funded by the US government.
A report on the political killings in the Philippines released by Amnesty
International in August, 2006, helped focus international attention and pressure
on the Philippines government. Numerous foreign civil society and human right
groups also conducted research and advocacy missions to the Philippines to
investigate the political killings, often focusing on specific classes of victims,
such as judges, lawyers, or women.
During an international tour in September, 2006, including Finland, Belgium, and
the United Kingdom, President Arroyo faced considerable pressure from European
leaders and the European Commission to curtail the killings. Arroyo invited
observers from Finland, Spain, and Belgium to investigate the killings.
The Philippines was elected as a member of the new United Nations Human
Rights Council in May 2006.