 PHILIPPINES
 The Philippine Government is a modified parliamentary system
 with a strong president who dominates the Philippine political
 arena. He also controls a ruling party which exerts decisive
 influence at every level of the Government. Freedom House, in
 its report for 1981, classified the Philippines as "Partly
 Free." Political opposition is tolerated, but within a limited
 scope.
 The economic system is marked by a vigorous private sector
 accompanied by state intervention in strategic sectors. The
 Philippines is a predominantly agricultural country with a
 growing industrial sector, which ranks economically in the
 lower middle range of developing countries.
 The country was ruled by Spain for nearly 400 years until 1898
 when the United States took control of the Philippines as its
 colony. After bloody devastation in World War II, the
 Philippines became independent in 1946. A large majority of
 the populace is Catholic, although there is a politically
 significant Muslim minority in some areas of the south. There
 are numerous ethnic groupings and dialects. Historically, the
 use of violence for political and private ends has been common
 in the Philippines.
 Two insurgencies are currently active. Both employ terrorist
 tactics, including murder, bombings, extortion, and robbery to
 further their goals. In the south, the Moro National
 Liberation Front has been waging a secessionist war since
 1972. The conflict has roots in inequities and
 misunderstandings dating back to early Spanish times,
 competition with Christians for traditional lands, the central
 Government's various efforts to extend its control over Muslim
 areas, the colonial legacy, and the Muslims' desire to preserve
 their cultural identity. The level of fighting has diminished
 considerably in recent years, but still leads to steady
 casualties. Insurgent activities of the New Peoples' Army, the
 military arm of the Communist Party of the Philippines, have,
 by contrast, grown slowly in recent years. The New Peoples'
 Army is now active in rural areas in a majority of provinces of
 the Philippines.
 The Government has stepped up its own military, economic, and
 political counter-efforts against the New Peoples'Army.
 Several hundred alleged guerrillas or their supporters were
 arrested during 1982, and military forces were deployed in
 ,greater strength in areas where New Peoples' Army insurgent
 activities increased in intensity.
 Since the lifting of martial law in January 1981, there has
 been some gradual improvement in the civil liberties situation,
 although restrictions remain. Abuses by some military
 personnel, including torture and summary executions, continue
 to be reported. Disciplinary action has been taken in some
 abuse cases.
 In 1982, reports of military abuses against civilians came
 mostly, but not exclusively, from insurgency areas. Forty-five
 detainees filed reports with the Government in 1982 charging
 torture during interrogation, an increase over 1981. Some of
 these stated that they were tortured while detained by military
 authorities in the Manila area. Charges of *salvaging*
 (summary execution) were reported in 1982 at a somewhat lower
 level than in 1981. Reports of abuses by military personnel in
 the countryside continued at about the same rate in 1982 as in
 
 
 783
 1981. Accounts of arbitrary arrest and detention continued to
 be received. The Government periodically conducts
 investigations into alleged abuses, including several in 1982.
 President Marcos and senior government officials spoke out
 repeatedly against abuses. The press has publicized the
 problem.
 Some gradual expansion in the exercise of civil and political
 liberties continued in 1982. Controls on the press were
 further relaxed, but in December 1982 the chief opposition
 newspaper was closed and its staff arrested for alleged
 subversive activities consisting in part of publication of
 articles claiming President Marcos' war record to be
 falsified. Criticism of the Government continued to be
 published in some of the Philippine media, though in a somewhat
 more subdued tone than prior to the opposition newspaper
 arrests.
 In 1982, freedom of speech has been generally exercised more
 assertively. Greater freedom of assembly has served to
 encourage political activity on the part of the opposition, and
 various party realignments are underway. In the National '
 Assembly, a small but rather vocal opposition manages to raise
 controversial issues with the Government, whose supporters
 dominatethe legislature. Opposition figures also exercise
 responsibilities in a limited number of provincial and local
 governments. In May 1982, village elections for about 300,000
 local government positions were held by nonpartisan, secret
 ballot for the first time in a decade. The voter turnout was
 large, and many observers of varied political views considered
 the elections fair. Many incumbents were defeated. Elections
 for members of two regional assemblies in the Muslim areas were
 held in June.
 In August and September 1982, the Government arrested
 approximately 60 labor leaders on charges of conspiracy to
 commit rebellion. About half were subsequently released. The
 remainder are undergoing trial. The accused labor leaders
 denied the charges against them. The Government raided church
 premises and arrested several Catholic priests and nuns in
 1982. No court verdicts have yet been issued. The Government
 alleged that those arrested were involved in communist
 activities. While the church hierarchy itself has expressed
 concerns about the excessive politicization of some small
 number of clergymen, the raids and arrests evoked strong
 criticism from church figures.
 The Philippine Government continues to offer asylum to
 Indochinese refugees and cooperates with international
 organizations and foreign governments which grant permanent
 resettlement to refugees.
 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Killing
 Most allegations of killings arise within areas of insurgency.
 In individual cases, it is often very difficult to determine
 who committed a killing or why, since the use of violence for
 political and personal reasons has not been unusual in the
 Philippines.
 Task Force Detainees, a Catholic-related group which compiles
 statistics on alleged violations of human rights and often
 publicly takes political positions in opposition to the
 Government, reports that 85 persons were 'salvaged," that is,
 
 
 784
 seized by Government security forces and summarily executed,
 during the first half of 1982, compared to 210 for all of
 1981. Based on its own investigations of incidents, Task Force
 Detainees also estimates that as of June 1982 there had been 59
 civilian deaths in events such as clashes between police or
 military and demonstrators. In Bulacan, in August, Minister of
 National Defense Enrile ordered an investigation into
 allegations that five persons were shot after being arrested,
 when official reports had indicated that there had been an
 *armed encounter.0 No results have been made public.
 Military men have been arrested in at least two cases and
 charged with murder. In one case, in April 1982, Dr. Remberto
 de la Paz was killed in his medical clinic in Samar. The
 military initially reported that he had been killed by the New
 Peoples' Army. After considerable press speculation on the
 case, the Minister of National Defense ordered a special
 investigation, and an army sergeant was arrested and charged.
 He had not been tried as of this writing. In Labo, Camarines
 Norte, four military men were charged in the shooting of five
 civilians. The most numerous allegations of such killings
 occur in the rural areas of Samar, the Bicol, Mindanao, and
 northern Luzon. The Government has not yet completed its
 investigation to determine those responsible for the killing in
 Sagod, Samar of over 40 people in 1981.
 In August and September 1982, responding to a significant
 increase in street crime, the Government conducted an
 anti-crime campaign in Manila in which over 50 common criminal
 suspects were shot in confrontations with police. There is
 concern among civil rights groups that there was an excessive
 resort to lethal force by arresting officers. The public's
 reaction to the campaign was mixed, since street crime had
 begun to affect a wide range of citizens.
 While bhe Government has embarked on several investigations and
 states that many military personnel have been disciplined for
 abusive behavior, many cases remain unresolved. It appears
 that military personnel have been given few serious judicial
 penalties for abusive actions.
 According to both government and private sources, the rebel
 groups the New Peoples' Army and Moro National Liberation Front
 are frequently themselves responsible for summary executions.
 They are reported to kill landlords, politicians, officials,
 and other key local figures, often by ambush. The reasons for
 such killings vary -- some are intended to intimidate local
 residents and demonstrate the insurgents' strength. Others are
 in response to alleged abuses by the officials or their
 opposition to the rebels. Insurgent activities have disrupted
 life in many areas. Government sources claim that nearly 150
 village officials were executed nationwide during the May 1982
 village election campaign.
 Several factors complicate efforts to assess the question of
 illegal killings by members of the Government security forces
 or other groups or individuals. Who committed a particular
 killing is often difficult to establish by actual evidence.
 The insurgents are responsible for some killings. Common
 criminals, extremist religious sects, private security forces,
 and vigilante groups, some with a possible connection to
 government units or insurgents, have also been blamed for
 killings. Numerous clashes between armed rebels and government
 forces occur, though human rights groups assert that some of
 the reported encounters are in fact executions of unarmed
 
 
 785
 civilians. Some reported killings have apparently never taken
 place, and others may go unreported. In 1982, international
 news media covered an account of an artillery shelling on Samar
 alleged to have killed 200 villagers. When a joint team of
 investigators from the Government and the political opposition
 later visited the site, the story was found to be false.
 b. Disappearance
 For the period January-July 1982, Task Force Detainees stated
 that it had received information that 12 persons had
 disappeared. For the full year 1981, the organization lists .32
 persons as having disappeared. The Government maintains that
 such disappearances cannot be attributed to its security
 forces. The question is complicated by allegations that the
 Government keeps some of those charged with subversion and
 rebellion incommunicado for a period of time for interrogation.
 c. Torture
 Torture is prohibited under the Constitution of the
 Philippines. Some of those arrested on suspicion of subversion
 have made statements that they were tortured during
 interrogation. There has been an increase in reports of
 torture in 1982 over 1981. According to the Ministry of
 National Defense, which investigates such incidents,' ten
 reports of torture or mistreatment of detainees were received
 in 1981, while in 1982, 45 reports were received by September
 30. The Government has asserted that some charges of torture
 are false and are being used by arrested rebels as a legal
 tactic.
 A group of detainees arrested in 1982 in Tagum, Davao del Norte
 filed sworn statements before the Supreme Court that they were
 tortured. More than 15 detainees arrested in the Manila area
 have also complained of such mistreatment. In most of the
 cases, the torture was reported to have taken place during
 interrogation at a military camp before the accused had access
 to counsel.
 The Supreme Court has entertained severlal habeas corpus
 petitions in cases where detainees said that they were
 subjected to torture during interrogation. In one case it
 ordered the trial court to hear evidence on the question of
 torture, and it ordered medical examinations of others
 allegedly tortured, an unusually strong move for the court to
 take. The report of the examinations has not been released.
 Some defense attorneys state that the fact that the court
 orders the defendants brought before them prevents or brings a
 halt to any mistreatment.
 The Government denies that torture has been used as a method of
 interrogation, although a Government study reportedly stated
 that "third degree or physical violence is the most common form
 of misbehavior' committed by policemen in getting confessions
 from suspects. The Ministry of National Defense investigates
 complaints of torture. Philippine Government authorities have
 acknowledged that while some cases of torture may have taken
 place, the Government's policy is to punish those guilty of
 such abuses. Government statistics do not reveal whether
 disciplinary action has been taken against those allegedly
 responsible in torture cases.
 d. Cruel, Inhumane, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment
 
 
 786
 Conditions in Philippine prisons are generally poor. Physical
 punishment is not officially part of the penal system, but life
 in the prisons is often harsh. According to lawyers who deal
 with political detainees, many prisoners arrested on charges of
 subversive activities are held incommunicado for interrogation
 at the time of their arrest. In some cases, prisoners have
 been held in isolation for long periods. The Government denies
 that any prisoner is held in solitary confinement, however.
 Prisoners held on charges of subversion have better
 accommodations in Manila than common criminals. They are
 permitted visits by family members and by legal counsel. Some
 detainees have conducted hunger strikes of limited duration or
 partial fasts over prison conditions and terms of detention.
 In parts of the country such as Mindanao, there have been
 instanceswhere villagers have been relocated away from
 insurgency-affected areas. There have been complaints that
 villagers have been moved involuntarily and that housing, food,
 and health conditions in the relocation areas are inadequate.
 The Government has ordered that these relocation practices be
 halted and the villagers be allowed to return to their original
 areas, but some reports indicate that many remain at the
 relocation sites.
 In areas of sustained military activity such as Bicol, northern
 Luzon, Davao, and Samar, there have been allegations of
 military abuse ranging from drunkenness and extortion to rape
 and murder. Reports of abuse have continued at about the same
 rate in 1982 as in 1981. In 1982, however, there was
 considerably more media coverage of such abuses than in
 previous years, and the Government has indicated it has stepped
 up its investigations into the allegations.
 The Ministry of National Defense stated that there had been 70
 cases of alleged military abuse of all kinds against civilians
 reported during the period January-September 1982. There was
 reportedly a backlog of 4,200 cases of complaints of abuse as
 of April 1982. Some military commanders have imposed strict
 discipline on their troops and have succeeded, in combination
 with civic action programs, in reducing incidents of abuse of
 local citizenry.
 Church-military liaison committees and 'peace and order"
 councils exist throughout the country to provide channels for
 dialogue and redress of citizens' grievances. Private lawyer
 groups are also involved in investigating alleged abuses.
 The Government has acknowledged that various offenses,
 including murder, have been committed by members of government
 forces. It has consistently stated that it unequivocally
 opposes military abuses. Conclusive evidence of military abuse
 is often difficult to obtain, and the Government frequently
 uses discharge from the service as a way of dealing with
 suspected offenders. According to government records, during
 the period January-October 1982, 46 military personnel were
 disciplined through dishonorable discharge, demotion,
 termination, or criminal prosecution; 39 police personnel were
 reprimanded, suspended, or dismissed; and 51 military personnel
 were charged before the special graft and corruption
 prosecutor, all in cases involving civilians.
 e. Arbitrary Arrest and Imprisonment
 
 
 787
 Civil rights groups tend to characterize those arrested for
 their opposition to the Government as political detainees,
 regardless of whether or not they advocate or use violent means
 to achieve their goals. Task Force Detainees compiles
 statistics on what they describe as 'political detainees,'
 including some known communist leaders. That organization
 asserts that there were 549 "arbitrary arrests" from January to
 July 1982.   Many of those arrested were released. According
 to the same organization, 756 such detainees were being held as
 of August 1982. The number of detainees has tended to decrease
 over the last several years. Prisoners are sometimes held in
 the provinces without charge by the local military for a few.
 days or weeks and are then released with no record made of the
 episode.
 The Government asserts that no one is arrested for political
 beliefs, rather that those accused are apprehended for specific
 criminal acts aimed at overthrowing the Government.
 Generally, detainees who advocate the overthrow of the
 government are charged with subversion and rebellion,
 possession of firearms and subversive documents, and sometimes
 with crimes such as arson and murder. As of September 1982,
 Government figures showed 453 persons under detention and
 charged with offenses against national security, of whom 177
 were arrested during the period January to September 1982.
 Government figures tend to be lower than Task Force Detainees'
 numbers. Reasons for the difference include a lag in the
 latter organization's recording of releases in the countryside,
 inclusion in the same organization's figures of cases which may
 not get into government statistics, and Task Force Detainees'
 categorization of some offenses as political which the
 Government considers common crimes.
 Under a letter of instruction issued by the President, a
 military commander may arrest without warrant if he believes
 that a defendant suspected of subversion or rebellion will flee
 or endanger public order. The President may also issue a
 presidential commitment order, providing for the arrest and
 holding without bail of such accused. Only the President can
 lift such a commitment order. This procedure effectively
 excludes the judiciary from the arrest process in many cases.
 Many defendants in subversion and rebellion cases are arrested
 by the military either without a warrant or pursuant to a
 presidential commitment order. As of September 1982,
 presidential commitment orders had been issued on 125 occasions.
 A similar instrument, the arrest, search, and seizure order,
 had been frequently employed during martial law. In subversion
 cases bail is usually denied, and the defendants .remain
 incarcerated throughout trial proceedings, which are frequently
 prolonged.
 Habeas corpus for common criminals is available. The writ is
 suspended throughout the country for persons charged with
 subversion or rebellion. Habeas corpus is also suspended in
 two regions of Mindanao where the Muslim revolt continues.
 Defendants in subversion and rebellion cases frequently
 petition the Supreme Court for a habeas corpus hearing. The
 court often grants a hearing, but does not release defendants
 charged with subversion or rebellion under habeas corpus.
 Defense counsels claim that in most instances after a habeas
 corpus petition is filed access to counsel is permitted, any
 abusive treatment is ended, and formal proceedings are brought
 against the accused.
 In some cases, the Government has put members of the opposition
 
 
 788
 accused of subversion under a loose form of house arrest, while
 their cases are being tried. In practice they have often been
 afforded considerable freedom to move about. The
 Church-Military Liaison Committee, the body established to
 improve relations between the two institutions, has worked out
 an agreement whereby arrested clergy and church workers may
 sometimes-be released in the custody of their superiors, with
 the understanding that the accused will appear for judicial
 proceedings.
 In 1982, Philippine authorities arrested several priests and
 nuns as well as a larger number of lay church workers on
 serious charges including subversion and murder. One priest
 who was widely regarded as having joined the communist rebel
 forces was reported killed in an encounter with Government
 troops. The Government has been accused of arresting church
 people only because of their presence in New Peoples' Army
 areas or their social activities on behalf of the poor. The
 Government maintained that it sought merely to apprehend
 communist cadre who had infiltrated religious organizations,
 not to quarrel with the church. The raids and arrests evoked
 strong criticism from church figures. Some ranking clergy have
 expressed concern about radicalization of some clergy. The
 leadership of the Catholic Church and the Government have
 indicated that they do not seek confrontation, but rather a
 continuation of constructive dialogue.
 Military intelligence units are charged with investigation and
 suppression of subversion and rebellion. Critics have
 contended that these units often arrest without warrant, hold
 persons incommunicado for days or sometimes longer in 'safe
 houses" and military camps, and sometimes utilize torture as a
 method of interrogation.
 f. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Both common criminals and those charged with subversive acts
 receive public trials in civilian courts. Because of backlogs
 and a shortage of judges, trials in criminal cases routinely
 take two to three years. 'Subversion" cases have often been on
 trial for longer periods. Only cases left over from the
 martial law period are still being tried in military courts.
 According to the Government, as of September 30, 1982, there
 were in existence 11 military commissions trying 42 cases
 involving 145 civilians.
 The right to counsel is guaranteed under law and in general is
 honored from the time that a person is presented at arraignment
 in court for the reading of the charges against him. Prior to
 arraignment, there are allegations by some of those charged
 with subversion and rebellion that they are held without access
 to counsel, sometimes for several weeks. If the defendant
 cannot afford counsel, the court will appoint one. There are
 several lawyers' groups, such as the Free Legal Assistance
 Group, which provide free assistance to alleged political
 offenders. The Government's Civil Legal Assistance Office and
 private attorney groups assist indigents.
 Charges in subversion and rebellion cases are often vague and
 lump together various defendants and groups and alleged
 violations. There are some cases with multiple defendants,
 claiming conspiracy to overthrow the Government, with little
 detail provided in the charges. Members of the political
 opposition have sometimes been linked with subversive elements
 in alleged conspiracies, and some have left the country to
 avoid lengthy trials, restriction of movement, or possible
 imprisonment.
 
 
 789
 A judicial reorganization bill was enacted in 1981, but has not
 yet been implemented. Except for the Graft and Corruption
 Court, all judges in courts below the Supreme Court are to be
 subject to replacement or reappointment by the President after
 recommendation by a judicial panel. The bill was
 unsuccessfully challenged as a violation of the
 constitutionally-guaranteed tenure of judges. The stated aim
 of the act is to improve the efficiency and integrity of the
 judicial system. It has received support from some bar groups
 and individuals and opposition from others.
 The court reorganization inevitably raised questions about the
 independence of the judiciary from the executive, as did other
 measures permitting removal of judges instituted during martial
 law. The case backlog continues to constitute a major
 impediment to the dispensation of justice. The courts rarely
 challenge the executive branch on major issues, but they
 sometimes render opinions critical of government actions and
 thus provide a degree of countervailing influence. The Supreme
 Court experienced a major scandal in 1982, causing all justices
 to submit resignations to the President after allegations that
 some of the justices had participated in a scheme to adjust the
 score of one of the justices' sons in the national bar
 examination. As a result, President Marcos accepted the
 resignations of two of the justices, but reappointed the rest,
 including one frequent critic of his administration.
 A special board of military prosecutors has been designated to
 advise the civilian prosecutors in the handling of important
 subversion and rebellion cases. Defense attorneys who handle
 these cases assert that the military prosecutors actually run
 the cases, and that they have considerable influence with trial
 judges. Government prosecutors deny these claims. There is a
 right to appeal all convictions.
 g. Invasion of the Home
 Under the Constitution a search warrant may be issued by a
 judge or other authorized officer upon a finding of probable
 cause. The President may order a search pursuant to his
 powers. In some subversion and rebellion cases, accused have
 alleged that their property was searched without a warrant.
 Military personnel in areas of insurgent activity sometimes
 enter and destroy private property without warning.
 2. Respect for Civil and Political Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Until late in 1982, media freedom had been expanding. The
 formal lifting of martial law in January 1981 had provided a
 psychological boost to journalists. The restrictive climate
 evident during the martial law period had markedly diminished.
 Tolerance by the Government for coverage of controversial
 issues, including news about opposition activities and human
 rights abuses, had increased, and media content had become more
 assertive vis-a-vis the Government. For example, the press dug
 aggressively into the 1982 Supreme Court bar examination
 scandal and had contained coverage of such issues as alleged
 military abuses against civilians. In December 1982, the 'We
 Forum,* an opposition newspaper, was closed and its staff
 arrested for alleged subversive activities consisting in part
 of publication of articles claiming President Marcos' war
 record to be falsified. The staff was subsequently released to
 
 
 790
 house arrest status and their trial began. After the closure,
 all major daily newspapers continued to air criticisms, albeit
 somewhat subdued, of government policy.
 There is no direct censorship, but the Government maintains
 informal means to influence or pressure the media. Press
 freedom itself was widely debated in the media in 1982,
 particularly by Manila columnists, and competition within and
 between Philippine media has intensified. In 1982, Manila
 acquired four new dailies, and publishers seemed increasingly
 willing to go to more venturesome lengths in quest of both
 circulation and more candid coverage to gain credibility with
 readers. Television and all major nationally-circulated
 newspapers are owned by persons sympathetic to the Government,
 but there are also several opposition papers circulated in
 limited numbers in the provinces.
 Newspapers operate knowing that the Government closely
 scrutinizes the topics they choose and the way they treat
 them. The list of subjects 'off-limits' to the media is
 shorter than it has been in years, but direct criticism of the
 Marcos family invites confrontation with the Government. There
 is no censorship of foreign books or periodicals, and
 correspondents for foreign media, many of whom are Filipinos,
 regularly cover controversial, sensitive topics head-on. Such
 magazines as *Time* and 'Newsweek" are widely circulated, and
 the "Asian Wall Street Journal," "International Herald
 Tribune, and "Far Eastern Economic Review" are sold in larger
 cities.
 b.   Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Freedom of assembly was generally observed in 1982. Rallies
 and demonstrations involving students and opposition political
 leaders took place to protest government policies. There were
 protests at the Supreme Court over the arrest of a labor leader
 andin downtown Manila concerning the September 1982 visit of
 President Marcos to the United States. A demonstration on
 nuclear disarmament was banned because of the suspected
 involvement of communist subversives. Several large opposition
 rallies have been held in provincial towns. Permits are
 required to hold public meetings. Sometimes they are granted
 by the authorities and sometimes not. There has been no
 interference with recent opposition political rallies, even
 those held without a permit.
 The constitutional right to organize and maintain labor unions
 is respected. While only 12.3 percent of the 18 million-person
 labor force was unionized in 1981, this seems more attributable
 to the economic structure of the country than to legal or
 political inhibitions. A majority of the labor force is
 composed of self-employed and unpaid family workers who are
 traditionally not union members. The unions claim that roughly
 one-third of the six million wage and salary earners are
 organized, and in key, large scale industries the rate of
 unionization is about 50 percent. Affiliation with
 international labor federations and trade secretariats is
 unhindered.
 The Trade Union Congress of the Philippines is the largest of
 the national trade union organizations and is the only one
 officially recognized by the Government. It follows a strategy
 of working with the Government to achieve its goals. Other
 labor groups have used more confrontational tactics, and in
 August and September 1982, several leaders from these groups
 were arrested and charged with subversion. The Government
 
 
 791
 asserts that it has evidence to support the charges, and that
 it is trying to separate the legitimate labor activities of the
 unions in question from the alleged subversive activities. The
 affected unions deny the charges. They remain free to conduct
 strikes and negotiations within the existing legal framework.
 The Trade Unions of the Philippines and Allied Services, the
 National Association of Trade Unions, and the Pambansang
 Katipunan ng Manggagawa are affiliated with the world
 Federation of Trade Unions, a communist labor front controlled
 by the Soviet Union. Therefore, there is persistent government
 suspicion regarding the motivation and sponsorship of
 anti-government and other labor activities instigated by such
 labor groups. They accordingly receive intense government
 scrutiny.
 Labor law requires a two-thirds vote of the workers prior to a
 strike and permits the Minister of Labor to designate essential
 industries in which strikes are prohibited and arbitration is
 mandatory. However, the Government has in many cases been
 tolerant of "illegal' strikes.
 As of September 1982, government statistics indicated that 78
 strikes had occurred in 1982. This was a considerable decrease
 from the number of strikes in 1981. There were some episodes
 of violence on picket lines, usually involving non-government
 security forces and picketers.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 While the right to practice one's religion is fully respected,
 involvement by clergy and lay workers in the political process
 has been a source of church-government friction. There is
 constitutional separation of church and state. While most
 Filipinos are Catholic, there is a large Muslim minority in the
 southern regions and there are several diverse Christian groups
 throughout the country. Tensions rooted in history have led to
 friction between Muslim and Christian elements in the southern
 Philippines. However, the Government has taken steps to ensure
 that followers of the Islamic faith are accorded religious
 freedom. As evidence of its concern, the Philippine Government
 established an institute in 1982 to train leading Filipino
 Muslim religious and legal figures for positions in the Sharia
 court system, which is based on Muslim personal law. The
 Government's Ministry of Muslim Affairs, established in 1981,
 has also provided financial support to ten madrasahs (Islamic
 schools) and eight Islamic centers in the south. Support is
 designed to preserve Filipino Islamic identity and cultural
 heritage.
 d. Freedom of Movement within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Freedom of travel generally is respected. There is free
 emigration. Travel taxes and fees are not excessive. Some in
 the political opposition in previous years experienced delays
 before obtaining clearances and travel documents necessary for
 departure. There were no reported cases of such problems in
 1982. Former detainees in temporary release status need
 Government permission to leave the country, but in most cases
 have obtained it without difficulty.
 As of October 1, 1982, there were some 4,800 Indochinese
 refugees in first asylum camps in the Philippines. The flow of
 Indochinese reaching the country by boat has diminished, but
 the Philippines continues to offer asylum and to cooperate with
 international organizations and foreign Governments which offer
 
 15-480 0 - 83 - 51
 
 
 792
 permanent resettlement to refugees. In addition to providing
 first asylum to boat people, the Government of the Philippines,
 in conjunction with the UN High Commissioner for Refugees,
 operates a refugee processing center (capacity 17,200) where
 refugees accepted for resettlement in the US and other
 destinations are brought from other southeast Asian countries
 and are given language training, cultural orientation, and
 vocational courses.
 e. Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 As chief of state and head of the ruling party, President
 Marcos wields preeminent power in the Philippines. The
 Constitution, promulgated during martial law and subsequently
 further amended, provides for a strong president in a
 parliamentary system responsive to presidential initiative.
 The President appoints the Prime Minister and all major
 government officials and has an almost insurmountable veto and
 the power to dissolve the National Assembly. He controls many
 aspects of party affairs, appointments, benefits, and
 discipline. He formulates national policy, and he may
 legislate in times of emergency or when in his judgment the
 legislature has failed to act. During 1982, the President
 issued a few decrees and several letters of instruction which
 had the effect of legislation. The threat of decree has
 occasionally served to prompt more expeditious results in the
 National Assembly.
 Under the constitutional amendments of 1981, an Executive
 Committee, composed of some cabinet members, legislators, and
 other regional officials, was established. Its responsibility
 is to assist the President and act as a caretaker during a
 presidential vacancy. During 1982, the committee began to
 assume some of the President's responsibilities in the
 day-to-day affairs of government.
 The ruling party is staunchly loyal to the President and
 controls most government positions. The National Legislature
 is a body with 179 currently filled seats. Party discipline is
 strictly enforced in the legislature. Most major party
 decisions are taken in closed caucus. Evidently there is
 considerable give and take in the caucus, but the President
 normally makes the final decisions on major policy matters.
 Over the past year there has been an increase in public debate
 in the assembly on sensitive legislative items by assemblymen
 in the ruling party. Laws on village level elections and on
 presidential succession procedures were openly debated. Press
 coverage of the debates was extensive.
 There is considerable opposition political activity in the
 country. Opposition parties exist openly and were engaged in
 realignment during 1982. Two new parties were born, and a
 coalition of several existing parties developed. The
 opposition holds a sprinkling of government positions
 throughout the system. There are elected minority governors,
 mayors, and village-level officials.
 The minority of 17 opposition party members in the National
 Assembly debates government initiatives with the ruling party.
 From time to time they succeed in convincing the majority to
 alter legislation. Press reporting on minority activities in
 the legislature has on occasion provided a forum for minority
 views. National Assembly elections are scheduled for 1984.
 
 
 793
 The 1982 elections for village councils were non-partisan. The
 focus of these elections was local community issues and
 personalities. Half of the election winners were new to their
 posts. The election, conducted by secret ballot, was generally
 considered fair. The body charged with oversight of elections
 is staffed with incumbents loyal to the president. In
 electoral protests the body has as a rule sided with the
 Government. The oversight body is a prime target of opposition
 politicians who argue that it is unfairly biased in favor of
 the Government.
 Women participate widely in government and in the political
 process. They hold positions from ministerial rank down to the
 village level, although they are a clear minority of office
 holders. There is one woman on the Supreme Court, and five are
 members of the National Assembly. There are a few women
 governors, mayors, vice mayors, and provincial council members
 throughout the country. Women are represented in legal,
 diplomatic, and academic circles.
 Elections to regional assemblies in two designated "autonomous
 regions' in the southern Philippines with large Muslim
 minorities were held in 1982. The autonomous regions were
 created in 1979 as part of the Government effort to address the
 concerns of the Muslim minority. A plebiscite ratified on May
 17, 1982 called for the merger of two regional executive
 councils. Implementation of the merger has been delayed
 pending resolution of personnel questions. At the national
 level, a Muslim was appointed to the influential Executive
 Committee.
 The Philippines has many other minority groups which live in
 upland areas. The Government has mounted development efforts
 in some areas where these groups live. This has resulted in
 occasional clashes with traditional values, leading to
 violence, and in some cases charges that tribal people were
 abused. The Government has suspended one major power and
 irrigation project in response to tribal opposition, and there
 is a national agency charged with assisting minority groups.
 3. Government Attitude Regarding International and Non-
 governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations of
 Human Rights
 The Philippines is a signatory to all United Nations human
 rights and refugee conventions. The Association of Major
 Religious superiors of the Philippines and other church groups,
 such as the National Council of Churches in the Philippines,
 monitor human rights. The Association sponsors the work of
 Task Force Detainees, which prepares lists of political
 detainees and reports alleged abuses based on first-hand
 reports from relatives and witnesses. These groups operate
 with relative freedom, although some members have been arrested
 on charges of subversion and rebellion. Some are still
 detained.
 Teams from the International Committee of the Red Cross have
 inspected Philippine detention centers bn an almost yearly
 basis over the last eight years. An inspection was conducted
 in 1982, and the confidential findings conveyed to the
 Government. The Civil Liberties Union of the Philippines
 actively investigates and reports alleged abuses. Attorneys'
 groups, such as the Free Legal Assistance Group, provide legal
 assistance to defendants in cases with political overtones. An
 
 
 794
 international workshop on human rights in conjunction with
 Philippine institutions and groups was held in February, and a
 group known as the Asian Council for Human Rights was launched
 by human rights figures from several ASEAN countries, including
 former Senator Jose Diokno, a well-known critic of the
 Government. In its 1982 report, Freedom House classified the
 Philippines as "Partly Free."
 In its report dated December 31, 1981, submitted to the 38th
 (1982) session of the UN Commission on Human Rights, the
 Commission's Working Group on Enforced or Voluntary
 Disappearances described its inquiries into reports which it
 had received concerning enforced or involuntary disappearances
 in the Philippines. The group recorded its appreciation for
 the cooperation received from the Government of the
 Philippines.
 An Amnesty International team visited the Philippines in 1981
 to collect information.   Amnesty indicated in its report of
 the mission, issued in September 1982, that its team called on
 the Deputy Minister of Defense who is charged with overseeing
 detainee affairs, but was unsuccessful in its efforts to call
 on more senior Philippine officials. The Amnesty report, which
 is available in the Philippines, charged the Philippine
 Government with tolerating or committing a variety of human
 rights abuses, including violations of judicial process,
 killings, and torture. The Government has criticized what it
 considers exaggerations and inaccuracies in the report, but has
 nonetheless ordered an investigation into the findings of the
 report and invited Amnesty to visit the Philippines again.
 The international press is permitted free access in the
 country, and critical reporting often results from such
 visits. The Philippine Government has criticized foreign human
 rights groups for what it considers one-sided reporting and
 interference in its affairs. It charges the Western press with
 bias in its reporting of human rights matters, but continues to
 permit representatives of such organizations and journalists to
 enter the Philippines and conduct investigations.
 The Ministry of National Defense has a special committee for
 investigating reports of human rights violations involving
 military personnel. Since its creation in 1979, the
 committee's influence in investigating instances of misbehavior
 and providing documentation for possible legal proceedings has
 been limited. However, as a result of its inquiries, a soldier
 was recently charged with murder in the shooting of a doctor in
 Samar, and four soldiers have been charged in the murder of
 five civilians in Camarines Norte.
 4. Economic, Social, and Cultural Situation
 The Philippines is a predominantly agricultural country ranking
 in the middle range of developing countries with an estimated
 per capita gross national product of $717. Real gross national
 product growth was above six percent during the 1970s, but was
 probably only about 2.7 percent in 1982. The population growth
 rate is about 2.3 percent annually. The inflation rate is
 currently about 10.5 percent. Real wages may have fallen
 slightly in the last year, symptomatic of the effect of world
 economic difficulties on the Philippines.
 Philippine development strategy emphasizes rural development,
 focusing on agricultural productivity, roads, electrification,
 nutrition, and health. At the same time, the country is
 pursuing vigorously the development of exporting industries and
 commercial agriculture by the private sector in conjunction
 
 
 795
 with development infrastructure, energy, domestic energy
 systems, and capital-intensive industries, principally by
 government or quasi-governmental organizations. Agriculture
 provides employment for approximately 52 percent of the work
 force, but produces only about 25 percent of gross national
 product and cannot productively absorb the estimated 700,000
 new workers who join the labor force each year. To generate
 additional employment, the Government has implemented
 development programs, is encouraging incentive investment in
 industries producing for export, and has established export
 processing zones, allowing tax-free production for export by
 industries utilizing Filipino labor. In addition the
 Government facilitates overseas employment of Filipinos in
 construction and maritime activities. The Government's
 Kilusang Kabuhayan at Kaunlaran or National Livelihood Program,
 aimed at stimulating employment, supports development of
 cottage industries for domestic and export markets.
 The Philippines is heavily dependent on earnings from commodity
 exports. It has been seriously affected by the sharp fall in
 world prices for coconut oil, copper, sugar, and forest
 products. Commodity industries employ an estimated 9.8 million
 Filipinos, and the economic slump has hit agricultural workers,
 those least able to cope with economic reversals, especially
 hard.
 Government agricultural programs continue to stress increased
 production of food grains and pilot projects for dairy, beef,
 and poultry. Price support and subsidy programs for fertilizer
 and insecticides have provided incentives for greater
 production. The Philippines is self-sufficient in rice.
 Agrarian reform in rice and corn holdings has contributed to
 security of tenure or lowered rents for one million tenants who
 are now either amortizing owners or leaseholders.
 Income distribution in the Philippines is skewed, with 41
 percent of the population below a Philippine Government-defined
 absolute poverty level in the rural areas, and 32 percent below
 that level in urban areas. Chronic undernourishment is a
 significant problem. The Government has carried out studies
 and recently, working with the World Bank, has been considering
 adoption of a national food and nutrition program.
 The adult literacy rate is 88 percent, one of the highest in
 any developing country. Free education is available to all
 through the elementary grades. Enrollment is high at all
 levels.
 Health care remains inadequate, although the Government has
 ongoing programs to provide and improve delivery, especially to
 the poor. The infant mortality rate was 54.7 per 1,000 live
 births in 1980, with a life expectancy of 63.5 years.
 The supply of low income housing is inadequate and the
 Government has initiated several programs to bring more and
 better housing onto the market. These programs have not yet
 had a significant impact. The average number of persons housed
 per room in 1970 was 2.4 in the rural areas and 2.1 in the
 urban areas.
 There has been substantial migration to the urban centers,
 particularly Manila, resulting in a proliferation of squatter
 settlements. At times government efforts to remove the
 squatters have been criticized as harsh. Significant
 percentages of existing houses lack sanitary toilets or
 
 
 796
 electricity. Many households, particularly in rural areas, do
 not have access to safe drinking water. Government
 electrification and water programs are continuing at a steady
 rate nationally.
 Efforts to develop the economy and enhance the well-being of
 the average citizen through agrarian reform, livelihood
 programs, and housing, water, sanitation, and health projects
 have met with uneven success. These efforts have been hampered
 by the weak international economy, budget stringencies, and
 changes in priorities.
 
 
 797
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- COLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 LOUNTRY: PHILIPPINES
 1980     1951      1982
 I.CCN. ASSIST.-TOTAL,,,          83.3     97.6    107.1
 LOANS ..............     ... S1.1     Z8.4     25.6
 GRANTS ..............       2.2     69.2     81.5
 A.AIO ......,....  ......      59.7     eS.5     89.4
 LOANS ..............     ... 31.1     ?8.4     25.6
 GRANTS...............    6.6      40.1     63.8
 (SEC.SUPP.ASSIT.)...         20.0      30'.0    50.0
 d.FOOD FOR PEACE .......        18.3      24.1     12.6
 LOANS. ........          .. 0.0       0.0      0.0
 GRANTS............        18.3      24.1     12.6
 TITLE I-TOTAL,,,,,,...,           0.0      0.0      0.0
 REPAY. IN !-LOANS.....          0.0      0.0      0.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR ...           0.0.      0.0      0.0
 TITLE II-TOTAL.........          1?.8     24.1     12.6
 E.RELIEF.EC.DEV & WFP,           3.9      4.5      1.6
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY ....          14.9     19.6     11.0
 C.OTHFR SOON. ASSIST...           4.b      5.0      5.1
 LOANS ..............         0.0       0.0      0.0
 GRANTS..............        4.R       5.0      5.1
 PEACE CORPS ......         4.d       5.0      5.1
 NARCOTICS .....           0.0       0.0      0.0
 OTHER .,.........          0.       0.0      0.0
 II.MlL. ASSIST.-TOTAL,,.          75.S     75.6     51.2
 LOANS ................ 50.0          50.0     50.0
 GRANTS.............        Z5.5      25.6      1.2
 A.MAP GRANTS..........        25.0      25.0      0.0
 8,CREOIT SALES-FMS..            50.0     50.0     50.0
 C.INTL mIL.E).TRNG....           0.5      0.6      1.2
 .TRAN-EXGESS STOCK...           0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS .....0.0                   0.0      0.0
 IIl.7OTAL ECON. & NIL,,,        155.3     173.2    158.3
 L)ANS...................   51.1      7 .4     75.6
 GRANTS.....  .......     77.7      94.3     82.7
 OTMER US LOANS .......            27.8     69.3       8.4
 !X-IM SANK LOANS .......        27.3      6.3      8.4
 AL  T.1 , , ,.,  . ,          0.0      0.0       0.0
 ALL OTHE3R...................00           00       00
 ASSISTANCE PROY  :NTERNATIONAL A3!NC:ES
 1 S      1?11      19sz     19413-82
 TTAL.......... .2,.5     479.7     74.6    5243.5
 154               67.u     295.0     505.6   34o3.5
 IFC                 9.9     40.2      21.0    164.4
 1:A                 0.0      0.0       C.0    122.2
 106                fG.u      Uu       0.0      Ou
 AUL           lF.j     155.5    213.S    1401.3
 AF6                0.0      0.0       0.0      .0
 u40P                3.1      '.0     O.    " 57.4
 OTM1R-UN           1Z.0      0.0       0.0     34.7
 tec                 0.0      J.0       0.0      0.0
 
 
 798
