PHILIPPINES
The report on the Philippines fails to reflect the progressive deterioration of human rights throughout 1987. While the report handles several issues well, it glosses over, disregards or dismisses well-founded reports of serious human rights violations committed in 1987 by military forces and citizens' groups sponsored by the military. In several respects, the report is a study in im-balanced reporting: the State Department consistently avoids reporting in its ov.'a voice that government agents committed grave human rights abuses, and it attacks the credibility of human rights organizations that monitor those abuses. In contrast, violations by the communist insurgents, the New People's Army (NPA"), <ire reported as fact.
f erhaps the most serious human rights development in the Philippines in 1987 was the proliferation of armed, anti-communist citizens' groups which operate with military support, and whose members committed serious human rights abuses, including extrajudicial executions, throughout the country. The State Department report goes to some length to downplay the abuses committed by the groups, which are commonly referred to as "vigilantes."
The report consistently distances the State Department from allegations of vigilante abuses, statmg, instead: "[djuring 1987 human rights groups focused on proliferating anti-Communist citizens' self-defense groups as frequent perpetrators of political killings," and "the human rights record of some of these organizations was criticized both in the Philippines and abroad." Though correctly noting that the nature of citizens' anti-communist groups varies widely, the report misleadingly suggests that serious abuses generally are committed by groups that operate without official support. After describing legal and "quasi-legal" groups, the report states:
There are also illegal private armies and fanatical cults such as the Tadtad which kill Communist sympathizers along with other political opponents.
118
Philippines
Some such groups have been implicated in political killings. Violence by Tadtad members against outsiders, including Communists, has sometimes been tolerated by local military authorities.
In fact, fanatical cultists such as Tadtad have received strong support by local military authorities in several provinces, and have committed numerous acts of exceptional violence — the group is known for its penchant for mutilating its victims with long knives.
The report seeks to contrast Tadtad's "unauthorized" violence wth the behavior of "officially unarmed" groups, such as Nakasaka, of which the report says "there is little evidence of human rights abuses." While Nakasaka has not been charged ^th numerous serious abuses, Tadtad cultists who were members of Nakasaka beheaded a suspected rebel in April 1987 and drank his blood soon after the citizens' group was endorsed by the national government. The incident received substantial publicity nationally, and also pointed up the inap-propriateness of the government's claim that Nakasaka is "unarmed" because its members use "only" bolo knives.
The State Department also seeks to counter charges relating to vigilante abuses by citing the popular support they enjoy. While the best known vigilante group, Alsa Masa of Davao City, does appear to enjoy popular support, many — perhaps most — of the vigilante forces employ heavy-handed tactics to coerce support, and this has even been true of Alsa Masa. Other vigilante groups have killed citizens who refused to join or organize local vigilante units.
The report notes measures taken by the Aquino government to ensure lawful behavior by the citizens' groups, particularly its adoption in October 1987 of guidelines regulating their behavior, but the report gives no indication that the national government generally ignored these guidelines. Military guidelines similar to those promulgated in October were issued by then Armed Forces Chief of Staff Fidel V. Ramos in April, but their provisions were flagrantly violated. For example, those guidelines require that provincial military commanders submit monthly reports on local citizens' groups to the Chief of Staff. When questioned about compliance with these reports during Senate hearings in November 1987, then Defense Secretary Rafael Ileto said he was unaware of any such reports. More important, provisions restricting the use of firearms
119
Critique
were consistently flouted, and crimes by vi^antes went unpunished, despite the guidelines' mandate that the groups must act ^^ithin the confines of law and be punished for violations.
The report's discussion of the Civilian Home Defense Force (CHDF) is also incomplete. The civilian militia, organized by President Marcos during martial law, committed numerous human rights violations. Its poor record prompted the Constitutional Commission assembled by President Aquino to draft into the new Constitution a provision calling for dissolution of the CHDF. While the State Department report correctly states that the Armed Forces of the Philippines has "screened personnel more effectively, discharging about 30 percent of [the CHDFs] membership," it fails to note that CHDF personnel nonetheless continued to commit serious abuses, including acts of extrajudicial execution, in 1987. It should also have been noted that many of those discharged from the CHDF became members of military-sponsored citizens' anti-communist forces.
The report's handling of abuses by vigilante groups and the CHDF exemplifies a more general failure to acknowledge that extrajudicial executions by agents of the state became a serious problem in 1987. The State Department's most direct general statement on the subject is vague and misleading: "Political killings are frequent in the Philippines and take place throughout the country. Because successful prosecution of political assassins is extremely rare, private vendettas are often pursued." While private vendettas are often the basis of killings, during 1987 politically motivated killings perpetrated by persons acting on behalf of the state were widespread. According to Amnesty International, since mid-1987 they "have become the most serious human rights problem in the Philippines."
The report seeks to discredit reports of such abuses by the leading human rights monitoring organization, Task Force Detainees (TFD), by questioning the group's integrity and methodology. It states that "TDF has been accused of using its statistics to support a politically motivated finding that the human rights situation in the Philippines is deteriorating." It also asserts that TFD's "broad definitions of human rights violations have the effect of increasing
120
Philippines
the number of reported incidents," but does not state that TFD has in fact tightened its standards for the category of political killings in recent years.
The report, apparently seeking to demonstrate the effects of what it regards as unreliable methodology, compares TFD's reporting on political killings to cases filed before the government's Commission on Human Rights (CHR). The State Department reports that the CHR and its predecessor "have received 123 reports of political killings since the February 1986 change of government. TFD reports208 summary executions by government forces during the first 11 months of 1987 alone. This figure compares to 197 reported by the organization in all of 1986...."
This comparison is grossly misleading. The CHR is not, as the report states, a "fact-gathering" body. It is empowered to receive and to investigate complaints of human rights abuses, but makes no effort to monitor violations in a comprehensive ashion. The 123 cases cited as "reports" of political killings received by the government body since February 1986 are in fact "complaints." TFD, by contrast, monitors abuses even when no complaint is filed.
The report's section on arbitrary arrest and detention suffers from one serious omission: it makes no mention of frequent "saturation drives" carried out by military and police forces in poor neighborhoods of Metro Manila during 1987. Up to 600 persons at a time have been netted in these sweeps, which typically have been executed without arrest warrants. During these raids people have been arrested on such arbitrary bases as having unusual facial moles — a characteristic that police say betrays NPA involvement — and on the basis of accusations by hooded informants accompanying the police.
The report is most straightforward in acknowledging the government's poor track record in investigating and prosecuting cases involving politically motivated murders. It states, "[pjolitical killings go largely unpunished in the Philippines," and includes a useful survey of the status of several well-known cases. The report also notes an acquittal of military agents in the highly publicized case of the disappearance in 1985 of Father Rudy Romano, and states that the priest's religious order and human rights groups "denounced the verdict." The report should have indicated the reasons for the denunciations: the prosecution was a textbook case of obstruction of justice. For example.
121
Critique
vntnesses were intimidated — the brother of the key witness was killed — and the government scheduled a hearing on one day's notice to lawyers representing the victim's interests. These and other practices by the prosecution ultimately led the victim's lawyers to withdraw from the case.
In contrast to its discussion of prosecutions for human rights abuses, the report's discussion of military discipline is generally misleading. The State Department emphasizes military training programs designed to instill respect for human rights and states that officers "must receive clearance from the CHR ... in order to be promoted." This is not true. Although the Armed Forces Chief of Staff agreed to submit names of officers being considered for promotion to the CHR's predecessor body, the Presidential Committee on Human Rights (PCHR) — this procedure was used to block one promotion — the military has stopped submitting names to the CHR. Even when names were submitted to the PCHR for review, the body had authority only to offer its views but not to veto a promotion.
More generally, the State Department's emphasis on military training programs on human rights obscures a profoundly important, and far more significant, point: in the course of 1987 military officials at every level voiced increasingly hostile views toward human rights. In June, for example, 30 military commanders met \sitb President Aquino to complain that human rights restraints were hampering their drive against the communist insurgents.
One aspect of the State Department's discussion of military discipline reflects an improvement over previous years' reports. In the past, we have criticized the State Department for failing to distinguish disciplinary action taken in response to military infractions imrelated to human rights from sanctions imposed for rights violations. This year, the report states: "The number of soldiers and policemen who have been tried, convicted, and sentenced for human rights violations is not available since the AFP judiciary does not maintain a statistical classification for abuses of human rights." We believe that the U.S. Embassy in Manila should, however, make greater efforts to monitor the progress of prosecutions against military personnel for human rights abuses. The Aquino government's failure thus far to convict a single soldier or officer
122
Philippines
m such a case is a significant measure of the human rights problems that persist in the Philippines, and deserves greater attention by U.S. Embassy officials.
On a related point, the report implies misleadingly, though perhaps inadvertently, that the CHR is empowered to initiate prosecutions based upon its investigation of complaints. It states: "If the CHR determines that a prima facie case has been made, it has the power to refer the case to military or civilian courts for trial." The CHR's powers are purely recommendatory, and its staff do not even systematically monitor the progress of cases which it recommends for prosecution to the Judge Advocate General.
The report's treatment of non-govemmental human rights organizations suffers from a critical omission. The State Department, which devotes considerable space to discrediting TFD, makes no mention of the dangers faced by TFD workers and other human rights workers in 1987. It states that TFD and other human rights groups "are unhindered in conducting investigations around the country and are routinely able to obtain safe-conduct letters from the Philippine Department of National Defense." In fact, TFD and other human rights monitors came under heightened pressure in 1987. Many received death threats and several were violently attacked. The military's growing hostility toward TFD and other human rights investigators significantly hindered the ability of such monitors to conduct investigations. One military officer even assaulted an investigator sent to Negros Oriental on behalf of the government's Commission on Human Rights, smashing the representative's tape recorder in his face.
The report similarly fails to address escalating pressures on human rights lawyers during 1987. Throughout the country, lawyers engaged in human rights work have received death threats from military sources or from citizens' groups that operate with military support. One, David Bueno, was shot to death in IIocos Norte in October 1987. Particularly affected were lawyers affiliated Vrith the Free Legal Assistance Group (FLAG), a highly-respected national association of lawyers who undertake himian rights cases. Of FLAG and other lawyers' human rights groups, the State Department says only that they "continue to provide some legal assistance to victims of human rights violations. These organizations have become less active, however, since many of their members joined the present Government and the political repression of the Marcos
123
Critique
era ended." The latter observation would have been appropriate in a report on 1986; it was much less true during 1987, when lawyers' groups once again became quite active in response to deteriorating human rights conditions.
The report's accounts of labor rights and press freedom suffer from similar omissions. The report's discussion of labor rights is incomplete without mention of serious harassment of labor activists in some areas during 1987; a number of labor activists were killed by vigilantes. Its discussion of press freedom Ukewise should have mentioned that at least 11 journalists became victims of political violence by extremists of both the left and right in 1987.
The particular deficiencies noted above reflect a fundamentally inaccurate view of the human rights situation in the Philippines that pervades the State Department's report. The report's portrayal of the Aquino government's overall stance on human rights in 1987 is that of a government faced with challenges, but unshaken in its commitment or ability to ensure respect for human rights. This view is suggested, for example, in the report's introductory observation that "[cjivil unrest fomented by anti-democratic forces failed to undermine the Government's commitment to democratic processes and respect for human rights." It is, however, all too clear that successive threats to the Aquino government mounted by rebellious military factions have profoundly dhninished the President's \^dliingness and ability to impose human rights restraints on the military. It is in this context that grave human rights abuses escalated in 1987.
124
