CHILD MARRIAGE
SOUTH SUDAN
BY BRENT STIRTON/REPORTAGE BY GETTY IMAGES FOR HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH
Helen, 16, stands beside her husband,
Jade, 50, outside their home in a
village near Juba, South Sudan. Helen
was married at 15 and said she would
have chosen school over marriage, but
her family was could not afford school
fees. She was in labor for five days
before having a cesarean section. Her
son is now 8 months old.
Kansuk, Central Equatoria State,
February 2013
A young woman recovers after giving birth
to twins in Bor Hospital in Jonglei State.
She was married at the age of 12 and had
her first child at the age of 15, enduring a
five-day labor. She is now 20 and these are
her 4th and 5th children.
Bor, Jonglei State, February 2013
Akuots father died when she was a young child. Her uncle
tried to force her into marriage, even though she and her
mother protested. Now 16, Akuot resisted the marriage and
ran away, determined to continue her education. Her uncle
and male cousins caught her, dragged her back to their
village, and beat her for three days while keeping her locked
inside without food or water.
Bor, Jonglei State, February 2013
A pregnant student stands in a classroom at
the Juba Day Secondary School. The school
administration does not permit students
who become pregnant to remain in regular
classes, but the teachers union offers
evening sessions for pregnant girls and
young mothers to continue their education.
Juba, Central Equatoria State, February 2013.
Cattle rest in the countryside near the town
of Bor. In pastoralist communities, dowry is
largely paid in cattle, while agriculturalist
communities combine money with cattle or
other livestock. Customary practices attach
great social and economic importance to
dowry payment, and a husbands
consequent rights over his wife.
Bor, Jonglei State, February 2013
(opposite page, above) Migrant workers from
Tajikistan on a construction site in Krasnaya
Polyana, Sochi. Thousands of workers from
outside Russia and from other parts of Russia
have come have come to Sochi to work in
construction that is underway ahead of the 2014
Winter Olympic and Paralympic Games.
(opposite page, below) Alexander Mzokov, 59,
and his wife, Natalia, who lived with their sons
Yuri and Evgenii and eight of their relatives in a
three-story home in Sochi, learned in April 2012
that the authorities would demolish their home of
13 years to make way for a road providing
infrastructure for the 2014 Winter Olympic and
Paralympic Games in Sochi. Although the
Mzokovs had full legal title to the house and the
land on which it stood, the authorities sued them
for constructing an illegal structure, and on
appeal won a court order to demolish the house
without providing them fair compensation. The
house was demolished on October 4, 2012.
(above) Members of the Sochi branch of the
Russian Geographical Society conducting field
research in the Caucasus Mountains in Sochi.
The Society's Sochi branch has frequently
publicized information about the potential
environmental impacts of Olympic construction.
Numerous activists and journalists in Sochi have
faced harassment, pressure, and threats after
criticizing Olympics-related human rights abuses
and other concerns.
Residents of Kudepsta, Sochi, protest the
proposed construction in their mountain
village of what was projected to be the
worlds largest natural gas power station.
The plant was to be part of infrastructure
development in Sochi ahead of the 2014
Winter Olympic and Paralympic Games.
Before environmental review and other
legally required procedures were
completed, workers built a bridge, felled
trees, and erected a large fence at the
power plant site. Residents painted No to
the Kudepsta power station! on the bridge.
Residents fear pollution, property
devaluation, and devastation of the
landscape and the towns appeal as a
tourist destination.
UNFOLDING TRAGEDY
THE CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC
BY MARCUS BLEASDALE/VII FOR HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH
FOMAC peacekeepers confiscate
machetes from people who fled into the
FOMAC compound to escape fighting
between anti-balaka militias and former
Seleka forces.
Displaced people find shelter in a disused
factory at the Christian mission in
Bossangoa. Tens of thousands of people
have been displaced by the fighting between
Seleka and anti-balaka forces.
(above) Captain Wilson, from the Republic of Congo, stands in
the FOMAC peacekeeping compound. When heavy clashes
erupted in Bossangoa in December 2013, the captain rallied his
peacekeeping troops with remarkable speed, deploying them
around town to safeguard tens of thousands of displaced people
sheltering in the Catholic church and other sites.
(left) Residents of Bossangoa, Central African Republic,
lie on the ground of the compound of FOMAC, the regional
peacekeeping Multinational Force of Central Africa, on
December 5, 2013. The residents had fled from gunfire from
anti-balaka forces. FOMAC troops tried to protect people from
anti-balaka attacks in the town, which lies 300 kilometers
(190 miles) north of the capital, Bangui.
Anti-balaka fighters have recruited
and armed children in villages
surrounding Bossangoa.