PHOTO ESSAYS
The photo essays that follow focus on the experiences of
what appear to be three very different groups of people—
migrants and asylum seekers in Greece, people with
disabilities in Russia, and adults and children living in, and
working around, gold mines in Nigeria’s Zamfara State. Yet all
suffer from lack of legal protections and from a range of
abuses that impact their health, their full participation in
society, and other fundamental human rights.
A HEAVY PRICE
LEAD POISONING
AND GOLD MINING
IN NIGERIA’S
ZAMFARA STATE
BY MARCUS BLEASDALE/VII
FOR HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH
Since 2010, ongoing, widespread, acute lead
poisoning has killed at least 400 children in
Nigeria’s Zamfara State. The lead poisoning is a
result of artisanal gold mining: small scale mining
with rudimentary tools. It is considered the worst
outbreak of lead poisoning in modern history, with
more than 3,500 children requiring urgent, lifesaving
treatment. Fewer than half are receiving it.
Zamfara has significant gold deposits of gold.
Miners crush and grind ore to extract gold, and in
the process release dust that is highly contaminated
with lead. Children in affected areas are exposed to
this dust when they work in the processing site,
when their relatives return home covered with the
dust, and when the processing occurs at home.
Children are also exposed to toxic lead in contaminated
water and food sources.
A child works in the processing site at a gold mine in
Bagega, Nigeria. Seven villages in the Zamfara region have
been cleaned, but Bagega is still highly contaminated.
Amina Murtala, a Bagega resident, told
Human Rights Watch that three of her six
children died from lead poisoning. Lead
levels were measured at 23,000 parts per
million in Amina’s family compound. A safe
level is under 400 parts per million.
A mine worker crushes rocks in a flour
grinder in the process of extracting
gold. The dust is highly toxic and many
adults suffer the effects of lead
poisoning, ranging from swelling,
dizziness and vomiting to organ failure,
infertility, and death.
Children work in the processing site at a gold mine
in Bagega.
A man holds a piece of gold mined
and processed in Zamfara State.
BREAKING BARRIERS
THE DISABILITY RIGHTS
MOVEMENT IN RUSSIA
BY PLATON FOR HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH
Although people with disabilities in Russia have seen improvements
since the end of the Soviet era, they remain largely cut-off from
society. Public attitudes and a lack of legal protections create barriers
to equality that prevent them from fully participating in public life.
Human rights advocates hope that Russia’s ratification of the
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD) in May
2012 will hasten the end of widespread discrimination against 13
million Russian citizens with mental and physical disabilities. The
2014 Sochi Olympics will certainly be a major test, as Russia will host a
large number of people with disabilities as guests of the winter games
and the subsequent Paralympics.
Yulia Simonova
Yulia is a co-program director of the
inclusive education program at
Perspektiva, Russia's leading
disability capacity-building and
advocacy organization, holding
training sessions on disability
issues; inclusive education
workshops for teachers, parents
and activists; and disabilities
awareness classes for schoolchildren.
Yulia has taught 1,000
young people to be trainers on
disability issues for Russian
schools. She swims, rides
horseback, and loves driving.
Vanya (Ivan) Alexeev
Vanya’s mother is an active member of the Parents’ Group at
Perspektiva. Since early childhood, Vanya has taken part in many
public actions organized by Perspektiva to support people with
disabilities. Vanya has read all of the Harry Potter books and hopes
to write a sequel someday. He loves to play with his younger brother
and sister.
Yulia Averyanova
For two years, Yulia ran Perspektiva’s sports programs and now
remains a consultant with the organization. Yulia enjoys skiing,
ice-skating, and paragliding. She recently introduced a blind
friend of hers to the delight of downhill skiing.
Alexei Krykin
Alexei is an active participant in
Best Buddies Russia, a volunteer
movement that creates one-to-one
friendships for persons with
intellectual and developmental
disabilities. Together with his buddy
Ruslan, a university student, he
goes out to the movies, theater, and
soccer games. Alexei is active in the
“Theater of the Naïve,” an acting
program engaging people with
disabilities, and in an artisan
workshop making all sorts of arts
and crafts, including ceramics. He
plays the flute, enjoys listening to
music, and likes table tennis.
Vera Kocheshkova
and her mother Tatiana
In 2011, Vera graduated from a high
school for children with disabilities.
She is also active in Best Buddies
Russia. She enjoys helping her
mother around the house; they are
best friends. “A daughter’s smile
makes a happy mother,” says
Tatiana. “Nothing is more important
in life.”
GREECE
HATE ON
THE STREETS
BY ZALMAÏ
FOR HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH
Greece prides itself on its hospitality.
But while tourists are welcome, the country
has become decidedly inhospitable for
many foreigners over the past decade.
Migrants and asylum seekers may be
subject to detention in inhuman and
degrading conditions, risk destitution, and
suffer xenophobic violence at the hands of
gangs of Greeks who attack them in central
Athens and elsewhere in the country with
frightening regularity. Human Rights Watch
found that despite clear patterns to the
violence, and evidence that it is increasing
amid deep economic crisis and after years
of mismanaged migration and asylum
policies, the police have failed to respond
effectively to protect victims and hold
perpetrators to account.
Dozens of migrants and asylum seekers line up for a meal at
a soup kitchen on Sofokleous Street in central Athens.
I went to the police station two days later.... The
only thing they asked me is where are you from,
what happened....They told me, ‘Ok if we find
[them], we will call you, we will try.’ They didn’t
give me anything.
Ali Mohammadi, a 25-year-old Afghan asylum seeker,
said a police officer asked him why he had not
fought back when he filed a complaint after a group
of men attacked him in March 2011 in Aghios
Panteleimonas square in Athens.
Every time they pass here this
happens. Three days ago, they
came and were hitting the door
with their legs.… Today they broke
the window and the door. At first
they threw bottles and then they
broke the glass with stones and
threw stones inside and then they
started kicking the door…. They
wear black clothes and … hoods.
Razia Sharife, an Afghan asylum
seeker, stands in front of her home,
located in the Aghios Panteleimonas
neighborhood of Athens. Sharife’s
home was attacked numerous times,
including four times in January 2012
and once in April 2012.
They asked me first, ‘Where are you
from?’ I said, ‘Somalia.’ When I
answered they tried to take my
daughter away.... They hit me on my
head with a wooden stick.... I fell down
bleeding. When I fell down and they
saw I was bleeding they ran away.
My daughter was crying. All the people
[around at the time of the attack] they
were watching but nobody helped me.
I didn’t go to the hospital.... It didn’t
matter if I was hurt. I just thought
about the baby and my daughter.
Mina Ahmad, a 20-year-old Somali
woman, was attacked by a group of men
near the Aghios Panteleimonas church
in Athens in October 2011. She was with
her infant daughter and was six-months
pregnant at the time.