EXILED
BURMA’S DEFENDERS
by Platon
Burma is one of the most repressive and closed societies in the world, run by
generals since 1962. Longstanding human rights abuses by the government
include silencing of most of civil society, torture in prison, use of child
soldiers, forced labor, trafficking of women, and attacks targeting civilians in
ethnic minority areas. In May 2010, Human Rights Watch took leading portrait
photographer Platon to the Thai-Burma border to photograph former political
prisoners, civil society leaders, ethnic minority group members, journalists
and other people in exile from their country, Burma.
(left) A group of mine victims: Kio Say, 43;
Hsa Ka Twe, 15; Par Taw, 45. Burma is one
of the top remaining users of landmines
as part of long-running armed conflicts
with ethnic minority groups.
(opposite) Left to right: Ashin Sopaka,
Ashin Issariya, known as “King Zero,” and
U Teza. September 2007 saw the largest
popular protests against military rule in
Burma in nearly 20 years. Burmese
government security forces killed, beat,
tortured, and violently dispersed peaceful
protesters, including monks.
Democratic Voice of Burma broadcast journalists Thiri Htet San, 30, and Moe Myint Zin, 34. The DVB
is a satellite radio and television news service, with highly professional reporters who risk their lives
to report and record events inside Burma, and then to broadcast the news back into Burma and to
distribute it worldwide.
A medical student at the time, Win Min became a leader of the 1988 pro-democracy
demonstrations in Burma. He is now one of the driving forces behind an innovative
collective called the Vahu (in Burmese: Plural) Development Institute, which trains
Burmese civil society workers to work for development and peaceful change.
“WHERE IS THE JUSTICE?”
INTERETHNIC VIOLENCE
IN SOUTHERN KYRGYZSTAN
by Moises Saman/Magnum Photos
Zhura Payzulaeva cries as she
recounts how seven members of
her family were killed in the first
two days of ethnic clashes in Osh.
22-year-old Eliza Makeeve holds a
photograph of her late husband,
23-year-old Ulan Dzhoroev, an
ethnic Kyrgyz man killed by
gunmen during clashes that
started June 10 in the city of Osh.
Violence erupted on June 10 when hundreds of
Uzbeks gathered near a dormitory in the center of
Osh, Kyrgyzstan, allegedly in response to recent
scuffles between Uzbeks and Kyrgyz. Human
Rights Watch researchers working in southern
Kyrgyzstan from June 10 to 22 documented the
subsequent massive looting and destruction of civilian property and widespread
acts of violence by Kyrgyz and Uzbek mobs in the city of Osh and the towns of
Jalal-Abad and Bazar-Kurgan. While both ethnic Kyrgyz and Uzbeks fell victim to
the violence, Uzbek neighborhoods were particularly affected as mobs of ethnic
Kyrgyz, many of them reportedly from villages surrounding the city of Osh,
repeatedly attacked Uzbek areas.
(above) An ethnic Uzbek man walks
past the burned remains of a house
burned by mobs during ethnic clashes
in the southern Kyrgyz city of Osh.
(left) An ethnic Uzbek Kyrgyz woman
displays the burned remains of her
Kyrgyz passport and her and her son's
identity papers after Kyrgyz security
forces destroyed them during a security
operation in the village of Nariman.
WALLS AT EVERY TURN
ABUSE OF MIGRANT
DOMESTIC WORKERS IN KUWAIT
by Moises Saman/Magnum Photos
Kuwait has the highest ratio of domestic workers to citizens in the
Middle East. The country’s more than 660,000 migrant domestic
workers constitute nearly a third of the work force in this small Gulf
country of only 1.3 million citizens. But domestic workers are
excluded from the labor laws that protect other workers. They have
minimal protection against employers who withhold salaries, force
employees to work long hours with no days off, deprive them of
adequate food, or abuse them physically or sexually.
Workers continue to spend long periods waiting at
embassy shelters, including the Philippines safe house,
shown here. Workers reported spending weeks or
months in official custody, moving from embassy
shelters to police stations, and from there to criminal
investigation facilities, before they were sent to
deportation detention.
A recruitment agent stands with a group of Ethiopian
domestic workers as they waited for potential clients at an
agency office in the basement of a shopping center in the
Hawalli neighborhood of Kuwait. Women who leave
employers and return to recruitment agencies—either as
a result of their employer’s decision or their request—are
called “returns.”
(above) More than 200 women are packed in a
sweltering room in the Philippines Embassy, where
they sleep on their luggage. Other labor-sending
countries, including Sri Lanka, Indonesia, Nepal,
Ethiopia, and India, maintain shelters in Kuwait.
Most are equally, if not more, crowded.
(left) Gyanu, 21, came from Nepal to work as a
domestic worker in Kuwait. After leaving her
employers, she sought refuge inside a makeshift
shelter operated from a private house on the
outskirts of Kuwait City.
“HELLISH WORK”
EXPLOITATION OF MIGRANT TOBACCO WORKERS
IN KAZAKHSTAN
by Moises Saman/Magnum Photos
Every year, tens of thousands of migrant workers from Kyrgyzstan travel to the
Central Asian economic powerhouse of Kazakhstan in search of employment.
Thousands of these migrant workers, often together with their children, find work in
tobacco farming, where many are subjected to abuse and exploitation by employers
supplying tobacco to Philip Morris Kazakhstan, a subsidiary of Philip Morris
International, one of the world’s largest tobacco companies.
(above) A migrant worker from Kyrgyzstan sits
inside her makeshift house in the village of
Koram, Kazakhstan.
(opposite) A child migrant worker’s hands are
covered in tobacco residue after picking leaves on
a tobacco farm near Koram, Kazakhstan.
A migrant worker from Kyrgyzstan
picks tobacco leaves near the village
of Malybai, Kazakhstan.
LORD’S RESISTANCE ARMY
Since September 2008, at least 2,000 civilians have been killed and
nearly 3,000 others have been abducted during attacks by the Lord’s
Resistance Army (LRA). The LRA, a Ugandan rebel group, operates in the
border region between northern Congo, the Central African Republic and
south Sudan. Many of the victims, including children, were beaten to
death, had their skulls crushed or their heads sliced with machetes.
Abducted children are forced to kill their family members. Three of the
LRA’s leaders – Joseph Kony, Okot Odhiambo, and Dominic Ongwen –
are sought by the International Criminal Court under arrest warrants
issued in July 2005 for war crimes committed in northern Uganda. All
three remain at large and continue to commit atrocities.
Boniface, 14, spent six months as a rebel fighter
with the Lord's Resistance Army and was
released after the government Uganda Peoples’
Defense Forces (UPDF) attacked their camp.
(above) Marcelline, 15, was forced to
be the “wife” of an Lord’s
Resistance Army (LRA) commander.
She spent over a year with the LRA.
(left) Masua, 22, is a fisherman and
father of three children. He was
abducted by the Lord’s Resistance
Army (LRA) and used as a porter.
When he became too tired to
continue, LRA commanders forced
children to hit him with sticks until
he was left for dead.
(above) Olivier, 16, was abducted
in October 2009. He was forced
to witness and participate in
brutal attacks by the Lord’s
Resistance Army.
(right) Yoris was shot by the
Lord’s Resistance Army in August
2010 while returning from the
market on his bicycle.
An abandoned school lies on the outskirts
of Ango, northeastern Congo. People have
fled because of recent abductions and
killings by the Lord's Resistance Army.