UPRISING
PHOTOGRAPHS FROM THE ARAB SPRING
On December 17, 2010, a 26-year-old Tunisian man set himself ablaze
after abusive police confiscated his unlicensed vegetable cart, his only
source of income. This desperate act of protest inspired a movement
that swept the country and ignited calls for reform throughout the
region. Thousands of Tunisians took to the streets to denounce their
tyrannical government and, within weeks successfully ousted
President Zine el-Abidine Ben Ali from power. On January 25, 2011,
Egyptians came together by the thousands to launch a massive
pro-democratic movement that within 18 days ended President
Hosni Mubarak’s 30-year reign. Emboldened anti-government
protests quickly erupted in Jordan, Yemen, Algeria, Bahrain, Iran,
Iraq, Syria, Oman, and Libya.
EGYPT A crowd celebrates Mubarak’s resignation
in Tahrir Square, Cairo, on February 11, 2011.
© 2011 Yuri Kozyrev/NOOR for TIME Magazine
EGYPT Laila Said with Wael Ghonim. Laila is the mother of 28-year-old Khaled
Said, whose torture and murder by Egyptian police on June 6, 2010, helped to
spark the discontent that eventually led to the Tahrir Square protests and
President Hosni Mubarak's downfall. Laila, who spoke out about the murder
of her son, became known as the "Mother of Egypt," and as an emblem of the
consequences of endemic police torture and impunity. Wael is a Google
regional marketing executive who administered the "We are all Khaled Said"
Facebook page after the young man’s killing.
© 2011 Platon for Human Rights Watch
EGYPT Ramy Essam, 23, is a charismatic
singer, guitarist, and songwriter who
became famous during the Tahrir Square
protests as “The Singer of the Square.”
Detained and tortured by the Egyptian
military after President Hosni Mubarak
fell, Ramy has written “The Square,” an
album of songs based on his experiences
during and after the protests.
© 2011 Platon for Human Rights Watch
YEMEN A poster of Yemen’s President Ali Abdullah Saleh on a roof
of a house in the old city of Sanaa. After more than three decades
of autocratic rule, Saleh bowed to unrelenting street protests and
signed an agreement on November 23, 2011, to relinquish power
over three months.
© 2011 Yuri Kozyrev/NOOR for TIME Magazine
TUNISIA A protester rests during a day
marked by clashes with the police in Tunis
on January 21, 2011. The slogan behind him
reads: “Death to dictatorship.”
© 2011 Alex Majoli/Magnum
BAHRAIN The funeral procession of
anti-government protester Abdul Ridha
BuHameed in Malkiya on February 22, 2011.
BuHameed was shot in the head when
Bahraini military and security forces
attacked peaceful anti-government
demonstrators marching toward the Pearl
Roundabout, in the capital, Manama.
© 2011 Yuri Kozyrev/NOOR for TIME Magazine
SYRIA A cell phone image of Ismail Bakir who was
reportedly tortured and killed by Syrian security
forces while trying to cross the border with Turkey.
© 2011 Stanley Greene/NOOR
LIBYA A Libyan reacts while touring Libyan leader
Muammar Gaddafi’s massive Bab al-Aziziya
compound in central Tripoli, which opposition
fighters overran in August 2011.
© 2011 Yuri Kozyrev/NOOR for TIME Magazine