 PALAU
 Formerly a United Nations trusteeship administered by the United States, Palau
 became an independent nation in free association with the United States on October
 1, 1994. Under the Compact of Free Association, the United States is responsible
 for Palau's defense. An archipelago of more than 300 islands in the Western Pacific,
 Palau has a total land area of 188 square miles and is politically divided into 16
 states, more than two-thirds of its approximately 18,000 population resides in or
 near the capital, Koror.
 The democratically elected Government is modeled after that of the United States.
 The Constitution, which took effect on January 1, 1981, provides for free and fair
 elections, executive and legislative branches, and an independent judiciary. The leg-
 islature, the Olbil Era Kelulau, is composed of two equal houses, the 14-member
 Senate and the 16-member House of Delegates.
 Palau has no security forces of its own, aside from local police and other civilian
 law enforcement personnel, all of whom are under the firm control of civil authori-
 ties.
 With a household median income of $12,791, Palau is a medium income country
 with a small, market-based economy largely sustained by transfer payments from
 the United States. Nearly half the work force is employed by government entities.
 Tourism and other service sectors account for most other paid employment. Tuna,
 harvested by foreign operated fleets, is the dominant export. Several small-scale op-
 erations, employing foreign workers, assemble clothing for export from imported ma-
 terials. Most of the population still work in traditional subsistence agriculture and
 fishing.
 Traditional customs sustain a value system that distinguishes between people on
 the basis of social status and sex. The weakening of those customs, including the
 breakdown of the extended family and the increasing abuse of alcohol and other
 drugs, has contributed to violence against women and instances of child neglect, the
 
 
 principal human rights problems. Societal discrimination against certain foreign
 workers, who account for nearly one-fifth of the population and one-half of the paid
 work force, is also a serious probler.
 RESPECT FOR HUMA4 RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Kihling.-There were no reports of political or
 other extrajudicial killings.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution prohibits such practices, and there were no reports that officials
 employed them.
 Prison conditions meet minimum international standards, and the Government
 permits visits by human rights monitors.
 d. Arbitrary   est, Detention, or Exile.-The Constitution prohibits arbitrary ar-
 rest, detention, or exile, and the Government observes this prohibition.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The Constitution provides for an indpendnt judi-
 ciary, and the Government respects this provision in practice. The Government in-
 cludes an independent special prosecutor and an independent public defender sys-
 tm. The Constitution provides for the right to a fair trial, and an independent judi-
 ciary vigorously enforces this right.
 There were no reports of political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Constitution prohibits such practices, government authorities generally respect
 these prohibitions, and violations are subject to effective legal sanction.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of speech
 and of the press, and the Government respects these rights in practice. An inde-
 pendent press, an effective judiciary, and a functioning democratic political system
 combine to ensure freedom of speech and of the press, including academic freedom.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution provides for
 these rights, and the Government respects them in practice.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for freedom of religion, and the
 Government respects this righ-_t in practice.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foregn Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Constitution provides for these rights, and the Government re-
 spects them in practice.
 The Government has not formulated a policy regarding refugees, asylees, or first
 asylum and government practice remains undefined. However, there were no reports
 of forced expulsion of anyone having a valid claim to refugee status.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 The Constitution provides citizens with the right to change their government
 peacefully, and citizens exercise this right in practice through periodic, free, and fair
 elections held on the basis of universal suffrage.
 There are no legal mpediments to women participating in government and poli-
 tics. As a result of the October general elections, a women will take a seat in the
 Senate for the first time. Women hold office in 10 of the 16 state legislatures where
 they constitute 7 percent of the membership.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violation of Human Rights
 Palau has a history of openness to a variety of human rights groups without gov-
 ernment restriction. Government officials have met with representatives of these
 groups and foreign officials regarding the issues of civil rights of foreign minority
 workers. Government officials are generally cooperative and responsive to their
 views. The Palau Red Cross Society opened its office in April; the local society is
 seeking full membership in the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Cres-
 cent Societies.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution prohibits discrimination on the basis of sex, race, place of origin,
 language, religion or belief, social status or clan affiliation, and the Government
 generally respects these provisions.
 
 
 743
 Women.-There are occasional allegations of violence against women, mainly re-
 lated to domestic abuse. Alcohol and other drug abuse increasingly contribute to this
 problem. According to the Attorney General's Office, the Government's Public
 Health Office, and women's groups, only a few such cases are reported to the au-
 thorities every year, but many more are believed to go unreported. Although assault
 is a criminal offense, women are reluctant to prosecute their spouses.
 Inheritance of property and of traditional rank is matrilineal, with women occupy-
 ing positions of importance within the traditional system. Women are serving under
 presidential appointment as bureau directors for women's interests, human re-
 sources, and clinical services. No instances of unequal pay for equal work or sex-
 related job discrimination were reported to the Office of the Attorney General.
 Children.-The Government demonstrates its strong commitment to children's
 rights and welfare through its well-funded systems of public education and medical
 care. There is no societal pattern of abuse directed against children. Child prostitu-
 tion and female genital mutilation are neither accepted within the culture nor prac-
 ticed. There is no difference in the treatment of girls and boys in educational oppor-
 tunities offered in Palau, nor in availability of scholarships to attend postsecondary
 education abroad. Girls and boys receive equal treatment in health care services.
 Child abuse is thought to be uncommon, and there have been few child abuse
 prosecutions. While children's rights are generally respected, there were reports of
 several instances of child neglect, a byproduct of the breakdown of the extended
 family.
 People With Disabilities.-The National Code includes a Disabled Persons Anti-
 discrimination Act and a Handicapped Children Act. There were no reported in-
 stances of discrimination against the disabled. There are no building codes or legis-
 lation requiring access for the disabled. The public schools have established special
 education rograms to address problems encountered by those with disabilities.
 National RaciallEthnic Min'rities.-Non-Palauans are prohibited from purchas-
 ing land or obtaining citizenship. The rapidly ifncreasing numbers of foreign work-
 ers, who now represent nearly half the work force and over 20 percent of the popu-
 lation, are viewed negatively by a majority of the citizens. Foreign residents can be
 subject to some forms of discrimination and are targets of petty, and sometimes vio-
 lent, crimes as well as other random acts against person and property. There have
 been credible complaints by foreign nationals that the authorities do not pursue
 crimes against non-Palauans with the same vigor as crimes against nationals. Cer-
 tain nationalities are the focus of systemic discrimination in employment, pay, hous-
 ing, education, and access to social services, although such discrimination is prohib-
 ited by law. Instances of abuse of workers' civil rights are predominately found per-
 petrated against domestic helpers, bar girls, construction laborers, and other lower
 skilled workers, the majority of whom are from the Philippines, China, and Ban-
 gladesh. Foreign workers are often reluctant to seek legal redress for fear of losing
 thneir employment and, thus, their right to remain in the country.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Assocation.-The Constitution provides for the right of all persons
 to assemble peacefully or to associate with others for any lawful purpose, including
 the right to organize and to bargain collectively. There are no active employee orga-
 nizations.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Coilectively.-The Constitution does not
 provide for the right to strike, and the Government has not addressed this issue.
 There is no legislation concerning collective bargaining or trade union organizations,
 although there are no legal impediments to either. Wages in the cash economy are
 determined by market factors.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The Constitution prohibits slavery
 or involuntary servitude except to punish crime. There were reported instances of
 foreign workers, especially domestic helpers and unskilled laborers, being forced to
 do jobs different from those for which they were recruited. Freedom of foreign work-
 ers to leave employment situations not to their liking may be hindered by physical
 barriers and/or the withholding of passports and return tickets to their country of
 recruitment.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The Constitution states that the
 Government peall protect children from exploitation. There is no minimum age for
 employment. Children are not typically employed in the wage economy, but some
 assist their families with fishing, agriculture, and other small-scale family enter-
 prises. The law requires compulsory education for children between 6 to 14 years
 of age, and the Government generalay enforces this law.
 
 
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-There is no minimum wage law. However, the
 Foreign nvestment Law (which is being revised) states that foreign companies must
 pay a minimum wage equivalent to the lowest wage paid a government worker-
 2.75 per hour. This amount appears to be sufficient, given the level of economic
 development, to provide a worker and his family with a decent standard of living.
 Anecdotal evidence indicates that unskilled workers for commercial firms are paid
 only $1.50 to $2.00 per hour. However, foreign workers are usually provided, in ad-
 dition to their wages, basic accommodations and food at no or nominal cost. Al-
 though these wages are low, Palau continues to attract large numbers of foreign
 workers from the Philippines, China, and Bangladesh.
 There is no legislation concerning maximum hours of work, although most busi-
 nesses are closed on either Saturday or Sunday. The Division of Labor has prepared
 some regulations regarding conditions of employment for nonresident workers. The
 Division may inspect the conditions of the workplace and employer-provided housing
 on specific complaint of the employees, but actual enforcement is sporadic; working
 conditions vary in practice. There is no legislation specifically giving workers the
 right to remove themselves from situations which endanger their health or safety
 without jeopardy to their continued employment, and there is no legislation protect-
 ing workers who file complaints about such conditions.
