 PALAU
 Formerly a United Nations trusteeship administered by the United States, Palan
 became an independent nation in free association with the United States on October
 1, 1994. Under the Compact of Free Association, the United States is responsible
 for the Republic of Palau's defense. An archipelago of more than 300 islands in the
 Western Pacific, Palau has a total land area of 188 square miles and is organized
 politically into 16 states. More than two-thirds of its approximately 18,000 popu-
 lation resides in or near the temporary capital, Koror.
 The democratically elected Government is modeled after that of the United States.
 The Constitution, which took effect on January 1, 1981, provides for free and fair
 elections, executive and legislative branches, and an independent judiciary. The leg-
 islature, the Olbil Era Kelulau, is composed of two equal houses, the 14-member
 Senate and the 16-member House of Delegates. The judiciary is independent in
 practice.
 Palau has no security forces of its own, aside from local police and other civilian
 law enforcement personnel, all of whom are under the firm control of civil authori-
 ties.
 With a household median income of over $12,000, Palau is a medium income
 country with a small, market-based economy largely sustained by transfer payments
 from the United States. Nearly half the work force is employed by government enti-
 ties. Tourism and other service sectors account for most other paid employment.
 
 
 868
 Tuna, harvested by foreign operated fleets, is the dominant export. Several small-
 scale operations, employing foreign workers, assemble clothing for export from im-
 ported materials. Most of the population still work in traditional subsistence agri-
 culture and fishing.
 Traditional customs sustain a value system that distinguishes between people on
 the basis of social status and sex. The loosening ties of the extended family and the
 increasing abuse of alcohol and other drugs are major contributing factors that lead
 instances of domestic violence and child neglect. Societal discrimination against cer-
 tain foreign workers, who account for nearly 25 percent of the population and 43
 percent of the paid work force, is also a serious problem.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no reports of political or
 other extrajudicial killings.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution prohibits such practices, and there were no reports that officials
 employed them.
 Prison conditions meet minimum international standards, and the Government
 permits visits by human rights monitors.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The Constitution prohibits arbitrary ar-
 rest, detention, or exile, and the Government observes this prhibition.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The Constitution provides for an independent judi-
 ciary, and the Government respects this provision in practice. The judiciary com-
 p rises the Supreme Court, the National Court, and the Court of Common Pleas.
 Judges are appointed to the Supreme Court and National Court by the President
 from a list recommended by the Judicial Nominating Commission. Appointments are
 for life.
 The Government includes an independent special prosecutor and an independent
 public defender system. The Constitution provides for the right to a fair trial, and
 an independent judiciary vigorously enforces this right.
 There were no reports of political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Constitution prohibits such practices, government authorities generally respect
 these prohibitions, and violations are subject to effective legal sanction.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of speech
 and of the press, and the Government respects these rights in practice. An inde-
 pendent press, an effective judiciary, and a functioning democratic political system
 combine to ensure freedom of speech1 and ofthe press, including academic freedom.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution provides for
 these rights, and the Government respects them in practice.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for freedom of religion, and the
 Government respects this right in practice.
 d. Freedom of Moverent Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Constitution provides for these rights, and the Government re-
 spects them in practice.
 The Government has not formulated a policy regarding refugees, asylees, or first
 asylum and government practice remains undefined. However, there were no reports
 of forced expulsion of anyone having a valid claim to refugee status.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 The Constitution provides citizens with the right to change their government
 peacefully, and citizens exercise this right in practice through periodic, free, and fair
 elections held on the basis of universal suffrage.
 There are no legal impediments to women participating in government and poli-
 tics. As a result of the October 1996 general elections, a woman gained a Senate
 seat for the first time. Women hold office in 10 of the 16 state legislatures where
 they constitute 7 percent of the membership.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Palau has a history of openness to a variety of human rights groups without gov-
 ernment restriction. Government officials have met with representatives of these
 groups and foreign officials regarding civil rights of foreign minority workers. Gov-
 
 
 869
 ernment officials are generally cooperative and responsive to their views. The Palau
 Red Cross Society opened its office in April 1996; having satisfied all requirements,
 the society has applications pending for full membership in the International Fed-
 eration of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution prohibits discrimination on the basis of sex, race, place of origin,
 language, religion or belief, social status or clan affiliation, and the Government
 generally resects these provisions.
 Women.-There are occasional allegations of violence against women, mainly re-
 lated to domestic abuse. Alcohol and other drug abuse increasingly contribute to this
 problem. According to the Attorney General's Office, the Government's Public
 Health Office, and women's groups, only a few such cases are reported to the au-
 thorities every year, but many more are believed to go unreported. Although assault
 is a criminal offense, women are reluctant to prosecute their spouses.
 Inheritance of property and of traditional rank is matrilineal, with women occupy-
 ing positions of importance within the traditional system. Women are serving under
 presidential appointment as bureau directors for women's interests, human re-
 sources, and clinical services. No instances of unequal pay for equal work or sex-
 related job discrimination were reported to the Office of the Attorney General.
 Children.-The Government demonstrates its strong commitment to children's
 rights and welfare through its well-funded systems of public education and medical
 care. There is no societal pattern of abuse directed against children. Child prostitu-
 tion and female genital mutilation are neither accepted within the culture nor prac-
 ticed. There is no difference in the treatment of girls and boys in educational oppor-
 tunities offered in Palau, nor in availability of scholarships to attend postsecondary
 education abroad. Girls and boys receive equal treatment in health care services.
 Child abuse is thought to be uncommon, and there have been few child abuse
 prosecutions. While children's rights are generally respected, there were reports of
 several instances of child neglect, a byproduct of the breakdown of the extended
 family.
 People With Disabilities.-The National Code includes a Disabled Persons Anti-
 discrimination Act and a Handicapped Children Act. There were no reported in-
 stances of discrimination against the disabled. There are no building codes or legis-
 lation requiring access for the disabled. The public schools have established special
 education programs to address problems encountered by those with disabilities.
 National/Racial/Ethnic Minorities.-Non-Palaans are prohibited from purchas-
 ing land or obtaining citizenship. The rapid increase in the number of foreign work-
 ers, who now constitute nearly 25 percent of the population and 43 percent of the
 work force, is viewed negatively by a majority of citizens. Foreign residents can be
 subject to some forms of discrimination and are targets of petty, and sometimes vio-
 lent, crimes, as well as other random acts against person and property. There have
 been credible complaints by foreign residents that crimes against non-Palaans are
 not pursued or persecuted by authorities with the same vigor as crimes against
 Palaua nationals. Certain nationalities experience generalized discrimination in
 employment, pay, housing, education, and access to social services, although such
 discrimination is prohibited by law. While precise data are lacking, there continues
 to be anecdotal reports about instances of abuse of workers' civil rights perpetrated
 against domestic helpers, bar girls, construction laborers, and other lower skilled
 workers, the majority of whom are from the Philippines, China, and Bangladesh.
 The most common abuses identified are misrepresentation of contract terms and
 conditions of employment, withholding of pay or benefits, and sometimes physical
 abuse. In a number of instances, local authorities who often lack training and re-
 sources, have taken corrective action when alerted by social service and religious or-
 ganizations to whom foreign workers have turned for assistance. Nonetheless, for-
 eign workers are often reluctant to seek legal redress for fear of losing their employ-
 ment and, thus, permission to remain in the country.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The Constitution provides for the right of all persons
 to assemble peacefully or to associate with others for any lawfulpurpose including
 the right to organize and to bargain collectively. There are no active employee orga-
 nizations.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectiely.-The Constitution does not
 provide for the right to strike, and the Government has not addressed this issue.
 There is no legislation concerning collective bargaining or trade union organizations,
 
 
 although there are no legal impediments to either. Wages in the cash economy are
 determined by market factors.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The Constitution prohibits slavery
 or involuntary servitude except to punish crime. The law does not specifically pro-
 hibit forced and bonded labor by children, but such practices are not known to occur.
 There were reported instances of foreign workers, especially domestic helpers and
 unskilled laborers, being forced to do jobs different from those for which they were
 recruited. Freedom of foreign workers to leave employment situations not to their
 liking may be hindered by physical barriers and/or the withholding of passports and
 return tickets to their country of recruitment.
 d. Status of Child Labor Practices and Minimum Age for Employment.-The Con-
 stitution states that the Government shall protect children from exploitation and
 children are protected by the general constitutional prohibition against forced and
 bonded labor (see Section 6.c.). There is no minimum age for employment. Children
 are not typically employed in the wage economy, but some assist their families with
 fishing, agriculture, and other small-scale family enterprises. The law requires com-
 pulsory education for children between 6 to 14 years of age, and the Government
 generally enforces this law. By regulation no foreigner under the age of 21 may be
 admitted into Palau for employment purposes.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-There is no minimum wage law. However, the
 Foreign Investment Law states that foreign companies must pay a minimum wage
 equivalent to the lowest wage paid a government worker-$2.74 per hour. This
 amount appears to be sufficient, given the level of economic development, to provide
 a worker and his family with a decent standard of living. Anecdotal evidence indi-
 catesthat unskilled workers for commercial firms are paid only $1.50 to $2.00 per
 hour. However, foreign workers are usually provided, in addition to their wages,
 basic accommodations and food at no or nominal cost. Although these wages are low,
 Palau continues to attract large numbers of foreign workers from the Philippines,
 China, and Bangladesh.
 There is no legislation concerning maximum hours of work, although most busi-
 nesses are closed on either Saturday or Sunday. The Division of Labor has prepared
 some regulations regarding conditions of employment for nonresident workers. The
 Division may inspect the conditions of the workplace and employer-provided housing
 on specific complaint of the employees, but actual enforcement is sporadic; working
 conditions vary in practice. There is no legislation specifically giving workers the
 right to remove themselves from situations which endanger their health or safety
 without jeopardy to their continued employment, and there is no legislation protect-
 ing workers who file complaints about such conditions.
