 PALAU
 On October 1, 1994, Palau became an independent nation in free association with
 the United States. Previous to that time, Palau had been a U.N. Trusteeship admin-
 istered by the United States since 1947 pursuant to an agreement with the United
 Nations. Under the Compact of Free Association between the Republic of Palau and
 the United States of America, the United States is responsible for defense. An archi-
 pelag of more than 300 islands in the Western Pacific, Palau has a total land area
 of 188 square miles and is politically divided into 16 states, with more than two-
 thirds of its approximately 17 000 population residing in or near the capital, Koror.
 The democratically elected 6overnment is modeled after that of the United States.
 The Constitution, which took effect on January 1, 1981, provides for free and fair
 elections, executive and legislative branches, and an independent judiciary. The leg-
 islature, the Olbil Era Kelulau, is composed of two equal houses, the 14-member
 Senate and the 16-member House of Delegates.
 Palau has no security forces of its own, aside from local police and other civilian
 law enforcement personnel, all of whom are under the firm control of civil authori-
 ties.
 Palau is a medium income country with a small market-based economy largely
 sustained by transfer payments from the United States. Nearly half the work force
 is employed by government entities. Tourism and other service sectors account for
 most other paid employment. Tuna, harvested by foreign operated fleets, is the dom-
 inant exrt. Several small-scale operations, employing foreign workers, assemble
 clothing for export from imported materials. Most of the population still work in tra-
 ditional subsistence agriculture and fishing.
 Traditional customs sustain a value system that distinguishes between pople on
 the basis of social status and sex. The weakening of those customs, including the
 breakdown of the extended family and the increasing abuse of alcohol and other
 drugs, has contributed to violence against women and a few reported incidents of
 child neglect, the principal human rights problems. Secietal discrimination against
 certain foreigu workers, who account  or nearly one-fifth of the country's population
 and one-halff the paid work force, is also a serious problem.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicil Killing.-Ther were no reports of political or
 other extrajudicial killings.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution prohibits such practices, and there were no reports that officials
 employed them
 Prison conditions meet minimum international standards, and the Government
 permits visits by human rights monitors.
 
 
 690
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The Constitution prohibits arbitrary ar-
 rest, detention, or exile and the Government observes this prohibition.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The Constitution provides for an independent judi-
 ciary, and the Government respects this provision in practice. The Government in-
 cludes an independent special prosecutor and an independent public defender sys-
 tem. The Constitution provides for the right to a fair trial, and an independent judi-
 ciary vigorously enforces this right.
 There were no reports of political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Constitution prohibits such practices, government authorities generally respect
 these prohibitions, and violations are subject to effective legal sanction.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of speech
 and of the press, and the Government respects these rights in practice. An inde-
 pendent press, an effective judiciary, and a functioning democratic political system
 combine to ensure freedom of speech and of the press, including academic freedom.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution provides for
 these rights, and the Government respects them in practice.
 c. Freedom of Rel4gion.-The Constitution provides for freedom of religion, and the
 Government respects this right in practice.
 d. Freedom ofMovement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Constitution provides for these rights, and the Government re-
 spects them in practice.
 No formal government policy toward refugee/asylum requests exists, and govern-
 ment practice remains undefined. However, there were no reports of forcelexpul-
 sion of anyone having a valid claim to refugee status.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 The Constitution provides citizens with the right peacefully to change their gov-
 ernment, and citizens exercise this right in practice through periodic, free, and fair
 elections held on the basis of universal suffrage.
 There are no legal impediments to women participating in government and poli-
 tics. There are no women in the legislature but women have served in the Cabinet
 and the legislature in the past. A woman is the elected governor of 1 of the 16
 states.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violation of Human Rights
 While untested during the country's first year of independence, Palau has a his-
 tory of openness to a variety of human rights groups without government restric-
 tion. Government officials have met with representatives of these groups and foreign
 officials regarding the issues of civil ri hts of foreign minority workers. Government
 officials are generally cooperative and responsive to their views. Palau is seeking
 membership in the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Soci-
 eties and cooperation with the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC).
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution prohibits discrimination on the basis of sex, race, place of origin,
 language, religion or belief, social status or clan affiliation, and the Government
 generally respects these provisions.
 Women.-There are occasional allegations of violence against women, mainly re-
 lated to domestic abuse. Alcohol and other drug abuse increasingly contribute to this
 problem. According to the Attorney General's Office, the Government's Public
 Health Office, and women's groups, only a few such cases are reported to the au-
 thorities every year, but many more are believed to go unreported. Although assault
 is a criminal offense, women are reluctant to prosecute their spouses.
 Inheritance of property and of traditional rank is matrilineal, with women occupy-
 ing positions of importance within the traditional system. The President appointed
 a woman as director of the Bureau of Women's Interest in 1994 and generally in-
 cludes women on executive branch committees and task forces. No instances of un-
 equal pay for equal work or sex-related job discrimination were reported to the Of-
 fice of the Attorney General.
 Children.-The Government demonstrates its strong commitment to children's
 rights and welfare through its well-funded systems of public education and medical
 care. There is no pattern of societal abuse directed against children. Child prostitu-
 tion and female genital mutilation are neither acceptable within the culture nor
 
 
 691
 practiced. There is no difference in the treatment of girls and boys in educational
 opportunities offered in Palau, nor in availability of scholarships to attend post-
 secondary education abroad. Girls and boys receive equal treatment in health care
 services.
 Child abuse is thought to be relatively uncommon, and there have been few child
 abuse prosecutions. While children's rights are generally respected, there were re-
 ports of several instanes of child neglect, a byproduct of the breakdown of the ex-
 tended family.
 People With Disabilities..-The National Code includes a Disabled Persons Anti-
 discrimination Act and a Handicapped Children Act. There were no reported in-
 stances of discrimination against the disabled. There are no building codes or legis-
 lation requiring access for the disabled. The public schools have established special
 education programs to address problems encountered by those with disabilities.
 NationatRaciallEthnic Minorities.-Non-Palauans are prohibited from purchas-
 ing land in Palau or obtaining citizenship. The rapidly increasing numbers of for-
 eign workers, who now represent nearly half the work force and over 20 percent of
 the population, are viewed negatively by a majority of the citizens. Foreign residents
 can be subject to some forms of discrimination and are targets of petty crimes and
 random acts of violence. Certain nationalities are the focus of systemic discrimina-
 tion in employment, pay, housing, education, and access to social services, although
 such discrimination is prohibited by law. Instances of abuse of workers' civil rights
 are predominately found perpetrated against domestic helpers, bar girls, construc-
 tion laborers, and other lower skilled workers, the majority of whom are from the
 Philippines, China, and Bangladesh. Foreign workers are often reluctant to seek
 legal redress for fear of losing their employment and, thus, their right to remain
 in the country.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The Constitution provides for the right of any person
 to assemble peacefully or to associate with others for any lawful purpose including
 the right to organize and to bargain collectively. There are no active employee orga-
 nizations.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The Constitution does not
 provide for the right to strike, and the Government has not addressed this issue.
 There is no legislation concerning collective bargaining or trade union organizations,
 although there are no legal impediments to either. Wages in the cash economy are
 determined by market factors.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The Constitution prohibits slavery
 or involuntary servitude except to punish crime. There were reported instances of
 foreign workers, especially domestic helpers and unskilled laborers, being forced to
 do jobs different from those for which they were recruited. Freedom of foreign work-
 er- to leave employment situations not to their liking may be hindered by physical
 barriers and/or the withholding of passports and return tickets to their country of
 recruitment.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The Constitution states that the
 Government sha     rotect children from exploitation. There is no minimum age for
 employment of children. Children are not typically employed in the wage economy,
 but some assist their families with fishing, agriculture, and other small-scale family
 enterprises. The law requires compulsory edfucation for children ages 6 to 14, and
 the Government generally enforces this law.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-There is no minimum wage law. However, the
 Foreign Investment Law (which is being revised) states that foreign companies must
 pay a minimum wage equivalent to the lowest wage paid a government worker-
 $2.75 per hour. This amount appears to be sufficient, given the Palau level of eco-
 nomic development, to provide a worker and his family with a decent standard of
 living. Anecdotal evidence indicates that unskilled workers for commercial firms are
 paid only $1.50 to $2.00 per hour. However, foreign workers are usually provided,
 in addition to their wages, basic accommodations and food at no or nominal cost.
 Although these wages are low, Palau continues to attract large numbers of foreign
 workers from the Philippines, China, and Bangladesh.
 There is no legislation concerning maximum hours of work, although most busi-
 nesses are closed on either Saturday or Sunday. The Division of Labor has prepared
 some regulations regarding conditions of employment for nonresident workers. The
 Division may inspect the conditions of the workplace and employer-provided housing
 on specific complaint of the employees, but actual enforcement is sporadic; working
 conditions vary in practice. There is no legislation specifically giving workers the
 right to remove themselves from situations which endanger their health or safety
 
 
 692
 without jeopardy to their continued employment, and there is no legislation protect-
 ing workers who file complaints about such conditions.
