 PAPUA NEW GUINEA
 Papua New Guinea (PNG) comprises some 1,000 tribes and over 800 distinct lan-
 guages in a population of about 4 million. It has a federal parliamentary system,
 ased on universal adult suffrage with periodic free and fair elections, and an inde-
 pendent judiciary.
 The Government has constitutional authority over the armed forces (PNGDF), the
 Royal Papua New Guinea Constabulary (RPNGC), and intelligence organizations.
 Government security forces committed serious human rights abuses in 1995.
 Exploitation of such natural resources as minerals, hydrocarbons, and tropical
 timber generates significant export and tax revenues. However, 85 percent of the
 population reside in isolated villages and engage in subsistence and smallholder ag-
 riculture. For a majority of the citizens, income and literacy are at a low level, and
 infant and maternal mortality rates are high.
 The Government continued to place major emphasis on the resolution of the 6-
 year-old secessionist movement on the island of Bougainville. Following a cease-fire
 with the Bougainville Revolutionary Army (BRA) in September 1994 (which the
 BRA later repudiated), the number of human rights abuses associated with the con-
 flict dropped significantly. However, the BRA continued to launch sporadic attacks
 on government and civilian targets in 1995, despite a general amnesty offered by
 the Prime Minister in May. Both the Government and BRA forces continued to com-
 mit serious abuses, including extrajudicial killings and physical abuse. The Govern-
 ment promised to investigate some members of the armed forces for such abuses,
 but no results were released.
 Besides the conflict with the BRA, there continued to be credible reports that se-
 curity forces abused prisoners and detainees, sometimes resulting in death in cus-
 tody. The Government on occasion investigated alleged instances of abuse or pros-
 ecuted those believed responsible. Prison conditions remained poor, and the Govern-
 ment limits freedom of assembly. Extensive discrimination and violence against
 women, and ethnically motivated tribal violence remained serious problems.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial KIlling.-Security forces committed a number
 of extrajudicial killings, most often as a result of use of excessive force. In some in-
 stances, the authorities punished the officers responsible for such abuses.
 In August a joint police-PNGDF patrol shot and killed a student near the front
 gate of the University of Papua New Guinea in Port Moresby following a confronta-
 tion with a group of students. Reacting to student protests, the Prime Minister or-
 dered a proboe of the killing, but at year's end the results of the probe had not been
 made public. Following a police raid on a village in Western Highlands province in
 May, in July three members of a police mobile squad were charged with murder,
 andthe squad leader, an inspector, and two other policemen were charged with un-
 lawful assault. In March a court sentenced a police sergeant to 5 years of hard labor
 for the July 1994 death of a suspect while in police custody. In Bougainville two
 former BRA members and five village chiefs were sentenced to terms of 10 to 20
 years for the 1990 killing of a local villager. The PNGDF is believed responsible for
 the deaths of three youths and disappearance of another in Bougainville at the end
 of 1994. Although the PNGDF commander publicly prmised a full investigation in
 March, at year's end its progress was uncertain.
 The Government has not investigated previous security force atrocities in the Bou-
 gainville conflict or brought perpetrators to justice, thus perpetuating the climate
 of impunity. With the Prime Minister's announced general amnesty for BRA crimes
 in May, it is unlikely the Government will investigate past instances of abuse by
 the armed forces, the worst of which took place in 1989 and 1990.
 Despite the Government's general adherence to the September 1994 cease-fire,
 BRA insurgents continued to launch sporadic attacks against civilians and security
 forces, which resulted in several deaths. In February the BRA claimed responsibility
 for shooting at a commercial commuter aircraft as it was taking off from a local air-
 field; one passenger was killed and another wounded. A series of ambushes and
 raids in August left several security and progovernment militia force personnel
 dead. Two young boys abducted in one BRA raid were later killed (see Section 1.b.).
 
 
 b. Disappearance.-In January the brother of an ex-BRA commander disappeared,
 possibly the victim of a feud among rival militias. In March the BRA claimed that
 PNG security forces and progoverment militias were still abducting secessionists.
 A series of BR raids in August led to several abductions: two boys ages 9 and 11
 were taken from the Manetai Community School, and several civilians were missing
 following a BRA raid on the Stemas Care Center.
 The Government did not make public the results of its investigation into the dis-
 appearance of a youth in Bougainvile at the end of 1994 (see Section L.a.).
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution forbids torture and other cruel or degrading treatment or punish-
 ment. Nonetheless, some PNG soldiers and police, as well as BRA insurgents, con-
 tinued to engage in such practices.
 For example, the PNGDF admitted that soldiers on Bougainville in September
 mistreated a priest whom they wanted to question concerning the whereauts of
 a suspected ex-BRA member. The priest was struck with a blunt instrument and
 seriously injured. The PNGDF later denied claims that the priest had been refused
 medical attention and failed to indicate whether disciplinary action would be taken
 against those involved.
 The courts took action to address some instances of past abuse. For example, in
 January a court awarded a Mount Hagen province man approximately $20,000 in
 damages following its determination that the police had unjustifiably shot him in
 1992Ain another case, a court awarded approximately $300,000 to villagers in West-
 ern Highlands province for an illegal raid, conducted jointly by police and the
 PNGDF in 1991. In August a former Highlands police commander was found guilty
 of assaulting a woman and received a suspended 6-month sentence. The commander
 and four other senior police officers were suspended from the force pending inves-
 tigation of a coverup.
 The BRA committed a number of serious abuses, including beatings of villagers
 (see Section 1.g.). Prison conditions remain poor, and facilities are severely over-
 crowded and understaffed. Medical care is frequently lacking and one prison com-
 mander complained publicly in August that the Government had "seriously failed"
 to provide for the health care needs of prisoners throughout the country. The Cor-
 rectional Services Act of 1995 attempts to address correctional training needs, and
 the Government, with the assistance of foreign donors, conducted an in-service com-
 missioning course for noncommissioned officers in September. Prison visits are per-
 mitted and diplomatic officers on occasion made such visits.
 The Government also permits visits by human rights monitors, although none re-
 quested permission to do so in 1995.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The courts generally enforce constitu-
 tional protections against arbitrary arrest and detention. However, the protections
 have been weakened by the 1993 Internal Security Act (ISA) and amendments to
 existing anticrime legislation which no longer require judicially issued warrants
 when authorities suspect a person has committed an ISA offense or certain other
 offenses. Under 1993 amendments to the Bail Act and the Criminal Code, only Na-
 tional or Supreme Court judges may grant bail in certain criminal cases involving
 firearms. In all other cases, bail may e granted unless the judge rules otherwise.
 Those under arrest have the right to legal counsel, to be informed of charges, and
 to have their arrests subjected to judicial review.
 Given the relative shortage of police and judicial resources and an exceptionally
 h.igh crime rate, pretrial detention periods can be long, particularly in rural areas.
 However, pretriaremand is subject to strict judicial review through continuing pre-
 trial consultations, especially at the National Court level. Nonetheless, cases are fre-
 quently delayed for months awaiting the results of police investigations.
 The Constitution prhibits exile and it  s not practiced.
 e. Denial of Fair Public TriaL.-The Cohtitution provides for an independent Judi-
 ciary, and the courts are independent of executive, legislative, and military authori-
 ties. The legal system is based on English common law. The Supreme Court is the
 final court of appeal and holds original jurisdiction on Constitutional matters. The
 National Court hears most cases and appals from the lower district courts estab-
 lished at the provincial level. There are also village courts headed by lay persons,
 who judge minor offenses under both customary and statutory law.
 The Coaitution provides for due process, including a public trial, and the court
 system generally enforces these prvisions. Defendants have the right to an attor-
 ney. Legal counsel is provided either by the public solicitor's office or by the Law
 Society on recommendation of the public solicitor's office for those accused of serious
 offenses and unable to afford counsel. 'Serious offenses" are generally defined as fel-
 ony charges or any case heard in either the National or district court (as opposed
 
 
 694
 
 to the village or magistrate courts). Defendants and their attorneys may confront
 witnesses, present evidence, plead cases, and appeal convictions.
 There were no reports of political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-While
 the authorities generally respect privacy rights, police in the highlands have burned
 homes to quell mtertribal conflict and punish communities suspected of harboring
 suspected criminals. Some communities have sought redress through the courts. For
 example, in June the National Court in Mount Hagen awarded $42,000 to villagers
 for property damage resulting from a July 1993 police raid. Police continued to con-
 duct warrantless searches and seizures.
 g. Use of Excessive Force and Violations of Humanitarian Law in Internal Con-
 flicts.-Following the September 1994 cease-fire with the BRA, the armed conflict
 decreased significantly. However, the BRA later disavowed the cease-fire and contin-
 ued insurgent activities in 1995 (see Section L.a.).
 In July and August the BRA launched a series of ambushes and attacks against
 government-held areas in which members of the security forces, progovernment mi-
 litia, and civilians were killed or wounded, and property-including a newly con-
 structed district office building-was burned or destroyed. BRA members also
 blocked a church-sponsored peace march, firing shots to disperse marchers who had
 sought to enter BRA-held territory. In response, the Government threatened to ter-
 minate the cease-fire.
 Peace talks were held in September and December between representatives of the
 Bougainville Transitional Government and representatives of the BRA and its self-
 styled Bougainville Interim Government (BIG). Toward the end of the year, despite
 the peace talks, the level of violence began to rise, most-though not all-of the in-
 crease in violence was by the BRA. Several civilians and members of the security
 forces were killed, dampening hopes that the talks would lead to a peaceful resolu-
 tion of the 6-year-old crisis.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for free speech, in-
 cluding freedom of the media, and the Government generally respects this freedom
 in practice.
 The media provided independent coverage and analysis of major controversies, in-
 cluding the ongoing insurrection on Bougainville and the legal problems of senior
 government ministers.
 The two daily newspapers and the two weeklies-one of which began publishing
 in May--compete aggressively. One of the dailies is owned by a Malaysian firm,
 which has invested heavily in PNG's timber industry, the newspaper publishes little
 on the controversial subject. of logging and forestry but is generally independent
 and unbiased on other issues. The television-broadcasting company, EM-TV, is also
 independent. Journalists are required to obtain permission from the Defense Force
 commander before traveling to Bougainville.
 In one instance of censorship in July, the government media adviser instructed
 the National Broadcasting Commission (NBC) not to run a radio program on which
 a panel of prominent government critics were to discuss provincial government re-
 forms. The Prime Minister later defended this action, saying that the NBC's objec-
 tive was to promote national unity. Although the NBC receives its funding from the
 Government, it usually maintained an independent line in its news broadcasts.
 The courts occasionally tried citizens and foreigners under those provisions of the
 Censorship Act which ban the import, broadcast, or publication of materials deemed
 pornographic according to Papua New Guinea's rather strict Censorship Code. The
 usual sentence for violations is confiscation and destruction of restricted goods, al-
 though the courts can legally impose a fine of $17 or more, or a prison sentence of
 up to 2 years. In March the Censorship Board ordered newsstands to remove copies
 of Cosmopolitan and Cleo magazines as both had "gone against the nature of de-
 cency" in several of their issues.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-Private associations and public
 assemblies are legal. The Government does not require registration of associations.
 International affiliation of church and civic groups is also freely permitted. Public
 demonstrations require police approval; however, such permission is frequently de-
 nied on the grounds that such activities encourage bystanders to engage in vandal-
 ism and violence. Although denied such a permit in March, university students
 nonetheless conducted a demonstration against the proposed increase in par-
 liamentarians' electoral development funds. The Police Commissioner publicly
 warned that illegal demonstrations would not be tolerated and dispatched armed po-
 lice to the planned demonstration site. The students' march was conducted peace-
 
 
 695
 fully, and confrontation was avoided when the Government announced that it would
 receive the students' petition.
 c. Freedom of Relgon.-The Constitution contains provisions for freedom of reli-
 gion, and the Government respects them in practice.
 d. Freedom of Movement within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-PNG security forces no longer require travelers to Buka to obtain per-
 mits. Government approval is still required to travel to Bougainville for those not
 from the island. Otherwise, freedom of movement within and outside the country
 is not restricted. The Government has not applied sections of the ISA left standing
 by the Supreme Court which authorize the Government to exclude from any part
 of the country anyone convicted under the Act or likely to commit an offense under
 its provisions.
 The Government hosts around 9,000 refugees from Irian Jaya, the neighboring
 province of Indonesia. Approximately 6,000-many of whom have land or kinship
 ties with Papua New Guineans-live along the border just inside Papua New Guin-
 ea. While Papua New Guinea recognizes Irian Jaya as an integral part of Indonesia,
 the Government nonetheless grants asylum to qualified refugees. There were no
 known forced repatriations of Irian Jayans to Indonesia. The Government continued
 to cooperate with the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees to manage the remain-
 ing 3,600 refugees remaining in the camp at East Awin.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens freely exercise the right to change their government through direct elec-
 tions with a secret ballot and universal adult suffrage. The voters elect a unicameral
 Parliament made up of 109 members from all 19 provinces and the Port Moresby
 National Capital District. Any citizen can stand for election, and several foreign-
 born citizens sit in Parliament. With a multiplicity of small parties, coalition govern-
 ments tend to be weak and shifting;, none has yet survived its 5-year electoral man-
 date. The next general election will be held in 1997.
 Although there are no legal barriers to their participation in political life, women
 are underrepresented in senior positions in government and politics. There are no
 women in the Cabinet or in Parliament.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 There are no official barriers to the formation of human rights groups in Papua
 New Guinea. While the PNG Association for Human Rights, formed in 1992, has
 been relatively inactive, the Individual and Community Rights Advocacy Forum, a
 nongovernmental organization (NGO), became increasingly active in 1995. It con-
 centrated its efforts on human rights and the environment. NGO's exercised their
 right to comment on human rights issues in the media without any known govern-
 mental interference or retribution. An NGO-sponsored "parallel forum," conducted
 in Madang in conjunction with the 16-nation South Pacific Forum in September, dis-
 cussed human rights issues in Irian Jaya. Although initially the organizers were de-
 nied a permit to demonstrate, permission was later granted.
 The Government continued its consideration of forming an independent human
 rights commission which would investigate abuses on Bougainville and elsewhere,
 or alternatively, having such abuses come under the jurisdiction of the existing Om-
 budsman Commission. While the Ombudsman Commission has devoted its efforts
 to investigating official corruption, its charter already is sufficiently broad to inves-
 tigate discrimination and human rights abuses. At year's end the Government an-
 nounced that it was creating a human rights commission.
 Based on his representative's fact-finding visit to the area, the U.N. Secretary
 General concluded that human rights violations had substantially decreased since
 the September 1994 cease-fire, and he decided not to appoint a special representa-
 tive to investigate abuses. The U.N. Human Rights Commission adopted a resolu-
 tion noting favorably the actions taken so far toward peace; expressing concern that
 the BRA had not participated in the October 1994 peace conference on Bougainville;
 and urging all parties to pursue a dialog towards a cessation of hostilities, restora-
 tion of peace, and promotion of human rights. The Government invited the Commis-
 sion to visit PNG. In October BRA leaders rejected a visit by the U.N. Special
 Rapporteur on Summary Execution who had traveled to PNG at the invitation of
 the Government.
 
 
 696
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution provides for equal protection under the law irrespective of race,
 tribe, place of origin, political opinion, color, creed, religion, or sex. Despite these
 constitutional and other legal guarantees, women often face discrimination.
 Extreme ethnic and geographic diversity prevents any one tribe or clan from
 dominating the country.The democratically elected government, based on loose coa-
 litions, has consistently avoided favoring one group over another.
 Women.-Violence against women, including domestic violence and gang rape, is
 a serious and prevalent problem. While ostensibly protected by their families and
 clans, women are nonetheless often victims of violence and force. Traditional village
 deterrents are breaking down, and the number of reported cases of rape in some
 areas is rising. Although rape is punishable by imprisonment, and sentences are
 handed out when assailants are found guilty, few assailants are apprehended. Do-
 mestic violence such as wife-beating is also common but is usually viewed by police
 and citizenry alike as a private family matter. Violence committed by women
 against women frequently stems from domestic problems, and, where polygynous
 marriages are still customary, there has been an increase in the number of women
 charged with the murder of another of their husbands' wives.
 The Constitution and laws have provisions for extensive rights for women dealing
 with family, marriage, and property issues. Some women in the modern sector have
 achieved senior positions in the professions, business, and civil service. Nonetheless
 traditional patterns of discrimination against women persist. Despite constitutional
 and legal provisions, most women, even those in urban areas, are considered second-
 class citizens. Village courts tend to enforce traditional attitudes and values that op-
 press both women and youth. For example, village court justices tend to be overly
 severe on women by imposing jail terms on those found guilty of adultery, while pe-
 nalizing men lightly or not at all. Circuit-riding national court justices frequently
 annul such village court sentences. Polygyny, a customary practice among some soci-
 eties particularly in the Highlands, and the custom of paying bride-price serve to
 reinforce a view of women as property.
 Both the Government and public organizations are working to improve the status
 of women but have had limited results. The Government provides a grant to the Na-
 tional Council of Women and has instituted an Office of Women's Affairs in the De-
 partment of Youth, Home Affairs, and Reli on.
 Children.-The Government did not dedcate significant resources to protect the
 rights and welfare of children. More than 40 percent of the population is under the
 age of 16. In PNG's traditional clan system, children are generally cared for within
 the extended family, in accordance with financial resources and the tribe's access
 to services. Because of the geographic isolation and remoteness of many villages,
 malnourishment and infant and maternal mortality rates are very high. Although
 statistics are not available, welfare officers believe that child abuse is increasing as
 village life and the extended family give way to the influences of modern society.
 Most programs to protect and develop youth are operated by NGO's and religious
 organizations. Many government programs are severely underfunded.
 People With Disabilities.-Through the National Board for the Disabled, the Gov-
 ernment provides limited funding to more than a dozen NGO's that provide services
 to the disabled. The Government does not provide direct programs or services. Serv-
 ices and health care for the disabled, except for that provided by the traditional
 family and clan system, do not exist in several of the country's provinces. No legisla-
 tion mandates accessibility for the disabled.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The right to form and join labor unions is protected
 by law, subject to registration by the Department of Labor. While the Government
 does not use registration as a form of control over unions, an unregistered union
 has no legal standing with the Department of Labor or before the courts and, ac-
 cordingly, cannot operate effectively. Unionized workers account for about one-half
 of the 250,000 wage earners in the formal economy and are organized into some 50
 trade unions. Most of the unions representing private-sector workers are associated
 with the Trade Unions Congress. Unions are independent of the Government and
 of political parties. They may freely affiliate with international organizations.
 Both public- and private-sector unions exercised their legal right to strike in 1995.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The Constitution provides for
 the right to engage in collective bargaining and to join industrial organizations.
 These rights are exercised freely. The Government did not take action to amend a
 law criticized by the International Labor Organization in 1994 which gives the Gov-
 ernment discretionary power to cancel arbitration awards or declare wage agree-
 
 
 ments void when they are contrary to government policy. Antiunion discrimination
 by employers against union members and organizers is prohibited by law. The De-
 partment of Labor and Employment and the courts are involved in dispute settle-
 ment. Wages over and above the minimum wage are set through negotiations be-
 tween employers and employees or their respective industrial organizations.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The Constitution forbids slavery
 and all forms of forced or compulsory labor, and there were no reports of such prac-
 tices.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The minimum working age, as es-
 tablished in the Employment Act, is 18 years. However, children between the ages
 of 11 and 18 may be employed in family related work provided they have parental
 permission, a medical clearance, and a work permit from a labor office. Such em-
 ployment is rare, except in subsistence agriculture.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-Minimum wages for the private sector are set
 by the Minimum Wage Board, a quasi-governmental body with worker and employer
 representation. A 1992 determination reduced the minimum wage for newly hired
 urban workers significantly, to equal the minimum wage for rural workers. The
 minimum wage of about $17.00 per week (kina 22.96) would not support a decent
 standard of living for a worker and family who exist solely on the cash economy.
 The Department of Labor and Employment and the courts take steps to enforce the
 minimum wage law, but enforcement is not effective because of the lack of re-
 sources. The depreciation of the kina against the U.S. dollar, about 30 percent since
 September 1994, has reduced the real wage received by most workers. Minimum
 wage levels, allowances, rest periods, holidays, leave, and overtime are regulated by
 law. The workweek is limited by law to 42 hours (44 in rural areas). The law pro-
 vides for at least one rest period of 24 consecutive hours in every week.
 Enforcement of the Industrial Health and Safety Law and related regulations is
 the responsibility of the Department of Labor and Employment. The law requires
 that inspections take place on a regular basis, but, due to a shortage of inspectors,
 they occur only when requested by workers or unions. The ability of workers to re-
 move themselves from hazardous conditions varies by workplace. Where workers are
 unionized, there is some measure of protection in such situations.
