 PAPUA NEW GUINEA
 Papua New Guinea, with some 1,000 tribes and over 800 distinct
 languages, is one of the world's most diverse societies. It
 has a federal, parliamentary system based on universal adult
 suffrage. Its Constitution is similar to that of other
 English-speaking parliamentary democracies, and it emphasizes
 respect for individual rights, especially traditional
 landholding.' The four transfers of power since independence
 in 1975 have been constitutional and peaceful.
 The Government controls the military, police, and intelligence
 organizations.
 The economy includes a modern free enterprise sector heavily
 dependent on foreign investment and a traditional subsistence
 sector that involves the vast majority of the population. The
 modern sector produces most of the wealth and slightly less
 than 80 percent of state revenue, with the balance made up by
 aid from Australia. Papua New Guinea has experienced
 difficulty in accommodating traditional land claims while
 trying to develop its rich natural resources.
 The dominant factor in the human rights situation in 1990 was
 the insurrection in the North Solomons Province of
 Bougainville and government actions in response (see Section
 l.g.). The nature of the conflict--a small, inadequately
 trained and poorly disciplined security force attempting to
 quell a local insurgency--has had serious consequences for the
 human rights of the Bougainville population and has placed a
 severe strain on the democratic institutions and economy of
 Papua New Guinea. Extrajudicial killings were committed by
 both government forces and insurgents. Security forces
 detained suspected sympathizers for up to 1 month without
 charge or trial. They and other detainees were often
 mistreated and tortured by security forces; insurgents also
 tortured civilians.
 Elsewhere in Papua New Guinea, the country's network of
 democratic social and political institutions serves to protect
 a range of civil and political rights, but police abuses
 appear to be growing.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing
 From early in the year, when fighting intensified on
 Bougainville, until March, when security forces were
 withdrawn, there were at least 19 reported cases of political
 or extrajudicial killing by security forces. During early
 January, news emerged of two such killings in late 1989 by
 security forces: that of Vincent Onari, who was beaten and
 shot on November 24,.1989, and Aloysius Minitong, who died in
 jail on December 28, 1989, after repeated torture. On January
 6, a soldier shot and killed a Bougainvillean mother and her
 child. Early in February, four Sipuru villagerfs were reported
 to have been shot dead by security forces after being
 tortured. At about the same time four persons, reported to
 have been innocent villagers, were shot as suspected
 insurgents in Buka. On February 14, soldiers reportedly
 detained and shot a United Church pastor, Raumo Benito, and
 
 
 PAPUA NEW GUINEA
 five of his.parishioners, subsequently dropping their bodies
 from a helicopter into the sea. A parliamentary report in
 March,-based on hospital records, revealed five other cases in
 which-the security forcesapparently killed detainees.
 The insurgents, known-as the Bougainville Revolutionary Army
 (BRA), also committed many extrajudicial killings. According
 to news reports, six persons, including four wardens, a
 civilian, and a young girl-were killed during a.BRA attack on
 the Kuveria jail on Bougainville on January 17.- A British
 citizen was killed by the BRA at Panguna airstrip on January
 24-% A report in April listed four men as having been
 summarily shot by their BRA captors.
 The special Papua New Guinea (PNG).Parliamentary Commission on
 the State of Emergency- on Bougainville conducted an
 .investigation in'February of allegations of human rights
 abuseaby security forces, including a visit to Bougainville
 ,by Commission members. The Chairman of the Commission
 criticized the killings, telling Parliament he was convinced
 that "only a minority" of the members of the security forces
 were involved. .,While the killings and -mistreatments were not
 officially condoned, security forces had not received-the
 training and discipline which could have prevented such
 abuses.- There were -in-fact several calls by security forces
 commanders for a tightening of discipline and an-end to- the
 abuses. and formal charges of manslaughter were brought
 -against the soldier who killed the mother and child in
 January. In February the Minister of Defense (who had ordered
 a probe into the reported killing of six persons in the
 helicopter incident-referred to above), the Controller of the
 State f-Emergency, and the head of the national police all
 issues warnings- to their forcesnthut tfrose. who committed
 violations of rights would be punished. - The Commander of the
 Papua New Guinea-Defence Forced (PNGDF) also joined in this
 warning.- A PNGDF-major was placed on a 1-year good behavior
 bond in November for unlawfully wounding a civilian. Court
 proceedings were opened in Rabaul to. prosecute 114 alleged
 breaches of constitutional rights during the fighting on
 Bougainville and any others that might arise as government
 forces move to pacify Buka and possibly make incursions into
 Bougainville. The Rabaul court was reported attempting to
 move the hearings to Buka to improve the collection of
 complaints and evidence. Most of the cases were still in
 abeyance at year's end because ofthe difficulty of collecting
 witnessesand evidence from.BRA-controlled Bougainville.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances
 perpetrated by the Government or its forces. Due to-
 communications difficulties with Bougainville, allegations of
 disappearances attributable to the BRA could not be verified.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 Although torture and other cruel or degrading. treatment or
 punishment are forbidden by the Constitution, security forces
 tortured,-beat, or mistreated detainees on;Bougainville. The
 struggle.degenerated into a downward cycle of attacks on
 innocent persons and, according to local tradition, "payback"
 attacks by tribal friends of the victims on the security
 forces. Among the cases of security forces abuse, that of
 Nihai.Moseka, a farmer from the Siwai district of Bougainville,
 
 
 992
 PAPUA NEW GUINEA
 stood out. Kidnaped by militants, he was recaptured and
 interrogated by security forces. When the latter were unable
 to find a rebel arms cache Moseka directed them to, he was
 severely beaten. There were other similar reports, including
 that of a Bougainvillean man who was kidnaped and beaten by
 soldiers in Port Moresby. In addition; following the return
 of security forces to Buka in September, there were credible
 reports that some suspected BRA members were beaten.
 Amnesty International (AI) repeatedly voiced its concern over
 torture and other abuses, and domestic -commentators remarked
 on the effect of abuses by the security forces on Bougainville,
 in driving young men into the ranks of insurgency. AI
 reported that the security forces subjected suspected BRA
 sympathizers, including entire conmunities in areas of alleged
 BRA activity, to--intimidation and random beatings, death
 threats, sexual harassment, house burnings, and destruction of
 other property.
 Charges of abuses were also made against the BRA: the beating
 of a reporter from the country's leading newspaper; the
 expulsion of non-Bougainvilleans; and reports that lawlessness
 continued behind the silence imposed on the island of
 Bougainville by the Government's blockade, interruption of
 communications, and denial of services. There were credible
 reports that the BRA committed acts of violence, including
 murder and possibly torture of civilians suspected of being
 informers.
 Police, too, in Bougainville and elsewhere, were accused of
 beatings and rape.. A staff assistant to a Member of
 Parliament was beaten by police, taken to a police station,
 and beaten again after accidentally bumping into a policeman
 while leaving a shop in Port Moresby, despite his prompt
 apology. The policeman was later charged. In another
 incident, a woman was pursued by.men in an unmarked van. When
 she appealed-to police in a patrol car, she was abused and
 severely beaten by policemen who emerged'from the van. In
 East Sepik Province and Lae, policemen were formally charged
 with rape. There are credible reports that, in responding to
 the virtually constant tribal warfare of the highlands, mobile
 police squads have engaged in instances of rapes, beatings,
 slaughter of livestock, and burning of houses.
 The press and churches watch carefully over prison treatment
 of the large convict population that the country's high crime
 rate has produced. Abuses by police may be reported to and
 investigated by the Ombudsman Commission, and courts often
 award damages and mete out punishment as appropriate in such
 cases. An increase in the number of cases of mistreatment has
 accompanied an increasing crime rate.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Except for those in Bougainville discussed in Sections 1.a.
 through 1.c., no cases of politically motivated arrests
 occurred. AI reported that in some of those cases persons
 suspected of sympathizing with the BRA were held without trial
 for periods of up to 1 month. An effort in 1989 by some
 officials to obtain an internment law that would permit
 holding suspected BRA members on Bougainville for up to 2
 months without trial was never adopted. The courts, which are
 based on the Australian system and English common law,
 strongly enforce constitutional protectipns against arbitrary
 arrest and detention. Exile is not practiced, and warrants
 
 
 PAPUA NEW GUINEA
 are required for arrests. Suspects have the right to legal
 counsel. 4Both in law and practice, accused persons are,
 informed of charges, and their arrest is subject to judicial
 review.-.They have-the.right to bail, except in cases where
 judges rule that kisk of flight or further violence requires
 continued confinement-.
 --e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 There were no-cases of denial of fair public trial. The court
 system is similak to those in other countries ~wth English-
 commbn. law traditions. The-law guarantees a.public trial; and
 due process rights are provided for in the Constitution.
 Defendants have the right to an attorney, at public expense in
 felony~cases involving violence. The defendanand his or-her
 attorney can-confront witnesses,.present-evidence,-plead their
 cases,,and.appeal convictions. Given the lack of police and
 judicial-resources and an exceptionally high crime rate,.
 periods between arrest and trial can'be long. Sucly-detention
 issubject to'strict judicial review, however, and a prisoner
 may not:be-held without trialifor more.than 6 months. -The
 courts are'completely independent of executive.-political,-or.
 military authorities;'and there are no'political prisoners.
 Corruption~and the Bbugainvillecrisis-have eroded the ability
 of the police to-investi~ate.abuses and- of-the judiciary to
 try offenders.   In the tase of the Bougainville crisis, the
 Chief Justice commented in 1989 that anyone whose human rights
 had been abusedby-the.Government might claim the court's
 protection. When queried by Al in January, he admitted
 receiving letters from abroad about abuses and said he had
 made inquiries with the Justice Minister'about them. In the
 absence of.,aresponse;- the Chief Justice said ;he-could not-
 launch an inv~stigation but had made complaint-forms available
 in all.cotrthotses and had-had them published in--the press for
 those-vwho-might fear to-obtain them from -ecourthouse. A
 SupremdeCourt Justice charged on his retirement in December
 1989 that:the courts- were not fulfilling their obligation to-
 investigate-human rights abuses.
 .,f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 -   Correspondence
 While privacy rights -are not widely abused, there were
 continued reports of burning of homes by police in the
 highlands to quell endemic tribal warfare. Operations on
 Bougainville also led to abuses. In-addition to burning-homes
 in villages thought to be sympathetic to the BRA, there were
 also reports of forcible entry into homes- by the security-
 forces. ThemGovernment appointed an 8-member team to assess
 the amount of compensation that should be -aid for the losses
 sustained by the population.
 g. -'Use of Excessive Force and Violations of Humanitarian
 Law in Internal Conflicts
 Armed conflict on Bougainville erupted in 1989 as a result of
 long-term secessionist sentiment compounded by unmet
 compensation demands by landowners against the operators of
 the Bougainville copper mine at Panguna. A government
 offensive in January-failed, leading to a cease-fire agreement
 and withdrawal of troops in March, followed by the imposition
 of a total blockade and cutoff of services to the island in
 May. Current government efforts center on peace talks,
 restoration of supplies and service, and. gradually reasserting
 
 
 PAPUA NEW GUINEA
 government authority where possible, as on Buka Island just to
 the north of Bougainville.
 The security forces early turned to the tactics of blockading
 areas and burning villages thought to shelter BRA insurgents,
 resettlement of persons from the areas of conflict to
 government camps, and harsh reprisals against those thought to
 sympathize with the rebels. Roads were cut off, and food and
 fuel supplies were not allowed to pass. There were few
 reports of prisoners bring taken, except for such cases as
 suspected BRA supporters discussed in Sections 1.a. and l.c.
 The BRA responded in kind, with kidnaping, torture, and murder
 of suspected government informers.
 In February there were reports of government use of chemical
 weapons against villagers in the Kongara Valley, one of the
 areas of the heaviest fighting. The Government denied the
 allegation, and there is no evidence that lethal chemical
 agents were used. The blockade imposed on the island of
 Bougainville following the removal of security forces also had
 harsh effects on the population, including: total cutoff of
 telecommunications, mail, food imports, and medical and other
 supplies. Malnutrition that already existed on parts of the
 island. isolated earlier by counterinsurgency operations
 .reportedly worsened. After peace talks ended in August, the
 Government attempted to ameliorate conditions by airdropping 2
 tons of-medical supplies on Bougainville.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 The Constitution provides for freedom of speech, including
 freedom of the broadcast media and publications. An
 independent press, an effective judiciary, and a functioning
 democratic political system have combined to promote freedom
 of speech and press. These freedoms were threatened in 1990,
 however,cas politicians made increasingly vocal attacks on
 them and as a new censorship law came into effect. In
 February and March, when government forces were being defeated
 on Bougainville, the Minister of Justice demanded restrictions
 on the freedom of foreign-owned media (the major newspapers,
 television, and radio are Australian owned) to report about
 the Bougainville crisis. The Minister of Communications
 threatened to reintroduce a "media bill" in Parliament,
 restricting journalists and banning them from Parliament. The
 political opposition charged that the leading news daily and
 its editor personally imposed a "blackout" on opposition views
 on such major national issues-as Bougainville, law and order,
 and the economy. In February a reporter was expelled for
 reporting about alleged government use of chemical weapons on
 Bougainville. In August the Minister of Trade and Industry
 called for state ownership and control of the media, and
 listed the media among those industries strategic to the
 country's development in which foreigners'should not be
 allowed to invest. The Minister based his proposal on the
 adverse publicity Papua New Guinea was receiving at home and
 overseas about deteriorating law and order problems, which he
 believed to be frightening away investors. That proposal
 received a strong rebuff from the Prime Minister, who denied
 that the Government wanted to control or own the media, and
 characterized the Trade Minister'8 view as "personal."
 In July the Classification of Publication (Censorship) Act of
 1989 came into effect, considerably tightening previous
 
 
 995
 PAPUA NMI GUINEA
 censdr~hip regulations by requiring inspection, approval
 labeling, and registration of all films, video and audio
 cassettes, and publications by government censors.before they
 could be distributed. According to the Government, the law is
 aimed'at efiminating violent and pornographic material.
 Educational'books, news, and current affairs-materials were
 not t6,be affected,"according to the chief censor. The law
 was assailed- ublicly by a television official for its-threat
 of possible  dlitical censorship. Its practical-effect'is as
 yet unclear. Press freedom remained robust.
 Academic freedom is generally respected. However, in October
 the University administration banned all expatriate faculty
 memb~rA frot producing any material critical 'of government
 activity.  ",  '  . . *"                   -
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Private associations and public assemblies are-legal.
 Assodiations do not require registration, but they may
 voluntar'ily.incorporate if they wish to raise funds.
 Interna tional-ffiliati6n, as of church and-civic groups; is
 also"pdfmitted: Demonstrations require'-police approval, but
 this is rarely deftiidor-limited; when it is, it is usually an
 effort'to-preserve order in the)face of high local-tensions
 rather:than'to suppress particular views.
 c. Freedom of Religion        -'-
 There are no restrictions'on- and no discrimination against the,
 practice of;religion, iihich is protected by law. Many      .
 indigenous and Christian denominations flourish. There are
 also small Buddhist and Muslim minorities. Missionaries, who
 work hnd m6 e freely throughout Papua New Guinea, provide the
 major portion of social services in many remote areas.
 d. Feedom of Movembht Within the Country, Foreign
 -Travel, Emigratibn, and Repatriation
 The only ieal restriction-on freedom of movement is the
 Bolgainville blockade, in effect since May, which cut off
 travel and-communication-to  id'frot that island, and the
 resettlement of villagers there'during the conflict. Freedom
 of movement within and outside the country is not restricted
 by law. While the Government continued to host about 7,500
 refugees frbm Irian Jaya in cooperation with the U.N. High
 Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR),'it has implemented stricter
 border controls and increased restrictions on members of the -
 Organisesi Papua Merdeka (Free Papua Movement, or OPM).
 The Government extradited an OPM leader and threatened to turn
 over others who cboperate with the OPM, reaffirming its policy
 not to permit PNG territory to be used as a base for OPM
 operations against-neighboring Indonesia.* The Government
 continuet-to work with the UNHCR and the Indonesian Government
 to encourage voluntary repatriation, but new legitimate
 refugees continued to be accepted by Papua New Guinea. The
 UNHCR reports that the Government'now allows the local
 settlement of Irian Jayans, and therefore the UNHCR is putting
 resources-into self-sufficiency projects worth $1.2 million in
 1991 for some 6,000 persons in East Awin.
 
 
 996
 PAPUA NEW GUINEA
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Citizens freely exercise their right to change their
 government through direct elections with a secret ballot and
 universal adult suffrage. The voters elect a unicameral
 parliament made up of 109 members from all 19 provinces and
 the Port Moresby national capital district. Any citizen can
 stand for election, and several foreign-born PNG citizens sit
 in the Parliament. With a multiplicity of small parties,
 coalition governments tend to be weak and shifting; none has
 yet survived its 5-year electoral.mandate.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The Government's attitude toward investigation of alleged-
 violations of human rights by local and international human
 rights groups has been defensive but not repressive. Reports
 of abuses made by AI as well as by dQmestic activists have
 drawn sharp reactions from government leaders. The Minister
 of Justice called for a ban on AI as an "immoral organization"
 with no understanding of sovereignty. In February the
 Minister of Defense harshly attacked the Catholic bishop of
 Bougainville for the latter's criticisms, including the charge
 of genocide, concerning the security forces' treatment of
 civilians. The bishop responded by again accusing the
 security forces of violence against the people and the
 clergy. The Government also criticized a local human rights
 organization, the Commission for Peace and Justice, for
 investigating human rights abuses in Papua New Guinea.
 The Government has, however, admitted to abuses and has moved
 to carry out its own investigation of them. Both in a July
 speech to Parliament and again at the August peace talks
 concerning Bougainville, the Foreign Minister acknowledged
 that severe human rights abuses ("atrocities") had taken
 place. While charges and countercharges of atrocities were
 .made at the peace talks, the Foreign Minister attempted to
 conciliate the Bougainvilleans for the sake of a settlement by
 offering to submit claims against the Government to an
 international commission of jurists, provided that claims of
 BRA atrocities were also submitted.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 Extreme ethnic and geographic diversity prevent domination by
 any one tribe or clan. The democratically elected government,
 based on loose coalitions, cannot afford to favor one group
 consistently over another. Extensive rights for women
 provided by the Constitution and law frequently run aground on
 traditional patterns of discrimination. Nevertheless, the
 achievements of women in the modern sector are substantial.
 Women serve as doctors, lawyers, business executives, civil
 servants, and in high government positions, including as Mayor
 of Port Moresby and as High Court Justice.
 Family law and marriage and property rights of women are
 guaranteed in the legal system, but the vast majority of women
 still live in a traditional system which relegates women to
 secondary status.
 
 
 997
 PAPUA NEW GUINEA
 Violence against women, including rape, is widespread. Some
 tribal and clan cultures emphasize antagonism between the
 sexes... While women are-ostensibly protected by their family
 and clan, they are nonetheless .often victims of force.-
 Attacks on women remain common-in intertribal warfare. Fear
 of rape, especially pack rape by gangs of up to 30 men, is
 common among women and constrains all their movements and
 activities. The authorities attempt to punish rape with
 redundant prison sentences of 8 to 10 years, but assailants
 are rarely apprehended, in part because the police force is
 understaffed and undertrained.
 Both-the Government and public organizations are working to
 upgrade the status of women. Several women's rights groups,
 most notably the National Women's Association, actively
 promote the evolution of the-role of women and run campaigns
 against such rampant crimes as rape and wife beating. With
 the current economic ,crisis, funds have been cut, resulting in
 less activity than last year when the Law Reform Commission
 and the Women and Law Committee.launched a well-received video
 campaign to improve the status of women. Other women's rights
 programs include a-government-training-program on population,
 family.,ltfe, health, -and participation in development. The
 International Confederation of Free 'Trade Unions (ItTFU)
 recently sponsored a program for training female members of
 unions how to understand their rights and to take a more
 active role in labor affairs.. Some of the-participants are
 seeking to establish a "women's wing" in the Trade Union
 Congress.(TUC).
 Section 6 Worker Rights-
 a. -The Right of Association
 The right to.form and join labor-unions is protected by law,
 subject to registration by the Department of Labor. While the
 Government does-not.use-registration as a form of control over
 unions, an unregistered union has no legal standing with, the
 Department of Labor or before the courts and accordingly could
 not operate with full effectiveness. Unionized workers number
 approximately 140,000 of the 280,000 wage earners in the
 formal economy and are organized into some 50 trade unions,
 most of which are associated with the TUC. They are
 independent of the Government.
 Both private and public sector unions have the right to
 strike, though public workers rarely have done so. The post
 and telecommunications workers, who are public employees, went
 on strike in early 1990, and, following wide controversy, the
 legality of their strike was upheld by the Labor Department.
 Although the Communications Minister at one point threatened
 the strikers with legislation banning strikes, the post and
 telecommunications workers won most of their demands, and the
 union suffered no reprisals. There were also a number of
 private sector strikes, including ones by journalists and at
 the economically vital Ok'Tedi and Porgera mining projects.
 Unions may freely affiliate with international organizations.
 The TUC is a member of the ICFTU, and the South Pacific and
 Oceania Council of Trade Unions, and constituent unions belong
 to international'trade secretariats.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 The Constitution ensures workers the right to engage in
 collective bargaining, to join industrial organizations, and
 
 
 998
 PAPUA NEW GUINEA
 to seek employment. These rights are exercised freely. Two
 important new unions were formed in 1990, primarily for
 collective bargaining purposes: the Porgera Mine Workers and
 the Merchants (Seamans) Service Guild. The law prohibits
 antiunion discrimination by employers against union members
 and organizers. The Department of Labor and Employment, as
 well as the courts, resolve complaints. There are no export
 processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 The Constitution forbids slavery and all forms of forced or
 compulsory labor, and no reports of their practice have been
 received.
 d. Miniminum Age for Employment of Children
 The minimum working age is 18. However, children between the
 ages of 11 and 18 may be employed in family related work
 provided they have parental permission, a medical clearance,
 and a work permit from a labor office. Such employment is
 rare except in subsistence agriculture. There is no
 compulsory minimum education requirement. The minimum age law
 is enforced by the Department of Labor and Employment, and by
 the courts.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 The working week is limited to 42 hours (44 in rural areas),
 and the basic mimimum wage is currently set at about $30 per
 week. This provides a bare minimum standard of living by
 local standards. Minimum wages are set by the Minimum Wage
 Board, a quasi-governmental body with worker and employer
 representation, and vary according to the type of work and
 industry and whether the work is urban or rural. Wage levels,
 allowances, rest periods, holidays, leave, and overtime are
 regulated by law. Under the Employment Act of 1978, a housing
 allowance or provision of housing is a perquisite in
 employment, although this latter benefit is enjoyed mostly by
 public sector employees.
 Enforcement of the industrial health and safety law and
 regulations 4s the responsibility of the Department of Labor.
 The law requires that inspections take place on a regular
 basis, but owing to too few inspectors they generally occur
 only when requested by workers or unions. Moreover, the
 health and safety regulations are vague and are being
 rewritten.
 
 
 999
