 PAPUA NEW GUINEA
 Papua New Guinea, the largest and most populous nation in the
 southern Pacific, covers half of the second largest island in
 the world plus additional islands to the north and east,
 together constituting a large portion of the cultural area
 commonly referred to as Melanesia. It has a federal,
 parliamentary form of government with a unicameral
 legislature. Political legitimacy rests on popular will
 expressed by majority vote in accordance with a Constitution
 embodying extensive public consultation and Melanesian
 tradition, which in general accords prestige based on
 individual accomplishments rather than heredity. The
 military, police, and intelligence services are under civilian
 control. Transfers of power since independence in 1975 have
 been peaceful and in keeping with the Constitution. In
 November 1985, Papua New Guinea experienced its third peaceful
 change of government since independence after a parliamentary
 vote of no confidence in Prime Minister Michael Somare. A new
 Government headed by Prime Minister Paias Wingti has been in
 power ever since. Also in November 1985, the Government
 terminated a state of emergency and curfew imposed 6 months
 earlier in response to widespread crime.
 A special problem is presented by more than 10,000 people from
 Irian Jaya who have illegally crossed into Papua New Guinea
 and who are now living in camps near the border. The
 Government has asked the assistance of the United Nations High
 Commisioner for Refugees (UNHCR) in determining which of these
 people are refugees. It is encouraging voluntary repatriation
 of the others.
 The economic system has three parts: the traditional, rural,
 subsistence economy which supports about 80 percent of the
 population; the privately controlled money economy; and
 enterprises in which the Government has invested. The private
 sector produces most of the wealth and provides three-fourths
 of government revenues; most of the remainder is aid from
 Australia. Papua New Guinea has major mineral, timber, and
 hydroelectric resources which are only just beginning to be
 developed.
 In 1986, as in previous years, no noteworthy human rights
 violations occurred in Papua New Guinea. A network of social
 and political institutions, including vigorous parliamentary
 democracy, a concerned and growing legal profession, active
 churches, a lively free press, and an increasingly informed
 citizenry are effective in maintaining human rights
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 Neither the Government nor any opposition group has resorted
 to political killing.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no reports of politically motivated disappearance.
 
 
 788
 
 PAPUA NEW GUINEA
 C. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 The Constitution forbids torture and cruel or degrading
 treatment. The prison population is one of the highest per
 capita in the world, due to the nation's unusually high crime
 rate. However, prisoners generally are treated fairly and
 humanely. The public, press, and clergy are keenly sensitive
 to allegations of police misbehavior. The courts and
 Ombudsman Commission investigate the small number of
 complaints and intervene when abuses are discovered. Civil
 damages have been awarded and offending officials punished in
 such cases.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Politically motivated arrests do not occur, and the courts
 vigorously enforce constitutional protections against
 arbitrary arrest or detention. Exile is not practiced.
 Warrants are required for arrests. Suspects have free access
 to a lawyer of their choice, and, in serious cases, counsel is
 provided at state expense. Suspects and their counsel are
 informed of charges and have the right to judicial review of
 detention. A reasonable bail is allowed, except when a judge
 rules that the risk of flight or further crime warrants
 detention. The Constitution forbids slavery and slave trade
 in all forms including forced or compulsory labor, except when
 the latter is imposed as a condition of sentence after due
 process of law.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The right to a fair, public trial is strictly observed.
 Defendants are represented by counsel. A high crime rate and
 a shortage of funds, police, and judicial personnel have
 caused the time spent awaiting trial for serious offenses to
 increase in recent years. Provision is made for writs of
 habeas corpus. Persons may not be held without trial for more
 than 6 months. The courts are free from executive, political,
 or military interference. There are no political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Sanctity of the home and family and privacy of correspondence
 are observed.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 An independent press, effective constitutional guarantees, and
 a functioning democratic political system combine to insure
 freedom of speech and press. The state-owned radio gives
 significant coverage to the statements of opposition
 politicians. Pornography is prohibited. Films are censored
 for suitability and classification based on sexual
 explicitness and degree of violence. Academic freedom is
 respected.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 The rights of association, to engage in collective bargaining,
 to join industrial organizations, and to seek employment are
 legally guaranteed and protected by the Constitution and are
 
 
 789
 PAPUA NEW GUINEA
 freely exercised. Although there is a legal requirement that
 a permit be obtained before a demonstration, no application
 has been denied recently. Labor unions are protected by law
 and are active and important in the country's economic and
 political life. Over 50 trade unions exist, among which the
 most significant are the various public employees'associations,
 the two mineworkers' unions, and the dockworkers' union. The
 private sector unions are free to strike and do so regularly.
 Papua New Guinea is a member of the International Labor
 Organization, and union executives often attend international
 councils. Employers' associations also flourish.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Freedom of religion is guaranteed by law. There are no
 controls on the practice of religion and there is no religious
 discrimination. A wide variety of indigenous and Christian
 denominations flourish. Missionaries are allowed to work
 freely in the country.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Freedom of movement of Papua New Guinea citizens within, into,
 and out of the country is not restricted by law.
 Naturalization is available to foreign residents who satisfy a
 residence requirement and are sponsored by a village; it can
 be revoked only for fraud. Freedom of movement was curtailed
 temporarily by the curfew imposed from June to November 1985
 to combat crime. The measure was based on the emergency
 provisions of the Constitution and was exceedingly popular,
 but was, nevertheless, challenged by legal specialists
 concerned about human rights. There were some allegations of
 abuse of police power in connection with the heightened
 surveillance which accompanied the emergency, as well as
 considerable sentiment on the part of many citizens that the
 police should be tougher. Charges of police abuse have been
 actively investigated. Armed conflict between tribal groups
 remains a serious problem in the Highlands region where
 one-third of the population lives. Although its origins are
 traditional, many experts believe that continued tribal
 fighting is a reaction to the increasingly impersonal
 governmental structure and court system. The use of firearms
 in tribal fights, in addition to axes and bows and arrows, is
 increasing. Recently the Prime Minister persuaded four
 provincial premiers in the Highlands region to ban sales of
 alcohol in an effort to control its very destructive
 consequences.
 The new Government of Paias Wingti inaugurated a revised
 policy toward the approximately 10,000 people from Irian Jaya
 living in camps along the border and the related Irian Jaya
 separatist movement, Organizasi Papua Merdeka (Free Papua
 Movement) or OPM. The Government has announced its intention
 to sign the U.N. Convention on Refugees and invited the UNHCR
 to play a major role in determining which of the border
 crossers are politically motivated. At the same time, the
 Government is cooperating with the Indonesian authorities to
 encourage voluntary repatriation of those border
 crossers--probably the majority--who do not fear persecution
 should they return. In addition the Government is planning to
 resettle the border crossers from the 14 border camps where
 they are currently located to 2 large settlements further away
 from the border, where it will be less expensive to supply
 them and where they can in time more easily support themselves.
 
 
 790
 PAPUA NEW GUINEA
 This resettlement is likely to be a long and expensive
 process. The Government has continued to express concern
 about the activities of the OPM. It has repeatedly emphasized
 that it will not allow Papua New Guinea to be used as a base
 for OPM guerilla operations into Indonesian territory. On the
 other hand, the Government remains sensitive to those who
 argue that it has a moral responsibility to provide permanent
 asylum or find asylum in third countries for politically
 motivated border crossers and to support their cause against
 the Government of Indonesia. The Government has repeatedly
 stated it will (with the help of the UNHCR) consider the
 effects of repatriation on a case-by-case basis and not
 forcibly repatriate anyone judged to be a refugee.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Papua New Guinea has a unicameral legislature composed of
 representatives from 19 provinces and the national capital.
 None of the seven organized parties has an absolute
 parliamentary majority. The present Government is a coalition
 of five parties. Politics are marked by keen competition for
 elected offices and loose party structures. Parliamentarians
 can and occasionally do cross party lines during votes. Any
 citizen can run for Parliament, and several members are
 foreign born. Three peaceful changes of government have taken
 place since independence. Preparations currently are under
 way for national elections, which must be held by June 1987, 5
 years after the date of the previous election. Candidates
 have already commenced active campaigning. It is likely that,
 as in the past, the 1987 election will result in a substantial
 turnover in the membership of the National Parliament. The
 Ombudsman Commission monitors campaign contributions.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 Although there have been no allegations by international or
 nongovernmental agencies of human rights violations, local
 politicians and some private groups have criticized the
 Government for not doing more to improve the lot of illegal
 border crossers from Irian Jaya who live in the temporary
 camps near the border. The UNHCR office in Port Moresby
 contributes towards the provision of minimal necessities for
 border crossers, and, as noted above, is actively involved in
 the process of determining which ones are politically
 motivated refugees. No domestic human rights monitoring group
 exists, but several outside groups have been permitted to
 visit border camps and have reported on them. The Ombudsman
 Commission and the courts take legal action against abuses
 when discovered, and the press and concerned politicians have
 been quick to publicize alleged governmental shortcomings.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 In part because of its extreme ethnic diversity, Papua New
 Guinea is not dominated by any one ethnic group or geographic
 region, and the democratically elected government cannot
 afford to display ethnic favoritism. Authoritarian control by
 a single individual, region, or ethnic group would be
 intolerable to the majority. Papua New Guinea's social and
 
 
 791
 PAPUA NEW GUINEA
 economic disparities are the result of historic and geographic
 conditions, not of discriminatory policy.
 Women have equal rights before the law and their status is
 gradually improving, but they still face difficulties.
 Wife-beating is said to be widespread, but it is rarely
 brought to the attention of the authorities. In urban areas,
 rape, along with other violent crimes, is a problem of
 increasing severity. In the village, women are protected by
 their kin, but attacks on women are a common feature of
 intertribal conflict. Against the background of traditional
 male dominance, the achievements of women in Papua New Guinea
 are significant. Some have become doctors, lawyers, and
 office directors. The Permanent Secretary for Labor and the
 head of the Education Commission are women. One woman is a
 member of the National Parliament and Minister for Civil
 Aviation, Culture, and Tourism. Several hold seats in
 provincial assemblies.
 CONDITIONS OF LABOR
 The Department of Labor is responsible for the enforcement of
 laws and regulations concerning safety, health, and working
 conditions. It regularly conducts industrial visits. Working
 hour limitations, rest periods, holidays, leave, wages, and
 compensation are regulated by the Employment Act of 1978.
 Under the Act, minimum wages are established by the Minimum
 Wages Board. These vary by industry and types of work, and
 whether or not work is performed in an urban or rural area.
 Standard hours of work are regulated as well and, although
 variable for some occupations, may not exceed 42 hours per
 week in an urban area or 44 hours in a rural environment.
 Children under the age of 11 may not be employed outside a
 family relationship. Children between the ages of 11 and 16
 may be employed only with parental permission, a medical
 clearance, and a work permit from a labor office. Except in
 agriculture, such employment is very rare according to the
 Papua New Guinea Department of Labor.
 
 
 792
 U.S.OYERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: PAPUA NEW GUINEA
 1984     1985     1986
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL..,         0.8      0.9      0.9
 LOANS .................    0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ...............     0.8      3.9      0.9
 A.AID ....................... 0.0       0.0      0.0
 LOANS ..............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 (SEC.SUPP.ASSIST.)..,         0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.FOOD  FOR  PEACE .......      0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS .................    0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ...............     0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE  I-TOTAL ..........       0.0      0.0      0.0
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS .....        0.0      0.0      0.0
 PAY.  IN  FOR.  CURR .....     0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE  1I-TOTAL .........       0.0      0.0     0.0
 E.RELIEF.EC.DEV & WFP,         0.0      0.0      0.0
 VJL.RELIEF  AGENCY.....        0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST...        0.8      0.9      0.9
 LOANS ..............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............       08       0.9      0.9
 PEACE CORPS               0.8      0.9      0.9
 NARCOTICS ........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 OTHER ..............      0.0      0.0      0.0
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL,.          0.0      0.1      0.0
 LOANS ..............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 -  GRANTS ...............     0.0      0.1      0.0
 A.MAP GRANTS.                  0.0      0.0      0.0
 3.CREOIT FINANCING           0.0      0.0      0.0
 .INTL  MIL.ED.TRN$ ....       0.0      3.1      0.0
 O.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK,,.         0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER  GRANTS ........       0.0      0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL  ECON.  &  MIL..       0.8      1.0      0.9
 LOANS ..............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ...............     0.8      1.0      0.9
 --      ------------------------------------------------------
 OTNER US LOANS.                  0.0      0.0      0.0
 EX-IM BANK LOANS:::::::         0.0      0.0      0.0
 ALL  OTHER ..............       0.0      0.0      0.0
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1984     1985     1986     1946-86
 TOTAL .........   65.2     54.7    118.7    698.0
 IBRD              49.3      9.7     74.9    279.0
 IFC                0.0      0.0      0.0      7.6
 IDA                0.0      0.0      0.0    113.2
 103                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 A03               15.0     44.3     43.8    265.2
 AFOB               0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 UN3P               0.9      0.7      0.0     16.0
 OT4ER-UN           0.0      0.0      0.0      2.1
 EEC                0.0      0.0      0.0     14.9
 
 
 793
