 PAPUA NEW GUINEA
 Papua New Guinea is the largest and most populous nation in
 the South Pacific. It covers half of the second largest
 island in the world plus additional islands to the north and
 east, constituting a large portion of the cultural area
 commonly referred to as Melanesia. It has a federal,
 parliamentary form of government with a unicameral
 legislature. Political legitimacy rests on popular will
 -expressed by majority vote in accordance with a constitution
 embodying extensive public consultation and Melanesian
 tradition, which in general accords prestige based on
 individual accomplishments rather than heredity. The
 military, police, and intelligence services are under civilian
 control. Transfers of power since independence in 1975 have
 been peaceful and in keeping with the Constitution.
 A special problem in Papua New Guinea is presented by
 approximately 10,000 Melanesians from Irian Jaya, Indonesia,
 who have illegally crossed into the country and are now living
 in camps near the border. The United Nations High
 Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) is working with the
 Government to determine which of these people are refugees.
 In 1988 about one-half of these refugees were consolidated in
 a single off-border camp.
 The economic system has three parts: the traditional, rural,
 subsistence economy which supports about 80 percent of the
 population; the privately controlled money economy; and
 enterprises in which the Government has invested. The private
 sector produces most of the wealth and provides three-fourths
 of government revenues; most of the remainder is aid from
 Australia. Papua New Guinea has major mineral, timber,
 hydroelectric, and possibly petroleum resources in the early
 stages of development.
 In 1988, as in previous years, no noteworthy human rights
 violations occurred in Papua New Guinea. A network of social
 and political institutions including vigorous parliamentary
 democracy, an independent judiciary, a concerned legal
 profession, active churches, a lively free press, and
 relatively informed citizenry are effective in maintaining
 respect for human rights. Intertribal conflict remains a
 serious problem in the highlands where one-third of the
 population lives.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 Neither the Government nor any opposition group resorted to
 political killing.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no reports of politically motivated
 disappearances.
 
 
 895
 PAPUA NEW GUINEA
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 The Constitution forbids torture and other cruel or degrading
 treatment. The prison population is one of the highest per
 capita in the world, due to the nation's unusually high crime
 rate. However, prisoners generally are treated fairly and
 humanely. Public, press, and clergy are keenly sensitive to
 allegations of police misconduct. The courts and Ombudsman
 Commission investigate complaints and intervene when'abuses
 are discovered. Civil damages have been awarded and offending
 officials punished in such cases. Charges of police abuse are
 actively investigated.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Politically motivated arrests do not occur, and the courts
 vigorously enforce constitutional protections against
 arbitrary arrest or detention. Exile is not practiced.
 Warrants are required for arrests. Suspects have free access
 to a lawyer of their choice, and, in cases of felony involving
 violence, counsel is provided at state expense. Suspects and
 their counsel are informed of charges and have the right to
 judicial review of detention. Release on bail is permitted,
 except when a judge rules that the risk of flight or further
 crime warrants detention.
 With regard to forced or compulsory labor, see Section 6.c.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The right to a fair, public trial is strictly observed.
 Defendants are represented by counsel except as noted above.
 A high crime rate coupled with a shortage of funds, police,
 and judicial personnel often make the time spent awaiting
 trial for serious offenses very long. Provision is made for
 writs of habeas corpus. Persons may not be held without trial
 for more than 6 months. The courts are free from executive,
 political, or military interference. There are no political
 prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Sanctity of the home and family and privacy of correspondence
 are observed.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 An independent press, effective constitutional guarantees, and
 a functioning democratic political system combine to insure
 freedom of speech and press. State-owned radio gives
 significant coverage to statements of opposition politicians.
 Pornography is prohibited. Films are censored for suitability
 and classification based-on sexual explicitness and degree of
 violence. Academic freedom is respected.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Provisions assuring the right of association are contained in
 the Constitution, and that right is freely exercised. There
 are no arbitrary restrictions on assembly.
 
 
 896
 PAPUA NEW GUINEA
 Demonstrations require legal permits, but. these are almost
 always granted. For a discussion of freedom of association as
 it applies to labor unions, see Section 6.a.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Freedom of religion is assured by law. There are no controls
 on the practice of religion and no religious discrimination.
 -A wide variety of indigenous and Christian denominations
 flourish. Missionaries are allowed to work freely in the
 country, although interdenominational disputes led to
 deportation of one American missionary in October 1987.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Freedom of movement of Papua New Guinea citizens within or
 into and out of the country is not restricted by law.
 Naturalization is available to foreign residents who satisfy a
 residence requirement and are sponsored by a village; it can
 be revoked only for fraud.
 The Government has adopted a humanitarian policy toward the
 approximately 10,000 people from Irian Jaya living in camps
 along the border and the related Irian Jaya separatist
 movement, Organisasi Papua Merdeka (Free Papua Movement) or
 OPM. The UNHCR has had a major role since late 1986 in
 determining which of the border crossers are politically
 motivated. At the same time the Government is cooperating
 with the Indonesian authorities to encourage voluntary
 repatriation of those border crossers--probably the
 majority--who do not fear persecution should they return. The
 Government is resettling border crossers from the nine border
 camps where they are presently located to one large settlement
 further away from the border. The Government continues to
 express concern about the activities of the OPM. It has
 repeatedly emphasized that it will not allow Papua New Guinea
 to be used as a base for OPM guerilla operations into
 Indonesian territory. On the other hand, the Government
 remains sensitive to those who argue that it has a moral
 responsibility to provide permanent asylum or find asylum in
 third countries for politically motivated border crossers and
 to support their cause against the Government of Indonesia.
 The Government has repeatedly stated it will (with the help of
 the UNHCR) consider the effects of repatriation on a case by
 case basis and not forcibly repatriate anyone judged to be a
 refugee.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 To Change Their Government
 Citizens freely exercise their right to change their
 government through direct and fair elections. There is a
 unicameral legislature composed of representatives from 19
 provinces and Port Moresby (the national capital). None of
 the organized parties has an absolute parliamentary majority.
 The present Government is a coalition of four parties.
 Politics are marked by keen competition for elected offices
 and loose party structures. Parliamentarians can and
 occasionally do cross party lines during votes. Any citizen
 can run for Parliament, and several members are foreign born.
 Five peaceful changes of government have taken place since
 independence.
 
 
 897
 PAPUA NEW GUINEA
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 There have been no allegations by international or
 nongovernmental agencies of human rights violations in Papua
 New Guinea. The Ombudsman Commission and the courts take
 legal action against abuses when discovered, and the press and
 concerned politicians have been quick to publicize alleged
 governmental shortcomings. The UNHCR provides permanent
 international monitoring of the Irian Jaya refugees.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 In part because of its extreme ethnic diversity, Papua New
 Guinea is not dominated by any one ethnic group or geographic
 region, and the democratically elected government cannot
 afford to display ethnic favoritism.
 Women have equal rights before the law and their status is
 gradually improving, but they still face difficulties.
 Wife-beating is widespread but is increasingly brought to the
 attention of the authorities. In urban areas, rape, along
 wi'th other violent crimes, is a problem of continuing
 concern. In the village, women are protected by their kin,
 but attacks on women are a common feature of intertribal
 conflict. Against the background of male dominance-in tribal
 society, the achievements of women in Papua New Guinea are
 significant. Some have become doctors, lawyers, and business
 executives. Several senior public servants are women and
 several hold seats in provincial assemblies. Accurate
 statistics on the percentage of women in the paid labor force
 are not available. The Department of Labor estimates this at
 8 percent. Family laws, marriage and property rights of women
 are formally guaranteed through the legal system based on
 English common law. However, tribal practices which may treat
 women as a form of chattel exist parallel to this system and
 are dominant for a majority of the population. Several
 women's rights groups, notably the National Women's
 Association, actively promote the evolution of the role of
 women, and run campaigns against-crimes such as rape and
 wife-beating.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 Labor unions are protected by law and are active and important
 in the country's economic and political life. Over 50 trade
 unions exist, among which the most significant are the Public
 Employees Association, and the two mineworkers' unions. The
 private sector unions are free to strike and do so on
 occasion. The trade union federation, the Papua New Guinea
 Trade Union Congress, is a member of the International
 Confederation of Free Trade Unions.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 The Constitution contains provisions assuring workers the
 right to engage in collective bargaining, to join industrial
 organizations, and to seek employment These rights are freely
 exercised. Labor laws and regulations are applicable
 uniformly throughout the country.
 
 
 898
 PAPUA NEW GUINEA
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 The Constitution forbids slavery and slave trading in all
 forms including forced or compulsory labor, except when the
 latter is imposed as a condition or sentence after due process
 of law.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 Children under the age of 11 may not be employed outside a
 family relationship. Children between the ages of 11 and 16
 may be employed only with parental permission, a medical
 clearance, and a work permit from a labor office. According
 to the Department of Labor, such employment is rare except in
 subsistence agriculture.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 The Department of Labor is responsible for the enforcement of
 laws and regulations concerning safety, health, and working
 conditions, and it regularly conducts industrial visits.
 Working hour limitations, rest periods, holidays, leave,
 wages, and compensation are regulated by the Employment Act of
 1978. Minimum wages are established by the minimum wages
 board. These vary by industry and types of work, and whether
 or not work is performed in an urban or rural area. They
 provide an adequate living within the local context. Standard
 hours of work are regulated as well and, although variable for
 some occupations, may not exceed 42 hours per week in an urban
 area or 44 hours in a rural environment. The provision of
 housing is a precondition for most employment. Enforcement of
 health and safety codes is an important focus of organized
 labor activity.
 
 
 899
