 PAPUA NEW GUINEA
 Papua.New Guinea (PNG), with some 1,000 tribes and over 800 distinct lan-
 guages for a population of about 4 million, is one of the world's most diverse soci-
 etiea. It has a federal parliamentary system based on universal adult suffrage. Free
 and fair elections carried out in June brouht about the fifth constitutional and
 peaceful transfer of power since independence in 1975. The Constitution resembles
 those of other English-speaking parliamentary democracies and emphasizes respect
 for individual rights.
 The Government has constitutional authority over the military, police, and intel-
 ligence organizations. An apparently unathorzed attack in Sep mber by the PNG
 Defense Force (GDF) on a village in neighbrng Solomon Islands, however, pro-
 voked Prime Minister Wingti to subject civilian contrl over military operations to
 close review. Weak PNGD F discipline has also led to abusive behavior involving ci-
 vilian communities near military bases. Similar problems continue to plague the
 Royal Papua New Guinea Constabulary the only police force. Total military expend-
 itures for 1989, the last year for which the U.. Arms Control and Disarmament
 Agency conducted a detailed analysin, were $48 million. There are no indications of
 any need or pressure to reduce these expenditures in the near future, at least until
 the Bougainville secessionist movement is contained.
 The economy is characterized by a relatively small but modern free enterprise sec-
 tor, heavily dependent on foreign investment, and a traditional subsistence sector
 that supports over 80 percent of the population. The modern sector produces most
 of the wealth and slightly less than 80 percent of government revenue, with the bal-
 ance of the budget needs made up by an annual cash grant from Australia.
 The Wi ngi   vernment took office in July and has made resolving the crisis on
 Bou ainvile Island, the last redoubt of secessionist insurgents, a hig  priority. A
 political solution, however, remains elusive. The Government regaine control over
 most of Bougainville, partly because Bougainvilleans increasingly called for a res-
 toration of public services and partly because of popular revulsion against human
 rights violations perpetrated by members of the Bougainville Revolutionary Army
 (BRA). The fundamentally democratic political institutions established by the Con-
 stitution include an Ombudsman Commission that has successfully investigated al-
 legations of human rights violations and wrongdoing by top government officials.
 the context of an exceptionally high crime rate, the Government is struggling
 to strengthen the rule of law throughout Papua New Guinea. In many areas, how-
 ever, it must contend with a tendency to settle disputes in the traditional, tribal
 way, i.e., often violently, without the help of the police or judiciary.
 Basic human rights are protected by the Constitution and generally respected.
 However, serious abuses, including extrajudicial killings, by security forces and in-
 surgents on Bougainville continued to be reported. Abuse of women and discrimina-
 tion against them are also serious human rights concerns.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-The most prominent incident involv-
 ing political or other extrajudicial killings during 1992 took place outside of PNG
 when a 10-man PNGDF squad shot and killed two Solomon Islands citizens in Sep-
 tember. The shootings took place during a PNGDF raid on a Solomon Islands village
 across the border from Bougainville Island. The PNGDF apparently sought to pre-
 vent BRA insurgents from resupplying at a fuel dump and trade store.
 
 
 632
 On Bougainville itself, a BRA radio station announced in April that Anthony
 Anugu, a South Bougainvillean chiefly leader who fell into BRA hands after nego-
 tiating an agreement with the Government in February, had been executed together
 with other members of his party. Anugu's death has not been confirmed although
 reports from Bougainville tend to agree he was killed. Some members of his party
 escaped.
 A human rights group reported in 1992 that on March 12 1991 PNGDF soldiers
 tortured and killed 11 young men from Hetan village on Buta Island (Bougainville
 and Buka Islands together make up PNG's North Solomon Province). BRA insur-
 gents also alleged that government forces committed massacres on Saposa Island off
 the coast of Bougainville, and at the towns of Wakunai and Arawa on Bougainville,
 but such claims have not been independently verified.
 The judiciary has so far taken few steps to investigate allegations of security force
 atrocities, although Buka, for example, was under firm government control through-
 out 1992. Little, if any, progress has been publicly reported in an inquest ordered
 last year by former Attorney General Narokobi into the deaths of 11 persons in
 North Solomons Province in 1989 and 1990. The Wingti Government, which took
 over from former Prime Minister Namaliu in July, has yet to announce whether it
 will fulfill its predecessor's pledge to establish a commission of inquiry to deal with
 human rights violations stemming from the Bougainville crisis.
 The BRA itself was reported to have killed three residents of a "progovernment"
 village near Arawa, provoking an exodus to government-controlled territory in early
 February. There are credible reports that BRA rebels frequently killed civilians on
 Bougainville. Four BRA members convicted of willful murder and grievous bodily
 harm were sentenced in 1992 to lengthy jail terms for offenses committed in 1990
 and 1991.
 b. Disappearance. -There were two separate reports that security forces were re-
 sponsible for politically motivated disappearances, beth concerning persons believed
 to be residing on Bougainville. In the first case, the alleged missing persons were
 later reported to be alive and well. In the second, three Bougainvilleans including
 two Catholic mission workers, were reported missing in September. PNGi5F soldiers
 allegedly intercepted the trio while were enroute to Bougainville from Solomon Is-
 Ian s.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution forbids torture and other cruel or degrading treatment or punish-
 ment. Reliable reports nonetheless suggest that PNG security forces (PNG soldiers,
 police, and correctional personnel), as well as BRA insurgents on Bougainville, con-
 tinued to engage in such practices. Reports of torture or other abuse by the PNGDF
 on Bougainv le frequent  o   nated with BRA rebels or sympathizers. Such re-
 ports, however, cannot be dismissed out of hand, given PNGDF difficulty in main-
 taining discipline.
 Instances of torture and abuse by PNG police were reported from regions through-
 out PNG in 1992, reflecting continued weakness in Royal Papua New Guinea Con.
 stabulary discipline and lack of respect for human rights. Villagers in Western Prov-
 ince, for example, complained about police brutality during a January raid that led
 to the confiscation of 24 firearms. Residents of Gahom village in East Spik Prov-
 ince claimed helicopter-brne police victimized them twice mn early March. There
 were credible allegations that police burned dwellings in communities within Enga,
 Morobe, Southern Highlands, and Eastern Highlan    rvinces as a form of collec-
 tive punishment for crimes committed by individuals. Police allegedly fired on resi-
 dents of Ku village, Simbu Province, in June during a confrontation. There were
 credible reports of police brutality involving people in Port Moresby, Lae, Wewak,
 and Mount Hagen. Reports of serious abuse frequently assert that the police in-
 volved were drunk.
 Four wardens at Kerevat Prison near Rabaul were convicted in May of physically
 abusing nine prisoners during late 1991. They were placed on good-behavior bends
 and ordered to compensate the victims. A PNG prison official who initially refused
 to permit a judeto enter the facility to investigate the allegations eventually co-
 operated under judicial pressure.
 There are credible reports that BRA rebels have tortured captives at detention
 camps in insurgent-held territory, particularly near the former copper mine site at
 Panguna, in central Bougainville. Victims are said to be tortured with heated imple-
 ments and severely beaten. The BRA is believed to have killed some victims, pos-
 sil  including Anthony Anugu, by dragging them behind vehicles.
 e ourt system does a dress cases o police abuse. A constable was charged
 with rape in Wabag in late 1991, and another was convicted of rape in Rabaul in
 August and sentenced to 6 years' imprisonment. A Supreme Court justice in Port
 Moresbu announced his intention in August to undertake a judicial inquiry into a
 
 
 633
 constable's admission during a criminal trial that police investigators had beaten
 the accused.
 Judicial redress is available to victims of official misconduct. For example, a
 newly elected Member of Parliament (M.P.) from Bougainville filed a suit against
 the Government seeking compensation for injuries suffered at the hands of security
 force members in 1989. His case was still pending at year's end. Another person,
 who lost his vision after being beaten by police in 1987, won a default judgment on
 December 30, 1991, of about $85,000. The Supreme Court introduced a simple form
 in 1989 enabling citizens to file human rights complaints with any national court,
 but this innovation seems to have had only a marginal impact on the enforcement
 of constitutionally guaranteed human rights.
 The Ombudsman Commission is empowered to investigate official abuse of au-
 thority and to refer cases to public prosecutors but rarely receives complaints
 against members of the uniformed forces. PNG's free press frequently publicizes al-
 legations of human rights violations by the uniformed forces.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The courts strongly enforce constitutional
 protections against arbitrary arrest and detention. Exile is not practiced, and judi-
 cially issued warrants are required for all arrests. Suspects have the right to legal
 counsel. Accused persons are informed of charges; their arrest is subject to judicial
 review; and they have the right to bail, except when judges rule otherwise. Police
 misconduct, as described previously, sometimes limits these rights in practice, but
 constitutional protections are upheld when cases come to the attention of the courts.
 In 1992 a judge disposed of some 26 cases involving allegations of human rights
 abuse on Buka Island held over from 1991 by dismissing half of the cases and con-
 tinuing the other half. The cases that were continued can be reopened. In most in-
 stances, the persons who filed the charges failed to come forward, did not comply
 with judicial deadlines, or could not provide evidence to support their claims.
 In February the BRA was reported to be keeping hundreds of villagers under "ar-
 rest" near Arawa, on Bougainville. BRA elements reportedly also detained a large
 number of people in the Siwai region in March.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The law guarantees a public trial and the Con-
 stitution provides for due process; an independent court system enforces both. De.
 fendants have the right to an attorney, even at public expense, in felony cases in-
 volving violence. Defendants and their attorneys may confront witnesses, present
 evidence, plead their cases, and appeal convictions. Given the relative shortage of
 police and judicial resources and an exceptionally high crime rate, periods between
 arrest and trial can be long. Such periods of detention, however, are subject to strict
 judicial review. The courts are completely independent of executive, political, or
 military authorities, and the Government does not hold any prisoners on purely po-
 litical grounds.
 A lack of access to Bougainville Island proper continues to hamper the judiciarys
 ability to investigate human rights violations there. BRA activity, for example, con-
 tinues in some government-controlled areas, discouraging the restoration of judicial
 services. It is not clear when the national court in Rabaul will be able to adjudicate
 the 66 claims of human rights abuses filed by Bougainvilleans against the Govern-
 ment that were pending in 1991.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-Privacy
 rights are not widely abused, but police are known to burn homes in the highlands
 to quell intertribal conflict and punish communities suspected of harboring crimi-
 nals. There have also been reports of forcible entry into homes by police searching
 for stolen goods or criminals. The forced eviction of squatters became a significant
 issue in 1992 in the National Capital District, Lae, Wewak, Mount Hagen, oroka,
 and Rabaul. Authorities in Goroka burned down 50 houses occupied by squatters.
 A national court in Lae upheld efforts by the Morobe provincial government to evict
 squatters but said the squatters should be given more time to move and the provin-
 cial government should consider compensating them.
 g. Use of Excessive Force and Violations of Humanitarian Law in Internal Con-
 flicts.-Armed conflict on Bougainville Island increased during 1992, resulting in
 claims by both sides of actions against civilians. For example, BRA supporters
 claimed that government patrl boats fired indiscriminately upon villages near the
 Bougainville shore. A PNG newspapr reported that government aircraft strafed the
 BRA stronghold of Arawa in late  ay, injurin  many civilians. Due to lack of access
 to the area, the specifics of these cases couldnot be verified. Security forces have
 in the past fired indiscriminately on Bougainville, and the Government has admit-
 ted that its aircraft fired on alleged insurgent positions from high altitude.
 Efforts by the PNG Red Cross to deliver medical supplies to Arawa by air in June
 and September were stymied by PNGDF objections. The BRA also impeded the de-
 
 
 livery of urgently needed humanitarian assistance: a BRA gang burned the supply
 ship7 /V Cosmaris in January at the port of Kieta, near Arawa.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of speech,
 including freedom of the broadcast media and publications. An independent press
 an effective judiciary, and a functioning democratic political system have promoted
 freedom of speech and press.
 The Parliament called a newspaper editor and the Chief Ombudsman before it in
 March and asked them to apoIogize for publishing allegedly derogatory material
 about M.P.'s. The editor apologized for an error in an article. The chief ombudsman,
 however, denied that cartoons included in the commission's annual reports had de-
 meaned M.P.'s and refused to apologize. Incensed M.P.'s re rtedly circulated a
 draft resolution calling on Parliament to jail the Chief Ombudman and his fellow
 Commissioners, but were informed that the Commission is protected by the Con-
 stitution. Public support for the Commission ultimately discouraged further at-
 tempts in Parliament to intimidate the chief ombudsman.
 A Swedish citizen who freelanced for Swedish Television died under mysterious
 circumstances near Kiunga, Western Province, in late April. While suicide could not
 be ruled out, the victim reportedly expressed concern just before his death that PNG
 police had been following him. A human rights group asked former Prime Minister
 Namaliu to order an investigation. Police in Kiunga conducted an inquiry, and a
 coroner's inquiry followed. By year's end the coroner's inquiry had not been com-
 pleted.
 Citizens and foreigners are occasionally convicted of possession of pornography
 under the Censorship Act. Academic freedom is generally respected.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-Private associations and public
 assemblies are legal. Associations do not require formal registration. International
 affiliation of church and civic groups is also freely permitted.
 Public demonstrations require police approval; this is frequently denied on the
 grounds that such activities encourage bystanders to engage in vandalism and vio-
 lence. Police in the National Capital District, for example, denied permission for a
 protest march by supporters of parliamentary candidates who lost in the June na-
 tional election. The Constitution contains provisions for the right to peaceful assem-
 bly but permits laws which limit the exercise of such rights in the interest of safe-
 guarding public safety and order.
 c. Freedom of Religin.-There are no restrictions on and no discrimination
 against the practice of religion, which is protected by the Constitution. Many indige-
 nous and Christian denominations flourish side by side with small Buddhist and
 Muslim minorities. Missionaries work and move freely throughout the country and
 provide most social services in many remote areas.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-PNG security forces continue to require travelers to Buka and Bougain-
 ville Islands to obtain permits. The Government prohibits unauthorized vessels or
 aircraft from calling at or landing on either island. Freedom of movement within
 and outside the country is not restricted by law, although provincial politicians con-
 tinue to encourage squatters from other parts of the country to return to their home
 regns.
 Te Government hosts between 4,500 and 5,000 Melanesian refugees from Irian
 Jaya, the neighboring province of Indonesia, with support from the office of the U.N.
 High Commissioner or Refugees (UNHCR) in Port Moresby. Some 1,500 to 2,000
 of these have land or kinship ties with Papua New Guineans and live just inside
 Papua New Guinea. They are not provided services by either the Government or the
 UNHCR. While Papua New Guinea recognizes Irian Jaya as an integral part of In-
 donesia, the Government nonetheless grants asylum to qualified refugees and allows
 foreign citizens who meet residency requirements to take up PNG citizenship. The
 Government administers UNHCR assistance, a significant portion of which is pro-
 vided by Australia, to about 3,750 refugees at the sole remaining camp at East
 Awin. Several hundred new arrivals from Irian Jays were relocated to East Awin
 in June. There were no known forced repatriations of Irian Jayan insurgents to In-
 donesia during 1992.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens freely exercise the right to change their government through direct elec-
 tions with a secret ballot and universal adult suffrage. The voters elect a unicameral
 parliament made up of 109 members from all 19 provinces and the Port Moresby
 National Capital District. Any citizen can stand for election, and several foreign-
 
 
 635
 born citizens sit in the Parliament. With a multiplicity of small parties, coalition
 governments tend to be weak and shifting, none has yet survived its 5-year electoral
 mandate.
 The Government changed hands on July 17 when Paias Wingti defeated Prime
 Minister Namaliu in the Parliament by a vote of 55-54. Namaliu had ousted Wingti
 on a motion of no confidence 4 years earlier. In the June parliaments  elections
 preceding the change of government, a record number of incumbent M-P.', includ-
 ing at least half of amaiu's cabinet, were defeated. A move to 1-day elections in
 four of the five volatile highlands provinces helped ensure that the polling was held
 peacefully throughout the country.
 Postelection distuirbances, caused by disruntled suporters of losing candidates,
 were confined for the most part to areas o rendemic confict. Over 50 petitions alleg-
 ing electoral law violations werefiled in the courts following the election, almost all
 seeking new elections. The courts dismissed several petitions and will hold hearings
 on the rest.
 Although there are no legal barriers to their participation, women are not found
 in significant numbers in senior positions in government or in politics (See Section
 5).
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vest igat ion of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 There are no official barriers to the formation of local human rights groups. The
 PNG Association for Human Rights was formed in Port Moresby in November to
 educate PNG citizens about their constitutional rights, collect information about
 human rights violations, serve as an advocate of children's rights, and lobby the
 Government on human rights issues. This is the only known human rights non-
 governmental group in Papua New Guinea. Other nongovernmental organizations
 have exereised their right to comment on human rights issues in PNG media with-
 out any known governmet  nterference or retribution.
 Amnesty International (A) urged the Government in 1991 to investgate human
 rights violations cmmitted by government forces on Bougainville.  n amaiu
 Government responded in September 1991, that it had "no immediate plan" to con-
 duct investigations. An Australian Al official rertedly called for an independent
 judicial inquiry into human rights violations in Nrth Slomons Province in a letter
 to Prime Minister Wingti shortly after the latter's election. The official requested
 access to Bougainville for international humanitarian and legal organizations for
 the same purpose. The Government has not publicly respnded to these requests.
 The U.N. Human Rights Commission s (UNHRC) Summission on Prevention of
 Discrimination and Protection of Minorities adopted a resolution in Auglst asking
 the UNHRC's Special Rapporteur on Agreements between States and Indigenous
 Peoples to consider the implementation of agreements between the PNG Govern-
 ment and the indigenous peoples of Bougainville. (This presumably refers to the
 H-Ioniara Accord, signed in January 1991, a political agreement negotiated between
 the Government and members of the BRA as part of an effort to encourage these
 armed insurgents to end their rebellion against the Government's authority.) The
 situatioaon Bougainville is to be included in a study by the Special Rapporteur.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Language, or Social Status
 Extreme ethnic and geographic diversity prevents domination by any one tribe or
 clan. The democratically elected Government, based on loose coalitions, cannot af-
 ford to favor one group over another consistently.
 Despite extensive rights for women provided by the Constitution and law, tradi-
 tional patterns of discrimination against women result in a significant denial of
 human rights. Some women in the modern sector have achieved senior positions,
 serving as doctors, lawyers, business executives, civil servants, and in high govern-
 ment positions. No woman  was elected to Parliament in the June balloting, how-
 ever nor did Prime Minister Wingti appoint any women to his Cabinet. Despite
 aless at      regarding family [aw, marriage, and property rights, most women
 tle    in a traditionls system which relegates them to second-class status. A fe-
 male judge told a regional workshop on women and violence in August that village
 courts enforce traditional attitudes and values that oppress women and youths.
 Violence against women, including rape, is widespread. Some tribal and clan cul-
 tures emphasize antagonism between the sexes. While women are ostensibly pro-
 tected by their family and clan, they are nonetheless often victims of violence and
 force. Attacks on women remain common in intertribal warfare. Fear of rape, espe-
 eially gang rape, is justifiably common among women and constrains all their move-
 ments and activities. The authorities punish rape with prison sentences, but assail-
 ants are seldom apprehended, in part because the police force is understaffed and
 
 
 636
 
 undertrained and because many police tend to view wife-beating as a private, family
 matter. Most areas without access to law enforcement services rely on "payback,
 a traditional form of revenge directed at the offender's tribe or clan, to deter or pun-
 ish rape. Persons convicted of gang rape, contrary to previous reports, may not be
 sentenced to death, although, since September 1991, the death penalty may be im-
 posed on persons convicted of willful murder.
 Village court justices tend to be overly severe on women, for instance, by imposing
 jail terms on women found guilty of adultery, while letting men off lightly. There
 is no pattern of similar discrimination against women by circuit-riding national
 court justices. Indeed, the latter frequently annul village court sentences and free
 unjustly imprisoned women.
 Both the Government and public organizations are working to upgrade the status
 of women. The Government provides a grant to the National Council of Women.
 Prime Minister Wingti called for equal opportunity for women in his first Independ-
 ence Day speech in September. The National Campaign Against Domestic Violence,
 led by the Women and Law Committee, is now in its sixth year. The Law Reform
 Commission has assisted the Bomana Police College in teaching a course on domes-
 tic violence to police recruits since 1987, emphasizing that complaints of violence
 against women are not to be dismissed as domestic squabbles.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The right to form and join labor unions is protected
 by law, subject to registration by the Department of Labor. While the Government
 does not use registration as a form of control over unions, an unregistered union
 has no legal standing with the Department of Labor or before the courts and accord-
 ingly could not operate with full effectiveness. Unionized workers account for ap-
 proximately half of the 270,000 wage earners in the formal economy and are orga-
 nized into some 50 trade unions, most of which are associated with the Trade
 Unions Congress. Unions are independent of the Government and of political par-
 ties.
 Both private and public sector unions have the right to strike, though public
 workers have rarely done so. The most contentious labor dispute in 1992 occurred
 when unions representing employees of the national airline demanded an across-
 the-board salary increase. Though the national court ordered the unions to refrain
 from work stoppages, strike activity continued and resulted in the dismissal of 78
 employees. Unions may freely affiliate with international organizations.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectiuely. -TheConstitution provides for
 the right to engage in collective bargaining, to join industrial organizations, and to
 scek employmcnt. These rights are exercised freely. The ILO again admonished the
 Government to amend the 1aw which gives it discretionary power to cancel arbitra-
 tion awards or declare wage agreements void when they are contrary to government
 policy. The law prohibits antiunion discrimination by employers against union mem-
 ers and organizers. The Department of Labor and Employment, as well as the
 courts, resolve complaints. There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The Constitution forbids slavery
 and all forms of forced or compulsory labor, and there were no reports of their prac-
 tice in 1992.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The minimum working age is 18.
 However, children between the ages of 11 and 18 may be employed in family related
 work provided they have parental permission, a medical clearance, and a work per-
 mit from a labor office. Such employment is rare except in subsistence agriculture.
 The Department of Labor and Employment and the courts take steps to enforce the
 minimum age law, but they are hampered by a lack of resoun es.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-Minimum wages are set by the Minimum
 Wage Board, a quasi-governmental body with worker and employer representation,
 and vary according to the type of work and industry and whether the work is urban
 or rural. In August the Board, in an effort to create jobs, ruled that the urban mini-
 mum wage be reduced dramatically to the rural minimum. The new urban mini-
 mum wage rate represents a setback for earnings of newly hired and unskilled
 workers and would not support a decent living for a worker and family, but, since
 most Papua New Guineans live within and contribute to an extended family, total
 net income to an individual wage earner will be only marginally affected.
 Minimum wage levels, allowances, rest periods, holidays, leave, and overtime are
 regulated by law. The workweek is limited by law to 42 hours (  in rural areas).
 Enforcement of the Industrial Health and Safety Law and related regulations is
 the responsibility of the Department of Labor. The law requires that inspections
 tao   lapu on  reGular basis, but because there are too few inspectors they gen-
 
 
 erally occur only when requested by workers or unions. Sanctions for violations are
 rarely applied. Moreover, the health and safety regulations are still under revision.
