 PAPUA NEW GUINEA
 Papua New Guinea is the largest and most populous nation in
 the South Pacific. It covers half of the second largest
 island in the world plus additional islands to the north and
 east, constituting a large portion of the cultural area
 commonly referred to as Melanesia. It has a federal,
 parliamentary form of government with a unicameral legislature.
 Political legitimacy rests on popular will expressed by
 majority vote in accordance with a constitution embodying
 extensive public consultation and Melanesian tradition, which
 in general accords prestige based on individual accomplishments
 rather than heredity. The military, police, and intelligence
 services are under civilian control. Transfers of power since
 independence in 1975 have been peaceful and in keeping with
 the Constitution. In July 1987, Papua New Guinea experienced
 its third parliamentary election since independence. The
 Government of Prime Minister Paias Wingti is in its second
 term.
 A special problem is presented by approximately 10,000
 Melanesians from Irian Jaya, Indonesia, who crossed into Papua
 New Guinea in 1984 and are now living in camps near the border.
 The United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) is
 working with the Government to determine which of these people
 are refugees. They are preparing to consolidate the refugees
 in two border camps, and encouraging voluntary repatriation of
 the others.
 The economic system has three parts: the traditional, rural,
 subsistence economy, which supports about 80 percent of the
 population; the privately controlled money economy; and
 enterprises in which the Government has invested. The private
 sector produces most of the wealth and provides three-fourths
 of government revenues; most of the remainder is aid from
 Australia. Papua New Guinea has major mineral, timber,
 hydroelectric, and possibly petroleum resources in the early
 stages of development.
 In 1987 as in previous years, no noteworthy human rights
 violations occurred in Papua New Guinea. A network of social
 and political institutions including vigorous parliamentary
 democracy, a concerned legal profession, active churches, a
 lively free press, and a relatively informed citizenry are
 effective in maintaining human rights.
 Armed conflict between tribal groups remains a serious problem
 in the highlands region where one-third of the population
 lives. Although its origins are traditional, many experts
 believe that continued tribal fighting is a reaction to the
 increasingly impersonal governmental structure and court
 system. The use of firearms in tribal fights, in addition to
 axes and bows and arrows, is increasing.
 RESPECT FOR HUM.AN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 Neither the Government nor any opposition group has resorted
 to political killing.
 
 
 778
 PAPUA NEW GUINEA
 b. Disappearance
 There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 The Constitution forbids torture and other cruel or degrading
 treatment. The prison population is one of the highest per
 capita in the world, due to the nation's unusually high crime
 rate. However, prisoners generally are treated fairly and
 humanely. Public, press, and clergy are keenly sensitive to
 allegations of police misbehavior. The courts and the
 Ombudsman Commission investigate complaints and intervene when
 abuses are discovered. Civil damages have been awarded and
 offending officials punished in such cases. Charges of police
 abuse are actively investigated.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, Exile, or Forced Labor
 Politically motivated arrests do not occur in Papua New
 Guinea, and the courts vigorously enforce constitutional
 protections against arbitrary arrest or detention. Exile is
 not practiced. Warrants are required for arrests. Suspects
 have free access to a lawyer of their choice, and, in serious
 cases, counsel is provided at state expense. Suspects and
 their counsel are informed of charges and have the right to
 judicial review of detention. A reasonable bail is allowed,
 except when a judge rules that the risk of flight or further
 crime warrants detention. The Constitution forbids slavery
 and slave trade in all forms, including forced or compulsory
 labor, except when the latter is imposed as a condition of
 sentence after duq process of law.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The right to a fair, public trial is strictly observed.
 Defendants are represented by counsel. A high crime rate
 coupled with shortages of funds, police, and judicial
 personnel have caused an increase in the time spent awaiting
 trial for serious offenses in recent years. Provision is made
 for writs of habeas corpus. Persons may not be held without
 trial for more than 6 months. The courts are free from
 executive, political, or military interference. There are no
 political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Sanctity of the home and family and privacy of correspondence
 are observed.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 An independent, competitive press, effective constitutional
 provisions, and a functioning democratic political system
 combine to insure freedom of speech and press. The state-owned
 radio gives significant coverage to statements of opposition
 politicians. Pornography is prohibited. Films are censored
 and classified based on sexual explicitness and degree of
 violence. Academic freedom is respected.
 
 
 779
 PAPUA NEW GUINEA
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 The right of association, to engage in collective bargaining,
 to join industrial organizations, and to seek employment is
 legally provided for in the Constitution and freely exercised.
 Although there is a legal requirement that a permit be obtained
 before a demonstration, no application has been denied
 recently. Labor unions are protected by law and are active
 and important in the country's economic and political life.
 Over 50 trade unions exist, among which the most significant
 are the various public employees' associations, the 2
 mineworkers' unions, and the dockworkers' union. The private
 sector unions are free to strike and do so on occasion. The
 Papua New Guinea Trade Union Congress is a member of the
 International Labor Organization and the International
 Confederation of Free Trade Unions. Employers' associations
 are also active.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Freedom of religion is assured by law. There are no controls
 on the practice of religion and no religious discrimination.
 A wide variety of indigenous and Christian denominations
 flourish. Missionaries are allowed to work freely.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Freedom of movement of Papua New Guinea citizens within or
 into and out of the country is not restricted by law.
 Naturalization is available to foreign residents who satisfy a
 residence requirement and are sponsored by a village; it can
 be revoked only for fraud.
 The Government has adopted a moderate policy toward the
 approximately 10,000 people from Irian Jaya living in camps
 along the border and the related Irian Jaya separatist
 movement, Organizasi Papua Merdeka (Free Papua Movement) or
 OPM. The UNHCR has had a major role since late 1986 in
 determining which of the border crossers are political
 refugees. The Government is planning to resettle the border
 crossers from the nine border camps where they are presently
 located to two large settlements further away from the border,
 where it will be less expensive to supply them, and they can
 in time more easily support themselves. This resettlement is
 likely to be a long and expensive process. At the same time,
 the Government is cooperating with the Indonesian authorities
 to encourage voluntary repatriation of those border crossers--
 probably the majority--who do not fear persecution should they
 return. The Government has continued to express concern about
 the activities of the OPM. It has repeatedly emphasized that
 it will not allow Papua New Guinea to be used as a base for
 OPM guerilla operations into Indonesian territory. On the
 other hand, the Government remains sensitive to those who
 argue that it has a moral responsibility to provide permanent
 asylum or find asylum in third countries for politically
 motivated border crossers and to support their cause against
 the Government of Indonesia. The Government has repeatedly
 stated it will (with the help of the UNHCR) consider the
 effects of repatriation on a case-by-case basis and not
 forcibly repatriate anyone judged to be a refugee.
 
 
 780
 PAPUA NEW GUINEA
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Papua New Guinea has a unicameral'legislature composed of
 representatives from 19 provinces and the national capital.
 None of the nine organized parties has an absolute
 parliamentary majority. The present Government is a coalition
 of four parties plus independents. Politics are marked by
 loose party structures and keen competition for elected
 offices. Parliamentarians can and occasionally do cross party
 lines during votes. Any citizen can run for Parliament, and
 several members are foreign-born. Four peaceful changes of
 government have taken place since independence. As in the
 past, the 1987 election was orderly and resulted in a
 substantial turnover in the membership of the National
 Parliament. An Ombudsman Commission monitors campaign
 contributions.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 There have been no allegations by international or
 nongovernmental agencies of human rights violations in Papua
 New Guinea. The Ombudsman Commission and the courts take
 legal action against abuses when discovered, and the press and
 concerned politicians have been quick to publicize alleged
 governmental shortcomings. The UNHCR provides permanent
 international monitoring of the Irian Jaya refugees.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 In part because of its extreme ethnic diversity, Papua New
 Guinea is not dominated by any one ethnic group or geographic
 region, and the democratically elected government cannot afford
 to display ethnic favoritism. The vitality of Papua New
 Guinea's democracy is such that authoritarian control by a
 single individual, region, or ethnic group would be intolerable
 to the majority. Papua New Guinea's social and economic
 disparities are the result of historic and geographic
 conditions, not of discriminatory policy.
 Women have equal rights before the law, and their status is
 gradually improving, but they still face difficulties.
 Wife-beating is said to be widespread but is rarely brought to
 the attention of the authorities. In urban areas, rape, along
 with other violent crimes, is a problem of continuing
 concern. In the village, women are protected by their kin,
 but attacks on women are a common feature of intertribal
 conflict. Against the background of traditional male
 dominance, the achievements of women in Papua New Guinea are
 significant. Some have become doctors, lawyers, and office
 directors. Several senior public servants are women and
 several hgld seats in provincial assemblies.
 CONDITIONS OF LABOR
 The Department of Labor is responsible for the enforcement of
 laws and regulations concerning safety, health, and working
 conditions. It regularly conducts industrial visits. Working
 hour limitations, rest periods, holidays, leave, wages, and
 compensation are regulated by the Employment Act of 1978.
 Minimum wages are established by the Minimum Wages Board.
 These vary by industry and types of work, and whether or not
 
 
 781
 PAPUA NEW GUINEA
 work is performed in an urban or rural area. Standard hours
 of work are regulated as well and, although variable for some
 occupations, may not exceed 42 hours per week in urban areas
 or 44 hours in rural areas. Children under the age of 11 may
 not be employed outside a family relationship. Children
 between the ages of 11 and 16 may be employed only with
 parental permission, a medical clearance, and a work permit
 from a labor office. Except in subsistence agriculture, such
 employment is very rare according to the Department of Labor.
 
 
 782
