 PAPUA NEW GUINEA
 Papua New Guinea (PNG) comprises some 1,000 tribes and over 800 distinct lan-
 guages in a population of about 4 million. It has a federal parliamentary system
 based on universal adult suffrage in periodic free and fair elections.
 The Government has constitutional authority over the armed forces (PNGDF), po-
 lice, and intelligence organizations. However, government failure to control and dis-
 cipline the PNGDF has led to human rights abuses involving civilian communities
 on the island of Bougainville. A similar failing has resulted in abuses by the Royal
 Papua New Guinea Constabulary (RPNGC), the country's only police force.
 The economy is characterized by a relatively small but modern free enterprise see-
 tor, heavily dependent on foreign investment, and a traditional subsistence sector
 that supports over 80 percent of the population. The modern sector produces most
 of the wealth and, normally, slightly less than 80 percent of government revenue,
 with the balance of the budget needs made up by assistance, including a cash grant
 from Australia.
 Resolving the secessionist movement, now over 5 years old, on the island of Bou-
 gainville continued to be a major priority of the Government. In October the Govern-
 ment of Prime Minister Chan sponsored an internationally monitored peace con-
 ference that was boycotted by senior Bougainville Revolutionary Army (BRA) lead-
 ers. Extrajudicial killings by security forces and BRA insurgents on Bougainville
 were major human rights abuses. Other continuing problems were the physical
 abuse, sometimes resulting in death, of detainees and prisoners by security forces,
 and the Government's failure to bring the perpetrators to justice; extensive discrimi-
 nation and violence against women; and a tradition of ethnically motivated violence.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There continued to be credible re-
 ports from Bougainville that the PNGDF and progovernment resistance fighters exe-
 cuted alleged BRA members or their supporters. In May the Catholic Bishops' Con-
 ference asserted that earlier in the year, persons who were either soldiers or resist-
 ance fighters brutally beat and executed Thomas Patoe at the Sovele Catholic mis-
 sion compound. Patoe was the younger brother of a BRA commander in the Nagovis
 area who had begun to work with resistance fighters. A BRA spokesman claimed
 that security forces tortured and executed Clement Duini of Amoing village in
 central Bougainville and two others from southwest Bougainville in July at govern-
 ment-run care centers. In February the BRA accused the PNGDF of killing a civil-
 ian by pushing him out of a flying helicopter.
 A circuit-riding National Court judge and the magistrate system have been rees-
 tablished in Buka. The Government nonetheless continued, as in previous years, to
 fail to investigate security force atrocities in the Bougainville conflict or to bring
 perpetrators to justice, thus perpetuating the climate of impunity that encourages
 the continuation of such abuses. In April the court did, however, sentence a former
 BRA commander to 17 years in prison for willful murder and arson during a No-
 vember 1990 BRA attack in Buka. No progress has been publicly reported in an in-
 quest ordered in 1991 by former Attorney General Narokobi into the deaths of 11
 persons in North Solomons Province in 1989 and 1990.
 Government sources hold the BRA responsible for 12 deaths of PNGDF personnel
 and the deaths of at least 3 policemen in 1994. There are also credible reports that
 the BRA killed civilians. Between January and March, the BRA is alleged to have
 engaged in at least 11 separate attacks resulting in at least 40 deaths. Prior to and
 during the 7-day October peace talks, both sides violated the cease-fire in several
 reported ambushes, resulting in at least seven deaths.
 Outside of Bougainville, in February a court in Mount Hagen sentenced a police-
 man to 5 years' hard labor for manslaughter. According to the court, the policeman
 was angered by the just released detainee's verbal abuse and retaliated by killing
 him with a spear. In July in Port Moresby a youth died in police custody during
 or immediately after questioning. The incident was investigated by police, but at
 year's end no charges had been filed.
 
 
 664
 b. Disappearance.--Although both the security forces and the BRA continued to
 allege that the other was responsible for civilian kidnapings or disappearances, no
 official charges were made publicly.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution forbids torture and other cruel or degrading treatment or punish-
 ment. Nonetheless, PNG security forces (PNG soldiers, police, and correctional per-
 sonnel), as well as BRA insurgents on Bougainville, continue to engage in such prac-
 tices.
 Credible reports indicate that the PNGDF mutilated or dismembered bodies of
 BRA killed in combat and left them as a warning to others. Other credible reports
 indicate that resistance forces supportin the FNGDF have done the same to
 wounded BRA. Security forces are reported to have burned homes in villages near
 Panguna during their August operation to retake the mine. A coroner's inquest into
 the role of PNGDF soldiers in the 1993 burning down of a Port Moresby club and
 the death of a soldier had reported no findings by the end of 1994.
 The BRA is believed responsible for a May attack in Mabes village that injured
 former Bougainville Member of Parliament (M.P.) Sir Paul Lapun and his family.
 Credible reports of torture, excessive force, and abuse by PNG police in all regions
 reflected continued government failure to discipline the RPNGC. Almost all of the
 more than 28 cases reportedly filed in 1994 with the national court, under special
 procedures designed to protect human rights, alleged abuse by correctional or police
 officers. Allegations ranged from rape while in detention to severe beatings that
 caused loss of sight or limb. In early 1994, villagers from several small communities
 near Fane, Cential province, reported that police had entered their homes in late
 December 1993, beating the villagers and stealing and destroyingproperty. The po-
 lice apparently were searching for suspected criminals. Such attacks on villages are
 frequently a form of collective punishment.
 Although the courts address cases of poie abuse that are pressed through the
 court system, many cases never reach the courts because of the lack of evidence,
 reliance on incomplete police investigations, or the failure of overburdened and un-
 derfunded prosecutors to follow through. Frequently witnesses can not be located or
 funds foundi to transport them long distances to court. In the first of five similar
 ruling in 1994, the national court in August ordered the State to pay more than
 $1 million to five clans in Chiibu province for damages inflicted by police in sepa-
 rate incidents in 1986 and 1990. According to the reports, which the Government
 never denied, police burned homes, destroyed crops, killed livestock, and assaulted
 villagers while searching for suspected criminals. In May a policeman in Lae was
 sentenced to 9 years' hard labor Yor the September 1993 rape of a woman in police
 custody. In Port Moresby, a senior police official is facing charges for raping a
 woman under detention. In October a National Court judge ordered the State and
 a police officer to pay damages to a prisoner for abuse suffered during detention.
 Prisons are severely overcrowded and understaffed, and prison escapes are com-
 mon. Due to government-wide financial difficulties, water and food were in short
 supply during the last half of the year.
 The authorities released some prisoners to relieve pressures on the prison system.
 Family members are allowed to visit and supply food to supplement the prison diet,
 although prison visits and privileges are frequently curtailed following disturbances
 or breakouts.
 Redress through the courts is sometimes available to victims of official mis-
 conduct. Following several years of litigation, the case brought by an M.P. from Bou-
 gainville seeking compensation for injuries suffered at the hands of security force
 members in 1989 was settled out of court. The Supreme Court introduced a simple
 form in 1989 enabling citizens to file human rights complaints directly with the na-
 tional court, without need for counsel. If the judge determines that the case has
 merit, he may direct an investigation. The compensation claim of five Chimbu clans
 cited previously in this section was initiated though this simplified process. It was,
 however, pursued by a private lawyer.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The courts enforce constitutional protec-
 tions against arbitrary arrest and detention. For example, using special procedures
 developed for human rights cases (see section 1.c.), in October the National Court
 fined the State for holding a civilian for 4 days without charge. The constitutional
 protections, however, have been weakened by the Internal Security Act and 1993
 amendments to existing anticrime legislation which provide that judicially issued
 warrants are no longer required when the authorities suspect that a person has
 committed any offense against that Act or in the case of certain, largely white-collar,
 offenses. The Act further permits a person to be classified as a member of a pro-
 scribed organization solely on the basis of an affidavit filed by the police commis-
 sioner, without further proof. The Government has not yet sought a conviction
 
 
 665
 
 under the Internal Security Act. Under amendments to the Bail Act and the Crimi-
 nal Code passed in 1993, only national or Supreme Court judges may grant bail in
 certain criminal cases involving a firearm. In all other cases, bail may be granted
 unless a judge rules otherwise. Those under arrest have the right to legal counsel,
 to be informed of charges, and to have their arrest subject to judicial review.
 In April a man from Centralprovince claimed that he had been held by the BRA
 for 6 years and released only following extensive negotiations with his familyHe
 claimed that he and five others had been taken prisoner while trying to leave Kieta
 in 1988. He had no information on the whereabouts of the others.
 Given the relative shortage of police and wdicial resources and an exceptionally
 high crime rate, periods between arrest and trial can be long, particularly in the
 rural areas where 6 months can pass between arrest and committal. Such periods
 of detention, however, are subject to strict judicial review, through continuing pre-
 trial consultations, especially at the National Court level. Nevertheless, cases are
 frequently delayed for months awaiting the results of police investigations.
 Exile is not practiced.
 e. Denial of7Fair Public Trial.-The Constitution provides for due process, includ-
 inga public trial, and an indpendent court system enforces this.
 Defendnts have the right to an attorney. Legal counsel is provided either by the
 Public Solicitor's office or by the Law Society on recommendation of the Public So-
 licitor's office, for those accused of serious offenses and unable to afford counsel. "Se-
 rious offenses" are generally defined as felony charges or any case heard in either
 the national or district court (as opposed to village or magistrate courts).
 Defendants and their attorneys may confront witnesses, present evidence, plead
 cases, and appeal convictions.
 The courts are completely independent of executive, political, or military authori-
 ties and the Government does not hold any prisoners on purely political grounds.
 Although the national court has resumed operation in Buka, North Solomons
 provine, the lack of free and safe access to Bougainvlle island proper continues to
 hamper investigations of alleged human rights violations there.
 f. Arbitrar     ference wth Privacy, Fmily, Home, or Correspondence.-While
 the authorities generally respect privacy rights, police in the highlands and the
 PNGDF in Bougainville have burned homes to quell intertribal conflict and punish
 communities suspected of harboring suspected criminals. Also, police often force
 entry into homes during searches for criminals or stolen goods.
 g. Use of Excessive Force and Violations of Humanitarian Law in Internal Con-
 flicts.-Armed conflict decreased significantly following the institution of a cease-fire
 September 9. There were two significant outbreaks of violence in the period reced-
 ing the ease-fire: the first, February-March, was attributed to the BRA and te sec-
 ond, August, was related to the PNGDF's action to retake Pangna copper mine.
 Each side claims the other committed abuses against civilians.  March the BRA
 accused the PNGDF of using civilians as human shields, citing specifically a March
 23 clash at Tabago and Maisurn in south Bougainvile. The PNGD F countered that
 the BRA was responsible for killing 17 civilians during an attack on a relief convoy.
 Throughout the year, but particularly immediately following the cease-fire, the Gov-
 ernment reported an increased number of civilians leaving BRA-contrlled areas in
 search of food, shelter, and health care. Before the September cease-fire, there were
 continuing reports of BRA attacks against civilians, beth to hamper economic activ-
 ity and to intimidate them into remaining in BRA-controlled areas. The BRA alleg-
 edly burned homes and villages throughout Bougainville in retaliation for villa ers'
 cooperation with security forces and to deny opponents use of the villages. BRA at-
 tacks on security forces continued despite the cease-fire, with a soldier and a civilian
 killed in mid-November. At least one member of a BRA party attempting to attend
 the early October Bougainville peace conference reportedly was wounded when the
 party was fired on by the PNGDF.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for free speech, in-
 cluding freedom of the media, and this freedom is generally respected in practice.
 The media provided independent coverage and analysis of major controversies in
 1994-including the ongoing insurrection on Bougainvil le, the legal problems of sen-
 ior government ministers, and the question of the legality of the snap election called
 by the former prime minister.
 One blatant attempt at censorship occurred nn April 6, when the Minister for
 Communication ordered the national radio broadcasting system, NBC, to stop broad-
 casting news from a summit meeting of the New Guinea islands' premiers on the
 grounds that the premiers might discuss secession. NBC, which receives its funding
 from the Government but maintains a generally independent line in its news stories
 
 
 666
 and editorials, defied the ban and continued to broadcast, drawing from press ac-
 counts supplied by others present at the summit. Following widespread domestic
 and international criticism, the Minister rescinded his order, claiming that his con-
 cern for the personal security of NBC reporters, rather than the political content
 of their coverage, had inspired his censorship attempt.
 The two daily newspapers and one weekly newspaper compete aggressively. One
 of the two dailies is owned by a Malaysian firm, which has invested heavily in
 PNG's timber industry, and by senior members of the former government, but the
 newspaper has nonetheless been generally independent and unbiased in its first
 year of existence.
 The Government and the PNG defense force continued to control the media's ac-
 cess to Bougainville, restricting access of journalists to the island and to partici-
 pants in the conflict, although a greater number were allowed to visit and interview
 combatants on both sides of the insurrection this year than in the past. There is
 no attempt to censor press reports filed from Bougainville.
 The courts occasionally try citizens and foreigners under the provisions of the
 Censorship Act which ban the import, broadcast or publication of materials deemed
 porno  ahic according to Papua New Guinea's rather strict, church-based stand-
 ards. The usual sentence for violations of the Censorship Act is confiscation and de-
 struction of the restricted goods, although the courts can legally impose a fine of
 $17.00 (20 Kina) or more or aprisn sentence of up to 2 years. The Ombudsman
 Commission and the courts in Papua New Guinea have supported the right of free
 speech over government prerogative in most of the cases they have been asked to
 address.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-Private associations and public
 assemblies are legal. The Government does not require registration of associations.
 International affiliation of church and civic groups is also freely permitted. Public
 demonstrations require police approval; this is frequently denied on the grounds
 that such activities encourage bystanders to engage in vandalism and violence. In
 April in Buka, the Government told organizers of a demonstration planned to pro-
 test a change in administrative personnel and responsibilities that the demonstra-
 tion would be illegal. The demonstration did not take place. In December human
 rights and women s activists were given permission to march inprotest of human
 rights abuses in general and the increasing incidence of criminal and family vio-
 lence.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution contains provisions for freedom of reli-
 gion, and the Government respects these fully.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-Following the October cease-fire, PNG security forces no longer re-
 quired travelers to Buka to obtain permits. Government approval is still required
 for travel to Bougainville for those not from the island. By the end of the year, a
 border post had reopened permitting crossings between PNG and neighboring Solo-
 mon Islands. Otherwise, freedom of movement within and outside the country has
 not been restricted in practice. The Government has not applied sections of the In-
 ternal Security Act left standing by the Supreme Court which authorize the Govern-
 ment to exclude from any part of the country anyone convicted under the Act or
 likely to commit an offense under the Act. The Government has dropped plans it
 announced in 1993 to introduce legislation establishing a national system of reg-
 istration and identification cards.
 The Government hosts around 9,000 Melanesian refugees from Irian Jaya, the
 neighboring province of Indonesia. Approximately 6,000, many of whom have land
 or kinship ties with Papua New Guineans, live along the border just inside Papua
 New Guinea. Neither the Government nor the United Nations High Commissioner
 for Refugees (UNHCR) provides services to them. While Papua New Guinea recog-
 nizes Irian Jaya as an integral part of Indonesia, the Government nonetheless
 grants asylum to qualified refugees, and regulations allow foreign citizens who meet
 the 10-year residency requirements to become PNG citizens. The Government ad-
 ministers UNHCR assistance to about 3,600 refugees at the sole remaining camp
 at East Awin.
 There were no known forced repatriations of Irian Jayan insurgents to Indonesia
 during 1994. More than 120 were voluntarily repatriated.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens freely exercise the right to change their government through direct elec-
 tions with a secret ballot and universal adult suffrage. The voters elect a unicameral
 Parliament made up of 109 members from all 19 provinces and the Port Moresby
 National Capital District. Any citizen can stand for election, and several foreign-
 
 
 667
 born citizens sit in Parliament. With a multiplicity of small parties, coalition govern-
 ments tend to be weak and shifting, none has yet survived its 5-year electoral man-
 date. Former Prime Minister Paias Wingti provoked a constitutional crisis in Sep-
 tember 1993 when he attempted, through an unexpected resignation and immediate
 reelection, to ensure that his coalition remained in office . In August the Supreme
 Court ruled that Wingti's reelection was invalid. He did not stand for office when
 Parliament on August 30 elected Deputy Prime Minister Sir Julius Chan Prime
 Minister.
 By-elections for Parliament ordered by the National Court in 3 provinces, follow-
 ing disputed 1992 elections, were contested by 26 candidates in October and con-
 ducted peacefully but were marred in one district by preelection violence in June.
 Postelection violence caused by disgruntled supporters of losing candidates contin-
 ued to occur, however, particularly in provincial and local elections.
 Although there are no legal barriers to their participation in political life, women
 are not found in significant numbers in senior positions in government or in politics
 (see Section 5). There are no women in the Cabinet or in Parliament.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 There are no official barriers to the formation of human rights groups. The PNG
 Association for Human Rights, formed in 1992, has been relatively inactive. The In-
 dividual and Community Rights Advocacy Forum (ICRAF), a nongovernmental orga-
 nization (NGO) formed in 1993, became increasingly active; it focused on human
 rights and the environment. NGO's have exercised their right to comment on human
 rights issues in the media without any known government interference or retribu-
 tion. The Government organized a U.N.-spnsored seminar in October to review its
 options for establishing a national human rights commission.
 The U.N. Human Rights Commission adopted a resolution in March urging the
 Government to seek a peaceful solution to the crisis in Bougainville, and it author-
 ized the Secretary General to consider appointing a Special Representative after
 September 30 if the situation warranted. The Government facilitated a visit by a
 senior U.N. official in August, and in September the Secretary General advised that
 he would not appoint a special representative. The Government permitted an in-
 creased number of visits to Bougainville by reporters, including an Australian tele-
 vision crew in February, and sponsored visits by an Australian parliamentary dele-
 gation in April, Tonga's Crown Prince in June, and a representative of the U.N. Sec-
 retary General for the October peace conference. However it has not extended invi-
 tations to nongovernmental human rights organizations that have expressed inter-
 est in investigating alleged human rights abuses there.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 Extreme ethnic and geographic diversity prevents domination by any one tribe or
 clan. The democratically elected government, based on loose coalitions, has taken
 care not to favor one group over another consistently.
 Women.-The Constitution and laws have provisions for extensive rights for
 women including family law, marriage, and property rights. Some women in the
 modern sector have achieved senior positions in the professions, business, and civil
 service. Nonetheless, traditional patterns of discrimination against women result in
 a significant denial of human rights. Despite constitutional and legal provisions,
 most women, even those in urban areas, still live in a system that relegates them
 to second-class status. Village courts tend to enforce traditional attitudes and values
 that oppress both women and youth.
 For example, village court justices tend to be overly severe on women by imposing
 jail terms on women found guilty of adultery, while pnalizing men lightly or not
 at all. Circuit-riding national court justices, however, frequently annul village court
 sentences and free unjustly imprisoned women. Nevertheless, when sentence is im-
 posed, there is a tendency to impose longer sentences on women than men, particu-
 larly in cases involving loss of life. Where polygynous marriages are still customary,
 particularly in the highlands, there has been an increase in the number of women
 charged with the murder of another of their husband's wives, reportedly due to the
 breakdown in custom and tradition.
 Violence against women, including domestic violence and gang rape, is prevalent.
 Some tribal and clan cultures emphasize antagonism between the sexes. While
 women are ostensibly protected by their families and clans, they are nonetheless
 often victims of violence and force. Traditional village deterrents, such as require-
 ments for compensation, are breaking down.
 
 
 668
 Attacks on women remain common in intertribal warfare as well. Fear of rape,
 especially gang rape is justifiably common among women and constrains not only
 their movements and social activities but also their ability to exercise authority and
 discipline. in business and professional activities. The number of reported cases of
 rape is rising steadily. Though rape is punishable by prison sentences, and sen-
 tences are handed out when assailants are found guilty, few assailants are appre-
 hended. Most areas without access to law enforcement services rely on "payback,"
 a traditional form of revenge directed at the offender's tribe or clan, to deter or pun-
 ish rape. Domestic violence such as wife beating is also common but is usually
 viewed by police and citizenry alike as a private, family matter. One study spon-
 sored by the police department itself found that wife abuse is prevalent in police
 families.
 Both the Government and public organizations are working to upgrade the status
 of women but so far with limited results. In June Parliament ratified the Conven-
 tion on the Elimination of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW). According to
 the U.N. Development Program, the literacy rate of PNGs adult female population
 has actually declined by 5 percent over the past 14 years. The Government provides
 a grant to the National Council of Women and has instituted an Office of Women's
 Affairs in the Department of Home Affairs and Youth.
 Childreni.-The Government's ability to protect the rights and welfare of children
 is limited by financial constraints. Approximately 44 percent of PNG's population
 is under the age of 16. In PNG's traditional clan system, children are generally
 cared for within the extended family, in accordance with financial resources and the
 tribe's access to services. Because of the geographic isolation and remoteness of
 many villages, malnourishment and infant and maternal mortality rates are very
 high. Although statistics are not available, welfare officers believe that child abuse
 is increasing as village life and the extended family give way to urban development.
 Most programs to protect and develop youth are operated by NGO's, including the
 recently formed child protection services and religious organizations. Many govern-
 ment programs are severely underfunded.
 People With Disabilities.-Through the National Board for the Disabled, the Gov-
 ernment provides limited funding for the disabled to approximately 14 NGO's which
 provide services. The Government does not provide programs or services directly.
 Services and health care for the disabled, except for that provided by the traditional
 family and clan system, do not exist in several of the country's provinces. No legisla-
 tion mandates accessibility for the disabled.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Rqht of Association.-The right to form and join labor unions is protected
 by law, subject to registration by the Department of Labor. While the Government
 does not use registration as a form of control over unions, an unregistered union
 has no legal standing with the Department of Labor or before the courts and, ac-
 cordingly, cannot operate effectively. Unionized workers account for about one-half
 of the 250,000 wage earners in the formal economy and are organized into some 50
 trade unions most of which are associated with the Trade Unions Congress. Unions
 are independent of the Government and of political parties. They may freely affiliate
 with international organizations.
 Both public- and private-sector unions exercised their legal right to strike in 1994.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The Constitution provides for
 the right to engage in collective bargaining and to join industrial organizations.
 These rights are exercised freely. In 1994 the International Labor Organization
 (ILO) again admonished the Government to amend the law that gives it discre-
 tionary power to cancel arbitration awards or declare wage agreements void when
 hey are ontrary to government policy. The Government has stated the amendment
 has not been made due to a lack of resources. The law prohibits antiunion discrimi-
 nation by employers against union members and organizers. The Department of
 Labor and Emploment, as well as the courts, is involved in dispute settlement.
 Wages over andaeve the minimum wage are set through negotiations between em-
 play ers and employees or their respective industrial organizations.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulory Labor.-The Constitution forbids slavery
 and all forms of forced or compulsory labr, and there were no reports of such prac-
 tices.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The minimum working age, as es-
 tablished in the Employment Act, is 18 years. However, children between the ages
 of -11 and 18 may be employed in family related work provided they have parental
 permission, a medical clearance, and a work permit from a labor office. Such em-
 ployment is rare, except in subsistence agriculture. The Department of Labor and
 
 
 669
 Employment and the courts take steps to enforce the minimum age law, but they
 are so hampered by a lack of resources that enforcement is not effective.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work-Minimum wages for the private sector are set
 by the Mimum Wage Board, a quasi-governmental body with worker and employer
 representation. The most recent determination, which became effective in October
 1992, reduced the minimum wage for newly hired urban workers by about 75 per-
 cent to $19.50 (Kina 22.96) per week. The new minimum wage would not support
 a decent standard of living for a worker and family who exist solely on the cash
 economy. A 12 percent devaluation of the Kina in September, and the further depre-
 ciation of the Kina following the decision to allow the currency to float in October,
 has reduced the real wage received by workers. Minimum wage levels, allowances,
 rest periods, holidays, leave, and overtime are regulated by law. The workweek is
 limited by law t 42 hours 4 in rural areas). The law provides for at least one
 rest period of at least 24 consecutive hours in every week.
 Enforcement of the Industrial Health and Safet Law and related regulations is
 the respnsiility of the Department of Labor and Employment. The law requires
 that inspections take place on a regular basis, but, due to a shortage of inspectors,
 they occur only when requested by workers or unions.
