Papua New Guinea
Human rights conditions in Papua New Guinea (PNG) remain po0r. PNG’s significant
oil, gas, and gold reserves have continued to fuel strong economic
growth, but improving living standards remains a challenge with consistently
poor governance and endemic corruption. PNG’s corruption taskforce made
strides in investigating cases and initiating court action, but more concerted
efforts are needed given the scope of the problem.
Violence against women in PNG is rampant. A series of gruesome crimes involving
mob torture and murder of accused sorcerers was reported in 2013. Police
violence is also common; authorities have publicly condemned specific
instances of police violence, but impunity for perpetrators remains the norm.
Torture and Other Police Abuse
Physical and sexual abuse of detainees—including children—by police and
paramilitary police units is widespread. Two years after the UN special rapporteur
on torture issued a report on PNG, the government has failed to adequately
respond to his recommendations addressing police abuse and impunity.
In May, police beat and slashed the ankles of 74 men following a street brawl in
Port Moresby, the capital. Two police officers were charged with unlawful
wounding and five others investigated for the attack. A judge called for the
prosecution of other police implicated in the incident.
Other reported incidents of police violence during the year included beatings,
robberies, attempted murder, and the fatal shooting of a child. Although the
official response to police violence improved in 2013, there had been no reported
convictions of perpetrators in 2013 at time of writing.
Some of PNG’s notorious paramilitary police units (Mobile Squads) have been
deployed to Manus Island to assist with security issues at an Australian-funded
detention center for asylum seekers. In July, members of the squad beat a local
man to death on the island. Five members of the squad were charged with murder.
Violence against Women and Girls
In February, PNG Health Minister Michael Malabag reported that up to 68 percent
of women in PNG have suffered violence; up to a third have been raped. In
September, PNG’s parliament unanimously passed the Family Protection Bill
2013, which criminalizes domestic violence.
Accusations of sorcery are pervasive across the country and are routinely
invoked to justify violence. Most victims are women. In February, a mob in
Western Highlands Province accused a 20-year-old woman of being a witch and
burned her to death. Two people were charged in the incident. Local media
have reported that at least eight other women were victims of such attacks
between February and this writing in late 2013; police reportedly were investigating
the attacks.
The UN special rapporteur on violence against women, Rashida Manjoo, visited
PNG in 2012 and released her report in March 2013. The report calls for the
repeal of the 1971 Sorcery Act, which allows accusation of sorcery as a defense
to murder. In April, a UN human rights official renewed calls for a repeal of the
Sorcery Act and demanded an end to the extrajudicial killing of accused sorcerers.
The PNG government repealed the Sorcery Act in May.
Disability Rights
Children with disabilities in PNG face abuse, discrimination, exclusion, lack of
accessibility, and a wide range of barriers to education.
Death Penalty
In a step backwards, in May the parliament expanded the scope of crimes eligible
for the death penalty. Sorcery-related killings, aggravated rape, and armed
robbery are now predicate crimes. The amendment signals PNG’s intention to
resume executions after nearly 60 years (no executions have taken place since
1954). There are currently 10 prisoners on death row.
Corruption
Corruption remains a chronic problem in PNG. In September, the trials of 31
people charged in corruption cases began following investigations by PNG’s
anti-corruption task force. Also in September, task force Chairman Sam Koim
estimated that 40 percent of the national budget is misappropriated each year.
In November, the government introduced a bill to create an independent anticorruption
commission, a step that has been discussed for many years.
Extractive Industries
Extractive industries are an important engine of PNG’s economic growth, but
have given rise to serious human rights problems and environmental harm.
In 2011, Human Rights Watch documented gang rape and other violent abuses
by private security personnel at PNG’s Porgera gold mine, operated by Canadian
mining giant Barrick Gold. Along with other steps, Barrick has responded by
rolling out an ambitious remediation program to compensate victims of sexual
violence. That program has been dogged by controversy, but could be an important
global precedent if it succeeds.
The country’s $US19 billion Liquefied Natural Gas (LNG) project, led by
ExxonMobil, is reportedly on track to begin production in 2014. LNG revenues
could have a transformative impact on the national economy but, without additional
safeguards, could also exacerbate corruption. Violent clashes related to
compensation claims marred construction for the project.
Key International Actors
Australia is the country’s most important international partner and provided
$469 million dollars in development assistance in 2012-2013.
In July, Australia announced a new agreement with PNG whereby Australia will
transfer to PNG some of the asylum seekers arriving irregularly by boat in
Australian waters. Under the agreement, PNG will undertake refugee status
determinations and individuals determined to be refugees will be settled permanently
in PNG or wait to be settled in a third country with no option to settle
in Australia. PNG has agreed to withdraw its seven reservations to the 1951 Refugee Convention—including refugee rights to wage-earning employment,
public education, and freedom of movement—but how and when this will take
place remains unclear. At time of writing, 780 asylum seekers were detained in
the Australian-funded processing center on PNG’s Manus Island.
In July, the UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) raised concerns about
PNG’s lack of capacity and expertise to determine refugee status, its mandatory
and arbitrary detention of asylum seekers in substandard facilities, and likely
resettlement difficulties facing non-Melanesians. The fate of LGBT asylum seekers
is particularly precarious because the PNG criminal code outlaws sex
“against the order of nature,” which has been interpreted to apply to consensual
homosexual acts.
The Australian government pledged to send 50 unarmed police officers to PNG
by the end of 2013 to act in advisory roles and help combat the surge in reported
violence in the country. This is a short-term engagement aimed at building
the capacity of PNG’s police force.