 PAPUA NEW GUINEA
 Papua New Guinea is the largest and most populous island
 country in the South Pacific. It has a federal, parliamentary
 form of government with a unicameral legislature. Political
 legitimacy rests on popular will expressed in majority vote in
 accordance with a Constitution embodying extensive public
 consultation and Melanesian tradition, which accords prestige
 based on individual accomplishments rather than heredity. The
 military, police, and intelligence services are under civilian
 control. The courts are independent and vigorously protect
 individual rights. The two government transfers of power
 since independence in 1975 have been peaceful and in keeping
 with the Constitution.
 The economic system has three parts: The traditional, rural,
 subsistence economy which supports about 80 percent of the
 population; the privately controlled money economy; and
 enterprises in which the Government has invested. The private
 sector produces most of the wealth and provides three-fourths
 of government revenues; most of the remainder is aid from
 Australia.
 In 1984, constitutional protection of individual rights
 continued to be maintained by the courts. A provincial
 government order to force squatters in and near the city of
 Madang to return to their villages without due process was
 declared unconstitutional and reversed; some prisoners
 charged with criminal offenses were released from jail for
 having been held over six months without trial; and an
 officer of the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade has
 been convicted and fined for striking two illegal border
 crossers during questioning.
 Since February 1984, about 11,000 Irian Jayans fleeing
 conditions in Indonesia have illegally crossed the border into
 Papua New Guinea and been gathered into nine border camps
 where they are maintained by the Government of Papua New
 Guinea and various aid organizations. Although repatriation
 of these border crossers is the Government's declared
 intention, it has also stated it will consider the effects of
 returning in each case and will not forcibly repatriate any
 border crosser. The Government has negotiated a number of
 guarantees and procedural safeguards with the Government of
 Indonesia aimed at insuring the safety and rights of border
 crossers before their return to Irian jays. Several hundred
 border crossers may eventually be classified as refugees and
 allowed to remain in Papua New Guinea or given refuge in third
 countries.
 In 1984 as in previous years, no significant complaints of
 human rights violations occurred in Papua New Guinea. In
 response to rising urban crime, large public demonstrations
 and meetings were mounted this year throughout the country to
 demand more active protective measures for the public.
 Consequently, some members of the public and of Parliament
 have spoken in favor of compromising individual rights to
 strengthen governmental control over urb.n crime as well as
 tribal fighting. However, no erosion of rights has occurred,
 and the growing legal profession, active churches, a lively
 press, and an informed citizenry are energetic in protecting
 freedoms.
 
 40-387 0 - 85 - 54
 
 
 840
 PAPUA NEW GUINEA
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 Neither the Government nor any opposition group has resorted
 to political killing.
 b. Disappearance
 Forced disappearance of persons by officials or suspected
 officials does not occur.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 The Constitution forbids torture and cruel or degrading
 treatment. Prisoners are almost always treated fairly and
 humanely. The courts and Ombudsman Commission investigate the
 small number of complaints and intervene when abuses are
 discovered. Civil damages have been awarded and offending
 officials punished in such cases.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Politically motivated arrests do not occur in Papua New
 Guinea, and the courts vigorously enforce constitutional
 protections against arbitrary arrest or detention. Exile is
 not practiced. Warrants are required for arrests. Suspects
 have free access to a lawyer of their choice, and in serious
 cases counsel is provided at state expense. Suspects and
 their counsel are informed of charges and have the right of
 judicial review of detention. A reasonable bail is allowed,
 except when a judge rules that the risk of flight or further
 crime warrants detention.
 On June 29, 1984, members of the Irian Jaya Separatist
 movement, Organisi Papua Merdeka (Free Papual Movement) or
 OPM, crossed into a remote area of Papua New Guinea, kidnapped
 and held captive for three days a Papua New Guinea school
 teacher who, they claimed, was spying on the movement's
 activities. The teacher was released unharmed when it became
 apparent that all levels of Papua New Guinea society,
 including the Government and OPM sympathizers, condemned the
 kidnapping.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The right to a fair, public trial is strictly observed.
 Defendants are represented by counsel. A high crime rate and
 a shortage of funds, police and judicial personnel have caused
 the time spent awaiting trial for serious offenses to increase
 in recent years. The right of habeas corpus, however, limits
 holding persons without trial to a maximum of six months. The
 courts are free from executive, political, or military
 interference. There are no political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Sanctity of the home and family and privacy of correspondence
 are observed.
 
 
 841
 PAPUA NEW GUINEA
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 An independent press, effective constitutional guarantees, and
 a functioning democratic political system combine to insure
 freedom of speech and press. State-owned radio gives
 significant, if not entirely equal, coverage to statements of
 opposition politicians. Pornography is prohibited. Films are
 censored for suitability and classification based on sexual
 explicitness and degree of violence. Adademic freedom is
 respected.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 The right of association is legally guaranteed and freely
 exercised. Labor unions are protected by law and are active
 and important in the country's economic and political life.
 Over 50 trade unions exist, among which the most significant
 are the various public employees' associations, the two
 mineworkers' unions, and the dockworkers' union. The private
 sector unions are free to strike and do so regularly. Papua
 New Guinea is a member of the International Labor Organization
 and union executives often attend international councils.
 Employers' associations also flourish. There is a legal
 requirement that a permit be obtained before a demonstration.
 No application has been denied recently.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Freedom of religion is guaranteed by law. There are no
 controls on the practice of religion and no religious
 discrimination. A wide variety of indigenous and Christian
 denominations flourish. Missionaries are allowed to work
 freely in the country and their contributions to spiritual
 life are widely and favorably recognized.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Freedom of movement of Papua New Guinea citizens within or
 into and out of the country is not restricted by law.
 Naturalization is available to foreign residents who satisfy a
 residence requirement and are sponsored by a village; it can
 be revoked only for fraud. Some economic privileges are
 reserved for native citizens. Persons who enter Papua New
 Guinea without documentation from the neighboring Indonesian
 Province of Irian Jaya are interviewed in order to establish
 the reasons for their entry. Current practice is to return
 those who come for economic reasons; and to find refuge
 through the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) for
 those judged likely to suffer reprisals if returned home.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Papua New Guinea has a unicameral legislature composed of
 representatives from 19 provinces and the national capital.
 None of the seven organized parties has an absolute
 parliamentary majority. Politics are marked by keen
 competition for elected offices and a loose party structure.
 
 
 842
 PAPUA NEW GUINEA
 Parliamentarians can and occasionally do cross party lines
 during votes. Any citizen can run for Parliament and several
 members are foreign born. Two peaceful changes of government
 have taken place since independence. The parliamentary
 elections since independence have resulted in substantial
 turnovers of members. An Ombudsman Commission monitors
 campaign contributions.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Non-governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 Although there have been no allegations by international or
 non-governmental agencies of human rights violations in Papua
 New Guinea, local politicians and some private groups have
 criticized the government for not doing more to improve the
 lot of illegal border crossers from Irian Jaya who live in
 nine-temporary camps near the border. The UNHCR has an office
 in Port Moresby that contributes toward the provision of
 minimal necessities for border crossers. No domestic human
 rights monitoring group exists, but several outside groups
 have been permitted to visit border camps and have reported on
 them. The Ombudsman Commission and the courts take legal
 action against abuses when discovered, and the press and
 concerned politicians have been quick to publicize alleged
 governmental shortcomings. The 1984 Amnesty International
 Report did not contain an entry for Papua New Guinea. Freedom
 House's 1983-84 report lists it as 'free.'
 ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND CULTURAL SITUATION
 Papua New Guinea has land and mineral resources, but modern
 technology has only recently arrived and is not yet widely
 disseminated. Most of the population lives at the subsistence
 level. Lack of infrastructure--roads, ports, and electric
 power--is a constraint on growth. Communal ownership of land,
 which discourages individual investment and inhibits the
 government's exercise of eminent domain, is another barrier to
 growth.
 Nonetheless, according to available economic indicators, the
 standard of living in Papua New Guinea is improving. Per
 capita Gross National Product is up from $360 in 1970 to $816
 in 1982, an average annual gain of two percent in real terms.
 According to World Bank statistics, in 1984 the population
 grew at the rate of 2.1 percent to 3,226,000.
 Infant mortality is declining (92.8 per 1,000 live births in
 1984). Life expectancy at birth in 1984 was 53.3 years.
 School enrollment is up from 39 percent of primary school-aged
 children in 1970 to 66 percent in 1982. The Government
 provides education and health care on a nondiscriminatory
 basis; however, the highlands region lags in education because
 of its later exposure to the outside world.
 Papua New Guinea devotes significant resources to confronting
 the serious social problems of tribal feuds in the rural
 highlands region and crime in the towns. Tribal fighting
 causes about 140 deaths a year, plus injuries and extensive
 destruction of homes and subsistence plots. Enforcement of
 existing laws is not wholly effective. Participants usually
 do not testify against each other and only a small proportion
 of persons arrested are convicted.
 
 
 843
 PAPUA NEW GUINEA
 Urban crime has its main roots in high unemployment among
 recent migrants from the countryside and a traditional
 acceptance of intergroup violence. The number of crimes
 actually reported nationwide in 1984 is about the same as
 1983, but there is a public perception that crime is steadily
 and markedly increasing and government leaders have made
 statements to this effect. The crime rate in Papua New Guinea
 is believed to be about double the average for developing
 countries. The resultant prison population is one of the
 highest in Asia and the South Pacific.
 Women have equal rights before the law and their status is
 gradually improving, but they still face difficulties.
 Wife-beating is said to be widespread, but it is rarely
 brought to the attention of the authorities. In urban areas,
 along with other violent crimes, rape is a problem of
 increasing severity. In the villages, women are protected by
 their kin, but attacks on women are a common feature of
 intertribal conflict. Against the background of traditional
 male dominance, the achievements of women in Papua New Guinea
 are significant. Some have become doctors, lawyers, and
 office directors. The Permanent Secretary for Labor and the
 head of the Education Commission are women. One woman, a
 former minister, is a member of the National Parliament and
 several hold seats in provincial assemblies.
 Word Bank statistics from 1975 (the latest available) indicate
 that only 20 percent of the population has access to safe
 water. Since that date, however, several governmental and aid
 programs have made safe water supply a development priority.
 Safe water is now available in towns and most villages.
 According to World Bank statistics, the average caloric intake
 of Papua New Guineans in 1981 was 92 percent of that needed.
 Cases of malnutrition in the more remote areas along the
 border and in parts of the highlands are still reported. Ten
 percent of the urban and 75 percent of the rural population
 were living below the absolute poverty level in 1979,
 according to World Bank statistics.
 
 
 844
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: PAPUA NEW GUINEA
 1982     1983     1984
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL...         0.4      0.6      0.8
 LOANS ..............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................    0.4      0.6      0.8
 A.AID ...... ..............    0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS ..............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................    0.0      0.0  o   0.0
 (SEC.SUPP.ASSIST.)...         0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.FOOD FOR PEACE .......        0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS ..............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................    0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE I-TOTAL ..........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS .....        0.0      0.0      0.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR .....        0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE II-TOTAL .........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.RELIEF.EC.OEV & WFP.         0.0      0.0      0.0
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY .....        0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST...         0.4      0.6      0.8
 LOANS ..............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................    0.4      0.6      0.8
 PEACE CORPS ......        0.4      0.6      0.8
 NARCOTICS ........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 OTHER .............       0.0      0.0      0.0
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL...         0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS ..............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................ . 0.0      0.0      0.0
 A.MAP GRANTS ..........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.CREDIT FINANCING ....        0.0      0.0      0.0
 C. INTL MIL.ED.TRNG ....       0.0      0.0      0.0
 D.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK...         0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS ........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. & NIL...         0.4      0.6      0.8
 LOANS ..............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................    0.4      0.6      0.8
 OTHER US LOANS ..........       60.0      0.0      0.0
 EX-IM BANK LOANS .......       60.0      0.0      0.0
 ALL OTHER ................. 0.0         0.0      0.0
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1982     1983     1984     1946-84
 TOTAL ..........  38.7    80.6     64.3    523.8
 IBRD               6.0     45.1     49.3    194.4
 IFC                0.0      0.0      0.0      7.6
 IDA                2.0      3.0      0.0    113.2
 IDS                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 ADB               28.0     24.0     15.0    177.2
 AFOB               0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 UNDP               2.5      0.0      0.0     14.4
 OTHER-UN           0.2      0.6      0.0      2.1
 EEC                0.0      7.9      0.0     14.9
 
 
 845
