 PAPUA NEW GUINEA
 Papua New Guinea (PNG) comprises some 1,000 tribes and over 800 distinct lan-
 guages in a population of about 4 million. It has a federal parliamentary system,
 based on universal adult suffrage with periodic free and fair elections, and has an
 independent judiciary.
 Serious disorder erupted in March. PNGDF Commander Brigadier General Jerry
 Singirok called on then Prime Minister Julius Chan and Vice Prime Minister Chris
 Haiveta to resign, following disclosure of a plan to hire foreign mercenaries from
 the company Sandline International in the Bougainville conflict. Looting and dem-
 onstrations took place, and both PNGDF troops and civilian protesters surrounded
 Parliament. Prime Minister Chan stepped down temporarily but resumed his posi-
 tion after being cleared of wrongdoing by a commission of inquiry. He lost his par-
 liamentary seat in July national elections, and a new government headed by Prime
 Minister Bill Skate took office.
 The Government has constitutional authority over the Defense Force (PNGDF),
 the Royal Papua New Guinea Constabulary (RPNGC), and intelligence organiza-
 tions. Government security forces committed serious human rights abuses.
 Exploitation of such natural resources as minerals, hydrocarbons, and tropical
 timber, and production of tree crops such as coffee, cocoa, and copra, generate sig-
 nificnt export and tax revenues. However 85 prcent of the population resides in
 isolated villages, and engages in subsistence and smallholder agrculture. For a ma-
 jority of citizens, income and literacy are at a low level, and infant and maternal
 r yrates are high.
 The Government's human rights reord remained the same. Killings and
 kidnapings by both sides in the 9-year secessionist insurgency on Bougainville con-
 
 
 871
 tinued, until a cease-fire was successfully negotiated in October. Besides the conflict
 with the Bougainville Revolutionary Army (BRA), there continued to be credible re-
 ports that members of the security forces committed extrajudicial killings, were re-
 sponsible for disappearances, abused prisoners and detainees, and employed harsh
 enforcement measures against civilians. The Government on occasion investigated
 allegations of abuse and prosecuted those believed responsible. Prison conditions re-
 main poor, there are lengthy pretrial detentions, and the Government infringes on
 citizens' privacy Tights and limits freedom of assembly. Extensive discrimination
 and violence against women, discrimination against the disabled, and violence be-
 tween tribes remain serious problems.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-On February 12, members of the se-
 curity forces at Kokopau, Bougainville, allegedly executed a man suspected of killing
 a member of the progovernment resistance and a telephone technician. PNGDF sof
 dier Taylor Bojori was arrested for killing a progovernment resistance fighter on
 Bougainville on August 15. Members of the constabulary committed a number of
 extrajudicial killings during police actions throughout the country, and the authori-
 ties on occasion punished constabulary officers.
 Excessive use of force by police resulted in several extrajudicial killings. While
 praying in the hills near Port Moresby in January, John Leo was shot and killed
 by police in pursuit of fleeing robbers. Four policemen in Lae were suspended after
 allegedly beating to death a man suspected of sorcery on March 12. A youth who
 had allegedly been selling wristwatches in front of a supermarket was shot and
 killed while fleeing from police on June 3. Police Sergeant Samson Ambus was sen-
 tenced to 7 years' imprisonment on August 27 for killing businessman Sande Ratu
 during a search for illegal .beer. An off-duty PNGDF soldier, Missian Waingut, was
 also sentenced to 7 years for manslaughter after killing a man during an argument.
 There was no progress in the investigation of the October 1996 killing of Theodore
 Miring, Premier o the   rogovernment Bougainville Transitional Government. De-
 spite clear indications that members of the progovernment resistance and the
 PNGDF were involved, no arrests were made.
 The level of armed conflict on Bougainville decreased. However, there were contin-
 ued reports of civilian casualties.
 A BRA commander who spoke in favor of disarmament was reportedly killed by
 his own men in June. A number of PNGDF and other security force personnel were
 killed in BRA ambushes.
 b. Disappearance.-Re ports of disappearances were fewer than in 1996. However,
 there continued to be alegations that both sides in the Bougainville conflict de-
 tained members of the opposing forces, who were not seen again. Due to limited ac-
 cess to Bougainville, these reports are difficult to verify.
 Bougainville Member of Parliament John Momis was kidnaped by rebel elements
 and held hostage for 16 days before being released in June.
 In July the BRA released five members of the PNGDF who had been taken pris-
 oner following the Kangu Beach massacre of September 1996.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution forbids torture and other cruel or degrading treatment or punish-
 ment. However, members of the security forces abused prisoners and detainees. Po-
 lice reportedly threaten suspects with death or severe injury if they do not confess.
 Constabulary members used excessive force at times, particularly in attempts to
 compel a community to surrender a criminal suspect. On July 21, police allegedly
 burned 30 houses and several shops in retaliation for the slaying of a police ser-
 geant in Madang. In August the Government rebuked and reprimanded a police
 commander who threatened to burn a number of villages (see Section 1.f.).
 In March police used tear gas and rubber bullets to quell a riot by approximately
 2,000 people over the proposed hiring of foreign mercenaries. However, only one se-
 rious injury was reported; a security guard chopped off a looter's hand.
 Prisons are overcrowded and understaffed, and are unable to provide adequate
 medical care or food to inmates. Conditions are life-threatening. Many prisoners as
 well as guards do not have uniforms, making it difficult for outsiders to distinguish
 between the two. The authorities closed at least three prisons as the result of dete-
 rioration and neglect. Inmates were either moved elsewhere or released. Outbreaks
 of typhoid were reported at some prisons.
 The Government permits prison visits by human rights monitors.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The courts generally enforce constitu-
 tional protections against arbitrary arrest and detention. However, these protections
 
 
 872
 were weakened by the 1993 Internal Security Act (ISA). Amendments to existing
 legislation provide that judicially issued warrants are no longer required when au-
 thorities suspect that a person has committed an ISA offense or certain other of-
 fenses. Under 1993 amendments to the Bail Act and the Criminal Code, only Na-
 tional or Supreme Court judges may grant bail in certain criminal cases involving
 firearms. In all other cases, bail may be granted unless the judge rules otherwise.
 Suspects who are arrested have the right to legal counsel, to be informed of the
 charges against them, and to have their arrests subjected to judicial review.
 Due to limited police and judicial resources and a high crime rate, suspects are
 often held in pretrial detention for a long time, particularly in rural areas. Pretrial
 remand is subject to strict judicial review through continuing pretrial consultations,
 especially at the National Court level. Nonetheless, cases are frequently delayed for
 months awaiting results of police investigations.
 Exile is rohibited by the Constitution and is not practiced.
 e. Deni  of Fair Public Trial.-The Constitution provides for an independent judi-
 ciary, and the courts are independent of executive, legislative, and military authori-
 ties.
 The Supreme Court is the final court of appeal and holds original jurisdiction on
 constitutional matters. The National Court hears most cases and appeals from the
 lower district courts established at the provincial level. There are also village courts
 headed by lay persons, who judge minor offenses under both customary and statu-
 tory law.
 The legal system is based on English common law. The Constitution provides for
 due process, including a public trial, and the court system generally enforce these
 provisions. Defendants have the right to an attorney. Legal counsel is provided ei-
 ther by the Public Solicitor's office or by the Law Society upon the recommendation
 of the Public Solicitor's office for those accused of serious offenses who are unable
 to afford counsel. "Serious offenses" are generally defined as felony charges or any
 case heard in either the National or district court (as opposed to the village or mag-
 istrate courts). Defendants and their attorneys may confront witnesses, present evi-
 dence, plead cases, and appeal convictions.
 There were no reports of political prisoners. Several nongovernmental organiza-
 tion (NGO) leaders who took part in protests against the Government in March
 claimed that charges subsequently brought against them were politically motivated.
 The charges were later dropped (see Section 2.b.).
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-Al-
 though the authorities enerally respect privacy rights, police at times have burned
 homes to quell conflict etween tribes and punish communities suspected of harbor-
 ing criminal suspects (see Sections 1.c. and 1.f.). Some communities have sought re-
 dress through civil suits; this provides compensation to victims but does not result
 in criminal prosecution of the perpetrators.
 On Augst 26, the East Sepik police commander threatened to burn a number of
 villages if the suspect in an attack on a foreign tourist was not handed over. Prime
 Minister Bill Skate directed that appropriate action be taken against the officer who
 had made the threat, and the officer was subsequently "rebuked and reprimanded."
 Although prvisions in the Constitution require warrants, the police continued to
 conduct warrantless searches and raids.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for free speech, in-
 cluding freedom of the media, and the Government generally respects this freedom
 in practice.
 The media provided independent coverage and analysis of major issues, including
 the controversy over the presence of the Sandiin mercenaries and the national elec-
 tions held in J       ouly.
 The combined circulation of two daily English-language newspapers is less than
 60,000. Two weekly newspaers, one in English and one in Pidgin (the national lin-
 gua franca), are also published. Alfreely express a variety of editorial viewpoints,
 and report on controversial issues such as alleged abuses by police and security
 forces, cases of alleged corruption by goveent officials, Bouganvile insurgent
 views ete One of the dailies is owned by a Malaysian firm, which has invested
 heavily in the country's timber industry; the newspaper publishes little on the con-
 trversial subjects of logging and forestry, but is generally independent and unbi-
 ased on other issues.
 The television broadcasting company, EM-TV, is independent. Television reception
 is mostly limited to the Port Moresby area. The government-owned National Broad-
 casting Corporation owns two radio networks whose effectiveness is limited by inad-
 equate fnding and deteriorating equipment. A privately owned radio network,
 
 
 873
 NAU-FM, is popular in Port Moresby and is expanding into other areas of the coun-
 try.
 Journalists who wish to travel to Bougainville are required to obtain permission
 from the Prime Minister's office and from the commander of the PNGDF. Requests
 are frequently denied on the grounds that the Government is unable to guarantee
 the reporter's safety.
 The Government respects academic freedom.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution provides for
 freedom of assembly; however, the Government limits this right in practice. Public
 demonstrations require police approval and 7 days' notice. The authorities fre-
 quently deny permission on the grounds that such activities could encourage by-
 standers to engage in vandalism and violence.
 On May 5, plice raided the headquarters of human rights nongovernmental orga-
 nizations PNG Watch, Individual and Community Rights Advocacy Forum, and
 Rainbow Trust, confiscating books, pamphlets, computers and diskettes. During the
 raids, PNG Watch executive officer Jonathan O'ata was arrested and charged with
 three counts of illegal assembly related to the Sandline mercenary protests in
 March. Sam Inguba, police commander of the National Capital District, said that
 the raids were a normal part of preelection operations, and that the police were
 searching for illegal firearms. Student activist John Napu and an executive of the
 Melanesian Solidarity Front, John Kawowo, were arrested on May 6 and also
 charged with unlawful assembly. After learning that his name was on a list of peo-
 ple to be arrested, human rights attorney Powes Parkop appeared voluntarily before
 the police and was similarly charged on May 13. The men were released on bail.
 The arrests were widely publicized and criticized. All charges against the four were
 quietly dropped in September, although this fact was not publicized (see Section 4).
 The Constitution provides for freedom of association and the Government gen-
 erally respects this right in practice. Associations that wish to open a bank account
 and conduct financial transactions are required to register for this purpose. The
 process of registration may be slowed by bureaucratic inefficiency, but there is no
 policy of denying registration. International affiliation of church and civic groups is
 freely permitted.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for freedom of religion, and the
 Government respects this right in practice.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the County, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-Government approval is required to travel to Bougainville. The PNGDF
 occasionaliy imposed sea travel restrictions on villagers living on small islands off
 Bougainville due to concerns over potential BRA attacks.
 Apart from Bougainville, the Government does not restrict freedom of movement
 within and outside the country. The BRA reportediy restricted people from moving
 from areas under its control to government-controlled areas.
 The Government provides first asylum for approximately 3,000 people who have
 fled from the neighbrig Indonesian province of Irian Jaya. The Government co-
 operates with the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) in as-
 sisting the Irian Jayans who live in the East Awin refugee camp in Western Prov-
 ince, and has administered the camp since June 1996, when the UNHCR office
 closed. The Government has a policy of limited integration for Irian Jayans with
 certain skills or other qualifications, who are accorded limited residency status and
 are permitted to leave the refugee settlement. Those who violate conditions of their
 refugee status can be repatriated. There were no known forced repatriations of Irian
 Jayans to Indonesia. Several thousand traditional border-crossers live in the border
 area and move freely between the two countries.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens freely exercise their right to change their government through direct elec-
 tions with a secret ballot and universal adult suffrage. Voters elect a unicameral
 parliament with 109 members from all 19 provinces and the National Capital Dis-
 trict. Any citizen can stand for election. Because of the high number of candidates
 for Parliament, some members have won election with less than 10 percent of the
 total votes cast.
 Following a general election in June in which 66 percent of eligible voters partici-
 pated, Bill Skate became Prime Minister, forming a coalition with members of the
 People's Progess and Pangu parties. Fifty-five of the 109 seats in Parliament
 Although there are no legal barriers to the participation of women in political life,
 they are underrepresented in senior positions in government and politics. Two
 women were elected to Parliament in the June elections.
 
 
 874
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 There are no official barriers to the formation of human rights groups. The Gov-
 ernment cooperates with human rights NGO's, but sometimes is slow in responding
 to their requests for information. The International and Community Ri hts Advo-
 cacy Forum (ICRAF), formed in 1993, concentrated on human rights and the envi-
 ronment. ICRAF and PNG Watch Council leaders participated in demonstrations in
 March against the planned use of foreign mercenaries in the Bougainville conflict.
 Four nongovernmental organization leader were arrested in May and charged with
 unlawful assembly, based on their participation in these demonstrations. They were
 released on bail and the charges were quietly dropped in September (see Section
 2.b.).
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution provides for equal protection under the law irrespective of race,
 tribe, place of origin, political opInion, color, creed, religion or sex. Despite these
 constitutional and other legal provisions, women often face discrimination.
 Extreme geographic diversity prevents any one tribe or clan from dominating the
 country. The democratically elected government, based on loose coalitions, has con-
 sistently avoided favoring any group. Virtually all citizens share Melanesian eth-
 nicity, and violence between groups is not ethnically based. Skirmishes and conflicts
 tend to be based on disputes between clans over issues such as boundaries, land
 ownership, and injuries and insults suffered by one clan at the hands of another.
 In the past, clan/tribal warfare was ritualized and fought with traditional weapons;
 the availability of high-powered firearms has made such conflicts deadlier.
 Women.-Violence against women, including domestic violence and gang rape, is
 a serious and prevalent problem. Traditional village mores, which served as deter-
 rents are weakening and are largely absent when youths move from their village
 to a larger town or to the capital. The number of gang rapes is believed to have
 risen. Although rape is punishable by imprisonment, and sentences are imposed
 when assailants are found guilty, few assailants are apprehended. Domestic violence
 such as wife beating is also common, but is usually viewed by police and citizens
 as a private family matter.
 Violence committed against women by other women frequently stems from domes-
 tic disputes. In areas where polygyny is still customary, an increasing number of
 women have been charged with the murder of another of their husband's wives. Ac-
 cording to one report, 65 percent of women in prison are there for attacking or kill-
 ing another woman.
 The Constitution and laws have provisions for extensive lights for women dealing
 with family, marriage, and property issues. Some women have achieved senior posi-
 tions in business, the professions, and civil service. However, traditional patterns
 of discrimination against women persist. Many women, even in urban areas, are
 considered second-class citizens. Village courts tend to impose jail terms on women
 found guilty of adultery, while penalizing men lightly or not at all. Circuit-riding
 National Court justices frequently annulled such village court sentences. In 1996
 the Government approved amendments to the Village Courts Act requiring that or-
 ders for imprisonment be endorsed by a district court before they take effect. Po-
 lygyny and the custom of paying a bride-price tend to reinforce the view that women
 are property.
 In addition to the purchase of women as brides, women are also given as com-
 pensation to settle disputes between clans. For the first time, in May 1996, an 18-
 year-old woman, Miriam Wilungal, refused to accept her clan's decision to include
 her, along with $15,000 and 25 pigs, in the compensation paid to another clan to
 resolve a killing. In February a National Court judge ruled in her favor, saying that
 her rights to personal freedom and equal status had been violated.
 According to a 1996 United Nations International Children's Fund (UNICEF) re-
 port, the country has a high maternal mortality rate. Only 40 percent of women are
 literate, trailing men by nearly 10 percent. According to another 1996 U.N. report,
 33 percent of girls do not attend primary school, compared with 21 percent of boys.
 Efforts by both the Government and NGO's to improve the status and conditions
 of women have had limited results. The Government provides a grant to the private
 National Council of Women. There is an office of women's affairs in the Ministry
 of Home Affairs, Youth, and Women.
 Children.-The Government did not dedicate significant resources to protect the
 rights and welfare of children. Most programs to protect and develop youth and chil-
 dren are operated by NGO's and religious organizations. Many government pro-
 grams are underfunded. Under the traditional clan system prevalent in the country,
 
 
 875
 children are generally cared for within the extended family, in accordance with fi-
 nancial resources andthe tribe's access to services. Because of the geographic isola-
 tion and remoteness of many villages, malnutrition and infant mortality rates are
 very high. More than 60 of every thousand children born do not survive their first
 year. Although Papua New Guinea ratified the U.N. Convention on the Rights of
 the Child (CRC) in 1993, the Government has not yet completed the report due in
 1995 on CRC implementation, nor prepared the national plan of action.
 People With Disabilities.-Through the National Board for the Disabled, the Gov-
 ernment provides funding to a number of NGO's that provide services to the dis-
 abled. The Government itself does not provide programs or services directly. Serv-
 ices and health care for the disabled, except for those provided by the traditional
 clan and family system, do not exist in several of the country's provinces. There is
 no legislation mandating accessibility for the disabled. Disabled persons face dis-
 crimination in education, training, and employment.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The right to form and join labor unions is provided
 by law, subject to registration by the Department of Industrial Relations. The Gov-
 ernment does not use registration as a form of control over unions. However, an un-
 registered union has no legal standing with the Department of Labor or before the
 courts, and thus cannot operate effectively. About half of the 250,000 wage-earners
 in the formal economy are organized and are members of one of approximately 50
 trade unions. Most of the unions representing private-sector workers are associated
 with the Trade Unions Congress. Unions are independent of the Government and
 of political parties.
 Both public and private sector unions exercised their legal right to strike in 1997.
 Unions may freely affiliate with international organizations.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The Constitution provides for
 the right to engage in collective bargaining and to join industrial organizations.
 These rights are exercised freely. Under the law, the Government has discretionary
 power to cancel arbitration awards or declare wage agreements void when they are
 contrary to government policy. This law was criticized by the International Labor
 Organization in 1994. Antiunion discrimination by employers against union leaders,
 members, and organizers is prohibited by law. The Department of Industrial Rela-
 tions and the courts are involved in dispute settlement. Wages above the minimum
 wage are set through negotiations between employers and employees or their re-
 spective industrial organizations.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The Constitution forbids slavery
 and all forms of forced or compulsory labor, including that performed by children
 and there were no reports of such practices. There were no reports of forced or bond-
 ed labor by children.
 d. Status of Child Labor Practices and Minimum Age for Employment.-The Em-
 ployment Act establishes the minimum working age as 18. However, children be-
 tween the ages of 11 and 18 may be employed in a family-related business or enter-
 prise provided they have parental permission, a medical clearance, and a work per-
 mit from a labor office. This type of employment is rare, except in subsistence agri-
 culture. Forced and bonded labor by children is prohibited and is not known to occur
 (see Section 6.c.).
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-Minimum wages for the private sector are set
 by the Minimum Wage Board, a quasi-governmental body with representatives from
 the labor and employer sectors. The Board made a determination in 1992, which is
 still valid, reducing the minimum wage for newly hired urban workers to the level
 of the minimum wage for rural workers. Also in 1992, the National Youth Wage,
 for new entrants into the labor force between 16 and 21 years of age, was set at
 75 percent of the adult minimum wage. The adult minimum wage of $28.00 (40
 kina) per week does not provide a decent standard of living for a worker and family
 who live solely on the cash economy. Although the Department of Labor and Em-
 ployment and the courts attempt to enforce the minimum wage law, enforcement
 is not effective due to lack of resources. Minimum wage levels, allowances, rest peri-
 ods, holidays leave, and overtime are regulated by law. The workweek is limited by
 law to 42 hours per week in urban areas and 44 hours per week in rural areas.
 The law provides for at least one rest period of 24 consecutive hours every week.
 Enforcement is lax.
 Enforcement of the Industrial Health and Safety Law and related regulations is
 the responsibility of the De partment of Labor and Employment. The law requires
 that work sites be inspected on a regular basis. However, due to a shortage of in-
 spectors, inspections take place only when requested by workers or unions. Workers'
 
 
 ability to remove themselves from hazardous working conditions varies by work-
 place. Unionized workers have some measure of protection in such situations.
