 PAPUA NEW GUINEA
 Papua New Guinea (PNG), with some 1,000 tribes and over 800
 distinct languages, is one of the world's most diverse
 societies. PNG has a federal parliamentary system based on
 universal adult suffrage. The Constitution is similar to that
 of other English-speaking parliamentary democracies in its
 emphasis on respect for individual rights. The four transfers
 of power since independence in 1975 have been constitutional
 and peaceful.
 The civilian government generally controls the military,
 police, and intelligence organizations, but there have been
 significant human rights abuses by individual members of the
 police and the military. The former Rapua New Guinea Defense
 Force (PNGDF) commander for Northern Solomons Province
 (Bougainville), Col. Leo Nuia, was rebuked by the Government
 for undertaking an unauthorized military raid in the troubled
 province in April.
 Papua New Guinea's economy is characterized by a relatively
 small but modern free enterprise sector heavily dependent on
 foreign investment and a traditional subsistence sector that
 involves the vast majority of the population. The modern
 sector produces most of the wealth and slightly less than 80
 percent of state revenue, with the balance of the Government's
 budget needs made up by aid from Australia. PNG has great
 difficulty in reconciling traditional land claims with official
 efforts to develop its rich natural resources.
 Resolving the insurgency in the North Solomons Province of
 Bougainville remains a high priority for the Government. PNG
 officials and Bougainville Revolutionary Army (BRA) leaders
 signed the "Honiara Accord" in early 1991, but efforts to
 implement the agreement have been hampered by periodic
 confrontations between soldiers and BRA rebels. The security
 forces, in contrast to their earlier behavior, have begun to
 demonstrate restraint toward members of the public in
 reoccupied areas. Col. Nuia, however, admitted in April that
 his forces had carried out several extrajudicial executions the
 previous year. There were also credible allegations of BRA
 torture and "disappearances" of persons in rebel-held areas.
 PNG's fundamentally democratic social and political
 institutions attempt to promote respect for human rights
 throughout the country through the ombudsman mechanism.
 However, individual members of the Royal Papua New Guinea
 Constabulary (RPNGC) and the PNGDF committed significant human
 rights violations, including murder, torture, physical
 mistreatment, collective punishment, and arbitrary detention.
 Although police and military offenders are sometimes tried and
 convicted by the courts, not all the perpetrators of these
 abuses are effectively punished.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing
 Several possible cases of political or extrajudicial killing by
 the PNGDF were reported in 1991. Col. Leo Nuia, former PNGDF
 commander in the North Solomons Province, stated on an
 Australian television show in April.that the PNGDF had executed
 a United Church pastor, Raumo Benito, andfive of his
 
 
 953
 PAPUA NEW GUINEA
 parishioners in February 1990 and thrown their bodies into the
 ocean from a helicopter. The Government immediately relieved
 Col. Nuia and prohibited further PNGDF Defense Force comments
 to the media. Col. Nuia was apparently relieved for his
 comments confirming that the incident had taken place. He has
 not been court-martialed in connection with the original
 incident. A soldier indicted for the killing of a
 Bougainvillean mother and child in 1990 was court-martialed
 and is currently serving a prison sentence. A BRA spokesman
 claimed in late 1991 that government security forces and a
 progovernment paramilitary group killed 48 residents of Buka
 Island in some 36 separate incidents, but these allegations
 have not been independently verified.
 BRA insurgents killed two government soldiers in north
 Bougainville in July and attacked PNGDF forces on two other
 occasions. BRA leader Sam Kauona admitted in a February
 television interview that the BRA killed four alleged criminals
 in 1990.
 Attorney General Bernard Narokobi appointed a senior magistrate
 in September to conduct an inquest into the deaths of 11
 persons during the 1989-90 conflict on Bougainville, including
 three persons allegedly killed by the BRA and one by government
 forces. The inquest, however, deals with only one of the 16
 deaths attributed to security forces by a human rights group,
 and the magistrate will face serious problems in gaining access
 to potential witnesses located on Bougainville. Prime Minister
 Namaliu has also promised to set up a commission of inquiry
 into the Bougainville crisis that will deal with human rights
 violations, once government control on Bougainville has been
 reestablished.
 RPNGC members are alleged to have engaged in extrajudicial
 killings. One person reportedly was shot dead during a police
 raid. at Wanigela, near the capital of Port Moresby. Persons
 from the Goilala region west of Port Moresby, angered at the
 killing of one of their clan members during a shootout with
 police, claimed the police have killed 28 youths from their
 area but provided no evidence. Three policemen were convicted
 separately of unlawful killing, manslaughter, and murder in
 cases dating to 1989. Another police constable is being sought
 for the murder of a student in 1989.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances
 perpetrated by the Government or its forces; however, there'
 were credible allegations of BRA-perpetrated disappearances in
 rebel-held areas.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or'Punishment
 Torture and other cruel or degrading treatment or punishment
 are forbidden by the Constitution; nonetheless,-there were
 credible reports that government security forces, including the
 PNGDF and RPNGC, engaged in such practices. Col. Nuia, former
 Defense Force commander in Worth Soloons Province, was
 reported to have severely beaten the cochairman of the
 Government's Bougainville task force, Bernard Simiha, in Rabaul
 in May for alleged BRA sympathies. PNGDF soldiers who
 reoccupied Buka and portions of Bougainville generally
 exhibited significantly improved discipline over their
 performance a year ago. Six PNGDF soldiers, however, were
 
 
 954,.
 PAPUA NEW GUINEA
 charged with shooting'a Buka civilian--wounding him in the
 head--and throwing a gasoline bomb at his house. The soldiers
 are to be tried by the national court.
 The BRA continued to control large portions of Bougainville,
 primarily through physical intimidation. Criminal BRA elements
 are reported to have extorted money and goods from storeowners,
 destroyed schools, and robbed people. Limited communications,
 however, impede the flow of information about government and
 insurgent conduct on Buka and Bougainville.
 Members of PNG's police force continue to inflict torture and
 other punishment on prisoners and detainees. Intoxicated
 police who abuse their authority are a major source of public
 complaints. Five community school teachers in Chuave were
 reportedly beaten up by drunken police in March, and a senior
 Justice Department official was assaulted at a police
 checkpoint in Port Moresby by intoxicated police in April.
 Police also retaliated against persons who file complaints.
 For example, police fired on a Mount Hagen security guard
 supervisor (who had reportedly simply inquired about the
 beating of one of his employees) and wounded another employee.
 Excessive use of force by the RPNGC occurs frequently during
 arrests. Two Popondetta policemen were sentenced to prison for
 assaulting a man they had detained and firing a shotgun next to
 his head. A national court office revealed in April that seven
 complaints, supported by medical affidavits, had been filed
 regarding police abuse in Wewak. There were also repeated
 reports of criminal suspects appearing in court with signs of
 physical brutality allegedly caused by the police.
 Police misconduct sometimes provokes large-scale conflict with
 communities. Policemen in Finschhafen, near Lae, were attacked
 by villagers angered by police brutality. Police in Banz, in
 the Western Highlands province, rampaged through several
 villages after the station commander was injured in a melee
 over an illegal bingo game. Repeated reports of blatant sexual
 harassment by police against female citizens in Lae have
 stimulated complaints by women's groups.  Incidents of police
 mobile squads burning houses and destroying property to punish
 communities suspected of harboring criminals or engaged in
 tribal warfare were reported in Chimbu, Eastern Highlands, and
 Western Highlands provinces.
 The Government recognizes the seriousness of police abuses.
 Police Minister Ijape ordered Police Commissioner Geno to
 discipline his men in February in response to "numerous
 complaints from all sectors of the community on the behavior of
 policemen." Shortly thereafter, however, the Government
 Ombudsman deplored "police bashing." In August Commissioner
 Geno ordered an investigation into the RPNGC's public
 complaints reporting system.
 The courts willingly hear cases of police abuse and mete out
 proportional punishment when convictions, based on evidence,
 are obtained. In addition to the judicial proceedings
 previously noted, three policemen were convicted of
 participating in a gang rape and sentenced to 6 years in
 prison. Papua New Guinea's active free press and network of
 churches expose incidents when they can, and abuses can be
 investigated by the Ombudsman Commission. The problems,
 however, are aggravated by the RPNGC's tendency to adopt
 paramilitary tactics and attitudes,, widening the gap between
 themselves and the communities they serve.
 
 
 955
 PAPUA NEW GUINEA
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 The courts, grounded in the Australian system of jurisprudence
 and English common law, strongly enforce constitutional
 protections against arbitrary arrest and detention. Exile is
 not practiced, and judicially issued warrants are required for
 all arrests. Suspects have the right to legal counsel.
 Accused persons are informed of charges, their arrest is
 subject to judicial review, and they have the right to bail,
 except when judges rule otherwise. Police misconduct, as
 described previously, sometimes limits these rights in
 practice, but constitutional protections are upheld when cases
 come to the attention of the courts.
 In April 133 suspected BRA members and criminals were reported
 to have been detained at the Hahela Care Center on Buka Island,
 in some cases for up to 3 months without trial. A national
 court judge who visited Buka in May ordered authorities to
 release or charge the detainees. They released 99 detainees
 without charge; charged 21, who were released pending trial;
 and announced that 13 had requested to remain in protective
 custody. At year's end, there were some 26 cases involving
 allegations of human rights abuse pending on Buka island.
 These cases are to be taken up in February 1992 during the next
 quarterly judicial circuit visit. National M.P. Michael Ogio,
 who spent 13 months in isolation at his home village on
 Bougainville under BRA orders, reported that the BRA was
 keeping many people under house arrest
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The independent court system in Papua New Guinea is similar to
 those in other countries with English common law traditions.
 The law guarantees a public trial, and due process rights are
 provided for in the Constitution. Defendants have the right to
 an attorney, even at public expense; in felony cases involving
 violence. The defendant and his or her attorney may confront
 witnesses, present evidence, plead their cases, and appeal
 convictions. Given the relative shortage of police and
 judicial resources and an exceptionally high crime rate,
 periods between arrest and trial can be long. Such periods of
 detention, however, are subject to strict judicial review. The
 courts are completely independent of executive, political, or
 military authorities, and the Government does not hold any
 prisoners on purely political grounds.
 The judiciary is hampered in investigating htiman rights abuses
 on Bougainville by its lack of access to the island, which is
 largely controlled by the BRA. Up to 66 applications alleging
 human rights violations by the Government have been filed with
 the national court in Rabaul by Bougainvilleans, but they have
 not been adjudicated because the court has been unable to gain
 access to the complainants on Bougainville.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Privacy rights are not widely abused, but police are known to
 burn homes in the highlands to quell intertribal conflict and
 punish communities suspected of harboring criminals. There
 have also been reports of forcible entry into homes by police
 searching for criminals or retaliating against persons who
 complain about police misconduct. A national M.P. was evicted
 from his government-owned residence by police acting without
 authority, but his eviction was overturned the next day by the
 
 
 956
 PAPUA NEW GUINEA
 Government. The forced eviction of squatters became a
 significant issue in the towns of Rabaul, Lae,. and Wau during
 1991.
 g. Use of Excessive Force and Violations of Humanitarian
 Law in Internal Conflicts
 Armed conflict on Buka and Bougainville islands (which together
 make up the North Solomons Province) continued during 1991 but
 at much reduced levels compared to the previous 2 years,
 primarily due to the Government's desire to settle the
 insurgency through negotiation rather than confrontation. The
 January 1991 Honiara Accord between the Government and the BRA
 held out hope that services could be restored while deferring
 the issue of Bougainville's political status, but progress in
 implementing the accord was slow. The PNGDF reoccupied part of
 Bougainville in April, sparking BRA charges of bad faith and,
 ultimately, renewed BRA attacks on government forces. The
 Government hindered the delivery of humanitarian assistance to
 Bougainville by nongovernmental organizations (NGO's),
 prompting the Australian Government to request improved access
 for Australian NGO's.
 Government security forces exercised restraint in areas they
 reoccupied, i.e., Buka island and part of northern
 Bougainville. Most specific allegations of security force
 abuses now date to 1989-1990. The PNGDF was reported in
 January to have strafed Bougainville villages from helicopters,
 but there have been no more such claims since then. The
 Government continues to restrict movement of people and
 supplies to Bougainville. Its blockade, aimed at undercutting
 support for the BRA, has imposed significant hardships on the
 people of Bougainville. M.P. Michael Ogio claims that the
 fighting on Bougainville has caused 1,500 deaths, with another
 3,000 deaths due to the government-imposed blockade. Others
 have made similiar claims, although a recent visit by NGO
 relief officials raises questions about these claims.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 The Constitution provides for freedom of speech, including
 freedom of the broadcast media and publications. An
 independent press, an effective judiciary, and a functioning
 democratic political system have combined to promote freedom of
 speech and press. Decreased tension over the Bougainville
 insurgency led to fewer clashes between the Government and the
 media.
 The Government nonetheless continued to exhibit sensitivity to
 adverse foreign reporting about Papua New Guinea. In
 particular, the Government barred Australian television
 reporters in April because their station had produced an
 unflattering show about Papua New Guineq. Australian
 television network SBS employees were also barred after they
 had illegally entered Bougainville to produce a television show
 on which Col. Nuia, the Government's former military commander
 in the North Solomons, confirmed PNGDF atrocities to an
 interviewer. M.P. Galen Lang complained about media
 sensationalization of crime in PNG and said he hoped criminals
 would assault journalists, sparking an outcry from PNG media.
 Despite these restrictions, the Government refrained from
 interfering with domestic media. For example, the National
 Broadcasting Commission, operating PNG's key network of radio
 
 
 957
 PAPUA NEW GUINEA
 stations, continues to exercise complete autonomy over its news
 reporting. The Censorship Act, prohibiting pornography, went
 into effect in 1990 but has had little visible impact.
 Academic freedom is generally respected.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Private associations and public assemblies are legal.
 Associations do not require formal registration. International
 affiliation of church and civic groups is also freely
 permitted. Public demonstrations require police approval; this.
 is not denied for political purposes but is occasionally denied
 for reasons of public order.
 n: Freedom of Religion
 There are no restrictions on and no discrimination against the
 practice of religion, which is protected by law. Many
 indigenous and Christian denominations flourish side by side
 with small Buddhist and Muslim minorities. Missionaries work
 and move freely throughout the country and provide the majority
 of such social services as are available in many remote areas.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 The only real restriction on freedom of movement is the
 Bougainville blockade, .which limits travel and communication to
 and -from that island province. In November the blockade was
 relaxed somewhat.   Freedom of movement within and outside the
 country is not restricted by law, although several provincial
 premiers have taken steps to evict squatters from other parts
 of the country and encourage them to return to their' homes.
 The Government hosts between 4,500 and 5,000 Melanesian
 refugees .from Irian Jaya, the neighboring province of
 Indonesia, with support from the U.N. High Commissioner for
 Refugees (UNHCR). Approximately'l,500 to 2,000 of these have
 land or kinship ties with Papua New Guineans and live just
 inside Papua New Guinea. They are not provided services by
 either the Government or the UNHCR. While Papua New Guinea
 recognizes Irian Jaya as an integral part of Indonesia, the
 Government nonetheless grants asylum to qualified refugebs.
 Although the Government closed Irian Jayan refugee camps close
 to the border in July, it helped to organize large-scale
 voluntary repatriations in conjunction with the UNHCR and the
 International Committee of the Red Cross. The Government
 continued to administer UNHCR assistance to about 3,000
 refugees at the,sole remaining camp at East Awin.
 Mecky Salosa, an Irian Jayan, ethnic Melanesian and Organisasi
 Papua Merdeka (OPM--Free Papua Movement) leader extradited from
 Papua New Guinea in 1990, was sentenced to life imprisonment in
 Indonesia for organizing and participating in an attack on a
 transmigration camp in which 14 people died. Salosa reportedly
 escaped from an Irian Jayan prison in August and was found dead
 of starvation. The Government arrested a number of OPM
 supporters and destroyed OPM camps along the 450-mile border
 from April through June. There were no known repatriations of
 OPM members to Indonesia during 1991. One human rights group
 urged the Government to cease the forced repatriation of Irian
 Jayan opponents of Indonesian rule.
 
 
 958
 PAPUA NEW GUINEA
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Citizens freely exercise their right to change their government
 through direct elections with a secret ballot and universal
 adult suffrage. The voters elect a unicameral Parliament made
 up of 109 members from all 19 provinces and the Port Moresby
 National Capital District. Any citizen can stand for election,
 and several foreign-born citizens sit in the Parliament. With
 a multiplicity of small parties, coalition governments tend to
 be weak and shifting; none has yet survived its 5-year
 electoral mandate. There have been four peaceful changes of
 government since independence. National parliamentary
 elections will next take place in June 1992, and the Government
 is expending over $17 million to educate and employ polling
 workers to ensure open, fair elections.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 While there are no official barriers to the formation of local
 human rights groups, so far as is known none has been formed.
 The Government's attitude toward investigation of alleged
 violations of human rights by local and international human
 rights groups has been defensive but not repressive. The
 Government permitted Amnesty International (AI) to visit Papua
 New Guinea during 1990, although high-ranking officials
 declined to meet with AI delegation members. The Government
 has not responded yet to specific allegations, detailed by
 Amnesty International in a November 1990 report, of
 extrajudicial executions and torture committed by security
 forces on Bougainville, except to include one of the deaths in
 a coroner's inquest authorized by the Attorney-General.
 The BRA, before a U.N. working group in Geneva meeting on
 indigenous populations, accused the Government of violating the
 Genocide Convention and called for international monitoring of
 the Honiara Accord. The Government rejected the charges.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 Extreme ethnic and geographic diversity prevent domination by
 any one tribe or clan. The democratically elected government,
 based on loose coalitions, cannot afford to favor one group
 consistently over another.
 Despite extensive rights for women provided by the Constitution
 and law, traditional patterns of discrimination against women
 result in significant human rights abuses. Some women in the
 modern sector have achieved significant positions, serving as
 doctors, lawyers, business executives, civil servants, and in
 high government positions. No woman currently sits in the
 Parliament nor are there women in the Cabinet. However,
 despite legal guarantees regarding family law, marriage, and
 property rights, most women still live in a traditional system
 which relegates them to secondary status. PNG judges said, in
 their 1990 annual report issued in 1991, that women are
 frequently imprisoned by village courts for essentially marital
 difficulties. A number of women prisoners jailed by village
 courts in highlands provinces were set free by judges.
 Violence against women, including rape, is widespread. Some
 tribal and clan cultures emphasize Antagonism between the
 
 
 959
 PAPUA NEW GUINEA
 sexes. While women are ostensibly protected by their family
 and clan, they are nonetheless often victims of violence and
 force. Attacks on women remain common in intertribal warfare.
 Fear of rape, especially gang rape, is common among women and
 constrains all their movements and activities. The authorities
 attempt to punish rape with prison sentences, but assailants
 are seldom apprehended, in part because the police force is
 understaffed and undertrained. The death penalty, adopted in
 August but not yet in effect, will apply to persons convicted
 of gang rape.
 Both the Government and public organizations are working to
 upgrade the status of women. The Government provides a grant
 to the National Council of Women. The Prime Minister's wife is
 active'in the national family planning movement..
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 The right to form and join labor unions is protected by law,
 subject to registration by the Department of Labor. While the
 Government does not use registration as a form of control over
 unions, an unregistered union has no legal standing with the
 Department of Labor or before the courts and accordingly could
 not operate with full effectiveness. Unionized workers number
 approximately 140,000 of the 280,000 wage earners in the formal
 economy and are organized into some 50 trade unions, most of
 which are associated with the Trade Unions Congress. Unions
 are independent of the Government and of political parties.
 Both private and public sector unions have the right to strike,
 though public workers have rarely done so. An example of a
 strike in the public sector occurred in 1990 and again in 1991,
 when post and telecommunications workers struck. During the
 latter strike, the National Court issued an injunction ordering
 workers back to work in response to a formal request from the
 Post and Telecommunications Corporation, a wholly government-
 owned firm. Workers did return to work, and their demands were
 later addressed. Unions may freely affiliate with
 international organizations.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 The Constitution ensures workers the right to engage in
 collective bargaining, to join industrial organizations, and to
 seek employment. These rights are exercised freely. The law
 prohibits antiunion discrimination by employers against union
 members and organizers. The Department of Labor and
 Employment, as well as the courts, resolve complaints. There
 are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 The Constitution forbids slavery and all forms of forced or
 compulsory labor, and no reports of their practice have been
 received.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 The minimum working age is 18. However, children between the
 ages of 11 and 18 may be employed in family related work
 provided they have parental permission, a medical clearance,
 and a work permit from a labor office. Such employment is rare
 except in subsistence agriculture. There is no compulsory
 
 
 960
 PAPUA NEW GUINEA
 minimum education requirement. The Department of Labor and
 Employment and the courts take steps to enforce the minimum age
 law but are hampered by a lack of resources.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 The workweek is limited by law to 42 hours (44 in rural
 areas). The basic minimum wage provides a bare minimum
 standard of living by local standards. Minimum wages are set
 by the Minimum Wage Board, a quasi-governmental body with
 worker and employer representation, and vary according to the
 type of work and industry and whether the work is urban or
 rural. Wage levels, allowances, rest periods, holidays, leave,
 and overtime are regulated by law. Under the Employment Act of
 1978, a housing allowance or provision of housing is a
 perquisite in employment, although this latter benefit is
 enjoyed mostly by public sector employees.
 Enforcement of the Industrial Health and Safety Law and
 regulations is the responsibility of the Department of Labor.
 The law requires that inspections take place on a regular
 basis, but because there are too few inspectors, they generally
 occur only when requested by workers or unions. Sanctions for
 violations are rarely applied. Moreover, the health and safety
 regulations are still under revision.
 
 
 961
