Papua New Guinea
As construction of a US$15 billion project to tap Papua New Guinea’s rich liquefied
natural gas (LNG) reserves got underway in 2010, Prime Minister Michael
Somare predicted that his troubled country was on the verge of transformation.
But longstanding problems that have consistently hobbled progress in the country
were on display throughout the year. Corruption scandals grabbed the headlines,
a UN investigation highlighted by now familiar patterns of brutal police
abuse, and violence against women and girls continued to be widespread.
Just as troubling are signs that the government is more committed to avoiding
accountability than improving its capacity to govern responsibly. In 2010 the government
moved to curtail the powers of its own widely-praised Ombudsman
Commission, while also trying to enact legislation that would strip citizens of their
right to challenge the legality of controversial extractive industry projects in court.
Extractive Industries
The government has staked the country’s future on its extraordinary abundance of
natural resources. Extractive industries are the main engine of the economy, but
the government has a long track record of failing to adequately regulate them. In
2010 there were already worrying signs that the LNG project could generate violent
disputes among landowners over compensation payments, this a full four
years before the gas is expected to flow.
In many ways the government has left large multinational extractive companies to
regulate themselves. For instance private security forces at the sprawling Porgera
gold mine—operated by Barrick Gold, a Canadian company—have been implicated
in incidents of gang rape and other human rights abuses. Yet the government
provides no meaningful oversight of such private security forces or effective,
accessible channels for victims to report such abuses.
In 2010 a group of citizens filed suit to prevent the Chinese-owned Ramu nickel
mine from building a pipeline that would deposit mine waste into the ocean. The
government responded by introducing amendments to the country’s Environment
Act that would strip citizens of their right to challenge government-sanctioned projects in court. At this writing the amendments have been passed by parliament
but not signed into law. Supporters of the Ramu mine also reportedly intimidated
and harassed the plaintiffs in the case.
Torture, Rape, and Other Police Abuses
Human Rights Watch has previously documented widespread patterns of abuse
by Papua New Guinea’s police force, including use of excessive force, torture, and
sexual violence, against children as well as adults. These abuses remain rampant
and almost all of those responsible continue to enjoy impunity. In the face of
widespread violent crime, such tactics have deeply eroded the public trust and
cooperation crucial to effective policing.
In May the UN special rapporteur on torture visited the country and documented
routine beatings of criminal suspects that often rise to the level of torture, extortion
of sex from female detainees, corruption, and other abuses. Police sometimes
deliberately disable suspects of serious crimes and escapees by cutting
their tendons with bush knives and axes. The UN special rapporteur found that
conditions in correctional institutions were “poor” and in police lockups
“appalling.” Children are regularly detained with adults in police lockups.
In July mobile police squads housed and fed by Barrick Gold at the company’s
Porgera gold mine allegedly kidnapped and raped three teenage girls. In an
unusual and positive move, the police suspended the alleged culprits from duty
and opened a criminal investigation into the incident. More than five years after
the police beat and sexually assaulted several dozen women and girls (and gang
raped at least four in detention) in a raid on the Three-Mile Guest House in Port
Moresby in March 2004, the Ombudsman Commission issued a report finding
that police had unlawfully arrested and detained the victims, used excessive
force, and raped and humiliated them. The Commission also found that senior
officials failed to supervise or control the officers under their command.
Violence against Women
Violence against women and girls is epidemic in Papua New Guinea, with studies
indicating that more than half of all women in Papua New Guinea have suffered physical assault by a male partner. Sexual violence against women and girls is
also commonplace. Support services such as shelters and emergency health care
are grossly insufficient and victims face formidable barriers to obtaining redress
through the justice system, including lack of information, limited legal aid, and
geographic distance. Many village courts rely on customary laws that fail to protect
women’s rights. The system often leaves perpetrators unpunished, a problem
exacerbated by some police officers’ own propensity to engage in sexual violence.
Government Corruption and Institutional Decay
The government has regularly become embroiled in corruption scandals over the
years and 2010 was no exception. A judicial report that came to light in April
detailed how top-level government officials and others siphoned off some $300
million through phony compensation claims. Meanwhile the capacity of key public
institutions continues to decay, especially in rural areas where the government
often fails to provide basic services like health and education. The
government–against widespread civil society protests–supported moves to curtail
the powers of its Ombudsman Commission, the very institution tasked with
unearthing patterns of government corruption and abuse.
The Rights to Health and Education
Papua New Guinea performs poorly on most indicators of economic and social
well-being. Rates of maternal and child mortality are among the highest in the
region. The closure of rural aid posts and health centers, declining transportation
infrastructure, the failure of allocated funds to reach local governments, and a
shortage of drugs, medical equipment, and trained health professionals all limit
access to quality healthcare.
The country has the highest prevalence of HIV/AIDS in the Pacific: around 34,100
people are living with the disease (0.92 percent of adults in 2010), with young
women most likely to be diagnosed. Gender-based violence and discrimination,
as well as poor access to healthcare, fuel the virus’s spread. People living with
HIV/AIDS often face violence and discrimination. Antiretroviral therapy is inaccessible
to most. Despite training, police undermine prevention efforts by targeting
female sex workers and men and boys suspected of homosexual conduct for beatings and rape. Police do so in part because they can threaten arrest using
laws criminalizing homosexual conduct and certain forms of sex work, and
because social stigma against homosexuals and sex work shields the police from
public outrage.
Primary education is neither free nor compulsory. Recent estimates of net primary
school enrollment rates range from around 45 to 55 percent. Barriers include long
distances to schools, a shortage of upper secondary placements, high school
fees, and school closures due to insecurity. Girls in particular suffer from sexual
abuse by other students and teachers, lack of water and sanitation facilities, and
face daily dangerous journeys to and from school.
The Role of Key International Actors
Australia, Papua New Guinea’s former colonizer, is the country’s most important
international partner. Australia provides some $450 million in assistance annually,
more than it provides to any other country.
The home governments of most multinational companies working in the country
provide few if any enforceable human rights standards to govern overseas corporate
behavior. In 2010 Canada’s parliament rejected a bill that would have taken
modest steps towards establishing such standards for Canadian companies,
including companies with operations in Papua New Guinea. The bill encountered
fierce resistance from the mining industry.
In 2011 Papua New Guinea’s human rights record is due to be examined at the UN
Human Rights Council.