 PAPUA NEW GUINEA
 Papua New Guinea (PNG) comprises some 1,000 tribes and over 800 distinct lan-
 guages in a population of about 4 million. It has a federal parliamentary system,
 based on universal adult suffrage with periodic free and fair elections, and has an
 independent judiciary.
 The Government has constitutional authority over the Defense Force (PNGDF),
 the Royal Papua New Guinea Constabulary (RPNGC), and intelligence-organiza-
 tions. Members of the security forces committed serious human rights abuses.
 The economy relies heavily on the export of minerals, hydrocarbons, tropical tim-
 ber, and tree crops such as coffee, cocoa, and copra and national earnings fell steep-
 ly during the year as a result of drought and the worldwide decline in most com-
 modity prices. A total of 85 percent of the population resides in isolated villages and
 engages in subsistence and smalholder agriculture. For a majority of citizens, in-
 come and literacy are at a low level, and infant and maternal mortality rates are
 The Government continued to be responsible for human rights abuses, although
 the conclusion of a cease-fire on Bougainville in October 1997 and progress in peace
 negotiations led to the end of abuses arising from the secessionist conflict. However,
 there was no progress in the investigation and prosecution of those accused of pre-
 vious abuses in the province. There continued to be credible reports that police com-
 mitted extrajudicial killings and beat suspects. New police management took mesas-
 
 
 1027
 
 ures to improve police training and discipline, and authorities' infringements on citi-
 zens' privacy rights were reduced, but not eliminated. The Government on occasion
 investigated allegations of abuse and prosecuted those believed responsible. Prison
 conditions remain poor and reductions in the number of court sittings increased pre-
 trial detention periods for many persons. The Government continued to limit free-
 dom of assembly, although only one group was denied a permit to demonstrate. Ex-
 tensive discrimination and violence against women, discrimination against the dis-
 abled, and violence between tribes remain serious problems, and abuse of children
 appears to be becoming more prevalent.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-Several instances of killing by police
 were reported during the year. According to police reports, most occurred during
 gunfights with criminal suspects who were resisting arrest. However, at least one
 resulted when a constable fired into, rather than over, a rioting crowd. He was
 charged and is expected to be tried.
 All police shootings are investigated by the police department's internal affairs of-
 fice and reviewed by a coroner's court. If the court finds that the shooting was un-
 justifiable or due to negligence, the police officers involved are tried. Families of per-
 sons killed or injured by police in such circumstances also may challenge the coro-
 ner's finding in the National Court, with the assistance of the Public Solicitor's Of-
 fice. Such a complaint was brought by the family of a habitual criminal who was
 shot and killed by police in East Sepik province. The coroner's court found that the
 shot was fired to prevent the suspect from escaping and that the killing was unin-
 tentional. The policeman is to be tried for manslaughter. As part of efforts to im-
 prove police discipline, the new Commissioner of Police ordered the renewed inves-
 tigation of dormant cases of serious offenses involving police officers.
 Cases of accidental shootings of bystanders by police during police operations are
 also investigated and reviewed by a coroner's court. According to police statistics,
 during the past 10 years, 7 such cases were referred to the National Court for trial.
 To date, two of those cases have been decided and the police personnel were con-
 victed of manslaughter and sentenced to 12 years in prison. The other cases were
 still pending a decision at year's end.
 There was no progress in the investigation of the 1996 killing of Theodore
 Miriung, Premier of the progovernment Bougainville Transitional Government. De-
 spite clear indications that members of the progoverment resistance and the
 PNGDF were involved, no arrests were made.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution forbids torture and other cruel or degrading treatment or punish-
 ment; however, police often beat suspects during arrests, and allowed members of
 the public to beat suspects as well. A man in Eastern Sepik province sued police
 for beatings that he said were administered to him in an unsuccessful attempt to
 extract a confession. Members of the public also complained to the press of abusive
 treatment and theft of property by police who manned highway roadblocks. Police
 management mounted undercover operations to bring this abuse under control.
 Although police management emphasized good community relations throughout
 the year, police and villagers clashed in Hanuabada, Port Moresby on January 3
 with both sides claiming provocation and brutality. Several people were injured and
 property destroyed.
 Prisons are overcrowded and understaffed and are unable to provide adequate
 medical care or food to inmates. Conditions are life threatening. Many prisoners as
 well as guards do not have uniforms, making it difficult for outsiders to distinguish
 between the two. Authorities closed several prisons during the year as the result
 of deterioration and neglect. Inmates were either moved elsewhere or released. Out-
 breaks of typhoid were reported at some prisons.
 The Government permits prison visits by human rights monitors.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The courts generally enforce constitu-
 tional protections against arbitrary arrest and detention. However, these protections
 were weakened by the 1993 Internal Security Act (ISA). Amendments to existing
 legislation provide that judicially issued warrants are no longer required when au-
 thorities suspect that a person has committed an ISA offense or certain other of-
 fenses. Under 1993 amendments to the Bail Act and the Criminal Code, only Na-
 tional or Supreme Court judges may grant bail in certain criminal cases involving
 firearms. In all other cases, bail may be granted unless the judge rules otherwise.
 
 
 1028
 Suspects who are arrested have the right to legal counsel, to be informed of the
 charges against themi and to have their arrests subjected to judicial review.
 Due to limited police and judicial resources and a high crime rate, suspects are
 often held in pretrial detention for a long time, particularly in rural areas. Pretrial
 remand is subject to strict judicial review through continuing pretrial consultations,
 especially at the National Court level. Nonetheless, cases are frequently delayed for
 months awaiting results of police investigations. Also circuit court sittings were less
 frequent because of budget difficulties, further delaying the decision of cases.
 Exile is prohibited by the Constitution and is not practiced.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The Constitution provides for an independent judi-
 ciary, and the courts are independent of executive, legislative, and military authori-
 ties. At times political interests interfere with due process. For example, following
 allegations in Parliament that a politician had made an illegal videotape of his sex-
 ual activity -with an underage girl, two police officers from another city enticed the
 girl allegedly involved from her home, took her to a second jurisdiction'where they
 charged her -with an offense, and. then -took her -to a third jurisdiction where she
 was committed for trial. The man involved in the case was charged much later and
 at year's end had not yet been committed for trial. Police management stated that
 it -did not instruct the officers to arrest the girl and is investigating the cir-
 cumstances.
 The Supreme Court is the final court of appeal and holds original jurisdiction on
 constitutional matters. The National Court hears most cases- and appeals from the
 lower district courts established at the provincial level. There are also village courts
 headed by lay persons, who judge minor offenses under both customary and statu-
 tory law. '
 -The legal system is -based on English common law. The Constitution provides for
 due process, including a public trial, and the court system generally enforces these
 provisions. Defendants have the right-to an attorney. Legal-counsel is provided ei-
 ther by the Public Solicitor's office or by the Law Society upon the recommendation
 of the Public Solicitor's office for those accused of serious offenses who are unable
 to afford counsel. "Serious offenses" are generally defined as felony charges or any
 case heard in either the National or district court (as opposed to the village or mag-
 istrate courts). Defendants and their attorneys may confront witnesses, present evi-
 dence, plead cases, and appeal convictions.
 There were no, reports of political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The au-
 thorities generally respect citizens' privacy rights, although there were instances of
 abuse, such as the police destruction of property reported at Hanuabada and the sei-
 zure of property from vehicles (see Section 1.c.).
 Although provisions in the Constitution require warrants, the police continued to
 conduct warrantless searches and raids.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including.
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for free speech, in-
 cluding freedom of the media, and the Government generally respects this freedom
 in practice.
 The media provided independent coverage and analysis of major issues, including
 accusations of corruption and immoral behavior directed at leading political figures.
 The combined circulation of two daily English-language newspapers is less than
 60,000. Two weekly newspapers, one in English and one in Pidgin (the national lin-
 gua franca), are also published. All freely express a variety of editorial viewpoints
 and report on controversial issues such as alleged abuses by police and security
 forces, cases of alleged corruption by government officials, Bougainville insurgent
 views, etc. A Malaysian firm, which has invested heavily in the country's timber in-
 dustry, owns one of the dailies; the newspaper publishes little on the controversial
 subjects of logging and forestry, but is generally independent and unbiased on other
 issues.
 The television broadcasting company, EM-TV, is independent. Television reception
 is mostly limited to the Port Moresby area.- The government-owned National Broad-
 casting Corporation owns two radio networks whose effectiveness is limited by inad-
 equate funding and deteriorating equipment. A privately owned radio network,
 NAU-FM, is popular in Port Moresby and is expanding into other areas of the coun-
 try.
 The Government respects academic freedom.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution provides for
 freedom of assembly; however, the Government limits this right in practice. Public
 demonstrations require police approval and 7-days' notice. A group that wished to
 
 
 1029
 march in support of independence for the Indonesian province of Irian Jaya was de-
 nied a permit to demonstrate.
 The Constitution provides for freedom of association and the Government gen-
 erally respects this right in practice. However, in December, acting on instructions
 from the Department of Foreign Affairs, police forcibly removed a sign identifying
 the location of the Port Moresby office of an Irian Jayan separatist group. The au-
 thorities did not otherwise interfere with the group, and the office remains open.
 Associations that wish to open a bank account and conduct financial transactions
 are required to register for this purpose. The process of registration may be slowed
 by bureaucratic inefficiency, but there is no policy of denying registration. Inter-
 national affiliation of church and civic groups is freely permitted.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for freedom of religion, and the
 Government respects this right in practice.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Government does not restrict freedom of movement within and out-
 side the country. Movement within Bougainville is free for all groups and internally
 displaced persons are free to return to their homes. However, some are reluctant
 to do so until police protection and delivery of basic services is improved. According
 to the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) there are less
 than 50 documented Bougainville refugees in the Solomon Islands. No more than
 500 additional Bougainvilleans are believed to be temporarily sheltering in the Solo-
 mon Islands of whom about 250 are residing in Red Cross-administered care cen-
 ters. The Government negotiated agreements with the Government of the Solomon
 Islands to establish the means for traditional border crossers in southern Bougain-
 ville and the northern Solomon Islands to pass easily between the two countries.
 The Government provides first asylum for approximately 3,000 persons who have
 fled from the neighboring Indonesian province of Irian Jaya. The Government co-
 operates with the UNHCR in assisting the Irian Jayans who live in the East Awin
 refugee camp in Western Province and has administered the camp since 1996, when
 the UNHCR office closed. The Government has a policy of limited integration for
 Irian Jayans with certain skills or other qualifications, who are accorded limited
 residency status and are permitted to leave the refugee settlement. Those who vio-
 late conditions of their refugee status can be repatriated. There were no known
 forced repatriations of Irian Jayans to Indonesia. Several thousand traditional bor-
 der crossers live in the border area and move freely between the two countries.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens freely exercise their right to change their government through direct elec-
 tions with a secret ballot and universal adult suffrage. Voters elect a unicameral
 parliament with 109 members from all 19 provinces and the National Capital Dis-
 trict. Any citizen can stand for election. Because of the high number of candidates
 for Parliament, some members have won election with less than 10 percent of the
 total votes cast.
 The most recent general election was held in June 1997. Fifty-five of the 109 seats
 in Parliament changed hands. A coalition government, led by Prime Minister Bill
 Skate, was formed following the election and continued in office in 1998. However,
 some coalition partners changed and-a number of individual Members of Parliament
 changed sides within the Parliament during the period.
 The law provides that a losing candidate may dispute the election of the winning
 candidate by filing a petition with the National Court. Such petitions may question
 actions of the candidate and his supporters or allege malfeasance by the election of-
 ficials. The procedure is fair, but is times consuming and expensive both to initiate
 and to defend. Following the 1997 election, 88 such petitions were fied. The major-
 ity of complaints were made against winning candidates or their supporters. The
 court accepted 40 of the petitions for trial. As of mid-September, the National Court
 had tried 33 of those cases. Of the nine cases decided against the declared winners,
 only two have resulted in a change in the incumbent in Parliament. The other seven
 cases have been appealed to the Supreme Court.
 Although there are no legal barriers to the participation of women in political life,
 they are underrepresented in senior positions in government and politics. Two
 women were elected to Parliament in the 1997 elections.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 There are no official barriers to the formation of human rights groups. The Gov-
 ernment cooperates with human rights NGO's, but sometimes is slow in responding
 
 
 1030
 to their requests for information. The International and Community Rights Advo-
 cacy Forum, formed in 1993, concentrated on human rights and the environment.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution provides for equal protection under the law irrespective of race,
 tribe, place of origin, political opinion, color, creed, religion or sex. Despite these
 constitutional and other legal provisions, women often face discrimination.
 I Extreme geographic diversity prevents any one tribe or clan from dominating the
 country. The democratically elected government, based on loose coalitions, has con-
 sistently avoided favoring any-group. Virtually all citizens share Melanesian eth-
 nicity, and violence between groups is not ethnically based. Skirmishes and conflicts
 tend to be based on disputes between clans over issues such as boundaries, land
 ownership, and injuries and insults suffered by one clan at the hands of another.
 In the past, clan/tribal warfare was ritualized and fought with traditional weapons;
 the availability of firearms has made such conflicts deadlier.
 Women.-Violence against women, including domestic violence and gang rape, is
 a serious and prevalent problem. Traditional village mores, which served as deter-
 rents, are weakening and are largely absent when youths move from their village
 to a larger town or to the capital. Although rape is punishable by imprisonment,
 and sentences are imposed when assailants are found guilty, few assailants are ap-
 prehended. The willingness of some communities, to settle incidents of rape through
 material compensation rather than criminal prosecutions makes the crime difficult
 to combat. Domestic violence, such as wife beating, also is common and is a crime.
 ,However, since most communities view domestic violence as a private matter, and
 few victims press charges, prosecutions are rare.
 Violence committed against women by other women frequently stems from domes-
 tic disputes. In areas where polygyny is still customary, an increasing number of
 women have been charged with, the murder of another of their husband's wives. Ac-
 cording to one report, 65 percent of women in prison are there for attacking or kill-
 ing another woman.
 The Constitution and laws have provisions for extensive rights for women dealing
 with family, marriage, and property issues. Some women have achieved senior posi-
 tions in: business, the professions, and civil service. However, traditional patterns
 of discrimination against women persist. Many women, even in urban areas, are
 considered second-class citizens. Village courts tend to impose jail terms on women
 found guilty of adultery, while penalizing men lightly or not at all. Circuit-riding
 National Court justices frequently annulled such village court sentences. In 1996
 the Government approved amendments to the Village Courts Act requiring that or-
 ders for imprisonment be endorsed by a district court before they take effect. Po-
 lygyny and the custom of paying a bride price tend to reinforce the view that women
 are property.
 In addition to- the purchase of women as brides, women also are sometimes given
 as compensation to settle disputes between clans. The courts have ruled that such
 settlements are a denial of the women's constitutional rights. During the year, the
 Jimi clan in the Western Highlands province included two 16-year-old girls as part
 of the compensation offered in the settlement of an interclan fight. The National
 Court has ordered a judicial inquiry.
 According to statistics published in the U.N. Development Program's 1998 report
 on human development, women are gaining rapidly on men in literacy and edu-
 cation. Adult literacy has risen.to 72 percent of the population. Sixty-three percent
 of women are literate, trailing men by 18 percent. There are 15 percent fewer girls
 in primary schools than boys. Maternal mortality levels remain relatively high at
 930 deaths per 100,000 live births.
 There is an Office of Women's Affairs in the Office of Church and Family Services
 of the Ministry of Provincial Affairs.
 Children.-The Government did not dedicate significant resources to protect the
 rights and welfare of children. Most programs to protect and develop youth and chil-
 dren are operated by NGO's and religious organizations. Many government pro-
 grams are underfunded. In the past, children have been well cared for within the
 family and under traditional clan and village controls. However, preliminary, small-
 scale studies indicate that this situation has changed over the last decade, especially
 in areas where households have become isolated from the extended family support
 system and depend on the cash economy for a livelihood. According to a report pre-
 pared by the Government and the U.N. Children's Fund, sexual abuse of children
 is believed to have become quite prevalent. Because of the geographic isolation and
 remoteness of many villages, malnutrition and infant mortality rates are very high.
 More than 60 of every thousand children born do not survive their first year. Al-
 
 
 1031
 
 though Papua New Guinea ratified the U.N. Convention on the Rights of the Child
 (CRC) in 1993, the Government has not yet completed the report due in 1995 on
 CRC implementation, nor prepared the national plan of action.
 People With Disabilities.-Through the National Board for the Disabled, the Gov-
 ernment finds to a number of NGO's that provide services to the disabled. The Gov-
 ernment itself does not provide programs or services directly. Services and health
 care for the disabled, except for those provided by the traditional clan and family
 system, do not exist in several of the country's provinces. There is no legislation
 mandating accessibility for the disabled. Disabled persons face discrimination in
 education, training, and employment.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The right to form and join labor unions is provided
 by law, subject to registration by the Department of Industrial Relations. The Gov-
 ernment does not use registration as a form of control over unions. However, an un-
 registered union has no legal standing with the Department of Labor or before the
 courts and thus cannot operate effectively. About half of the 250,000 wage earners
 in the formal economy are organized and are members of one of approximately 50
 trade unions. Most of the unions representing private-sector workers are associated
 with the Trade Unions Congress. Unions are independent of the Government and
 of political parties.
 Both public and private sector unions exercised their legal right to strike during
 the year.
 Unions may freely affiliate with international organizations.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The Constitution provides for
 the right to engage in collective bargaining and to join industrial organizations.
 These rights are exercised freely. Under the law, the Government has discretionary
 power to cancel arbitration awards or declare wage agreements void when they are
 contrary to government policy. This law was criticized by the International Labor
 Organization in 1994. The law prohibits antiunion discrimination by employers
 against union leaders, members, and organizers. The Department of Industrial Rela-
 tions and the courts are involved in dispute settlement. Wages above the minimum
 wage are set through negotiations between employers and employees or their re-
 spective industrial organizations.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The Constitution forbids slavery
 and all forms of forced or compulsory labor, including that performed by children,
 and there were no reports of such practices. There were no reports of forced or bond-
 ed labor by children.
 d. Status of Child Labor Practices and Minimum Age for Employment.-The Em-
 ployment Act establishes the minimum working age as 18. However, children be-
 tween the ages of 11 and 18 may be employed in a family-related business or enter-
 prise provided they have parental permission, a medical clearance, and a work per-
 mit from a labor office. This type of employment is rare, except in subsistence agri-
 culture. Forced and bonded labor by children is prohibited and is not known to occur
 (see Section 6.c.).
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-Minimum wages for the private sector are set
 by the Minimum Wage Board, a quasi-governmental body with labor and employer
 representatives. The Board made a determination in 1992, which is still valid, re-
 ducing the minimum wage for newly hired urban workers to the level of the mini-
 mum wage for rural workers. Also in 1992, the National Youth Wage, for new en-
 trants into the labor force between 16 and 21 years of age, was set at 75 percent
 of the adult minimum wage. The adult minimum wage of $9.87 (22.96 kina) per
 week does not provide a decent standard of living for a worker and family who live
 solely on the cash economy. Although the Department of Labor and Employment
 and the courts attempt to enforce the minimum wage law, enforcement is not effec-
 tive due to lack of resources. Minimum wage levels, allowances, rest periods, holi-
 days leave, and overtime are regulated by law. The workweek is limited by law to
 42 hours per week in urban areas and 44 hours per week in rural areas. The law
 provides for at least one rest period of 24 consecutive hours every week. Enforce-
 ment is lax.
 Enforcement of the Industrial Health and Safety Law and related regulations is
 the responsibility of the Department of Labor and Employment. The law requires
 that work sites be inspected on a regular basis. However, due to a shortage of in-
 spectors, inspections take place only when requested by workers or unions. Workers'
 ability to remove themselves from hazardous working conditions varies by work-
 place. Unionized workers have some measure of protection in such situations.
 
 
 1032
