 PAPUA NEW GUINEA
 Papua New Guinea covers half of the second largest island in
 the world plus additional major islands to the north and east,
 together constituting a large portion of the cultural area
 commonly referred to as Melanesia. It has a federal,
 parliamentary form of government with a unicameral
 legislature. Political legitimacy rests on popular will
 expressed by majority vote in accordance with a Constitution
 embodying extensive public consultation and Melanesian
 tradition, which accords prestige based on individual
 accomplishments rather than heredity. The military, police,
 and intelligence services are under civilian control. The
 courts are independent and vigorously protect individual
 rights. The two government transfers of power since
 independence in 1975 have been peaceful and in keeping with
 the Constitution.
 The economic system has three parts: The traditional, rural,
 subsistence economy which supports about 80 percent of the
 population; the privately controlled money economy; and
 enterprises in which the Government has invested. The private
 sector produces most of the wealth and provides three-fourths
 of government revenues; most of the remainder is aid from
 Australia. Papua New Guinea has major mineral, timber, and
 hydroelectric resources only just beginning to be developed.
 In 1985, despite growing pressures generated by rising crime,
 constitutional protection of individual rights continued to be
 maintained by the courts. In order to deal with the problem
 of crime, the Government imposed a state of emergency in June,
 the main feature of which was a curfew.
 A special problem is presented by the around 10,000 people
 from Irian Jaya who have illegally crossed the border and who
 are now living in camps near it. The Government would like to
 repatriate these border crossers but it intends to deal with
 the problem in a humane way and on a case-by-case basis.
 In 1985 as in previous years, no noteworthy human rights
 violations occurred in Papua New Guinea. The active measures
 taken to deal with the crime problem were implemented only
 after lively debate and strong public support and have not
 significantly compromised individual rights. A network of
 social and political institutions including vigorous
 parliamentary democracy, a concerned and growing legal
 profession, active churches, a lively free press, and an
 increasingly informed citizenry, are effective in maintaining
 human rights.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1     Respect for the Integrity of the Person,
 Including Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 Neither the Government nor any opposition group has resorted
 to political killing.
 b. Disappearance
 There have been no reports of politically motivated
 disappearances.
 
 
 842
 PAPUA NEW GUINEA
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 The Constitution forbids torture and cruel or degrading
 treatment. The prison population is one of the highest in the
 region, due to the nation's unusually high crime rate.
 However, as a general rule, prisoners are treated fairly and
 humanely. The courts and Ombudsman Commission investigate the
 small number of complaints and intervene when abuses are
 discovered. Civil damages have been awarded and offending
 officials punished in such cases.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Politically motivated arrests do not occur in Papua New
 Guinea, and the courts vigorously enforce constitutional
 protections against arbitrary arrest or detention. Exile is
 not practiced. Warrants are required for arrests. Suspects
 have free access to a lawyer of their choice, and, in serious
 cases, counsel is provided at state expense. Suspects and
 their counsel are informed of charges and have the right to
 judicial review of detention. A reasonable bail is allowed,
 except when a judge rules that the risk of flight or further
 crime warrants detention. .
 The Constitution forbids slavery and slave trade in all forms
 including forced or compulsory labor, except when the latter
 is imposed as a condition of sentence after due process of
 law.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The right to a fair, public trial is strictly observed.
 Defendants are represented by counsel. A high crime rate
 coupled with a shortage of funds, police, and judicial
 personnel have caused the time spent awaiting trial for
 serious offenses to increase in recent years. The right of
 habeas corpus, however, limits holding persons without trial
 to a maximum of six months. The courts are free from
 executive, political, or military interference. There are no
 political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Sanctity of the home and family and privacy of correspondence
 are observed.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 An independent press, effective constitutional guarantees, and
 a functioning democratic political system combine to insure
 freedom of speech and press. State-owned radio gives
 significant coverage to statements of opposition politicians.
 Pornography is prohibited. Films are censored for suitability
 and classification based on sexual explicitness and degree of
 violence. Academic freedom is respected.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 The right of association, to engage in collective bargaining,
 to join industrial organizations, and to seek employment is
 
 
 843
 PAPUA NEW GUINEA
 legally guaranteed and protected by the Constitution and
 freely exercised. Although there is a legal requirement that
 a permit be obtained before a demonstration, no application
 has been denied recently.
 Labor unions are protected by law and are active and important
 in the country's economic and political life. Over 50 trade
 unions exist, among which the most significant are the various
 public employees' associations, the two mineworkers' unions,
 and the dockworkers' union. The private sector unions are
 free to strike and do so regularly. Papua New Guinea is a
 member of the International Labor Organization and union
 executives often attend international councils. Employers'
 associations also flourish.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Freedom of religion is guaranteed by law. There are no
 controls on the practice of religion and no religious
 discrimination. A wide variety of indigenous and Christian
 denominations flourish. Missionaries are allowed to work
 freely in the country.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Freedom of movement of Papua New Guinea citizens within or
 into and out of the country is not restricted by law.
 Naturalization is available to foreign residents who satisfy a
 residence requirement and are sponsored by a village; it can
 be revoked only for fraud.
 Freedom of movement was temporarily curtailed by the curfew
 imposed in June 1985 to combat crime. The measure was based
 on the emergency provisions of the Constitution and has been
 exceedingly popular, but has, nevertheless, been challenged by
 legal specialists concerned about human rights. There have
 been some allegations of abuse of police power in connection
 with the heightened surveillance which accompanied the
 emergency, as well as considerable sentiment on the part of
 many citizens that the police should be tougher. Charges of
 abuse have been actively investigated.
 The Prime Minister announced that the Government would propose
 laws to control migration of jobless individuals into Port
 Moresby and other urban areas. It is not clear whether this
 measure will in fact be implemented.
 The Government has indicated continuing concern about the
 activities of the Irian Jaya Separatist movement, Organisi
 Papua Merdeka (Free Papua Movement) or OPM. Adherents of OPM
 have in some cases used threats and intimidation to maintain
 control over the populations of border camps. On the other
 hand, OPM sympathizers have continued to argue that the
 Government of Papua New Guinea has a moral obligation to give
 permanent asylum to the border crossers and to support their
 cause against the Government of Indonesia.
 Approximately 10,000 people from Irian Jaya, the neighboring
 province of Indonesia, who have illegally crossed the Papua
 New Guinea border, remain in 14 camps where they are
 maintained by the Government of Papua New Guinea and various
 aid organizations. Although repatriation of these border
 crossers is the Government's declared intention, it has also
 
 
 844
 PAPUA NEW GUINEA
 stated it will consider the effects of returning on a
 case-by-case basis and not forcibly repatriate any border
 crosser it judges to be a refugee. The Government has
 negotiated a number of guarantees and procedural safeguards
 with the Government of Indonesia aimed at insuring the safety
 and rights of border crossers before their return to Irian
 Jaya. Current policy is to return those who come for economic
 reasons; and to find settlement through the U.N. High
 Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) for those determined to be
 refugees.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Papua New Guinea has a unicameral legislature composed of
 representatives from 19 provinces and the national capital.
 None of the seven organized parties has an absolute
 parliamentary majority. Politics are marked by keen
 competition for elected offices and loose party structures.
 Parliamentarians can and occasionally do cross party lines
 during votes. Any citizen can run for Parliament, and several
 members are foreign born. Two peaceful changes of government
 have taken place since independence. The parliamentary
 elections since independence have resulted in substantial
 turnovers of members. An Ombudsman Commission monitors
 campaign contributions.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 Although there have been no allegations by international or
 nongovernmental agencies of human rights violations in Papua
 New Guinea, local politicians and some private groups have
 criticized the Government for not doing more to improve the
 lot of illegal border crossers from Irian Jaya who live in the
 temporary camps near the border. The UNHCR has an office in
 Port Moresby that contributes toward the provision of minimal
 necessities for border crossers. No domestic human rights
 monitoring group exists, but several outside groups have been
 permitted to visit border camps and have reported on them.
 The Ombudsman Commission and the courts take legal action
 against abuses when discovered, and the press and concerned
 politicians have been quick to publicize alleged governmental
 shortcomings. The 1985 Amnesty International Report does not
 contain an entry for Papua New Guinea. Freedom House rates it
 as "free."
 ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND CULTURAL SITUATION
 Papua New Guinea has a population of 3,326,000, most of whom
 live at the subsistence level. Many authorities believe that
 the population growth is now considerably higher than the
 World Bank figures of 2.1 percent and may, in fact, be as high
 as 4 percent, thus fueling employment problems. Nevertheless,
 based on strong economic growth earlier, Papua New Guinea
 currently has a relatively high per capita gross national
 product (GNP) of US$820.
 Papua New Guinea has land and mineral resources but modern
 technology has only recently arrived. The economy is marked
 by vivid contrast between a high technology sector (minerals
 and forestry) which produces most of the wealth, a cash crop
 sector (coffee, palm oil, tea, cocoa and copra) which is
 
 
 845
 PAPUA NEW GUINEA
 fairly evenly divided between smallholders and commercial
 planters, and a large subsistence sector much of which is
 economically stagnant. Lack of infrastructure--roads, ports,
 and electric power--is a constraint on economic growth.
 Communal ownership of land, which discourages individual
 investment and inhibits the Government's exercise of eminent
 domain, is another barrier to growth.
 Buoyed by high prices for its major exports and continuing
 massive Australian aid, Papua New Guinea experienced strong
 economic growth during most of the 1970's. Social services,
 including health and education, spread rapidly into the vast
 interior and isolated island provinces alike. However with
 the decline of copper and gold prices, economic growth has
 stopped. This, together with an announced gradual cutback in
 Australian aid, has raised serious questions about the
 economic future which are being addressed in a new five-year
 plan.
 Provision of basic services has continued to increase, and
 such indicators as infant mortality (90.6 per 1,000 births,
 life expectancy at birth (54.23 years in 1985), and literacy
 (32 percent) have continued to show improvement. In rural
 areas much of the population still lacks access to safe
 water. According to 1980 statistics, 30 percent of the urban
 population but only 19 percent of the rural population had
 access to safe water. However, in recent years governmental
 and aid programs have made safe water supply a development
 priority and safe water is now available in towns and most
 villages. Estimated caloric intake is still somewhat below
 requirements with the available calorie supply as a percentage
 of requirements only 92 .percent. Cases of malnutrition in the
 more remote areas along the border and in parts of the
 highlands continue to be reported. About three-quarters of
 the rural population live below the absolute poverty level,
 according to 1979 statistics. School enrollment is up from 39
 percent of primary school-age children in 1970 to 66 percent
 in 1982.
 Population movement to the urban centers, particularly Port
 Moresby and Lae, in combination with a tradition of violence
 between the great number of different ethnic groups, has
 resulted in serious and growing social problems. While
 traditional tribal warfare in rural areas remains a concern,
 it has been overshadowed by urban, often ethnic-based crimes.
 The crime rate in Papua New Guinea is believed to be much
 higher than that in most developing countries. Enforcement of
 existing laws is plagued with difficulties both in the
 provinces and in Port Moresby. Police are overworked and
 underequipped; individuals refuse to testify against their
 clansmen, and conviction rates are low.
 The recent emergency measures had some success in the Port
 Moresby area, perhaps in part because some criminals have
 moved back to provincial areas, but these measures are by
 nature temporary. Problems associated with in-migration from
 rural areas to urban areas will remain serious as long as the
 number of jobs is insufficient to meet the expectations of
 those attracted by the promise of modern sector wages. In
 short, the related problems of rural stagnation, unemployment,
 and crime are likely to remain serious for some time.
 The Department of Labor is responsible for the enforcement of
 safety, health, and working conditions laws and regulations.
 
 
 846
 PAPUA NEW GUINEA
 It regularly conducts industrial visits. Working hour
 limitations, rest periods, holidays, leave, wages, and
 compensations are regulated by the Employment Act of 1978.
 Within the Act, minimum wages are established by the Minimum
 Wages Board. These vary by industry and types of work, and
 whether or not work is performed in an urban or rural area.
 Standard hours of work are regulated as well and,
 although variable for some occupations, may not exceed 42
 hours per week in an urban area or 44 hours in a rural
 environment.
 Children under the age of 11 may not be employed outside a
 family relationship. Children between the ages of 11 and 16
 may only be employed with parental permission, a medical
 clearance, and a work permit from a labor office. Except in
 agriculture, such employment is very rare according to the
 Papua New Guinea Department of Labor.
 Women have equal rights before the law and their status is
 gradually improving, but they still face difficulties.
 Wife-beating is said to be widespread, but it is rarely
 brought to the attention of the authorities. In urban areas,
 along with other violent crimes, rape is a problem of
 increasing severity. In the villages, women are protected by
 their kin, but attacks on women are a common feature of
 intertribal conflict. Against the background of traditional
 male dominance, the achievements of women in Papua New Guinea
 are significant. Some have become doctors, lawyers, and
 office directors. The Permanent Secretary for Labor and the
 head of the Education Commission are women. One woman, a
 former minister, is a member of the National Parliament and
 several hold seats in provincial assemblies.
 
 
 847
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS ANO GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: PAPUA NEW GUINEA
 1983     1984     1985
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL,,.         0.6      0.8      0.0
 LOANS ................ 0.0          0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................     0.6      0.8      0.0
 A.AID ........ .............   0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS ................ 0.0          0.0      0.0
 ,GRANTS ................    0.0      0.0      0.0
 (SEC.SUPP.ASSIST,)...         0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.FOOD FOR PEACE .......        0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS ..............    ... 0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................    0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE  I-TOTAL ..........       0.0      0.0      0.0
 REPAY. IN $-LOANS .....        0.0      0.0      0.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR .....        0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE  II-TOTAL .........       0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.RELIEP.EC.OEV & WFP,         0.0      0.0      0.0
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY .....        0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST,..         0.6      0.8      0.0
 LOANS ................ 0.0          0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................     0.6      0.8      0.0
 PEACE CORPS ......        0.6      0.8      0.0
 NARCOTICS ........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 OTHER ..............      0.0      0.0      0.0
 II.NIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL..          0.0      0.0      0.1
 LOANS .....   ....... 0.0           0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................     0.0      0.0      0.1
 A.NAP GRANTS ..........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.CREDIT FINANCING ....        0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.INTL NILEOTRNG ....        0.0      0.0      0.1
 D.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK...         0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS ........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. & NIL..          0.6      0.8      0.1
 LOANS ................ 0.0          0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................     0.6      0.8      0.1
 OTHER US LOANS ..........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 EX-IM BANK LOANS .......        0.0      0.0      0.0
 ALL OTHER ................ 0.0          0.0      0.0
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1983     1984     1985     1946-85
 TOTAL ........    80.6     65.2     54.0    578.6
 ISRD              45.1     49.3      9.7    204.1
 IFC.               0.0      0.0      0.0      7.6
 IDA                3.0      0.0      0.0    113.2
 IDS                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 ADS               24.0     15.0     44.3    221.4
 AFOB               0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 UNDP               0.0      0.9      0.0     15.3
 OTHER-UN           0.6      0.0      0.0      2.1
 EEC                7.9      0.0      0.0     14.9
 
 
 848
