P8GL8 N<N GL@E<8
Papua New Guinea has abundant natural resources, but poor governance and
corruption have prevented ordinary citizens from benefitting from this wealth.
The government has failed to safeguard environmental concerns in mining
operations, and the continued dumping of mine waste into rivers poses potentially
severe health risks.
The government has not taken concrete steps to address pervasive abuses by
the police force that are committed with impunity, as documented in a February
report by the United Nations special rapporteur on torture. Violence against
women is widespread, buttressed by limited social services and a weak justice
system.
Dysfunctional government institutions continue to paralyze the country. In
August Peter O’Neill, the former treasurer, was elected prime minister after
opposition leaders persuaded parliament to declare the prime minister’s office
vacant while sitting Prime Minister Michael Somare received medical treatment
overseas. In September the National Court referred Somare’s bid to hold his
seat in parliament to the Supreme Court. Somare has been the country’s dominant
political figure for more than 40 years. Some have expressed cautious
optimism that new leadership could herald a more transparent and accountable
government.
Extractive Industries
Extractive industries are the main engine of the economy, but the government
has long failed to adequately regulate them, with devastating consequences to
the environment. Papua New Guinea’s sprawling Porgera gold mine, 95 percent
owned by Canadian company Barrick Gold, has produced more than 16 million
ounces of gold since opening in 1990, worth more than US$20 billion today.
The mine dumps 16,000 tons of liquid waste into the Porgera River every day, a
controversial practice that is out of line with current industry standards. Critics
worry it could pose serious health risks to communities downstream.
A protracted legal battle over the Ramu Nickel mine, set to begin operations in
late 2011, involves Ramu Nico Management (MCC), the Chinese company that
owns the majority of the mine, and landowners raising compensation discrepancies
and environmental concerns. In July the National Court dismissed an
application that landowners had brought for a permanent injunction preventing
the mine from dumping waste into the sea. The Supreme Court was hearing an
appeal at this writing.
Exploration drilling as part of a projected $15 billion Liquid Natural Gas (LNG)
project is set to expand at the end of the year. Disputes between local landowners
and LNG contractors have been common since the project was sanctioned
in 2009, and unresolved disputes over compensation for landowners, outstanding
business development grants, and inadequate benefits for employees continue
to generate protests and occasional violence. In August local villagers
attacked two employees at the LNG site in Komo, a proposed airfield, forcing
Exxon Mobile to temporarily halt operations.
Torture and Other Police Abuse
Human Rights Watch has previously documented widespread abuse by Papua
New Guinea’s police, including use of excessive force against demonstrators,
torture, and sexual violence, including against children.
In February the UN special rapporteur on torture released a report on Papua
New Guinea documenting routine beatings of criminal suspects that often rise
to the level of torture, extortion of sex from female detainees, corruption, and
other abuses. Conditions in correctional institutions were “poor,” and
“appalling” in police lockups, where children are regularly detained with
adults. The report outlined measures to address corruption and impunity in the
police force, including ratifying the Convention against Torture and amending
domestic legislation. At this writing the government had taken no substantive
measures to address widespread abuses documented in the report.
Violence against Women
Violence, including sexual violence, against women and girls is rampant in
Papua New Guinea. Support services such as shelters and emergency health
care are grossly inadequate. Victims face formidable barriers to obtaining
redress through the justice system, including lack of information, limited legal
aid, and geographic distance. Many village courts rely on customary laws that
do not protect women’s rights. The system often leaves perpetrators unpunished,
a problem exacerbated by the propensity of some police to engage in
sexual violence.
Private security personnel employed at the Porgera gold mine have been implicated
in alleged gang rapes and other violent crimes. Following publication in
February of Gold’s Costly Dividend, Human Rights Watch’s report on this issue,
Barrick Gold and police uncovered additional cases of alleged abuse. Barrick
fired six employees for involvement in, or failure to report, alleged sexual violence.
Police arrested three current and former Porgera Joint Venture employees
in January. Two were charged with rape and the third with inflicting grievous
bodily harm. Barrick has committed to improve oversight and accountability
mechanisms in order to prevent future abuse. At this writing it was working to
establish a compensation mechanism for victims.
Corruption
The government has regularly been embroiled in corruption scandals. In
Transparency International’s 2010 Corruption Percentage Index, which evaluates
and ranks public sector corruption in countries all over the world, Papua
New Guinea ranked 154 out of 178 countries surveyed.
After taking office Prime Minister O’Neill called for establishing an independent
commission against corruption and initiated a corruption investigation task
force. In August the prime minister announced an investigation of the National
Planning and Monitoring Department after revelations that $850 million in
development funds had allegedly been inappropriately distributed to companies
and individuals. Despite public commitments to tackle the corruption crisis, the new government’s rhetoric must be matched by action to address the
government’s systemic culture of graft.
Health and Education
Papua New Guinea performs poorly on most indicators of economic and social
well-being. Rates of maternal and child mortality are among the region’s highest.
The closure of rural aid posts and health centers, and the shortage of
drugs, medical equipment, and trained health professionals all limit access to
quality health care.
The country has the highest prevalence of HIV/AIDS among the Pacific islands.
According to the most recent health data, around 34,100 people live with the
disease (0.92 percent of adults in 2010), with young women most likely to be
diagnosed. Gender inequality; sexual violence; inadequate HIV-prevention
information, including opposition to condom promotion; and poor access to
health care fuels the virus’s spread. People living with HIV/AIDS often face violence
and discrimination.
Primary education remains neither free nor compulsory. According to AusAID,
the net enrollment in primary education was 63 percent of school-age children
in 2009. Barriers include long distances to schools, a shortage of upper secondary
placements, high school fees, and school closures due to insecurity.
The new government has committed to fully subsidize education up to grade 10
beginning in January 2012, though similar pledges have been made in the past
with few results.
Key International Actors
Australia, Papua New Guinea’s former colonial ruler, is the country’s most
important international partner, providing some $498 million in annual assistance.
In August Australia and Papua New Guinea agreed to reopen a processing center
on Manus Island for asylum seekers who arrive in Australia by boat.
However, the issue has been deferred indefinitely after the Australian High Court’s September ruling that overseas detention and processing of asylum
seekers was unlawful. Despite Australia’s apparent agreement to process asylum
claims on Manus Island, Papua New Guinea remains responsible as a party
to the 1951 Refugee Convention for ensuring a fair refugee status determination
process and respect for the principle of nonrefoulement (“non-return” to persecution),
as well as being responsible for humane treatment of migrants and
durable solutions for refugees. The center has yet to officially open.
In 2011 the UN Human Rights Council examined Papua New Guinea’s rights
record through the Universal Periodic Review process. Addressing the recommendations
of states, Papua New Guinea acknowledged a wide range of human
rights concerns, but failed to offer clear steps to combat such issues. For
instance, in addressing questions about the special rapporteur’s report on
police abuse and torture, Papua New Guinea offered what is now a familiar
response: the recommendations, it said, were “under review.”