 PAPUA NEW GUINEA
 Papua New Guinea (PNG) comprises some 1,000 tribes and over 800 distinct lan-
 guages in a population of about 4 million. It has a federal parliamentary system,
 based on universal adult suffrage with periodic free and fair elections, and has an
 independent judiciary.
 The Government has constitutional authority over the Defense Force (PNGDF),
 the Royal Papua New Guinea Constabulary (RPNGC) and intelligence organiza-
 tions. Government security forces committed serious human rights abuses.
 Exploitation of such natural resources as minerals, hydrocarbons, and tropical
 timber, and production of tree crops such as coffee, cocoa, and copra, generate sig-
 nificant export and tax revenues. However, 85 percent of the population resides in
 isolated villages, and engages in subsistence and smallholder agriculture. For a ma-
 jority of the citizens, income and literacy are at a low level, and infant and maternal
 mortality rates are high.
 The 8-year-old secessionist movement on the island of Bougainville continued.
 While human rights abuses by both sides decreased following the September 1994
 cease-fire, the secessionist Bougainville Revolutionary Army (BRA) later repudiated
 the cease-fire and, following repeated BRA attacks, the Government also renounced
 it in March and launched an unsuccessful offensive in June-July. Human rights
 abuses by both sides, including extrajudicial killings and physical abuse, increased
 with the greater level of hostilities. Some human rights abusers have been pros-
 ecuted in the courts.
 Besides the conflict with the BRA, there continued to be credible reports that se-
 curity forces committed extrajudicial killings, were responsible for disappearances,
 abused prisoners and detainees, and employed harsh enforcement measures against
 civilians. The Government on occasion investigated alleged instances of abuse and
 prosecuted those believed responsible. Prison conditions remain poor, there are
 lengthy pretrial detentions, and the Government limits freedom of assembly. Exten-
 sive discrimination and violence against women, discrimination against the dis-
 abled, and ethnically motivated tribal violence remain serious problems.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killings.-The PNGDF on Bougainville, as
 well as the progovernment militia allied with it, and the RPNGC when taking police
 actions, committed a number of extrajudicial killings. While no defense force or mili-
 tia members have yet been prosecuted, the authorities on occasion punished some
 RPNGC officers, fulfilling a romise by police officials to bring police officers accused
 of serious misconduct to trial.
 According to the United Nations Special Rapporteur, who visited in late 1995 at
 the invitation of the Government, the PNGDF was believed to have extrajudicially
 executed 64 people between 1991 and 1995. The Government reportedly made no
 response to the allegations of human rights violations that the Special Rapporteur
 transmitted to it. Although reports of extrajudicial killings have lessened, PNGDF
 
 
 745
 soldiers and allied militia members, called in to mediate a local dispute, were sus-
 pected to have killed eight ex-BRA members in June, after leading them away from
 a village near Torokina. Although the PNGDF leadership vowed to investigate the
 allegation and take tough measures against those involved, no report was publicly
 released and no corrective action was taken. Following a month-long research mis-
 sion to PNG, two representatives from Amnesty International (A) told the media
 that relatives had reported several killings that had taken place on Buka island,
 the administrative center of Bougainville province.
 In August the Prime Minister stated that human rights abuses on Bougainville
 were inevitable, but reaffirmed the Government's commitment to investigate and
 prosecute those on all aides who commit serious abuses. The Government has begun
 an investigation into the murder of the Premier of Bougainville in which Defense
 Force meers have been implicated. No other reported human rights abuses by se-
 curity forces on Bougainville have been investigated. With the Prime Minister's an-
 nounced general amnesty in May 1995 for BRA crimes committed up to that time,
 which was extended to include security force actions on Bougainville, it is unlikely
 that the Government will investigate past abuses, the worst of which took place in
 1989 and 1990.
 RPNGC overreaction on occasion resulted in extrajudicial killings. In an incident
 in July, which witnesses described as an execution-style murder, a policeman called
 to investigate harassment reports shot a young man at point-blank range with a po-
 lice-issued assault rifle on a street in Port Moresby in front of a crowd of onlookers.
 The victim was an innocent bystander. The policeman was later arrested and
 charged with wilflul murder. In March a pregnant woman, who was a passenger
 along with several children in a car driven by her husband, was shot by police who
 thought the car was stolen. The policeman responsible was arrested and later
 charged with murder, after the woman died in the hospital. Other examples of ac-
 tions taken against police offiers for extrajudicial killings include: A constable sen-
 tnced to 5 years in prison for killing a man when police attempted to quell a brawl
 at a onvenience shop in Port Moresby; three policemen charged with murder for
 the November 1994   et of a man whom they had struck several times in the
 course of arresting hin for running a black market beer operation in Enga province;
 and in Otober the polie commander in Lae, the count rfs second largest city, was
 arrested and charged with willful murder for the shooting death of a man during
 a riot at a sporting event in September. There were also reports that detainees died
 under suspicious circumstances while in police custody, as well as during arrests.
 The country's Chief Magistrate expressed concern in April about the long delays in
 internal investigations of police shootings, saying that police investigators appeared
 "suspiciously reluctant" to complete their investigations.
 The BRA killed and terrorized civilians in areas it controls. The BRA reportedly
 killed six civilians including an elderly woman on Bougainville's west coast in June,
 a civilian in southwest Bougainville in April, two civilians in south Bougainville also
 in April, three civilians including an old woman in northwest Bougainville in Feb-
 ruary, two civilians in southwest Bougainville also in February, and three civilians
 outside Bougainville's main town of Arawa in January. In September the BRA re-
 portedy killed five civilians and wounded several others in an ambush in Buin,
 southern Bougainville, and killed two villagers, who were described as dedicated
 peace workers, near Tinputz in the northern part of the island. Frequently the BRA
 ambushes civilians after they leave government-controlled care centers to tend their
 fields and gardens at their abandoned villages. The Red Cross field office in Arawa,
 which coordinates operations on the island, temporarily closed in July after rebels
 fired on it, the third such BRA attack since the Red Cross resumed operations on
 Bougainville. Both the visiting U.N. Special Rapporteur and the AI team heard re-
 ports that the BRA was responsible for atrocities, executions, and unlawful deten-
 tions.
 In October Theodore Miriung, the Premier of the progovernment Bougainville
 Transitional Government and an advocate for peace was killed by unidentified gun-
 men while dining with his family at their home village. Miriung had been strongly
 critical of both the Government and the rebels for using force to resolve the Bou-
 gainville crisis. To ensure the objectivity of the investigation, at the Prime Min-
 ister's request an independent inquest was conducted, headed by a distinguished ju
 rist appointed by the Commonwealth Secretariat. Prior to departing the country fol-
 lowing a 3-week investigation, the Sri Lankan judge who conducted the inquest told
 the press that some Defense Force members along with resistance members were
 involved in the killing. The Government was awaiting a full report at year's end.
 b. Disappearance.-There were several reports that people disappeared on Bou-
 gainville while they were under the control of the PNGDF and its allied militia. In
 February the chief provincial officer publicly expressed concern over allegations that
 
 
 nine people had disappeared in various parts of Bougainville while detained by secu-
 rity forces. In September the chief coordinator of the Kangu Beach care center dis-
 appeared after being detained by PNGDF soldiers.
 The BRA also was suspected of involvement in several disappearances, including
 one case in July in which a man disappeared after being picked up by the BRA in
 Kieta. According to one report, scores of patients removed by the BRA from the
 Longata health center could have died when taken to BRA-controlled areas where
 health care was not available.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution forbids torture and other cruel or degrading treatment or punish-
 ment. Nonetheless, some PNG soldiers, allied militia and  lice, as well as BRA in-
 surgents, continued to engage in such practices. In April PNGDF members report-
 edly detained several Buka villagers without charges, forcing some to run extended
 distances or sit unsheltered at gunpoint under the scorching sun for long periods
 of time. In May a PNGDF officer detained a senior provincial political leader over-
 night and threatened him at gunpoint for reporting directly to authorities in Port
 Moresby.
 RPNGC members used excessive force, particularly when dealing with tribal fight-
 ing in the highlands region of the country. In a particularly egregious incident, po-
 lice mobile squads reportedly shot several villagers and left over 200 families home-
 less when they burned homes and destroyed other property in the Markham Valley
 following tribal violence in February. During the 2-month-long coroner's inquest, the
 Police Commissioner admitted that the police had overreacted and caused massive
 destruction.
 Members of the police have been accused of being ill-disciplined and quick to use
 violence to obtain information, to punish perceived slights, or to punish those in po-
 lice custody. In June police beat students and a reporter at a demonstration (see
 Section 2.b.). During a joint police-electoral commission workshop in May, the Prime
 Minister called on police to refrain from unnecessary and rough behavior when car-
 rying out their duties. The Police Commissioner has publicly vowed to discipline po-
 lice members who use brutal tactics.
 Police officers have been charged before the courts for criminal offenses (see Sec-
 tion L.a.). In April two officers were sentenced to 7 years' imprisonment for the De-
 cember 1994 rape of a teenage girl at the police barracks in Port Moresby. In Feb-
 ruary a policeman was charged with raping a girl at a police station in the Western
 Highlands province earlier that month. In a case in May involving the beating of
 a prisoner, the courts fined the four prison wardens involved, in addition to setting
 a judgment against the State.
 A BRA rebel, accused of participating in a reign of terror in the Tinputz district
 of Bougainville in late 1995, was convicted in September and sentenced to an 8-year
 jail term on arson, armed robbery, and theft Charges. Up to 18 other BRA insur-
 ents are awaiting prosecution on charges including murder, rape, and armed rob-
 e Following numerous omplaints, in September poice on Buka arrested on as-
 sault charges one militia member and announced plans to arrest others believed re-
 sponsible for harassing several villagers, who were illegally detained for several
 days in a militia camp, and reportedly forced to crawl naked, and drink urine.
 Prisons are severely overcrowded and understaffed, and are unable to provide
 adequate medical care or even food due to the Government's financial problems. Al-
 though the Correctional Services Act, which came into effect in February, attempted
 to addess humane custody of prisoners, the Minister responsible for prisons stated
 publicly that most inmates were being held in "appalling conditions." He called upon
 the Government to either fund the system adequately or close the prisons. The act-
 ing Prison Commissioner admitted in May that prison conditions throughout the
 country had deteriorated, especially due to overcrowding. Many prisoners as well as
 guards do not have uniforms, making it difficult for outsiders to distinguish between
 the two. The prison in Daru, Western Province, was closed in 1993, with only those
 convicted of the most serious offenses such as rape and murder being held in the
 local jail. All other convicts were released into society, which led to the expression
 of great concern by the country's Chief Justice in September.
 The Government permits visits by human rights monitors.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The courts generally enforce constitu-
 tional protections aginst arbitrary arrest and detention. However, these protections
 were weakened by the 1993 Internal Security Act (ISA) and amendments to existing
 anticrime legislation that provide that judicially issued warrants are no longer re-
 quired when authorities suspect that a person has committed an ISA offense or cer-
 tain other offenses. Under 1993 amendments to the Bail Act and the Criminal Code,
 only National or Supreme Court judges may grant bail in certain criminal cases in-
 volving firearms. In all other cases, bal may be granted unless the judge rules oth-
 
 
 747
 erwise. Those under arrest have the right to legal counsel, to be informed of the
 charges against them, and to have their arrests subjected to judicial review.
 Given the relative shortage of police and judicial resources and an exceptionally
 high crime rate, pretrial detention periods can be long, particularly in rural areas.
 However, pretrial remand is subject to strict judicial review through continuing pre-
 trial consultations, especially at the National Court level. Nonetheless, cases are fre-
 quently delayed for months awaiting the results of police investigations.
 The Constitutionprohibits exile and it is not practiced.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The Constitution provides for an independent judi
 ciary, and the ourts are independent of executive, legislative,  military a or-
 ties. The legal system is based on English common law. The Supreme Court is the
 final court of appeal and holds original jurisdiction on constitutional matters. The
 National Court hears most cases and appeals from the lower district courts estab-
 lished at the provincial level There are also village courts headed by lay persons,
 who judge minor offenses under both customar and satuor law.
 The Constitution provides for due process, including a public trial, and the court
 system generally enforces these provisions. Defendants have the right to an attor-
 ney. Legal counsel is provided either by the public solicitor's office or by the Law
 Society on recommendation of the public solicitor's office for those accused of serious
 offenses and unable to afford counsel. "Serious offenses" are generally defined as fel-
 ony charges or any case heard in either the National or district court (as opposed
 to the village or magistrate courts). Defendants and their attorneys may confront
 witnesses, present evidence, plead cases, and appeal convictions. Despite these safe-
 guards, justice was delayed for many remandees throughout the country in Septem-
 ber when Supreme and National Court circuit schedules were disrupted due to a
 financial crisis.
 There were no reports of political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-While
 the authorities generally respect privacy rights, police-especially in the high-
 lands-have burned homes to quell intertribal conflict and punish communities sus-
 pected of harboring suspected criminals.
 Some communities have sought redress through civil suits, a practice that pro-
 vides compensation to victims but does not result in criminal prosecution of the per-
 petrators. Over the past 2 years, the State has paid nearly $5 million following
 court-ordered judgments for wrongful police raids. In a court case in August, the
 judge not only ordered the state to pay sizable monetary compensation to villagers
 in the southern highlands for a police raid in 1990, but also ordered the former po-
 lice minister and three police officers personally to pay compensation for their rles
 in committing abuses, which included assault, false arrest, and inhuman treatment
 of suspects.
 In spite of constitutional provisions requiring warrants, the police continued to
 conduct warrantless searches.
 g. Use of Excessive Force and Violations of Humanitarian Law in Internal Con-
 flicts.-Following the September 1994 cease-fire agreement with the BRA, the
 armed conflict decreased significantly. However, the BRA boycotted an October 1994
 peace conference, and continued insurgent activities in 1995-96. The Government
 repudiated the cease-fire in March, and launched an unsuccessful military operation
 against the BRA in June-July.
 Prior to commencing the operation, the Government warned all civilians in BRA-
 held areas to move to government-supported care centers for their own protection.
 Many thousands did, but found that the authorities were not able to feed or care
 for the new arrivals. Many subsequently returned to their villages after the oper-
 ation ended. Others, who either chose not to go to the care centers or whom the
 BRA prohibited from doing so, risked being caught in the fighting. In one incident,
 four members of a family were reportedly killed by a government mortar round
 which exploded in their village, Kurai, in central Bougainville. Without conflrming
 the incident, the security forces apologized, but stressed that civilians had been
 warned to leave the area.
 PNGDF abuse of the local population is blamed for provoking the Kangu Beach
 massacre in September, in which 12 soldiers and policemen were killed and five oth-
 ers taken prisoner. The Government released a report in October blaming members
 of the Resistance Force (a progovernment militia) and the BRA for the killings, but
 criticized PNGDF "severe provocations" including: Troop indiscipline; drunkenness;
 drug use; fraternization with local women; and mistreatment of Resistance Force
 personnel.
 The BRA in July reportedly burned two villages and a community school in retal-
 iation against villagers who had departed for government care centers. The BRA
 
 
 748
 also reportedly prevented people in areas it controlled from traveling to government-
 controlled areas for medical treatment.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for free speech, in-
 cluding freedom of the media, and the Government generally respects this freedom
 in practice.
 The media provided independent coverage and analysis of major controversies, in-
 cluding the ongoing insurrection on Bougainville and the legal problems of govern-
 ment and opposition politicians.
 The two daily newspapers and the two weeklies compete aggressively in Port
 Moresby, but have limited circulation in other urban areas. One of the dailies is
 owned by a Malaysian firm, which has invested heavily in PNG's tiqber industry;
 the newspaper publishes little on the controversial subjects of logging and forestry,
 but is generally independent and unbiased on other issues. The tlevision broadcast-
 ing company, EM-TV, is also independent, although_ there is limited television recep-
 tion outside Port Morsby. The government-owned National Broadcasting Corpora-
 tion (NBC) owns two radio networks that potentially could reach the country's en-
 tire pop ulation, but the networks are limited by poor funding and the deteriorating
 state of their equipment. A privately owned radio network, NAU-FM, is popular in
 Port Moresby and is expanding int other areas of the country.
 Journalists are required to obtain permission from the Prime Minister's office and
 from the defense force commander before traveling to Bougainville. Requests are fre-
 quently denied under the rationale that the PNGDF cannot guarantee the reporters'
 safety (see Section 2.d.).
 In January the Constitutional Review Commission (CRC), a parliamentary body,
 began a review of ways to make the media "more accountable" and to ensure that
 persona "aggrieved by media abuses have accessible redress." However, media and
 general public representatives reacted strongly, viewing the CRC effort as an at-
 tempt to control the media. The CRC initially reported in June that no new restric-
 tions needed to be enacted, and recommended instead that an independent media
 commission be established charged with self-regulation, an approach that the media
 representatives supported. However, media representatives again became concerned
 when the CRC chairman stated in October that the CRC habeen directed to draft
 legislation to make the media more accountable and to establish an independent
 body, in addition to the media commission, that would look into complaints against
 the media.
 The Government showed itself acutely sensitive to media criticism on several oc-
 casions. In February the Prime Minister attacked as "totally unfounded" and "dam-
 aging to the country" a media report, later confirnmed, relating to strained meetings
 between a World Bank team and the Government. The Prime Minister sought con-
 sideration of barring the media representatives involved from reporting on par-
 liament. The Forestry Minister admitted to having placed four telephone calls in an
 unsuccessful attempt in September to convince EM-TV management to stp showing
 a documentary on Bouainvle, while it was being broadcast. The Minister defended
 his actions by saying the program was not in the people's interest. Such government
 sensitivities have apparently affected reporting. The editor of a Port Moresby news-
 paper stated publicly in February that the media have deliberately chosen not to
 report on certain areas that would be open subjects in Western societies, such as
 the private lives of political leaders and allegations of corruption.
 The courts occasionally tried citizens and foreigners under those provisions of the
 Censorship Act that ban the import, broadcast or publication of materials deemed
 pornographic according to Papu New Guinea's Censorship Code. The usual sen-
 tence for violations is confiscation and destruction of restricted goods, although the
 courts can legally impose a e   of $17   o  r  a prison sentence of up to 2 years.
 Cosmopolitan and Cleo magazines were banned in 1995 for having "gone against the
 nature of decency" in several of their issues.
 The BRA reportedly on occasion jammed the broadcasts of the prgovernment pro-
 vincial station, Radio United Bougainville.
 The Government respects academic freedom.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly.-Public assemblies and private associations are
 legal. Public demonstrations eqirer polie approval and 7 fay' prior notice. Such
 permission is frequently denied on the grounds that such activities encourage by-
 standers to engage in vandalism and violence. Students protesting university fees
 staged unapproved demonstrations. In one such demonstration in June, police fired
 tear gas and waring shots over the heads of rotesting students at the university
 campus in Port Moresby, and beat several stuents as wel1 as a television reporter
 after the students allegedly threw rocks. The police commander defended the police
 
 
 749
 action, and stated that students must give the required 7 days' notice to hold dem-
 onstrations.
 The Government does not require registration of associations. International affili-
 ation of church and civic groups is also freely permitted.
 c. Freedom of Religion.--The Constitution contains provisions for freedom of reli-
 gion, and the Government respects them in practice.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-Government approval is required to travel to Bougainville. Following
 the September 1994 cease-ire on Bougainville PNG security orces no longer re-
 qred travellers to Buka to obtain permits. However, following a series of lethal
 BRA attacks around the island in March, all scheduled flights were cancelled and
 the airport closed for a short period. Even officials of the progovernment Bougain-
 ville Transitional Government have on occasion been restricted from travelling from
 the administrative center on Buka to Bougainville. The PNGDF occasionally im-
 posed sea travel restrictions on villagers living on small islands off Bougainville due
 to concerns over potential BRA attacks.
 Otherwise, the Government does not restrict freedom of movement within and
 outside the country. The Government has not applied sections of the ISA that au-
 thorize the Government to exclude from any part of the country anyone convicted
 under the act or likely to commit an offense under its provisions. It has on occasion
 used its immigration powers to prohibit entry of noncitizens with whose views its
 disagrees. In June it refused to issue a visa to a Tongan human rights monitor in-
 vited to participate in a government-hosted U.N. Decolonization Committee meeting
 taking place inPort Moresby.
 The BRA reportedly restricted people from moving from its areas into government
 areas. The BRA also prevented several church groups from entering its areas to con-
 duct peace vigils, although it did permit entry to a three-woman religious group in
 May.
 Me Government provides first asylum for approximately 3,000 people who have
 fled from the neighboring Indonesian province of Irian Jaya. The Government co-
 operates with the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) in as-
 sisting the Irian Jayans who live in the East Awin refugee camp in Western Prov-
 ince. Until June this camp was administered by the UNHCR, but its functions were
 transferred to the Government when the UNHCR closed its office. Just prior to the
 closing, the Government announced a new policy of limited integration of Irian
 Jayans having certain skills or other qualifications, who could be accorded permis-
 sive residency status and permitted to leave the refugee settlement. A government
 committee is being formed to review applicants for such permission; it can also au-
 thorize repatriation of Irian Jayans who violate the conditions of their refugee sta-
 tus. There were no known forced repatriations of Irian Jayans to Indonesia in 1996.
 Several thousand traditional border-crossers live just within the country's border
 and move more or less freely between the two countries.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens freely exercise the right to change their government through direct elec-
 tions with a secret ballot and universal adult suffrage. The voters elect a unicameral
 parliament of 109 members from all 19 provinces and the Port Moresby National
 Capital District. Any citizen can stand for election; several foreign-born citizens sit
 in Parliament and one sits in the Cabinet. With a multiplicity of small parties, coali-
 tion governments tend to be weak and shifting; none has yet survived its 5-year
 electoral mandate in the 20 years of PNG independence. The next general election
 will be held in July 1997.
 Although there are no legal barriers to their participation in political life, women
 are underrepresented in senior positions in government and in politics. There are
 no women in the Cabinet or in Parliament. Although 3 women have been elected
 to parliament since independence in 1975, none has been elected in the past 15
 years.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 There are no official barriers to the formation of human rights groups. While the
 PNG Association for Human Rights, formed in 1992, has been inactive, the Individ-
 ual and Community Rights Advocacy Forum (ICRAF), a nongovernmental organiza-
 tion (NGO), has become increasingly active since its formation in 1993. ICRAF con-
 centrated its efforts on human rights and the environment. NGO's exercised their
 right to comment on human rights issues in the media without any known govern-
 mental interference or retribution. ICRAF leaders participated in a peaceful dem-
 
 
 750
 onstration by Irian Jayan supporters who presented a petition to members of the
 U.N. decolonization meeting in Port Moresby in June.
 The Government permitted a month-long visit by representatives of Amnesty
 International, who were investigating human rights problems, especially those relat-
 ing to Bougainville. The team completed its visit, which included a stop in Buka,
 in July.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution provides for equal protection under the law irrespective of race,
 tribe, place of origin, political opinion, color, creed, religion, or sex. Despite these
 constitutional and other legal guarantees, women often face discrimination.
 Extreme ethnic and geographic diversity prevents any tribe or clan from dominat-
 ing the country. The democratically elected government, based on loose coalitions,
 has consistently avoided favoring any group.
 Women.-Violence against women including domestic violence and gang rape, is
 a serious and prevalent problem. While ostensibly protected by their families and
 clans, women are nonetheless often victims of violence. Traditional village deter-
 rents are breaking down, and the number of gang rapes is believed to have risen.
 Although rape is punishable by imprisonment, and sentences are levied when assail-
 ants are found guilty, few assailants are apprehended. Domestic violence such as
 wife beating is also common, but is usually viewed by police and citizenry alike as
 a private, family matter. According to a 1992 report ofthe Law Reform Commission,
 two-thirds of wives have been beaten by their husbands.
 Violence committed by women against women frequently stems from domestic
 problems, and, where polygynous marriages are still customary, there has been an
 increase in the number of women charged with the murder of another of their hus-
 band's wives. According to one report, 65 percent of women in prison are there for
 attacking or killing another woman. In view of the number of such incidents, a sen-
 ior police official in the highlands region in April called for legislation to make a
 man who has married more than one wife responsible if one of the wives dies as
 a result of a fight among the wives.
 The Constitution and laws have provisions for extensive rights for women dealing
 with family, marriage, and property issues. Some women in the modern sector have
 achieved senior positions in the professions, business, and civil service. However,
 traditional patterns of discrimination against women persist. Despite constitutional
 and legal provisions, most women, even those in urban areas, are considered second-
 class citizens. For example, village courts tend to be overly severe on women, impos-
 ing jail terms on those found guilty of adultery, while penalizing men lightly or not
 at all. Circuit-riding National Court justices frequently annulled such village court
 sentences. In April the Government approved amendments to the Village Courts Act
 requiring that orders for imprisonment be endorsed by a district court before they
 take effect. Polygyny, a customary practice among some tribes, particularly in the
 highlands, and the custom of paying bride-price serve to reinforce a view of women
 as property. This view was carried to the extreme when tribesmen from a western
 highlands village, in pressing compensation claims for the death of a relative, de-
 manded that a young woman be included as part of a compensation package of
 goods and money. ICRAF brought the matter to the National Court which in June
 issued a protective custody order to prevent the villagers from threatening the
 woman.
 According to U.N. Children's Fund (UNICEF) figures released in June, Papua
 New Guinea has a very high maternal mortality rate. Only 40 percent of women
 are literate, trailing men by nearly 10 percent. According to another U.N. report,
 33 percent of girls are not attending primary school, compared to 21 percent of the
 boys, thus perpetuating their disadvantage. Bth the Governmet and NGO's are
 working to improve the status and conditions of women, but have had limited re-
 sults. The Government provides a grant to the National Council of Women. A Divi-
 sion of Women's Affairs exists in the Department of Youth, Home Affairs, and Reli-
 gion.
 Children.-The Government did not dedicate significant resources to protect the
 rights and welfare of children. Most programs to protect and develop youth are oper-
 ated by NGO's and religious organizations. Many government programs are severely
 underfunded. In PNG's traditional clan system, children are generally cared for
 within the extended family, in accordance with financial resources and the tribe's
 access to services. Because of the geographic isolation and remoteness of many vil-
 lags, malnourishment and infant mortality rates are very high. More than 60 in-
 fants out of every 1,000 die during their first year of life. Although statistics are
 not available, we are officers believe that child abuse is increasing as village life
 
 
 and the extended family give way to the influences of modern society. Although
 PNG ratified the U.N. Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC) in 1993, it has
 not yet completed the report due in 1995 on CRC implementation, nor prepared the
 national program of action.
 People With Disabilities.-Through the National Board for the Disabled, the Gov-
 ernment provides limited funding to more than a dozen NGO's that provide services
 to the disabled. The Government does not provide direct programs or services. Serv-
 ices and health care for the disabled, except for that provided by the traditional
 family and clan system, do not exist in several of the country's provinces. No legisla-
 tion mandates accessibility for the disabled. Disabled persons face discrimination in
 education, training, and employment.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The right to form and join labor unions is provided
 by law, subject to registration by the Department of Industrial Relations. While the
 Government does not use registration as a form of control over unions, an unregis-
 tered union has no legal standing with the Department of Labor or before the courts
 and, accordingly, cannot operate effectively. Unionized workers account for about
 one-half of the 250,000 wage-earners in the formal economy and are organized into
 some 50 trade unions. Most of the unions representing private-sector workers are
 associated with the Trade Unions Congress. Unions are independent of the Govern-
 ment and of political parties. They may freely affiliate with international organiza-
 tions.
 Both public- and private-sector unions exercised their legal right to strike in 1996.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The Constitution provides for
 the right to engage in collective bargaining and to join industrial organizations.
 These rights are exercised freely. The Government did not take action to amend a
 law criticized by the International Labor Organization in 1994 that gives it discre-
 tionary power to cancel arbitration awards or declare wage agreements void when
 they are contrary to government policy. Antiunion discrimination by employers
 against union members and organizers is prohibited by law. The Department of In-
 dustrial Relations and the courts are involved in dispute settlement. Wages over the
 minimum wage are set through negotiations between employers and employees or
 their respective industrial organizations.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The Constitution forbids slavery
 and all forms of forced or compulsory labor, and there were no reports of such prac-
 tices.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The minimum working age, as es-
 tablished in the Employment Act, is 18 years. However, children between the ages
 of 11 and 18 may be employed in family-related work provided they have parental
 permission, a medical clearance, and a work permit from a labor office. Such em-
 ployment is rare, except in subsistence agriculture.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work-Minimum wages for the private sector are set
 by the Minimum Wage Board, a quasi-governmental body with worker and employer
 representation. A 1992 determination, which is still valid, reduced the minimum
 wage for newly hired urban workers significantly, to equal the minimum wage for
 rural workers. The minimum wage of about $17.00 (22.96 kina) per week does not
 provide a decent standard of living for a worker and family who exist solely on the
 cash economy. At the same time, the national youth wage, for new entrants into the
 job market of 16 to 21 years of age, was set at 75 percent of the adult minimum
 wage. The Department of Labor and Employment and the courts take steps to en-
 force the minimum wage law, but enforcement is not effective because of the lack
 of resources. The depreciation of the kina against the U.S. dollar, about 30 percent
 since September 1994, has reduced the real wage received by most workers. Mini-
 mum wage levels, allowances, rest periods, holidays, leave, and overtime are regu-
 lated by law. The workweek is limited by law to 42 hours (44 in rural areas). The
 law provides for at least one rest period of 24 consecutive hours in every week.
 Enforcement of the Industrial Health and Safety Law and related regulations is
 the responsibility of the Department of Labor and Employment. The law requires
 that inspections take place on a regular basis, but, due to a shortage of inspectors,
 they occur only when requested by workers or unions. The ability of workers to re-
 move themselves from hazardous conditions varies by workplace. Where workers are
 unionized there is some measure of protection in such situations.
 
 
