Papua New Guinea
Parliamentary elections in July 2007, although not without incident, concluded
without the feared large-scale violence, resulting in Sir Michael Somares return
as prime minister and changes in key cabinet ministries. Again, only one woman,
Dame Carol Kidu, was elected to parliament.
Police rape and torture, impunity for gender-based violence and discrimination,
and abuses against people living with and affected by HIV/AIDS remain widespread.
Two men were sentenced to death in October for murder, although no executions
have been carried out since the death penalty was reintroduced in 1991.
Police Violence, Juvenile Justice, and Detention of Children
Police continue to routinely use excessive force, torture, and sexual violence
against individuals in custody. In the face of widespread violent crime, such tactics
have proved ineffective as crime control, and have deeply eroded the public
trust and cooperation crucial to policing. Impunity and corruption fuel abuse as
police are rarely held accountable for violence, either through internal disciplinary
mechanisms or by the criminal justice system.
Otherwise promising juvenile justice reforms have had little effect on widespread
police violence against children and other vulnerable groups, as converting new
standards into changed police practices remains elusive. However, progress in
developing the juvenile justice system continues with additional training for
police on new standards for dealing with children. A third juvenile policy monitoring
unit opened in the highlands. The units are intended to divert children from
the formal justice system into mediation or informal conflict resolution mechanisms,
and to prevent detention with adults. However, in many areas, police continue
to detain children with adults in police lockups, where they are denied medical
care and placed at risk of rape and other forms of violence.
In prisons and other juvenile institutions, children awaiting trial are mixed with
those already convicted. Many facilities lack blankets, beds, mosquito nets, clothes, or any education or rehabilitation programs. As children may face
months or even years in detention awaiting trial, these are serious problems.
Some prisons and rural lockups received additional funds in 2007, resulting in
improvements to staff housing and conditions for some inmates.
A new juvenile justice act emphasizing rehabilitation and reintegration, with
arrest and detention as measures of last resort, awaits parliamentary review at
this writing.
Violence and Discrimination against Women and Girls
Violence against women and girlsincluding domestic violence, gang rape, and
torture and murder for alleged sorceryis pervasive and rarely punished. In
October news reports of a man pulling the fetus from his pregnant wifes womb
provoked widespread public outrage. Parliamentarian Kidu presented to parliament
a petition on violence against women signed by more than 4,000 people. At
this writing, parliament has declined to debate the issue. Police often ignore complaints
or demand money or sex from victims. Nevertheless, in August the
Supreme Court upheld the conviction of James Yali, a parliamentarian, for raping
his 17-year-old sister-in-law; the ruling invalidated his reelection.
Girls and womens low status also is reflected in disparities in education, health
care, and employment; heavy household workloads; and polygyny.
Human Rights Monitoring Mechanisms
The Ombudsman Commission, which has taken useful steps to monitor government
corruption, has a human rights unit, but the units capacity to pursue cases
is weak. In June 2007 the police force signed an agreement with the
Ombudsmans Commission to create a police ombudsman, but it remains to be
seen whether the office will take up torture and cruel, inhuman, and degrading
treatment, and, if it does, whether it will have the political backing and resources
to hold officers accountable.
Prohibitive costs and procedural difficulties make it all but impossible for many
citizens to pursue civil claims against police officers suspected of abuse. Successful claims have limited deterrent effect because the costs are born by the
state, not the police force or individual officers.
Nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) and womens rights activists play an
essential role in obtaining services for victims of violence, but some face threats
for their work.
HIV/AIDS
Papua New Guinea has the highest prevalence of HIV/AIDS in the Pacific: the government
and UNAIDS estimate that almost 60,000 people were living with the
disease at the end of 2007 (1.61 percent of persons ages 15-49).
Antiretroviral therapy remains inaccessible to most, and few have the tools to protect
themselves from infection. People living with HIV/AIDS often face violence
and discrimination in their communities. In August an activists report that southern
highlands villagers had buried alive at least three people living with HIV/AIDS
received international condemnation. The government promised to investigate
and, in the context of conflicting claims by some local groups, announced it had
found no evidence of the practice.
Despite ongoing police training on HIV/AIDS, police undermine prevention efforts
by targeting female sex workers, men and boys suspected of homosexual conduct,
and street vendors for beatings and rape. Police also extort money from
such individuals, using the threat of arresting them for illegal activities. Police are
known to abuse people simply for carrying condoms; such actions deter condom
use and undermine protection efforts. However, NGOs report some improvements
on the part of individual officers as the result of training.
Education
Primary education is neither free nor universal. Gross primary enrollment is low
about 75 percent of school-age children in 2005according to United Nations
data, while secondary school enrollment rates are below 30 percent. School fees
and related costs pose a significant barrier to childrens education, despite partial
government subsidies in some provinces. Fees, which are high compared with average annual income, are often linked to non-attendance, dropout, and the
entry of children into child labor.
Key International Actors
The government has not at this writing responded to requests to visit Papua New
Guinea from the UN special rapporteurs on torture, health, or education. Papua
New Guinea is not a party to the Convention against Torture or to other major
human rights treaties, apart from the Convention on the Rights of the Child, the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women, and
the Convention on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination. The United Nations
Childrens Fund (UNICEF) continues to lead juvenile justice reform efforts.
Australia remains, by far, the most important external actor and largest foreign
donor, playing a significant role in, among other areas, the law and justice sector
and HIV/AIDS. However, Australia does not take a human rights approach to
development, and relations between the two countries remain strained.
This summary does not address human rights developments in Bougainville.