 POLAND
 Poland is ruled by the leadership of the Polish United Workers
 (Communist) Party (PUWP) headed by General Wojciech
 Jaruzelski. Jaruzelski is also the Supreme Commander of the
 Armed Forces in his capacity as Chairman of the National
 Defense Committee. In November 1985, General Jaruzelski
 became Chairman of the Council of State. He was succeeded as
 Chairman of the Council of Ministers by Zbigniew Messner, an
 economist. Two other parties, the United Peasants Party and
 the Democratic Party, are represented in the Government and
 the Sejm (parliament), but their representatives collaborate
 closely with and are dominated by the Communist leadership.
 During the PUWP's 10th Congress in June and July 1986, General
 Jaruzelski was reconfirmed as First Secretary of the party.
 Poland has a powerful security apparatus administered by the
 Minister of Internal Affairs. The Ministry has acted in a
 more restrained manner since the unprecedented public trial,
 conviction, and sentencing of four of its secret police
 officers for the October 1984 kidnaping and murder of Father
 Jerzy Popieluszko, a Catholic priest and human rights activist
 with close ties to the Solidarity trade union movement.
 Poland's economic recovery continues slowly under the burden
 of substantial difficulties, including a large debt to foreign
 creditors. Reforms aimed at greater decentralization of
 decisionmaking have modified only marginally the economic
 system's basic dependence on central control over resource
 management, production, and distribution. The major exception
 to that system remains Poland's predominantly private
 agricultural sector, in which the right to own land is
 provided. Small private businesses, mostly in the crafts and
 service areas, are also permitted.
 In July the Sejm passed a law providing conditional clemency
 for political prisoners, and on September 11 the Government
 followed up by releasing all political prisoners accused or
 convicted of crimes "against the State or public order." This
 decision did not affect those convicted of treason, economic
 sabotage, espionage, or terrorism. After the amnesty, the
 Sejm passed a law providing that some political offenses could
 be treated as misdemeanors rather than as offenses against the
 criminal code. As of mid-November, no one was held on charges
 based on the articles of the Polish penal code that had
 normally been used by the authorities to hold political
 prisoners, although several persons had been detained briefly
 and, in some cases, fined before being released. Several
 persons, however, whose offenses had apparently been
 politically motivated, were being held formally on criminal
 charges.
 During the PUWP's 10th Congress, General Jaruzelski proposed
 the creation of the new office of a Spokesman on Citizens'
 Rights and a new Consultative Council to the Council of State
 in which independent voices would have a share. Various
 formulas for the Spokesman's mandate have been published and
 are under study. The new Consultative Council to the Chairman
 of the Council of State (Jaruzelski) came into being on
 December 6. Among its 56 members are several prominent
 Catholic social activists and many noted intellectuals who
 have no party affiliation.
 Despite such improvements in the human rights situation, the
 authorities, especially the security service and the
 judiciary, retained overwhelming power to deal with political
 
 
 993
 POLAND
 dissidence or other forms of opposition. For example, the
 1985 law on special criminal procedures provides, among other
 things, for the greatly enlarged use of summary courts
 empowered to bring an accused to trial within 48 hours of
 arrest and to impose prison terms of up to 3 years for certain
 criminal and noncriminal (political) offenses. The
 authorities frequently used this law in political cases in the
 period before the September amnesty.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 No instances of political killing in Poland were confirmed
 this year, though the British-based Information Center of
 Polish Affairs reported that a Solidarity activist from Nowy
 Sacz died in a hospital on February 2 after an attack by
 .unknown assailants" in unexplained circumstances. In
 February the death in 1985 while in police custody of a Gdansk
 university student, Marcin Antonowicz, was ruled accidental by
 an official investigation, and the police officers involved in
 his detentioi were cleared. Many Poles remain convinced,
 however, that his death was the result of police brutality.,
 The Polish Helsinki Committee believes that since December 31,
 1981, the deaths of some 250 to 300 persons, including many
 active in Solidarity, may be directly attributed to the violent
 imposition of martial law, brutal treatment of detained persons
 in the hands of the police and deaths of a suspicious nature
 in which there are allegations of police involvement.
 b. Disappearance
 Instances of prolonged or permanent disappearance have not
 been reported.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 There were no reported instances of the authorities
 systematically using torture to extract information. However,
 there have been frequent complaints by human rights groups
 that the police or secret police have mistreated, beaten, or
 tortured persons in their custody. Some former Solidarity
 activists have also stated that they were beaten or tortured
 while serving prison sentences. During 1986 there were
 several reports of torture and beatings which Polish and
 Western human rights groups say were perpetrated either by
 police or perons working for the authorities.
 One of the most serious allegations was made in January when a
 young Warsaw Pole was reportedly burned, beaten, and subjected
 to electric shocks to the genitals by three unidentified
 assailants. In April a number of sources reported that noted
 Solidarity activist Wladyslaw Frasyniuk was being physically
 mistreated in prison. The Government denied these charges,
 though the government spokesman admitted that "physical
 pressure" had been applied to Frasyniuk to remove him to
 solitary confinement. Frasyniuk, now at liberty, has made no
 public comment on this subject.
 
 
 994
 POLAND
 In May underground sources alleged that two individuals were
 brutally assaulted by police officers when found reading
 underground newspapers in Piastow, a small town near Warsaw,
 and that a 15-year old was beaten with truncheons and
 suspended by a pair of handcuffs from a metal bar during
 interrogations in police custody. In June a young man claimed
 that he had been kidnaped for 2 days by the secret police,
 tortured, and forced to sign a promise to cooperate with the
 security services in the future, a charge the government
 spokesman denied, stating that the young man had simply been
 detained by police for a preventive and cautionary
 conversation.
 Both the regular police and the Zomo riot police have employed
 rubber truncheons and water cannon against antigovernment
 demonstrators. As the number of demonstrations dwindled in
 1986, there have been fewer reports of the use of excessive
 police force under those circumstances.
 There were continuing reports of poor prison conditions for
 political prisoners and of some prisoners suffering from food
 poisoning or hepatitis as a result of eating the prison fare,
 as well as developing tuberculosis in the prison environment.
 Medical services reportedly were also poor at many prisons,
 and medical treatment was allegedly denied to a few political
 prisoners. Some prisoners have been furloughed in order to
 obtain necessary medical care. Prisoners who engaged in
 hunger strikes, either to protest prison conditions or to seek
 governmental recognition as political prisoners, have been
 subjected to force-feeding by prison authorities, allegedly
 administered roughly. There were also allegations that
 prisoners were beaten. It is unknown how many prisoners were
 subjected to maltreatment or how often it occurred.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Polish law allows for a 48-hour detention period before the
 authorities have to bring formal charges. Certain categories
 of offenses may actually be tried within 48 hours of arrest
 under special, accelerated procedures whose use was greatly
 enlarged under legislation passed in May 1985. Suspects
 falling under other categories of offenses may, after the
 presentation of the legal basis for formal investigation, be
 held in indefinite "investigatory" or "temporary" arrest.
 During this period, there is no guarantee of access to a
 lawyer, and visits are generally denied.
 Once a formal indictment is filed in a case not handled under
 accelerated procedures, the defendant is allowed ample time to
 study the charges in consultation with an attorney of his or
 her choice. A trial date is set only after the defendant
 expresses readiness. Legal provisions for bail are rarely
 used, but suspects, as well as those already convicted, are
 sometimes furloughed for humanitarian reasons.
 Although there may have been some improvement in the situation
 in 1986, human rights groups such as Helsinki Watch report
 continued detention of persons for vague and tenuous reasons.
 Polish law contains no provision for forced exile. Some
 former political prisoners have reported that they were told
 by police that harassment of them and their families would end
 only if they emigrated. Some labor and political activists
 occasionally expressed fears that they would be refused
 reentry if they were to travel abroad, especially to the West.
 
 
 995
 POLAND
 Under 1983 legislation, persons who are registered as
 unemployed and who refuse to seek employment without adequate
 justification may be listed as "habitual parasites" and
 compelled to accept specific employment, usually street
 cleaning, park maintenance, or garbage collection, under
 threat of penal sanction. To date, the law has not been
 applied as a means of political coercion, as a sanction
 against the free expression of political or ideological
 opinions, or as a means of racial or social discrimination.
 Penal sanctions under this law are rare, though some recently
 released political prisoners have reported that the police
 have threatened them with this law as a form of harassment.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Amendments to the Penal Code, enacted in May 1985 ostensibly
 to assure the speedy hearing of certain accusations, have
 greatly enlarged the scope for application of special
 accelerated trial procedures that severely limit the rights of
 defendants. In such summary trials, charges are made by the
 police rather than the prosecution, and the defendants are not
 given an opportunity to choose an attorney. The assigned
 public defender has little time to discuss the case with his
 client and no time to search for witnesses or for evidence of
 innocence since the defendant may be tried and sentenced
 within 48 hours of arrest. These special courts, which
 earlier dealt only with a narrow range of misdemeanor-type
 offenses, can pronounce prison sentences of up to 3 years and
 a fine of about $3,000 for some offenses. Persons accused of
 inciting public unrest, possessing independent publications,
 or participating in illegal organizations have been convicted
 under these summary procedures. The conviction rate under
 these procedures is extremely high.
 In October 1986, the Sejm passed legislation that allows
 certain crimes against the public order (political offenses)
 to be treated as misdemeanors subject to a maximum penalty of
 a $250 fine and/or 3 months' deprivation of liberty meted out
 by misdemeanor courts. The new legislation gives the
 authorities the option of handling certain crimes either as
 misdemeanors or as felonies depending on the perceived
 seriousness of the offense. Persons detained during political
 demonstrations in Krakow in November were fined and released,
 apparently under the misdemeanor provisions. Others were
 apparently warned and released without penalty.
 The trial of Solidarity leader Lech Walesa in February in
 Gdansk was widely criticized for the "political" and
 unsubstantiated nature of the charge that Walesa had slandered
 Sejm election officials in October 1985 by stating that voter
 turnout in the October 1985 parliamentary elections had been
 lower than the figure they had claimed. The charge was
 dropped after Walesa stated in court that he had had no
 intention of slandering anyone. The trial was closed to
 Western diplomatic representatives but open to some Western
 journalists and outside observers.
 Also in February, the Supreme Court upheld the convictions of
 three noted Solidarity activists, Adam Michnik, Bogdan Lis,
 and Wladyslaw Frasyniuk, on charges of "membership in an
 illegal organization" and "fomenting public unrest," although
 it reduced the sentences of Michnik and Lis. Frasyniuk's
 remained unchanged at 3 1/2 years. All three were released
 under the September 11 decision.
 
 
 996
 POLAND
 In April Leszek Moczulski, the leader of the Confederation for
 an Independent Poland (KPN), was sentenced to 4 years in
 prison for "engaging in activity contrary to state interests."
 One of his associates, who reportedly had contracted
 tuberculosis while in prison awaiting trial, was sentenced to
 2 1/2 years in prison, a motion to release him due to the lack
 of adequate medical care in prison having been denied. Both
 persons were released as a result of the July 17 law and the
 September 11 decision. In May Solidarity activist Seweryn
 Jaworski was sentenced to 2 years' imprisonment for "fomenting
 public unrest" in connection with his activities in the
 October 1985 Sejm elections boycott. He was released in
 September 1986.
 Prior to the September 11 decision, the number of political
 prisoners had risen from slightly more than 200 to between 300
 and 350 in June. The amnesty excepted those detained or
 convicted for treason, economic sabotage, terrorism, and
 espionage. Although some human rights groups consider some of
 these as political prisoners, they remain under investigative
 arrest or are serving prison sentences. In October a priest
 and a young man involved in the 1982 murder of a police
 sergeant were released from prison, while the sentences of two
 other youths convicted in the case were significantly
 reduced. The provisions of the July 17 law were also applied
 to 3 of the 4 convicted murderers of Father Jerzy Popieluszko,
 reducing their sentences from 25 to 15 years, from 15 to 10
 years, and from 14 to 8 years, respectively. The sentence of
 Grzegorz Piotrowski, the principal killer, remained unchanged
 at 25 years. Since the September 11 decision, only one person
 was reportedly arrested and held on a political charge--
 distributing underground literature--but she was released with
 a warning after several days.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home or
 Correspondence
 Mail and phone calls are selectively monitored. Overt
 censorship of the mail and announced monitoring of telephone
 calls ceased with the suspension of martial law. Packages to
 be mailed abroad must be assembled at the post office in the
 presence of a customs official or postal worker. It is
 generally assumed that the Polish secret police uses an
 extensive network of informers. Prior to the September
 amnesty, the authorities showed their ability to monitor
 private activities when Interior Minister Kiszczak announced
 that police had questioned 3,000 people suspected of
 underground activities in a single day.
 Polish citizens are not forced to participate in any political
 organizations, although it is generally understood that
 membership in the PUWP is necessary for advancement in certain
 professions. The Government does not interfere with the right
 to marry or to have children as one chooses, nor does it
 prevent the teaching of religion to children at home or in
 churches. However, the Government often views as suspect the
 contacts of its citizens with foreigners and with domestic
 political opponents. Searches without warrant of homes and
 offices and confiscation of personal documents and property
 continue in Poland. Warrants are sometimes required under
 Polish law, although the circumstances under which the warrant
 requirement applies are ambiguous.
 
 
 POLAND
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 The Constitution provides for freedom of speech. The freedom
 to express one's opinion in a private conversation, whether or
 not in a public place, is generally tolerated, while the
 freedom to distribute opposition pamphlets or deliver a
 controversial speech in a public place is not. The rejection
 of the Communist government by the overwhelming majority of
 the Polish people finds reflection in various indirect ways by
 which Poles manifest their viewpoint. One example is the
 monthly "Mass for the Fatherland" held in many churches,
 including Warsaw's St. Stanislaw Kostka where Father
 Popieluszko formerly preached.
 Official censorship of all media exists as part of the
 authorities' control mechanism. Censorship in Poland
 generally assumes one of three basic forms. First, there is
 self-censorship. Many articles are consciously or
 unconsciously self-censored by their authors before being
 submitted, more often to increase the chances for publication
 than to avoid specific reprisals. Second, editors of
 state-run media may kill an article or program entirely if
 they feel its content is politically too controversial.
 Controversial articles or programs which do appear are often
 the result of prolonged bargaining with editors and censors.
 Editors are subject to pressure to maintain an official line.
 Finally, there is the government censorship apparatus. It is
 frequently impossible to detect the impact of the formal
 censorship process in state-controlled media, but such
 publications as the Catholic weekly, Tygodnik Powszechny, and
 the monthly of the Catholic Intellectuals Clubs, Wiez,
 indicate to their readers, in brackets, where the censors have
 deleted material and which particular provision of the
 censorship law has been invoked. Perhaps most importantly,
 people can be arrested and convicted for publishing or
 distributing any publication not approved by the censors.
 The vast majority of newspapers and journals are state owned
 and operated, as are publishing houses, television channels,
 and radio stations. Access to foreign publications is
 limited. Attempts at independent radio broadcasts have been
 suppressed. While the state-owned press follows the approved
 government line on all essential issues, it sometimes provides
 a forum for debate on certain domestic issues and even on some
 foreign policy questions. This is usually a debate of nuance
 rather than of fundamental principles, goals, or policies.
 The major national dailies are closely identified with
 elements of the ruling elite (e.g., the Communist party, the
 government apparatus, and the armed forces), and the distinct
 interests of each can often be detected in its paper's
 columns. In addition, long articles, essays, and columns in
 various weeklies present contending views on such matters as
 economic and administrative reform, public policy and cadre
 matters, the nature and extent of "national reconciliation,"
 and the role of the Church and labor unions.
 Despite censorship, Poland may still have the least controlled
 official press (as distinct from the more tightly run
 electronic media) of all Warsaw Pact countries. Some
 nongovernmental publications such as Tygodnik Powszechny offer
 a wholly credible voice different from that of the
 government-run media, although their circulation and impact
 are reduced by government restrictions on newsprint and
 
 
 998
 POLAND
 censorship. There is also an active underground press,
 chiefly reflecting the views of the banned Solidarity trade
 union and its supporters. It publishes weekly newspapers,
 periodicals, books, and, most recently, videotapes that reach
 a wide readership in the major cities despite government
 efforts to stamp it out. In December, the Government
 undertook new efforts to prevent underground press
 distribution through confiscation of property, such as
 automobiles, and use of punitive fines against those found to
 be involved. The underground press nevertheless thrives with
 hundreds of publications in circulation.
 Amendments adopted in July 1985 to the 1982 Higher Education
 Law empower local and national authorities to increase
 substantially their control over universities and other
 college-level institutions which could significantly increase
 the curbs on freedom of inquiry. The changes in the law
 provide for the vetting of all candidates for rectorships by
 the Minister of Higher Education for a greater degree of
 direct government involvement in university operations, and
 for strict limitations on the role of university senates and
 student self-government. The 1985 amendments legislate the
 composition of university senates, reserving seats for party
 and other official representatives and senior faculty while
 limiting representation for younger faculty, "nonscientific"
 university employees, and students. In late 1985, over 70
 rectors, deans, and department chairmen were dismissed from
 their administrative positions in order to ensure tighter
 government control. They retained their teaching positions
 and tenure, however.
 During 1986 the Communist party and the Government repeatedly
 called for an increased role for party organizations on
 campus. A long-expected "evaluation" of university faculty
 members began in the autumn of 1986. Described by the
 Government as an attempt to weed out less productive academics
 in midlevel positions and to increase opportunities for the
 advancement of junior faculty, the "evaluation" is widely
 viewed within Polish academic circles as having at least the
 potential for abuse as a political instrument to force the
 removal of academics whose views do not coincide with those of
 the regime. Although Polish institutions of higher learning
 still retain a degree of autonomy (which often varies from
 campus to campus, depending on the talents and convictions of
 individual administrators), the trend over the past 2 years
 has been in the direction of greater emphasis on governmental
 and ideological control.
 At the same time, Poland is also the home of the only
 independent university in Eastern Europe, the Catholic
 University of Lublin (KUL). KUL's very existence, as well as
 its extensive ties to institutions and individuals in the West
 (it counts Pope John Paul II among its former faculty members),
 is visible evidence of the national and religious traditions
 which still help to shape Polish higher education. There are
 also a number of diocesan seminaries, independently
 administered by the ordinary Bishop in Poland's dioceses.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Freedom of peaceful assembly and association is at government
 sufferance and subject to tight restrictions. Permits are
 required to hold public meetings or rallies. Requests for
 permits for protest meetings are routinely denied. The
 frequency and intensity of large-scale public demonstrations
 
 
 999
 POLAND
 held without government endorsement continued to decline in
 1986. Unofficial discussion groups and alternative cultural
 events continue to take place in churches and private homes
 with the toleration of the authorities.
 The law permitting the formation of nonprofit, independent
 foundations for certain charitable, social, and health
 purposes remains on the books, but negotiations on the Church's
 attempt to create a foundation to channel public and private
 contributions from the West to aid Polish private agriculture
 have ended. The Episcopate of the Roman Catholic Church
 announced in September that it had decided to break off
 discussions which had gone on for 4 years on the establishment
 of this foundation because the Government, in the Church's
 view, wanted to exercise excessive control over the
 formulation and execution of the foundation's projected
 programs.
 Under Polish law, associations and clubs need official
 permission or sponsorship to function legally. Among the most
 significant of Poland's many clubs is the Catholic
 Intellectuals' Club (KIK), which has reopened branches in
 several cities, including Warsaw and Krakow, since receiving
 permission to resume activities after martial law. The KIK
 sponsors lecture series and other activities which are open to
 the interested public, with little or no interference from the
 authorities.
 Some officially sponsored professional associations were
 formed after the Government's dissolution in 1983 of such
 organizations as the writers' and journalists' unions, which
 had attained a remarkable degree of independence in 1980-81.
 These successor groups have thus far failed to earn the
 support of a significant proportion of Poland's intellectuals
 despite the material incentives such membership offers. The
 Episcopate of the Roman Catholic Church, in two communiques
 issued in June and August 1986 after plenary conferences of
 the Bishops, called for the right to establish associations
 independent from political parties. Poland's chapter of the
 Pen Club, an organization of writers with international
 connections, remains suspended.
 The Trade Union Act of 1982 abolished all previous unions and
 set the rules for the formation of successor unions. All
 unions must receive court permission to exist. Amendments
 passed in 1985 by the Sejm indefinitely postponed the
 possibility of trade union pluralism contained in the 1982
 law. Government leaders and spokesmen on several occasions in
 1986 underscored the official position that union pluralism is
 out of the question because it would be divisive in the
 workplace and reduce worker efficiency. Leaders of the
 official unions, the vast majority of which are grouped under
 the umbrella of the National Alliance of Trade Unions (OPZZ)
 formally established in November 1984, have been especially
 vehement in their public opposition to trade union pluralism.
 The leadership of the OPZZ made clear that the official unions
 should be a partner to the authorities, and OPZZ Chairman
 Alfred Miodowicz was elected to the Politburo of the Polish
 United Workers' Party in June. The program passed at the
 November Congress of OPZZ emphasized the role unions are to
 play in cooperation with the authorities to increase production
 and set as a goal the integration of union structures.
 Membership in the OPZZ is claimed to be 6.5 million. This
 number constitutes less than half the work force eligible for
 
 
 1000
 POLN
 membership. The OPZZ withdrew its claim to be the only legal
 representative of workers during the December trade union
 congress after protests by local unions which were not members
 of OPZZ.
 Solidarity has not tried to play a significant role in the
 official unions, although many of the nearly 10 million
 workers, who were members of Solidarity during its legal
 period, have joined the new unions. Although illegal as an
 organization, Solidarity continues to be active on some worker
 self-management councils in some factories.
 After the release of political prisoners, Lech Walesa in
 September called into being a new Provisional Council of
 Solidarity, which the Government subsequently declared to be
 illegal. The Council's activities have not, however, been
 repressed, reflecting what appears to be a government policy
 of not interfering with the Council as long as its
 pronouncements have a nonprovocative, passive formulation.
 The 1982 law severely circumscribes the right to strike,
 making legal work stoppages virtually impossible. Occasional
 wildcat strikes have been settled at the factory level.
 Leaders of such strikes, if identified, may face
 discrimination at the workplace or even loss of their jobs.
 Solidarity activists continue to face difficulties in keeping
 or reclaiming old jobs, or in securing employment commensurate
 with their qualifications.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 The Constitution guarantees "freedom of conscience and
 belief," and Polish citizens, both in law and in fact, enjoy
 considerable freedom to practice their religion. However,
 party authorities discourage the open practice of religion by
 party members. The Roman Catholic Church in Poland has
 criticized a new course in comparative religion being
 introduced into schools.
 Poland is predominantly Roman Catholic; the Roman Catholic
 Church maintains over 3,300 churches, schools, and other
 institutions, and a vigorous program of building new churches
 is going on with state permission. The Catholic Church
 publishes significant numbers of books and periodicals, as
 does the independent Catholic press, though some practical
 restrictions are imposed by limiting access to printing
 equipment and government-allocated paper. Sunday Catholic
 mass and services of other religions are broadcast over Polish
 radio under a provision of the 1980 Gdansk Accords that is
 still observed.
 Relations between the Government and the Roman Catholic Church
 were strained during the first half of 1986 because of the
 trauma of the 1984 murder of Father Jerzy Popieluszko, the
 inability to set up a church-sponsored foundation to aid
 private agriculture, and the large number of political
 prisoners. Tensions receded after the amnesty. The Primate
 and the Episcopate as a whole, as well as individual clergy
 and Catholic lay leaders, continued to campaign vigorously for
 greater individual freedom and respect for human rights,
 including the right of individuals to organize themselves
 peacefully in various social groupings.
 There is no government-sponsored discrimination against
 minority religions; but some members of all of these religions
 
 
 1001
 POLAND
 assert that discrimination does occur, primarily as the result
 of traditional tensions between the Catholic Church and
 Poland's various ethnic minorities. The Muslim and Jewish
 faiths and the various Protestant denominations often find it
 difficult to maintain their places of worship and train their
 clergy, mainly because of the small numbers of their faithful,
 widely dispersed congregations, limited financial resources,
 and traditional prejudices. The Orthodox faith, the largest
 minority religion, is concentrated in Poland's eastern
 provinces. Estimates of the number of its faithful range from
 800,000 to 1.5 million. It maintains 350 churches and has
 also begun an ambitious program of church building and
 monastery renovation. The Orthodox Church sponsors the
 publication of a number of books and several periodicals and
 broadcasts its masses on Polish radio four times a year. As
 the result of recent administrative action, it has obtained
 the return of some religious buildings previously under
 government control. Apart from financial difficulties, there
 have been complaints of Polish ethnic prejudice (most of the
 Orthodox faithful in Poland are of Byelorussian, Ukrainian, or
 Russian origin). Orthodox believers face a major problem in
 maintaining contact with their religious brethren in the
 Soviet Union.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 There are no restrictions on travel within Poland. There are
 no legal restrictions on changing one's residence but the
 housing shortage makes this nearly impossible in practice.
 Cases of persons working in one location and legally
 "residing" hundreds of kilometers away are not uncommon.
 Travel abroad is permitted to the vast majority under the 1983
 law liberalizing passport issuance. The authorities claim
 that over 90 percent of applicants obtain passports. Actual
 denials of passport applications are not numerous. Denials
 are most often received by persons working in areas of
 scientific research or industry considered "sensitive" by the
 Government. Several prominent dissidents have been denied
 passports for visits abroad; others have declined to apply for
 passports, fearing that, once out of Poland, they would be
 denied the right to return.
 In order to receive an emigration passport, Poles must divest
 themselves of all real property and obtain customs permission
 for any personal items they wish to take with them. Although
 most applicants for emigration passports eventually obtain
 them, certain cases appear to require an unduly lengthy
 waiting period. While a few Solidarity members, formerly
 interned or jailed because of their activity, have been denied
 passports when seeking to relocate to another country, many
 others have been encouraged to leave, as the Government tries
 to rid the country of persons it views as "troublesome." Once
 having established legal residence abroad, a Polish citizen
 must exchange an emigration or, in some cases, a tourist
 passport, for a consular passport (one issued by a Polish
 Consulate). Otherwise there are no formal restrictions on an
 emigrant's return to Poland.
 Only Polish citizens who have been issued emigration passports
 are legally permitted to take up residence in another
 country. Polish citizens who return to Poland with tourist
 passports after establishing a residence abroad may experience
 difficulties in obtaining a reissuance of their tourist
 passports. Polish citizens who emigrate legally from Poland
 
 
 1002
 POLAND
 and who desire to return for brief visits on consular
 passports generally experience few difficulties with the
 authorities.
 Under Polish law, only the Council of State may revoke
 citizenship. Involuntary revocation must be based on one of
 the following activities: actions violating the duty of
 allegiance to the Polish State; actions detrimental to the
 substantial interests of Poland; departure from Poland after
 May 9, 1945, and failure to return when so requested by the
 Polish Government; evasion of military service; or conviction
 abroad of a crime also recognized as a felony under Polish
 criminal law. The Government recently used this prerogative
 in revoking the citizenship of two former ambassadors who
 defected to the United States, as well as the citizenship of a
 Polish journalist now working for Radio Free Europe.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Poland is ruled by the PUWP, or Communist party, through
 General Jaruzelski who, with a small group of advisers,
 determines national policy goals. They implement policy
 through the government ministries and through a parallel party
 bureaucracy which complements and interacts with the
 ministries. Unlike elsewhere in Eastern Europe, the party is
 not always clearly the dominant force. various economic
 ministries, as well as the military and security service,
 often play key roles, not only in exercising power but also
 sometimes in setting policies. The two other coalition
 partners, the United Peasants Party and the Democratic Party,
 are completely responsive to PUWP guidance. The Patriotic
 Movement for National Rebirth, an umbrella group of political,
 economic, and social organizations cooperates with the
 authorities.
 The Constitution specifies that the Sejm is the chief
 legislative body of Poland. The Sejm can be counted on to
 pass, nearly unanimously, any legislation that the Prime
 Minister and the relevant bureaucracies believe is necessary.
 Nevertheless, when the authorities seemed undecided or divided
 during 1986, deputies in the Sejm were on occasion able to
 modify proposed legislation, especially in behind-the-scenes
 committee sessions.
 During and after the PUWP's 10th Congress, there were several
 official proposals to democratize society and make the Govern-
 ment more responsive to society's needs. The Government
 proposed the creation of a new office of "ombudsman," or
 Spokesman for Citizens' Rights, which is presently under
 discussion. The government spokesman said that it would be
 inadmissible for prominent Solidarity leaders to participate
 in official activities. In December the Government announced
 creation of a 50-member Consultative Council composed of
 proregime and some independent figures. Many leading
 dissidents declined to participate. The powers of the Council
 and the extent of its influence on policy are as yet unclear.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The Government of Poland is party to many international
 covenants with human rights components, including the Final
 Act of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe,
 
 
 1003
 POLAND
 signed in 1975. Government authorities typically contend,
 however, that international and nongovernmental inquiries into
 the state of human rights in Poland based on these agreements
 constitute interference in Poland's internal affairs. The
 Polish Government never cooperated in the implementation of
 the 1983 Resolution of the U.N. Human Rights Commission asking
 the U.N. Secretary General or his designee to do a
 comprehensive report on the human rights situation in Poland.
 Poland's decision to withdraw from the ILO, announced in 1984
 and scheduled to take effect in November 1986, was made in
 response to the decision of the ILO's Executive Board to take
 formal notice of the report of the ILO's Commission of Inquiry
 into violations of international labor standards. The Polish
 Government announced on November 14 that it had decided to
 postpone its decision to withdraw from the ILO for 1 year,
 citing the recommendation of the OPZZ and the expectation that
 the ILO would change its unfriendly attitude towards Poland as
 reasons for the decision.
 There are no government-controlled or sponsored organizations
 in Poland devoted exclusively to human rights issues.
 Independent human rights groups have no official permission to
 exist. Nevertheless, late in 1986 there were established the
 Human Rights League centered in Szczecin and a human rights
 group called into being by Lech Walesa and associated with
 Solidarity. The anonymous Polish Helsinki Committee compiles
 occasional reports evaluating the human rights situation in
 Poland. For example, it prepared a report on "The Violation
 of Human Rights and Basic Freedoms in the Polish People's
 Republic 1983-86" for the 1986 review meeting in Vienna of the
 Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe. Underground
 publications frequently raise questions about human rights
 practices in Poland, focusing particular attention in 1986 on
 the problem of political prisoners and on allegations that
 some were suffering mistreatment in prison.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 Women's rights have not become a public issue in Poland.
 Historical circumstances, including World War II losses,
 helped open access for women into many previously closed
 professions. Women work in all blue-collar trades, except for
 heavy mining and steel, and in all professional fields.
 Despite their major presence in the work force and the fact
 demonstrated by government statistics that they are generally
 better educated than men, women usually earn less than their
 male counterparts, and only a small proportion of women are
 found in the higher levels of local and national government.
 Poland has had a liberal maternity and child care leave policy
 dating to the Solidarity-inspired Gdansk Accords, though some
 of its tenets seem to be changing. Women are now entitled to
 3 (formerly 4) months of paid maternity leave, and
 increasingly fewer are able to opt for the supposedly
 guaranteed maximum of 3 years of unpaid child care leave,
 after which they are guaranteed a job at the same level of
 pay. To the extent that this policy is being continued, it
 has some social benefits in terms of child-rearing and
 strengthening of the family; it also takes pressure off
 Poland's miniscule official day-care system for young
 children, in which only 1.2 percent of all women are able to
 find a place for their children.
 
 
 1004
 POLAND
 CONDITIONS OF LABOR
 The Polish labor code generally forbids the employment of a
 person who has not reached the age of 15. The employment of a
 .young person", defined as aged 15 through 18, is permitted,
 provided the individual has completed basic schooling.
 Special exceptions are sometimes required if a particular job
 might pose a health danger. The labor code specifies that a
 "young person" without professional qualification may be
 employed only for the purpose of vocational preparation,
 although again there is a provision for special exceptions.
 The length and distribution of hours of work is regulated by
 the Polish labor code. Paid annual holidays are provided
 for. In practice, most families find that both husband and
 wife must be employed in order to sustain an acceptable
 standard of living. The minimum conditions for the protection
 of worker health and safety spelled out in the Polish labor
 code seem, in most respects, adequate. Poland, however,
 suffers serious environmental pollution problems, some of
 which particularly affect worker health. There are frequent
 allegations that some plants fail to maintain
 government-regulated worker health and safety standards, and
 the official media occasionally publicize such cases.
 
 
 1005
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.PISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: POLAND
 1984     1985     1986
 I.ECON.  ASSIST.-TOTAL,..        20.9     13.8      4.0
 LOANS .................     0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............        20.9     13.8      4.0
 A.AID ...... ..............      0.0      0.0      4.0
 LOANS ..............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .......... ....      0.0       D.0      4.0
 (SEC.SUPP.ASSIST.) ..         0.0       0.0      4.0
 B.FOOO FOR PEACE .......        20.9     13.8      0.0
 LOANS ..............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................    20.9     13.8      0.0
 TITLE  I-T3TAL ..........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS .....         0.0      0.0      0.0
 PAY.  IN  FOR.  CURR .....      0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE  Il-TOTAL .........       20.9     13.8      0.0
 E.RELIEF.EC.OEV & WFP.         0.0       0.0      0.0
 VOL.RELIEF  AGENCY .....       20.9     13.8      0.0
 C.DTHER ECON. ASSIST,.           0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS ..............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .......... .... 0.0            0.0      0.0
 PEACE CORPS ......        0.0       0.0      0.0
 NARCOTICS ........        0.0       0.0      0.0
 OTHER ..............      0.0       0.0      0.0
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL...          0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS ..............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .......... .... 0.0            0.0      0.0
 A.MAP  GRANTS ..........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.CREDIT FINANCING ....         0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.INTL HIL.EOTRNG ....         0.0      0.0      0.0
 O.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK,.,          0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER  GRANTS ........       0.0       0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. & MIL,,.         20.9     13.8      4.0
 LOANS ..............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............       20.9      13.8      4.0
 OT4ER  US  LOANS ..........       0.0      0.0      0.0
 EX-IM BANK LOANS .......         0.0      0.0      0.0
 ALL  OTHER ..............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 -----       -------------------------------------------------
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1984     1985     1986     1946-86
 -----       ------------------------------------------------
 TOTAL ........     0.9       0.0      0.0     24.2
 IBRO               0.0       0.0      0.0      0.0
 IF'                0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 IDA                 0.0     0.0       0.0      0.0
 103                0.0       0.0      0.0      0.0
 A03                0.0       0.0      0.0      0.0
 AFD5               0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 UNIP               0.9       0.0      0.0     21.8
 OTiER-UN           0.0       0.0      0.0      2.4
 EEC                0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 
 
 1006