	POLAND
Poland's quest for institutionalized justice continues to realize notable successes. By the end of 1993 the CSCE could say that Poland had "crossed the Rubicon," while the UN Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination applauded "evidence that [Poland] has consolidated its status as a democratic State based on the rule of law." Despite this, the myriad challenges facing human rights in Poland did not entirely evaporate in 1993, Progress in the sphere of the law does not automatically translate into tolerance on the street.
The 1993 State Department report is, as in past years, generally accurate. Indeed, it contains a number of laudable improvements over last year's effort, with a wider range of sources and a somewhat greater sensitivity to broader issues such as those raised by the "lustration" debate. The minor factual errors of omission and scope do not significantly detract from the overall quality of the report. However, a number of last year's oversights are repeated.
Despite coherent legal protections in the Polish military code, conscientious objectors are being sent to prison in increasing numbers and some have been named prisoners of conscience by Amnesty International, There is no mention at all of this problem in the report. Likewise, despite changes to the State Department's instructions requesting fuller reporting on prison conditions, the issue is minimized in the 1993 report.
The economy's schizophrenic reaction to "shock therapy" continued to exacerbate social tensions. Poland's Gross National Product reportedly grew by four percent in 1993, the second fastest rate in Europe, with industrial production up by 6.2% and inflation at year's end down ten points from the 1992 figure of 45%. At the same time, unemployment continued to swell, finishing the year at 15,7%, while real wages declined. The report notes that women and younger workers suffered disproportionately. Ominously, 38% of Poles now find themselves living below the official poverty line. Even as the trappings of the good life become more readily apparent, other more menacing quality of life indicators, such as a festering public health crisis, detract from recent economic accomplishments. The Government Census Bureau found that 13 million Poles live in "areas of environmental danger" or areas with "high concentrations of toxic substances," and admitted that infectious hepatitis is not under control. The rate of tuberculosis — another disease of poverty — remains twice the European average.
Ambivalence over the distribution of the fruits of reform, evidenced most notably in strikes by public workers, contributed to the dissolution of the parliament (the Sejm) after the government narrowly lost what was supposed to be a symbolic no-confidence vote in May. The reasons for this turn of events were hotly debated. The eminent pro-democracy activist Adam Michnik credited a secular backlash against the Catholic Church and its allies. Others pointed to popular discontent with economic shock therapy, reflected in the victorious Democratic Left Alliance's
281
CRITIQUE 1993
providential slogan: "It Doesn't Have To Be This Way; Reforms Should Work For People."
Unfortunately, the new Polish government is based on yet another unproven coalition. At the same time, the ongoing if belated consolidation of the hard-right parties may lead to a future reversal on some human rights issues. Criticism of incumbent politicians and the excesses of election fervor have already led to some isolated problems with freedom of speech. The report notes the occasional imtoward enthusiasm of the police for using batons to re-route political demonstrators, although this appears to reflect a continuing historical problem with police brutality. The report also notes the June arrest of 12 people for posting flyers announcing a demonstration. Because the posters alleged that members of the government had collaborated with the Communist secret police, the 12 were charged with violations of the infamous Article 270 of the Penal Code, which prescribes six months to eight years in prison for anyone who "publicly insults, ridicules and derides the Polish nation, the Polish People's Republic, its political system, or its principal organs." Earlier in the year, two students escaped imprisonment but received a stiff fine for shouting "down with Walesa — Communist agent" during a 1992 demonstration. Commendably, the new Sejm Speaker, Jozef Oleksy, joined the Human Rights Ombudsman, Professor Tadeusz Zielinski, in calling for an end to Article 270.
In the area of fi^edom of the press, the report generally reflects the evidence presented by a November 1993 study by Human Rights Watch/Helsinki, prepared for a CSCE seminar. The report also notes the potential restrictions on free speech posed by Article 18 of the new broadcast law, which entered into effect in February. Article 18 allows the National Broadcast Council (NBC) to fine and pull the license of stations that broadcast programming insufficiently respectful of "Christian values." Because the NBC's creation was sullied by political interference and mysterious maneuvering (as the report notes), few licenses were actually issued during 1993 and the "values" issue did not have much chance to arise. It remains to be seen how much self-censorship will be inspired by the Christian values directive.
The report fails to mention some attempts at censorship during 1993. A German-language minority newspaper, Schlesien Report, was threatened with "delegalization" for consistently "unfavorably representing Poland." Also, one of the first bills considered in Pawlak's Sejm was a state secrets bill, listing 106 items of classified information, which some observers note could be manipulated for political purposes. Catholic deputies in the Sejm declared censorship to be a legitimate means of defending "religious feelings and honor" as they opposed a now defunct Charter of Rights and Freedoms proposed by President Walesa in January. The report details the unnerving, if buffoonish, attempts of the right-wing Catholic party ZChN to press charges against a satirical rock group and a movie theater
282
_POLAND
showing Martin Scorsese's "The Last Temptation of Christ." Unreported activity included an attempt by the Lublin branch of ZChN to press criminal charges against the Polish edition of Playboy magazine, until a local prosecutor halted proceedings, ruling the magazine "erotic" rather than pornographic and thus not in violation of the law. The same ZChN branch was also, mystifyingly, seeking to bring charges against a theater group staging the musical Cats.
Freedom of conscience, as noted above, faced challenges in the realm of ethical objection to military service, an area ignored by the' report. An estimated 40-50 young men were prosecuted during the year for attempting to exercise their legal right to alternative service. While military service is mandatory for able-bodied young men, the 1988 amendments to the Law of Universal Obligation of the Defense of Poland recognize the legitimacy of conscientious objection and provide exhaustive protections for those engaged in alternative service. Furthermore, Resolution 1987/46 of the UN Commission on Human Rights calls for the accommodation of conscientious objectors and Article 4(b) of the European Convention provides terms under which alternative service can be made available.
Polish military courts evaded these domestic and international obligations by ruling instead on religious criteria. For example, the District Drafting Commission decided in June 1992 that, as a Roman Catholic, the pacifist Jaroslav Jamrozik's personal convictions could not err from those of his Church — which does not as a matter of doctrine oppose military service. After refiising his call-up, Jamrozik was sentenced to one year in prison on April 13, 1993 by the Silesian Military District Court. A similar rationale was used to send Roman Galuszka and Tomasz Jarosik to prison for 18 and 12 months, respectively, starting in July 1992. The Military Chamber of the Supreme Court rejected an appeal by the Minister of Justice for Galuszka's release, at which point Amnesty International declared him a prisoner of conscience. (The organization also declared Jarosik a prisoner of conscience.) On April 22, 1993 Galuszka was granted conditional release. Particularly disturbing are the cases of Piotr Krzyzanowski and Piotr Dawidziak who, in January 1993, had their sentences extended from six months to one year after the General Prosecutor of the Polish Army demanded harsher treatment from the military chamber of the Supreme Court in Warsaw. Both men were members of the Wroclaw branch of Objektor, a support organization for conscientious objectors. Both men began their sentences in February 1993 at which point Amnesty International designated them prisoners of conscience and called for their release. They were released in August after serving half their sentences.
When provisions for alternative service were first announced in 1988, the Defense Ministry's spokesman blithely guessed that "this number [of objectors] will not be counted in thousands." Yet by the early months of 1993 some 3,200 young men were waiting to be assigned appropriate jobs. Proposed legislation ensuring alternative military service for conscientious objectors was derailed by the
283
CRITIQUE 1993
dissolution of the Sejm in May. The harsh sentences described above may reflect a determination to stem the swelling number of conscientious objectors.
hi an improvement over its immediate predecessor, the report notes the lack of practical legal redress for women facing discrimination in the workplace despite constitutional assurances of equality.
Just as Polish politics downgrades the importance of women's rights — an attitude reflected in the newly introduced anti-abortion statute, the harshest in Europe other than the Republic of Ireland — so too is ethnic conflict a secondary issue in the minds of many Polish human ri^ts advocates. Yet the largely homogenous country does have potential problems, both internally and externally. Sadly, anti-Semitism and anti-Roma (gypsy) sentiment is reportedly still alive and well in all too many quarters, and the report correctly notes continuing random violence directed at the Roma minority.
The report also notes isolated instances of alleged and actual mistreatment of refugees, but fails to mention new regulations, issued on July 9 on the Conditions of Detainment and Arrest Connected with E?q)ulsion of Aliens and Requirements and Regulations Applicable in Security Camps. Stemming from a 1992 law on aliens, the regulations allow authorities to detain foreigners for up to 90 days during deportation proceedings if they are considered likely to evade the final order. Security camps were established in October although their constitutionality was under review at year's end. Although Poland ratified the Geneva Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees in 1991, the government had yet to propose implementing legislation by the end of 1993.
Similarly, religious tolerance remained an area ripe for improvement. After the government chose to introduce religious education into schools with a ministerial regulatory directive — as opposed to a statutory approach — Human Rights Ombudsman Tadeusz Zielinski requested a Constitutional Tribunal investigation into the ministry's authority to promulgate such regulations. For his efforts, Zielinski became a subject of Cardinal Glemp's 1993 Easter Sermon, in vstoch he was denounced for attempting to remove "the cross from (Polish) schools" and other "Hitlerite and Communist practices." Subsequently, 80 Sejm deputies from Catholic parties demanded Zielinski's ouster. As the report notes, while the Tribimal subsequently ruled on April 20 in favor of the ministerial process, it severely circumscribed the reach of the regulations by ruling that: (a) no declarations can be required from students affirming that they study religion as an extracurricular subject or affirming that they have elected not to do so; (b) if religion is taken as an extracurricular course, no certified grade may be given; and (c) the withdrawal of a teacher's license to teach religion by religious authorities is not synonymous with termination of the teacher's confract. Crucifixes in classrooms and school prayer were deemed legal. The government promised to amend its directive accordingly within three months.
284
_POLAND
Shortly thereafter, on June 1, with parhament dissolved, the government accepted a proposed concordat with the Vatican. The report notes the problematic nature of the accord in the light of separation of church and state. Under the concordat the state would accept teaching of religion in schools according to programs prepared by the Church, exempt the Church from all taxation, grant it authority over marriage and divorce and subsidize seminaries. The concordat presented a sticky problem for the new coalition government. While the majority ex-Communists were inclined to deny the parliamentary approval necessary for ratification, their coalition partners from the Peasant Party maintain close ties to the Church. By the end of the year, five separate legal analyses of the concordat had been commissioned. As anticipated, these uncovered discrepancies between the terms of the concordat, and ratification has been delayed for the time being.
Somewhat akin to religious freedom is the question of "lustration." While the recent elections have laid the issue to rest for now, it clearly remains latent. The report overstates one lustration-related problem concerning the September elections. While it is true that the May 1993 electoral law required candidates to sign a declaration that they had never worked for the official state security apparatus under the Communist government, the report neglects to mention that by June the Constitutional Tribunal had effectively invalidated the provision. While ruling that there is a "moral and political imperative" for candidates to tell the truth on this question, a false statement could not be considered in and of itself grounds for protesting the election results.
Two other potentially serious lustration problems were also sidestepped in 1993. Absent from the report is any discussion of the ¿'eyw-approved police pension bill denying pensions to military prosecutors and other officers who had persecuted Poles engaged in pro-democracy activities. The bill would also have reduced pensions for secret police employees serving from 1944 to 1989 if they had participated in the persecution of opposition figures. After complaints by human rights activists, Walesa vetoed the bill on January 15, finding that it violated the principal of equal protection before the law, imposed collective responsibility and vested nonjudicial bodies with judicial powers.
In the second case, Wlodzimierz Cimoszewicz, the new Justice Minister and Deputy Prime Minister for Social Questions, wrote to the Constitutional Tribunal expressing the view that a clause in legislation proposed by his predecessor, which would have removed judges who have "violated the principle of independence," would be unconstitutional, and that only "objective" reasons for non-performance, such as health, age or conviction for a criminal act, should be disqualifiers. While the Tribunal declared the amendment unconstitutional on November 9, the intent of the phrase — to guarantee redress of past abuses ~ was found valid, although the Tribunal urged that a better method be found. The report notes the finding by the Senate Office of Intervention that the majority of Polish
285
CRITIQUE 1993
judges are holdovers from the Communist era, when the courts practiced "telephone justice," implementing the decisions of local party bosses. Consequently, as the report notes, many judges do not have the proper training to implement the law.
Ironically, complaints concerning ongoing political interference were lodged by representatives of the police themselves. Miguel Pendraz, president of the European Council of Police Trade Unions, concluded after a 1993 visit that the physical infrastructure of police facilities and the resources available to police in Warsaw, were no better than those in Uganda. Andrzej Kosiak, chairman of the Polish police union, protested the force's politicization, saying that, "Every time a new interior minister is appointed, there is also a new commander in chief of the police, and sometimes new voivodship police commanders as well. All this is making the police dependent on political requirements." Both Pendraz and Kosiak complained of amendments to a pending police act, including provisions whereby police officers may be dismissed for the "good of the service" without consultation with the union or right of appeal. The report ignores these concerns.
Unfortunately, the report's discussion of prisons is not as good as in previous years. It downplays the plight of those receiving prison sentences even as it acknowledges overcrowding, food shortages and brutality. Conditions in Polish prisons remain dismal, the most notorious example being that of a 14th Century monastery that remains in use despite being only marginally habitable. Because of lack of facilities and staff, most prisons remain in almost permanent lockdown. Conditions in pretrial detention, which is not limited by law, can be even more brutal. Nonetheless, the current Director of Central Prison Administration, Dr. Pavel Moczydlowski, has continued his attempts to institute progressive reforms — such as permitting conjugal visits and ownership of radios and televisions — while seeking additional revenue by publicizing the deplorable conditions that he must oversee. Despite instructions to pay more attention to prisoners' rights, the report minimizes these issues. The plight of prisoners is, however, better in Poland than in many other countries in one important respect: Poland is perhaps the only country in the world that allows NGO human rights monitors continual and unrestricted access to its facilities. The report should also be commended for outlining the atrocious legal status of psychiatric patients.
As usual, the reporting on labor's right to organize and bargain collectively is exemplary and does a good job of pointing out lapses in the implementation of laws that would be worthwhile if only they were enforced. Some issues, such as child labor and environmental hazards, remain downplayed.
The 1993 report commendably exhibits less of a bias toward the status quo than some of its recent predecessors, and better represents the contradictory crosscurrents that define the state of human rights in Poland today.
286
