 POLAND
 Poland in 1991 completed the transition from a Communist state
 to a multiparty democracy. Following free local government
 elections and the first popular presidential election in 1990,
 a new Parliament was chosen in freely contested elections in
 October 1991. Since no single party received more than 13
 percent of the vote, President Lech Walesa asked Bronislaw
 Geremek, a leader of the largest party--the Democratic Union--
 and then Jan Olszewski, the candidate of a minority coalition
 of five parties, to attempt to form a coalition government. In
 late December, Olszewski put together a coalition Government--
 supported by, among others, the Center Alliance, the Christian
 National Union, and several peasant parties--that was ratified
 by Parliament.
 Although political disagreements delayed work on drafting a new
 constitution to codify the new democratic system, virtually all
 parties represented in the Parliament declared that the renewal
 of this effort will be a priority task.
 The restructuring of police and internal security forces within
 the Ministry of Internal Affairs, begun in 1990, brought those
 forces under the democratic Government's firm control in 1991
 and strengthened institutional safeguards that they would not
 be used for purposes of political repression. However, a rise
 in reported police beatings of criminal suspects during initial
 interrogations provoked a parliamentary investigation that is
 continuing.
 In 1991 Poland continued its historically unprecedented
 transformation from a centrally planned to a market economy.
 The Government maintained an economic austerity program to keep
 inflation under control through a tight money supply in order
 to provide a foundation for future sustained economic growth.
 At the same time, its policies were aimed at promoting private
 investment, both domestic and foreign, and privatizing large
 state-owned industries and other government monopolies. While
 inflation ran at about 3 percent per month, unemployment rose
 to 11 percent, and declining budget revenues forced the
 Government to cut back some social services and to cap wages
 and benefits in the state sector. Real incomes dropped over 30
 percent since January 1990 as a result of the recession and
 austerity measures. These factors generated scattered strikes
 and public criticism of government economic policy. However,
 the nonagricultural private sector continued to grow and now
 accounts for more than 20 percent of economic activity.
 Progress in human rights continued in 1991. The privatization
 of the print media was completed, and several private radio
 stations and one private television station began to operate.
 The Commissioner of Civil Rights Protection was active in
 investigating complaints of police brutality and sexual
 discrimination, as well as allegedly unfair dismissals of
 former Communists from their jobs. On the other hand, examples
 of popular intolerance, seen in incidents of anti-Semitism and
 an anti-Gypsy riot in June, brought quick official action to
 condemn such behavior and, where appropriate, to arrest and
 bring to trial those involved in violence. The Senate's Office
 of Intervention received reports of discrimination against
 students who did not participate in voluntary religious
 instruction classes in the public schools. There has been no
 official action in response to these reports.
 
 
 1196
 POLAND
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing
 There were no reports of killings for political motives by the
 Government or domestic political groups.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no reports of abductions, secret arrests, or
 clandestine detention by police or other official security
 forces.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 There were no reported allegations of torture.
 Human rights activists, however, noted an alarming increase in
 the number of beatings reported by persons in police custody not
 yet charged with a crime. Nearly 100 such allegations were made
 either to local prosecutors or to the Commissioner for Civil
 Rights Protection in 1991. Approximately 20 police officers
 were prosecuted for abusing detainees, and several were
 dismissed after charges were proved. The Senate's Office of
 Intervention, a human rights oversight office, initiated a
 general investigation of these charges in September. Low police
 morale, poor training, and a desire to elicit confessions from
 suspects in an atmosphere of increasingly frequent violent
 crime were cited by observers as possible causes.
 Polish human rights groups reported continuing improvement in
 prison conditions during 1991. The new director of the Central
 Prison Administration, appointed in April 1990, initiated a
 program of renovation of some facilities and improved training
 for prison guards. Prison guards are now required to have high
 school diplomas and to pass a 3-month basic training course
 taught in part by outside experts. A new program of periodic
 seminars for guards was also initiated in 1991. Most
 restrictions on the number and size of food and clothing
 parcels which relatives could send to prisoners were lifted.
 While prison authorities continued to read outgoing mail,
 including complaints sent to government authorities regarding
 living conditions, prison guards were ordered to cease the
 previously common practice of not forwarding complaints to
 outside authorities.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 There were no reported instances of persons arrested or detained
 for the expression of views critical of the Government.
 Although the Polish administration is drafting revisions to the
 criminal code, this rewriting remains incomplete. The law
 continues to allow for a 48-hour detention period before the
 authorities are required to bring formal charges; suspects are
 not permitted access to a lawyer during this period. Most
 allegations of mistreatment of criminal suspects by police
 involve beatings or efforts to coerce confessions during this
 detention period.
 
 
 1197
 
 POLAND
 Polish law provides that once a prosecutor presents the legal
 basis for- a formal investigation, a detainee may be held under
 "temporary" arrest for up to 3 months (with a possible court-
 ordered extension) until the prosecutor files an indictment.
 Prosecutors, however, reportedly used "temporary" arrest'only
 in the most serious criminal cases, such as murder or armed
 robbery. Bail may be posted for less serious crimes, although
 human rights activists noted that increasing economic hardship
 during 1991 made it difficult or impossible for some criminal
 suspects to raise the required bond.
 The law guarantees the detainee under "temporary" arrest access
 to a lawyer. Prosecutors must still authorize all visits to
 detainees but may issue general authorizations for repeated
 visits'from particular individuals. General authorizations of
 this type are routinely issued to defense attorneys on request.
 Overcrowded court dockets resulted in increasingly frequent
 extensions of pretrial detentions during 1991, with such
 detentions occasionally lasting a year or more; at the end of
 1991, approximately 70 persons held in pretrial detention had
 been jailed a year or more.
 The law contains no provision for forced exile.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Poland has a three-tier court system, consisting of regional
 and provincial courts, and a Supreme Court which is divided
 into civil and criminal divisions. Judges are appointed by the
 President for set terms; most proposals for a new constitution
 include provisions to establish a more independent judiciary.
 Criminal cases are tried in regional and provincial courts by a
 panel consisting of a professional judge and two lay issessors;
 the seriousness of the offense determines which of these is the
 court of first instance. Over the past year, difficulties in
 finding persons willing to volunteer their time to act as lay
 assessors has contributed to court backlogs and extended
 pretrial detentions of criminal suspects. Ultimate appeals are
 heard by a panel of judges from the Supreme Court.
 Most cases are tried in open court. The court, however,
 retains the option of closing a trial to the public in some
 circumstances, such as divorce cases, trials in which state
 secrets may be disclosed, or to protect public morality. The
 latter concern was cited by a Warsaw district court in June in
 barring the press and public from the pornography trial of
 publisher and former Communist government spokesman Jerzy Urban,
 who was acquitted by the court in July.
 Once formal charges are filed, the defendant is allowed to study
 the charges andconsult with an attorney, who is provided at
 public expense if necessary. Once the defendant is prepared, a
 trial date is set. Defendants must be present during trial and
 may present evidence and confront witnesses in their own
 defense. All are presumed innocent until proven guilty. At
 the end of a trial, the court renders its decision orally. The
 court of original jurisdiction then has 7 days to prepare a
 written decision. A defendant has the right to appeal within
 14 days of the written decision. Appeals may be made, among
 other grounds, on the basis of new evidence or procedural
 irregularities. There were no accusations of politically
 motivated court decisions in 1991.
 The Commissioner for Civii Rights Protection criticized a lack
 of due process in the dismissals of some schoolteachers and
 
 
 1198
 POLAND
 other government officials who were members or alleged
 sympathizers of the former ruling Communist party. In some
 instances, such persons were reportedly denied the opportunity
 to defend themselves prior to dismissal or to appeal decisions
 against them.
 There were no reports of political prisoners being held in
 Poland in 1991.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Search warrants issued by a prosecutor are required to enter
 private residences. In urgent cases when a prosecutor is not
 immediately available, police may enter a residence with the
 approval of the local police commander. In the most urgent
 cases in which there is not time to consult with the police
 commander, police may enter a private residence after showing
 their official identification. Although there are some
 complaints that this procedure is occasionally abused, human
 rights activists in 1991 detected no regular pattern of abuse
 by Polish police.
 The Government no longer monitors private mail and telephone
 calls, unless it is ordered by the prosecutor in an official
 investigation. Incoming overseas mail is occasionally opened,
 but persons complaining of this practice believe that it
 represents a criminal attempt to steal valuables rather than an
 effort to monitor correspondence.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 These freedoms are provided for in the Constitution and
 respected in practice. Many new private newspapers and
 periodicals expressing a wide variety of views were launched in
 1991, and no barrier exists to the establishment of a private
 newspaper other than readership demand and capital. Many small,
 independent firms published an increasing variety of books
 expressing a broad range of political and social viewpoints.
 Foreign periodicals are also freely and easily available in
 major cities.
 In 1991 a government liquidation commission comprised of leading
 journalists reflecting a broad political spectrum completed its
 task of privatizing state-published newspapers and periodicals.
 In several instances, the commission exercised its option of
 refusing to accept the highest bid for a newspaper if it felt
 the sale would not be in the national interest. Most observers
 believed that the commission generally made its decisions fairly
 and without political bias. However, in one controversial
 decision in the city of Wroclaw, local authorities reversed a
 decision by the commission to award the leading local daily to
 a journalists' committee and instead placed its own supporters
 in charge.
 The Government owns and operates the two national television
 channels and eight local television stations, the latter
 broadcasting approximately 6 hours weekly. The Government also
 operates 4 national radio networks and 16 regional stations.
 Efforts to enact a new law governing broadcast media which would
 significantly streamline licensing procedures for independent
 stations stalled, resulting in a legal vacuum in which the
 Government attempted to regulate independent broadcast stations
 
 
 1199
 POLAND
 administratively. A new private television station in Wroclaw
 successfully resisted an effort by central authorities to shut
 it down, as did several independent radio stations. During
 1991 approximately 10 independent radio stations were operating,
 including popular stations in Warsaw and Krakow. In the absence
 of any established licensing procedures, stations which the
 Government unsuccessfully ordered to cease operations contended
 that their legal status was no 'different from that of stations
 whose operations did not draw official disapproval.
 Radio and television air a wide range of political viewpoints;
 one Warsaw radio station runs several hours of Radio Free Europe
 news and public service broadcasting daily. The television
 news, according to many observers, produced critical and
 balanced stories on the Government and leading public figures.
 Polish journalists charged, however, that television news
 editors occasionally refused to air stories which portrayed
 leading government figures in an especially unfavorable light,
 and accusations of political bias were made in connection with
 the cancellation of an investigative program, "Observer," in
 early 1991. All Polish political parties would have preferred
 greater coverage of their candidates on state-run television
 during the parliamentary elections. Most observers agreed,
 however, that campaign coverage was fair; a desire to avoid
 charges of bias may have led television news editors to provide
 less coverage to events such as campaign rallies than might
 otherwise have been the case.
 Charges were filed in December 1990 against defeated
 presidential candidate Stan Tyminski under pre-World War II
 legislation makiig it illegal to defame state or government
 leaders after he accused former Prime Minister Tadeusz
 Mazowiecki, a rival candidate, of treason in one campaign
 speech. The charges were dropped in January 1991 when'Tyminski
 publicly apologized for his remarks. Charges were also filed
 in November against Boleslaw Tejkowski, chairman of the Polish
 National Alliance Party, for repeated anti-Semitic statements
 made during television appearances on behalf of his party's
 campaign in the parliamentary elections. Tejkowski, whose
 party received insufficient support to-'win parliamentary
 representation, was charged with violating laws against
 inciting racial or ethnic hatred.
 Academic freedom is respected.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Poles enjoy the freedom to join together formally and informally
 to promote nonviolent causes and protest government policies.
 Permits are not required for public meetings. Permits are
 issued routinely for public demonstrations; the Government does
 not interfere with otherwise peaceful and nondisruptive
 demonstrations even if permits have not been applied for.
 With government approval, private associations are permitted to
 organize. Such approval is almost always granted and-is not
 withheld for political or other arbitrary reasons.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 The Constitution provides for freedom of conscience'and belief,
 and citizens enjoy the freedom to practice any religion.
 Religious groups may organize, select, and train personnel,
 solicit and receive contributions, publish, and engage in
 consultations with coreligionists without government
 
 
 1200
 POLAND
 interference. There are no restrictions on establishing and
 maintaining places of worship.
 Poland is overwhelmingly Roman Catholic in religious
 affiliation. The Catholic Church maintains over 16,000
 churches, schools, and other institutions and vigorously
 continues to build new ones. It also publishes significant
 numbers of books and periodicals, as does the independent
 Catholic press. Catholic Mass is broadcast on Sundays by the
 state-run radio.
 There is no government-sponsored interference with the practice
 of minority religions. Eastern Orthodox, Ukrainian Catholic,
 and much smaller Protestant, Jewish, and Muslim congregations
 meet freely.
 Public opinion polls consistently showed a majority of Poles of
 all religious persuasions expressing concern about the Catholic
 Church's promotion of its social agenda. The Church-led
 campaign for a strict antiabortion law, which provides for jail
 sentences for those who perform abortions, became a cause of
 intense controversy.
 The Constitutional Court reviewed and upheld the
 constitutionality of the Ministry of Education's decision on
 religious education in the public schools. The vast majority
 of public schools continued to provide facilities for voluntary
 religious instruction of their students by Catholic priests.
 Senior Church officials contend that this program is being
 carried out without significant controversy and that the rights
 of those students choosing not to attend religious instruction
 are fully protected. On the other hand, the Senate's Office of
 Intervention continued to receive reports from some students
 complaining of discriminatory behavior by teachers and fellow
 students because they did not attend religious classes. In
 practice, students who chose not to attend such classes, or
 their parents, were required to affirm their preference to
 school administrators and frequently to explain their reason
 for refusal. The Senate's Office of Intervention also received
 credible reports that teachers were fired by local school
 administrators for publicly protesting the methods by which
 they believed students were pressured to attend religious
 instruction. There has been no official action to investigate
 the charges or to reinstate the dismissed teachers. In areas
 heavily populated by Eastern Orthodox and Ukrainian Catholic
 believers, public school space was made available to their
 representatives to provide religious instruction. Non-Catholic
 religious education is available privately in Poland, but aside
 from the above exceptions it is unavailable in public schools.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 There are no legal restrictions on domestic or foreign travel.
 Virtually all Polish citizens are able to obtain passports for
 worldwide travel valid for up to 10 years.
 Citizenship may be revoked involuntarily only for reasons
 specifically defined by law. There are no unusual provisions
 in the law for the revocation of citizenship, and the
 Government rarely invokes the law.
 Poland became a destination for persons emigrating or fleeing
 from the former Soviet Union, Albania, Romania, Lebanon, Iran,
 Iraq, Ethiopia, and other countries for economic and political
 
 
</pre>
<pre>
 1201
 POLAND
 reasons. Many of these persons used Poland as a transit point
 to other countries, as did tens of thousands of Soviet Jews on
 their way to Israel. Persons seeking political asylum,
 especially from the former Soviet Union, may be granted
 permanent resident status. Refugees generally are not forced
 to return to countries in which they have a reasonable fear of
 persecution. In December the Government adopted new regulations
 incorporating international standards for defining refugees.
 In addition, Polish authorities have granted refugee status on
 humanitarian grounds to some persons outside the international
 definition.
 A Lithuanian deserter from the Soviet military was stopped by .
 German border guards as he attempted to cross the Polish-German
 border, and turned over to a Polish border guard post. The
 local Polish guard post, acting upon its own initiative and
 understanding of a 1956 Polish-Soviet status of forces agreement
 that called for the return of deserters to the Soviet army,
 turned the Lithuanian deserter over to a Soviet military unit
 stationed nearby, who in turn returned him to the Soviet Union.
 Althouglhis incident stirred up a political debate within
 Poland, To disciplinary action was taken against the local
 border guards.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Poland is a multiparty democracy in which all citizens 18 years
 of age and older have the right to vote.
 Following upon free elections for local government offices and
 for the Presidency in 1990, more than 100 political parties
 from across the political spectrum participated in free and
 open elections for 460 seats in the Sejm (lower house) and 100
 seats in the Senate (upper house) of the Parliament which
 replaced the parliament chosen in partially free elections in
 June 1989. With no single party receiving as much as 13
 percent of the vote, the proportional-system used resulted in
 seats being won by 30 political parties and formations. The
 turnout was under 44 percent of eligible voters. In late
 December, after a number of unsuccessful attempts to form a
 government, a coalition headed by Prime Minister Olszewski was
 ratified by the Sejm. The coalition received support from,
 among others, the Center Alliance, the Christian National
 Union, and peasant parties.
 In September electoral commissions in two electoral districts
 invalidated petitions filed by Party "X," a political party
 headed by former presidential candidate Stan Tyminski, claiming
 that the petitions contained large numbers of invalid or
 falsified signatures, The Central State Electoral Commission
 thereupon declined to certify Party "X" as a nationwide party,
 severely restricting the number of candidates it could field.
 Party "X" unsuccessfully appealed the Commission's decision
 through the courts.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The Helsinki Committee, established by human rights activists
 to monitor Poland's compliance with the 1975 Helsinki Final Act
 of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe (CSCE),
 was asked by the Ministry of Interior to provide lecturers on
 human rights issues for the police academy. Its members
 
 
 1202
 POLAND
 indicated that they were given a free hand to investigate
 prison conditions in Poland. However, they also reported they
 had encountered resistance when they requested permission to
 visit police lock-ups to investigate allegations of beatings
 and mistreatment there. Most branches of the Government
 cooperated readily with independent domestic and international
 nongovernmental human rights groups investigating allegations
 of human rights abuses.
 Poland has become a leading advocate of human rights in
 international bodies. In April the CSCE established its office
 for monitoring free elections in Warsaw. Beginning in June,
 Poland proposed at several CSCE meetings the expansion of this
 office's mandate to monitor the development of free
 institutions throughout Europe.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 There is no legally sanctioned discrimination against ethnic or
 religious minorities or women. These forms of discrimination
 are prohibited by Polish law.
 In general, except in connection with the proposed antiabortion
 law (see Section 2.c.), issues concerning women have not become
 a major public issue in Poland, and women's organizations are
 just emerging. The Commissioner for Civil Rights Protection
 received a small number of grievances from women alleging
 sexual discrimination in 1991. Although some women have become
 prominent in Polish politics and society, most upper-level
 management positions continue to be held by men, and, at a time
 of increasing economic austerity, activists charged that female
 workers were more likely to be laid off first from failing
 concerns. The Ministry of Labor and many state-owned firms
 continue to regard certain positions as being reserved for
 either men or women. Anecdotal evidence suggests that women
 sometimes do not receive equal pay for equal work; statistical
 data has not been compiled on this subject.
 Spousal abuse is a criminal offense in Poland, and reported
 incidents are often attributed to alcohol abuse. Persons
 convicted of spousal abuse are subject to imprisonment from 6
 months to 5 years. Because it is not discussed openly and such
 incidents are rarely reported to the police, the extent to
 which it occurs is not known.
 Jewish organizations expressed concern over continuing evidence
 of anti-Semitism in Poland. Anti-Semitic statements were
 scrawled in public places, including on Jewish institutions and
 monuments, and some Jewish cemeteries were vandalized during
 1991. Several minor Polish political parties used anti-Semitic
 slogans during the October parliamentary election campaign, and
 a small gang of youths attacked Warsaw's sole active synagogue
 in September.
 Poland's governing bodies and leading political organizations
 repeatedly and staunchly condemned these incidents and made
 strong efforts to combat anti-Semitism. In March President
 Walesa created a Presidential Council on Polish-Jewish
 Relations consisting of 21 leading Polish Catholic and Jewish
 intellectuals under the leadership of Walesa's political
 secretary; the Council strongly condemned the use of anti-
 Semitic slogans during the election campaign and created
 subcommittees to study means of ekpanding educational efforts
 to combat anti-Semitism. In January the episcopate of the
 
 
 1203"
 
 POLAND
 Roman Catholic Church issued a pastoral letter condemning
 anti-Semitism that was read in churches during Mass. President
 Walesa himself made strong public statements condemning
 anti-Semitism and all forms of ifitolerance.
 A dispute over the former Jewish cemetery in Kalisz ended in
 April when local authorities halted construction of a heating
 pipeline that had resulted in the cemetery's desecration and
 ordered the trench which had been dug through the cemetery to
 be filled in. Since that time, although this cemetery--like
 many other Jewish, Catholic, and other cemeteries in Poland--
 remains in a neglected state, its condition does not appear to
 have been deliberately altered.
 Local authorities acted swiftly to suppress an anti-Gypsy riot
 in the town of Mlawa in June, in which a number of Gypsy homes
 were looted and other property destroyed and several Gypsies
 injured. Police arrested five alleged riot leaders who in late
 1991 had been formally indicted but not yet tried.
 Representatives of the Ukrainian, Byelorussian, and Lithuanian
 minorities sought unsuccessfully to expand existing public
 education facilities in minority languages. Currently,
 regulations permit a minority language class to be formed upon
 the application of eight or more students at the same level in
 a Polish public school, but budgetary constraints have
 occasionally been cited by local authorities for refusing such
 requests. Elementary school classes in Byelorussian and
 Lithuanian are regularly held in the regions of the country
 where these minorities are concentrated; they are less common
 in Ukrainian, in part because the Ukrainian minority is more
 generally dispersed throughout Poland. There are no minority
 language classes in German.
 Polish public radio stations initiated new radio programs in
 minority languages such as Ukrainian and German during 1991.
 Ukrainian Catholics continued efforts to reclaim Church
 property which the former Communist regime had turned over to
 the Roman Catholic Church; one particularly prdminent case
 involved a dispute in which a small group of Polish Roman
 Catholics barricaded and occupied the Church of St. Theresa, a
 large church in Przemysl. Although some ethnic Ukrainian Poles
 believe that the Government should now affirmatively reverse
 the former regime's decision, the present Government has taken
 no official action and has avoided public comment of any kind
 regarding the dispute. There were also incidents of anti-
 Ukrainian graffiti.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 Trade union legislation passed in 1991 establishes that all
 workers, including the police and frontier guards, have the
 right to establish and join trade unions of their own choosing.
 As few as 10 persons may form a trade union, and a founding
 committee of 3 persons must register the union at the
 appropriate provincial court. A decision of the court refusing
 registration may be appealed to a court of appeals. Interbranch
 national unions and federations must register with the
 provincial court in Warsaw.
 These registration requirements are not pro forma and they have
 been successfully challenged. Polish courts had previously
 
 
 1204
 POLAND
 denied registration to Solidarity '80, a trade union offshoot
 of the original Solidarity union, because it refused to accept
 the provisions of the 1982 trade union law which imposed
 burdensome restrictions on strikes and heavy legal penalties
 against strikers. After a protracted legal dispute, the Warsaw
 provincial court recognized the registration of Solidarity '80
 in September.
 Beside the Solidarity union, other major unions include the
 Communist-inspired National Alliance of Trade Unions, OPZZ,
 organized in 1982 as the sole legal alternative to the then
 banned Solidarity union, and the Federation of Miners, an
 independent union. According to new trade union legislation,
 OPZZ will be required to relinquish some "inherited" properties
 and return assets it acquired following the imposition of
 martial law.
 Unions are independent of the Government. They have the right
 to join labor federations and confederations, as well as to
 affiliate with international labor organizations. The
 Government and legislature are presently engaged in the process
 of revamping the labor code. New laws on employment and on
 trade unions and collective bargaining were passed in January
 and May.
 The new Trade Union Act, which took effect in August, is less
 restrictive regarding the right to strike than the 1982 version
 but still prescribes a lengthy procedure before a strike may be
 launched. If strictly adhered to, the law .provides several
 opportunities to challenge a strike, including the threat of
 legal action. An employer--either state-owned or private
 firms--must start negotiations the moment a dispute begins.
 Negotiations end either with an agreement or a protocol
 describing the differences between the parties. If negotiations
 fail, a mandatory mediation process begins with a mediator
 appointed jointly by the disputing parties or, lacking agreement
 between them, by the Minister of Labor and Social Policy. If
 mediation fails, the trade union may launch a warning strike
 for a period of 2 hours or seek arbitration of the dispute.
 A full-fledged strike may not be launched until 14 days after
 the dispute is announced. Strikes are prohibited entirely in
 the Office of State Protection, and by police, firemen, military
 forces, prison services, and frontier guards. It may be
 proclaimed by the trade union after approval by the majority of
 voting workers and should be announced at least 5 days before
 its commencement. If the strike is organized in accordance
 with the provisions of the Act, the worker retains his right to
 social insurance benefits but not to his pay. If a strike is
 "organized contrary to the provisions of the law," the workers
 may lose social insurance benefits; organizers are liable for
 damages and may face civil charges and fines.
 The Government hopes that such a lengthy process will discourage
 major labor disputes that could potentially destabilize the
 political and economic situation. The law has not yet faced a
 real test involving a major labor dispute. Short-term warning
 actions and strikes involving occupation of the workplace were
 common occurrences in the second half of 1991 and were usually
 settled by mutual compromise between the strikers and the
 Government, which is still the dominant employer.
 The mining union alleged in a complaint to the International
 Labor Organization (ILO) supported by the OPZZ that the
 Government had refused to submit a labor dispute to mediation
 
 
 1205
 POLAD
 as required by law, but the pertinent ILO body dismissed the
 complaint in December.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 The May 1991 law on trade unions and collective bargaining
 provides for legal sanctions for antiunion discrimination. A
 notable weakness in the law, given Poland's transition from a
 centrally planned to a market economy, is the lack of specific
 provisions to ensure that the union has continued rights of
 representation when a state firm undergoes privatization,
 bankruptcy, or sale. Solidarity is particularly concerned that
 many joint ventures are ignoring Polish labor law. According
 to Polish officials, regulations concerning collective
 bargaining are generally not recognized or enforced in the
 private sector.
 Wages are set in negotiations at the enterprise level between
 unions, management, and workers' councils. Legislation passed
 in 1991 does not require that wage agreements be registered
 with the Government. The Government has sought to impose a
 ceiling on wages in state enterprises through.a penalty tax in
 an effort to link wages to increases in productivity and to
 reduce inflationary pressures on the economy. President Walesa
 on January 2 signed a revised version of the law which lifted
 wage controls on the private sector and granted greater
 flexibility for firms to grant wage increases based on higher
 profits. The penalty tax is charged on any state company that
 increases its average wage in excess of a government-set
 "inflation coefficient." As of September, the coefficient was
 60 percent of the monthly increase in retail prices. Solidarity
 and the Government negotiated a higher base.in June, implemented
 in July, which allows a greater wage"increase before the penalty
 tax applies.
 Special duty-free zones exist in or have been contemplated for
 some 15 locations throughout Poland but, with the exception of
 one zone in Poznan, have not thus far attracted much attention.
 There are no special labor regulations pertaining to these
 zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 Compulsory labor does not exist in Poland. Forced labor is
 prohibited by law.
 Legislation introduced during the martial law period that
 permitted the use of police powers against persons inactive for
 "socially unjustified reasons" was removed from the criminal
 code in 1990.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 The Labor Code forbids the employment of persons under the age
 of 15. The employment of persons aged 15 to 18 is permitted
 only if that person has completed basic schooling and if the
 proposed employment constitutes vocational training. The age
 floor is raised to 18 if a particular job might pose a health
 danger. The Government is alert to reports of violations of
 child labor laws and enforces the legal protection of minors,
 but it appears unable at present to monitor the growing private
 sector.
 
 
 1206
 POLAND
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 The national minimum wage, negotiated every 3 months by the
 Ministry of Labor and Social Policy and the trade unions, is
 insufficient to provide a worker and his family a decent living.
 The minimum wage is broadly applicable in the state economic
 sector where enforcement and union representation ensure
 compliance. It is not possible to determine whether the
 minimum wage is observed in the burgeoning private sector,
 although wages are generally higher there. The maximum legal
 workweek is 48 hours, but in practice most Poles work 40 hours
 a week most of the year.
 The Legal Code defines minimum conditions for the protection of
 workers' health and safety; a new draft of that Code was
 scheduled for parliamentary approval by the end of the year.
 Working conditions in Poland are poor; norms for chemicals,
 dust, and noise are routinely exceeded. There were about
 110,000 serious work-related accidents in 1990, involving 842
 deaths, 5,000 cases of dismemberment, and another 102,000 cases
 of serious physical impairment.
 Enforcement of health and safety regulations is a growing
 problem because of the rapid increase in private firms in the
 economy. Less than 5 percent of the firms are monitored, and
 there is an absence of clarity as to which agency is
 responsible for the monitoring. On the one hand, the State
 Labor Inspectorate, which is directly responsible to the
 Parliament and has a staff of 800 inspectors, is charged with
 monitoring the implementation of collective agreements and
 health and safety laws but is prepared only to inspect
 state-owned firms. On the other hand, the Ministry of Labor
 and Social Policy is the government agency responsible for
 setting standards and actually enforcing the law.
 
 
 1207
