 POLAND*
 Despite the continued existence of potentially
 dangerous pressures from hardliners within the Polish
 party leadership, Polish society continued to evolve
 in 1981 toward a pluralistic system. The independent
 Polish workers' movement which took concrete form in
 the summer of 1980 consolidated itself in 1981. The
 "Solidarity" worker movement was joined by an
 independent "Rural Solidarity" organization of
 private farmers, which was given legal status on May
 12, 1981. The phenomenal growth of the two
 independent movements has already fundamentally
 changed the political structure of Poland. Equally
 basic changes in the economic and social structure
 are in process. The last half of the 1970's is now
 officially, as well ap popularly, seen as a period of
 economic errors, leadership corruption and political
 blindness which resulted in the alienation of the
 people from the regime.
 The growth of the Solidarity movements, although
 brought on by economic pressues, had its roots in a
 wider malaise affecting every aspect of life in
 Poland. In the context of human rights, this
 movement has influenced all the categories covered in
 this report. The Polish population has demanded
 political democratization, economic justice, and a
 reorientation of social priorities to satisfy the
 most vital human needs.' The regime in its renewal
 policy has promised satisfaction, within limits, of
 these aspirations. The regime sought in many cases
 to avoid full implementation of the many agreements
 reached with the new movement. Pressure from
 Solidarity, however, has already resulted in de
 facto, if not de Jure, recognition 6f the right to
 free assembly, of the rights of workers to bargain
 collectively and of the workers' right to strike if
 their just demands are not met. Solidarity members
 and their allies have also gained substantially the
 right to free speech and press, and achieved some
 access to the radio and TV. Consolidation of worker
 Solidarity's institutions came in September and
 October 1981, when the Union, now claiming membership
 of approximately ten million, held a national
 congress which confirmed Walesa's leadership and
 received extensive coverage by both Polish and
 foreign media. The Union adopted a program
 addressing not only normal worker issues, but also
 demanding further negotiations with the government on
 broader economic, political and social issues.
 The worker Solidarity program includes issues such as
 increased media access for itself and for the
 Catholic church; limitation of censorship;
 intervention on behalf of prisoners of conscience and
 -This report is current up to December 13, 1981. A
 brief description of human rights conditions
 immediately following the military coup of December
 13 is appended to this report.
 
 (834)
 
 
 835
 on behalf' of those abused by the authorities; more
 consumer goods and housing for the population;
 improved health care; and wage increases which will
 take account of the rising cost of living and lessen
 the disparity between the highest and the lowest paid
 workers. The private farmers in Rural Solidarity
 (claiming membership of two million)'have pressed for
 greater access to seeds, fertilizer and farm
 implements vis-a-vis the favored state farms, arguing
 that only thus will they be able to satisfy the
 population's demand for increased meat and other
 basic foodstuffs.
 This report is based on the United States
 government's own sources of information and on
 statistics and reports published both. by the Polish
 government and by Solidarity. Cases of police
 brutality were documented after 1976 by such
 organizations as-the Committee for Social
 Self-Defense (-KSS/KOR), which announced on September
 28, 1981 that'it was disbanding and turning its task
 of civil rights' defense to Solidarity.
 Last year's survey highlighted KSS/KOR reports on
 police brutality. The report was thus most critical
 of the police and justice system in Poland,
 especially as it impacted on those least able to
 defend themselves. It is one mark of the success of
 KSS/KOR and Solidarity pressure that the' more
 flagrant judicial abuses appear to have decreased
 sharply. The police apparatus in Poland, mindful of
 the new public mood and conscious of its limited
 credibility, has shown restraint and moderation. The
 police no longer exercise unbridled authority. One
 veteranhuman rights activist argues that the
 decrease in current police brutality stems not from
 an appreciation of constitutional guarantees, but in
 recognition of the strength of Solidarity.
 The report which'follows should be read in the light
 of the momentous events in Poland over the past
 fifteen months. It notes human rights abuses and
 shortcomings which have existed for years, and which
 continue to exist. The negative aspects are
 tempered, however, by what as taken place and the
 repetition of government and party decisions and
 declarations affirming a conciliatory policy toward
 non-communist elements in the pluralistic society.
 If sincerely and consistently applied in the months
 and years to come, this policy will further improve
 the human rights. climate in Poland. A reemergence of
 hardliners, however, could lead to an erosion of this
 *situation. In addition, the report should be read
 with the understanding that the abuses cited have now
 come to light only because of Poland's relatively
 open society, which permits an opposition to exist
 and to report on the dark side of Polish life.
 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person,
 Including Freedom from:
 
 
 836
 a. Torture
 Torture is prohibited under the Polish penal code.
 No reports of torture have been received during the
 past year.
 A reportedly widespread practice in the past was for
 the police to beat persons arrested on other than
 political charges to obtain confessions and as a form
 of punishment. Prisoners were reportedly beaten for
 five minutes, told to confess, and if they failed to
 do so were beaten again. The extent of police
 beatings of persons arrested for disorderly conduct,
 drunkenness and other petty offenses cannot be
 verified. One authoritative nongovernment source
 stated that in his view there has been a dramatic
 decrease of police beatings of arrestees under all
 circumstances. No report has been received, however,
 of any case in which a policeman was punished for use
 of excessive-force when arresting or questioning a
 suspect.
 In the most publicized case during the past year,
 police on March 19 in the northern city of Bydgoszcz
 ejected Solidarity leaders who were occupying offices'
 in a public building. In the ensuing melee three
 Solidarity leaders were severely beaten. Following a
 lengthy invest.igation of the incident, the local
 prosecutor's office announced in last August that no
 indictments would be forthcoming.
 b. Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 Last year's report estimated that Polish prisons held
 200,000 prisoners. However, it now appears that this
 figure was erroneous, and that the true figure was
 closer to 100,000. Almost all prisoners were jailed
 on criminal, not political charges. There are
 unofficial reports indicating that during the past
 year, the prison population was nearly halved by
 extensive paroles, and asserting that the prisons now
 hold only 50,000 to 60,000 detainees. One motivating
 factor may have been a number of prison disturbances,
 including an early September prison riot in
 Bydgoszcz, during which more than 150 prisoners
 escaped. There is no evidence that persons convicted
 qf crizpes are subjected to cruel or inhuman
 punishment, with the exception of overwork and some
 cases of overcrowding. Capital punishment is
 infrequent, although at least nine offenses listed in
 the criminal code carry the death penalty.
 Unofficial sources inform us that a vast reform of
 the penal code is being studied, aimed in part at
 eliminating the death penalty for several of these
 offenses. As in most societies, the great majority
 of convicts come from the poorest and most poorly
 educated class of people. No evidence has been
 received that prisoners are given different treatment
 based on the type of crime for which they were
 convicted, their social class, race, sex or religion.
 
 
 837
 c. Disappearances
 There is no evidence that persons are abducted,
 secretly arrested or held in clandestine detention in
 Poland. People have been arrested and held by the
 police for questioning without being allowed
 immediately to notify their families or to obtain
 legal counsel. These periods of detention by law may
 last no longer than 48 hours. According to a
 reliable unofficial source, the practice has been
 largely discontinued since autumn 1980 (see below),
 and most recent reports indicate that persons
 detained only for questioning are released after
 twelve hours or less.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest and Imprisonment
 The authorities previously made use of the legal
 provision for holding a person 48 hours without
 formal charges, often as a means to curb opposition
 elements. One observer estimated, for example, that
 900 people were picked up and held in this way over a
 six months period in 1980. Sometimes persons were
 detained, held 48 hours, released and then picked up
 again for another period of 48 hours. In late
 November 1980, an internal document from the
 prosecutor general's office, which outlined this
 practice, was made public. According to one source,
 because of the scandal which ensued, there have been
 practically no subsequent cases of repeated detention
 without charges. Habeas corpus does exist in Poland
 and is guaranteed by the constitution (article 87;
 paragraph 1), but the legal writ of the police is
 wide and the courts are generally compliant with
 police requests for holding a person.
 Although most persons imprisoned are held for
 criminal rather than political crimes, the
 government, under pressure from the Soviet Union, has
 ordered the arrest of many persons for spreading what
 is called "anti-Soviet," as well as "anti-state,"
 propaganda. Defaming the Soviet Union, the party,
 and the government is illegal under Polish law. On
 October 26 the prosecutor general's office announced
 the indictment of six regional Solidarity leaders
 from Chelm for disseminating posters which "insulted,
 derided and humiliated the government and the
 political system of the Polish People's Republic."
 Similar arrests several days earlier led to violent
 clashes between police and angry crowds in the cities
 of Katowice and Wroclow. In an October 7 report to a
 committee of the SeJm (parliament), the vice-minister
 for internal affairs noted that 50 investigations of
 anti-Soviet propaganda were then underway. He added
 that the police had confiscated over 100,000 such
 publications, along with paper and printing or
 copying equipment.
 
 
 838
 e.     Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Alongside the regular court system in Poland. which
 is under the jurisdiction of the ministry of justice,
 there is an informal court system under the ministry
 of the interior known as the collegium for
 misdemeanor affairs, which in 1978 (the last year for
 which statistics are available) tried 723,400 people,
 of whom 649,400 were found guilty of such offenses as
 vagrancy or drunkenness. Anyone who is not working
 for a state enterprise or a cooperative can be
 arrested and brought before this body, which has the
 right to sentence them to up to three months, usually
 in labor camps. The convicted person has three days
 in which to file an appeal, but in practice appeals
 are normally denied.
 The right to legal counsel is guaranteed by the
 constitution (article 63, paragraph 2) and in
 practice is not abridged. Legal counsel is not
 necessarily present during the initial interrogation
 period of an investigation, but one observer stated
 in 1980 that he had his lawyer with him during
 questioning after his numerous arrests. Sometimes
 the breakdown seems to be between persons arrested
 for political infractions and those arrested for
 common criminal or misdemeanor offenses. The former
 are usually more sophisticated and demand the
 presence of their lawyer, while the latter may
 receive much more arbitrary treatment at the hands of
 the police. The judiciary is nominally independent
 of executive control. Decisions which have political
 importance are in effect decided by the government
 even if the formal decision is handed down by a court
 of law; The one moment of drama thus far in the KPN
 trial mentioned hereafter came when the court granted
 a defense motion to release the detainees on bond.
 The prosecutor immediately appealed directly to the
 Polish supreme court which overruled the lower
 court's decision the same day.
 Military courts try persons accused of security
 offenses. The military courts operate under a
 separate code of procedure from the civilian courts
 and the right to appeal is only to a military review
 panel, not to a civilian court,
 f.     Invasion of the Rome
 Police searches of homes are not uncommon in Poland.
 A warrant is required, but is easily obtained if
 requested by the police: it can be written in such
 broad language that even apparently harmless private
 property can be removed. Investigating officers from
 the security service are required only to show the
 warrant and to give their rank. They are not
 required to show personal identification. There are
 no recent reports of forced entry of private homes,
 but confiscated property is not generally returned to
 its owner. The monitoring of telephones is widely
 practiced in Poland, especially in the cases of
 opposition political figures.
 
 
 839
 2. Respect for Civil and Political Liberties,
 Includings
 a.    Freedom of Speech, Press, Religion and
 Assembly
 All of the above freedoms are guaranteed in the
 Polish constitution, but in practice there are some
 limitations. The press, radio, television, exhibits
 and public performances, including films, are all
 subject to censorship. A new law on censorship was
 passed by the Polish parliament in July 1981 and came
 into effect as of October 1. The law specifically
 spells out topics forbidden in print and in
 performances -- e.g., criticisms of the territorial
 integrity of Poland, of Poland's constitutional
 regime, and of the principles of Poland's foreign
 policy and its allies. At the same time, the new law
 excludes from censorship many items formerly
 censored, among which are textbooks, academic theses,
 Catholic church publications and, most notably, labor
 organizations' internal publications. The law also
 decentralizes the censorship process by making the
 local censorship boards the organs of first instance
 and the main (read "central") censorship board a sort
 of censorship appeals court.
 The law further weakens the censors' power by
 explicitly prohibiting the boards from issuing
 guidance on the coverage of events, or from stopping
 publication because of the boards' dissatisfaction
 with the way an event has been reported.
 Although it is still too early to judge the ultimate
 effect of the new law on censorship, the law does
 reflect the current state of the Polish media.
 Within obvious and, in Poland, almost unchallenged
 parameters, each medium has a great deal of freedom
 of action. Where limitations exist, they largely
 stem from individual editorial decisions, rather than
 from a centrally determined and monitored policy.
 One practical result of the relatively unbridled
 flexibility of the Polish media is the extensiveness
 of the coverage of local events: everything from
 protest marches and demonstrations to
 government-Solidarity debates and dire analyses of
 the state of the Polish economy is fair game. A
 second practical result is that the media now resist
 any sort of sweeping characterization, except that
 they operate independently of each other and outside
 any strict, centralized control. Hence, television
 remains the authorities' favorite medium for
 expressing their own -- and almost exclusively their
 own -- point of view, while certain traditionally
 liberal intellectual weeklies, along with several
 widely circulated dailies in Warsaw and the
 provinces, have broken new investigative ground.
 
 89-510 0 - 82 - 54
 
 
 840
 During the past year there has also been a
 proliferation of publications serving both the
 national Solidarity organization and its regional and
 factory affiliates. Although the government
 maintains extensive control over the supplies of
 paper, the national Solidarity organ, "Solidarnosc
 Tygodnik," appears weekly in press runs of 500,000
 and has attempted, thus far unsuccessfully, to
 increase the run to one million. Although no figures
 are available on the size of the press runs for the
 regional and plant Solidarity bulletins -- some of
 which appear five times a week -- it is known that
 several of them are issued in runs of between 10,000
 and 50,000 copies. Several of the Solidarity
 publications, including "Solidarnosc Tygodnik," have
 run afoul of the censorship boards. One regional
 Solidarity publication was closed down temporarily
 for publishing anti-Soviet caricatures. On the other
 hand, the national press announced-November 4 that
 another regional Solidarity publication had convinced
 the Polish courts to overturn a negative censorship
 ruling.
 At the same time, there have been recent indications
 of a crackdown on party journalists, including the
 editors of party newspapers. Stefan Bratkowski, the
 outspoken liberal president of the Polish
 Journalists' Association, was expelled from the party
 October 16, ironically just before he led the Polish
 journalists' delegation to the Moscow Convention of
 the International Journalists' Organization. Jurek
 Nachefar, editor-in-chief of "Sztandar Mlodych," the
 newspaper of the official youth movement, was ousted
 after the October 9 issue contained an interview with
 veteran KSS/KOR and Solidarity activist Jacek Kuron.
 Imported publications are not included in the new
 censorship law. The limiting factor on access to
 foreign publications is not a censorship law, old or
 new, but the shortage of the hard currency. Thus,
 while not a single issue of "Newsweek" or the
 "International Herald Tribune" was confiscated over
 the past year, these publications, which once were at
 least available in reading rooms, are now rare,
 because of the inability to pay for subscriptions.
 Political controls on academic inquiry are at their
 lowest ebb in the history of the People's Republic of
 Poland. The present university rectors were elected
 by members of their universities, rather than imposed
 from above. Not surprisingly, few Polish university
 rectors as of November 1981 are the same people who
 held these offices a year ago, when the old system
 prevailed. Several of the new rectors are members of
 Solidarity. University reforms agreed to by the
 Polish government in February 1981, grant students a
 greater freedom of choice; Russian language and
 Marxist philosophy were abolished as compulsory
 subjects, and a larger number of electives is offered
 to university students in their major fields of
 
 
 841
 study. The picture is complicated by the reforms in
 the ministry of higher education, where the increase
 in local autonomy means, among other things, that no
 central authority really has the power to enact and
 enforce the academic reforms uniformly throughout the
 country. Hence, there is a good deal of regional
 variation in the degree of reform. Many university
 students reacted to the reforms with pessimism,
 fearing that they will soon be withdrawn, as happened
 in 1956-57. Nonetheless, instructors who were kept
 out of teaching for political reasons in recent
 years, are now back at work; lectures on formerly
 taboo topics like modern Polish history are widely
 given; and university hall bulletin boards routinely
 feature photographs of recent strikes and
 demonstrations, petitions, and detailed denunciations
 of various government policies.
 It should be noted that the government's consent to
 academic reforms was obtained as the resolution to
 the month-long February 1981 student strike,
 conducted without vandalism or similar misbehavior on
 the student side, and observed without repression or
 violence on the government side.
 Freedom of assembly in Poland is technically
 conditioned on approval by the local authorities, who
 must be notified before the meeting or demonstration
 is scheduled to take place. In practice, since
 August 1980, most demonstrations organized by or
 connected to the Solidarity movement have taken place
 without approval by the authorities. These
 demonstrations included mass "hunger marches" in late
 July 1981 to protest food shortages, and subsequent
 mass demonstrations and rallies by thousands of
 workers in early August, which halted mass transit in
 downtown Warsaw for two days. After unauthorized
 demonstrations in the past, the authorities would
 frequently arrest the organizers and have them
 sentenced to fines or from one to three months
 imprisonment for disturbing the peace. There have
 been no reports of this practice since October 1980.
 The right to form labor unions and the right to
 strike have been granted by the government. The
 government has even conceded that workers should be
 paid while on strike, unless the strike is deemed
 "political." Prior to August 1980, workers who tried
 to organize trade unions or strike were fired under
 article 52 of the labor code, which permits firings
 for unauthorized absence from work. While article 52
 has not been repealed, enforcement is apparently very
 rare. The government's acceptance of Solidarity as
 an independent labor movement, free of state and
 party control, has completely altered the balance of
 forces between workers and management. The
 Solidarity unions have concluded collective
 bargaining agreements with the government on wage
 increases and working conditions. (Under the old,
 official union system, the various enterprises
 negotiated wages and working conditions directly with
 
 
 842
 the responsible ministries without meaningful input
 from the workers.) Solidarity also demanded a role
 in management of the state enterprises, to include
 the right of retaining or dismissing the enterprise
 director. The Polish parliament in September 1981
 passed a law on worker self-management which gave
 workers a co-determining role in the naming and
 retention of the directors of all enterprises except
 those considered strategic. The number and identity
 of strategic enterprises has not yet been established.
 Greater religious freedom has been achieved in Poland
 during the past fifteen months. Traditionally, the
 state tried to minimize the roles of the Catholic
 church in Poland's public life. It would not
 authorize all the permits for the construction of new
 churches, nor allow the church to have access to the
 mass media. It also denied the church any influence
 in the public education system, even though 80 or
 more percent of the Polish people are practicing
 Catholics. One of the principal concessions by the,
 government in August 1980 was an agreement, since
 implemented, to allow broadcast of the mass on state
 radio every Sunday morning. The ceremonies
 surrounding the funeral of the revered Stefan
 Cardinal Wysynski on May 31 received several hours of
 live coverage on nation-wide Polish TV and radio. The
 press gives extensive coverage to Pope John Paul II,
 to meetings with Polish church leaders, and to
 statements by the primate and the episcopate. The
 government and church mixed commission on religious
 affairs meets periodically. On several occasions the
 party first secretaries have met with the primate.
 Poland's small Protestant sects are allowed to
 operate without any major government obstruction.
 The small Jewish minority maintains its traditions..
 The government has permitted immigration to Israel.
 The Warsaw synagogue has been renovated and
 restoration of many unkept Jewish cemeteries has been
 promised. There are also a number of Russian
 Orthodox churches apparently functioning without
 hindrance. And in the extreme northeast, several
 hundred Tartars in a few villages follow Islam.
 In addition to the religious minorities mentioned
 above, there are small ethnic minoritiess ethnic
 Germans, White Russians, Ukrainians, and Gypsies.
 Some ethnic friction occurs, and bigoted attitudes
 toward one ethnic minority or another is common.
 While individuala from several of these groups
 occasionally claim persecution or harassment from
 officials, there is little evidence, however, to
 suggest any government program of. discrimination,
 although gypsies are occasionally molested by
 police. In mid-September the police in the city of
 Konin acted with dispatch to rescue a number of gypsy
 children and their parents from a mob which appeared
 to have formed spontaneously. No instance is
 recalled of any similar mass public incident with
 blatant overtones of discrimination or bigotry. The
 incident received widespread public condemnation.
 
 
 843
 b. Freedom of Movement Within the Country,
 Foreign Travel, Emigration and Repatriation
 Polish citizens are free to move within Poland
 without prior authorization. Foreigners visiting
 Poland are also allowed to move about without undue
 restraints, although they are required to register
 with the police.
 Poland does not prevent the return of Polish citizens
 who are temporarily abroad. In fact it encourages
 its citizens to retain Polish citizenship, even after
 they have been abroad for several years. The
 government has long had a policy of preventing or
 delaying the travel abroad of people who have
 immediate family members remaining abroad without
 authorization of the Polish authorities. It still
 occasionally refuses passports to political
 opposition figures who wish to travel abroad.
 Implementation of the Polish government's new policy
 and regulations on the issuance of tourist (as
 contrasted to emigration) passports began in April
 1981. Under the regulations, forms have been
 simplified; passports have been made valid for all
 countries of the world for a period of three years,
 and processing time was reduced. Under the new
 policy, issuance has been much more generous than In
 the past. It appears that possibly a million Poles,
 many of whom have previously been refused passports
 on one or more occasions, received tourist passports
 this year. In an increasing number of cases, entire
 families have been granted tourist passports. There
 is some reason to believe, however, that this high
 rate of issuance may stem at least in part from the
 desire of the authorities to reduce the number of
 unemployed or underemployed in Poland and to increase
 hard currency remittances from abroad. The number of
 passports issued valid for emigration has not risen
 correspondingly. It is clear that many Poles are
 taking advantage of the new opportunity to avoid
 delays inherent in obtaining emigration passports
 and, instead, to obtain any kind of passport in order
 to leave Poland either permanently or to work for a
 few years in a Western country. A number of Polish
 press reports have been quite explicit about this
 practice.
 In general, the Polish government discourages
 emigration. One large category of people who face
 difficulties in obtaining emigration passports
 consists of those who wish to join relatives who left
 Poland illegally. Another consists of those who
 themselves emigrated "illegally" and who return to
 Poland for a "temporary" visit. Many Poles in the
 latter category say that they were informed by a
 Polish consul in the United States that their
 families in Poland would be issued emigration
 passports if they would return to Poland to pick them
 up. When they have done so they have found
 
 
 844
 themselves trapped there, often for years. It is not
 clear upon what basis the Polish government does
 finally issue emigration passports. In general,
 however, the Polish government has been willing to
 issue emigration passports to newly-acquired spouses
 of American citizens without delay. A considerable
 number of Polish citizens apply for asylum or refugee
 status every year. The calendar 1981 figure for
 those applying for asylum or for refugee status would
 be in the magnitude of between 20,000 and 50,000. It
 should be emphasized that many of those applying for
 refugee status in 1981 are doing so for economic
 rather than political reasons. Poland has in the
 past granted exit permission to over 500 individuals
 who are members of divided families. This
 constitutes a significant and improved government
 effort to ameliorate the divided families problem.
 Poland has allowed several hundred thousand ethnic
 Germans tO leave Poland over the last ten years to
 join their families in West Germany.
 c. Freedom to Participate in the Political
 Process
 The constitution of the Polish People's Republic
 sanctions one political party, the Polish United
 Workers' Party (PUWP). It governs with the support
 of the Democratic Party and the United Peasants'
 Party in what is known as the Front of National
 Unity. Both the Democratic Party and the United
 Peasants' Party are subservient to the PUWP. The
 government recently announced that a council to
 determine means of broadening the political base of
 the Front of National Unity will be named.
 The officially-sponsored Catholic group, PAX, and the
 ostensibly Catholic 'ZNAK' Group are represented in
 the Sejm (Parliament), but both groups operate within
 limits set by the Party. Since August 1980, however,
 there has been a considerably greater diversity of
 views expressed in the Sejm, even by Party members.
 There have also been reports of mini-rebellions
 within the Sejm against certain government bills, and
 a report that at least one ministerial nomination was
 rejected. The law on worker self-management, as
 passed by the Sejm in late September 1981,
 incorporated in one section compromise language
 almost word for word as proposed by the Solidarity
 national leadership in place of the original language
 in the government bill.
 Opposition political groups such as the Committee for
 Social Self-Defense (KSS/KOR), the Movement for the
 Defense of Human and Citizens' Rights (ROPCIO), and
 the Confederation for an Independent Poland (KPN)
 have been active in Poland since 1976. Most members
 of the first two groups joined the Solidarity
 movement in one capacity or another. The founder of
 KSS/KOR announced its dissolution September 28,
 adding that he expected Solidarity to assume its
 
 
 845
 functions. While the Solidarity leadership insists
 that the labor movement is not a political party,
 Solidarity, with some ten million members, has
 clearly become the major social force in Poland.
 Leszek Moczulski, the leader of the avowedly
 nationalistic KPN, which along with KSS/KOR is the
 principal target of the government campaign against
 "anti-socialist forces", was arrested in late
 September 1980. Since late August 1981, he and two
 fellow KPN members have been on trial, charged with
 anti-State and anti-Soviet activities. Many groups
 in, or associated with, Solidarity have called openly
 for their release, although Solidarity has
 disassociated itself from KPN views.
 3. Government Attitude and Record Regarding
 International and Non-governmental Investigations of
 Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 The Polish government does not appear to have taken a
 position on the investigation of human rights'
 violations in Poland. It obviously does not accept
 allegations that such violations do occur and would
 be unlikely to cooperate if any international human
 rights organizations attempted to investigate reports
 of such violations. All of the opposition groups
 listed in Section 2, above, monitored the human
 rights situation in Poland in the past. Amnesty
 International was represented in Poland by a member
 of the ROPCIO group. KSS/KOR and ROPCIO in October
 1980 prepared extensive reports on the human rights
 situation in Poland, which were conveyed to the
 governments of those countries which signed the
 Helsinki Final Act for consideration at the Madrid
 CSCE Review conference. Some of the authors of the
 1980 report, now working under the aegis of
 Solidarity, are preparing an update, which they hope
 to complete within the next two months.
 Poland is a signatory of the Final Act of the
 Helsinki Accords of August 1975; thus it is
 represented at all review conferences of CSCE. It is
 also a member of the UN Human Rights Commission and
 ratified the UN Covenant on Civil and Political
 Rights in 1977. Poland does not officially recognize
 the right of nongovernmental human rights groups to
 report on the situation in Poland, but in 1980 it
 permitted representatives from Amnesty International
 to visit Poland on an unofficial basis.
 4. Economic and Social Circumstances
 Poland's 1979 GNP per capita in 1979 dollars was
 $3,830.
 Health care, employment and education are guaranteed
 to Polish citizens by the Polish constitution.
 During the past year, the Polish economy performed
 poorly. While food supplies are above the
 subsistence level, such items as meat, butter, sugar
 
 
 846
 and other staple products are frequently unavailable,
 or only available after a long wait in line. Prices
 for most staple commodities and manufactured goods
 have been fixed by law and are policed by the
 government. Some prices were raised earlier this
 year, however. Extensive price reform, accompanied
 by some compensation, is planned for late 1981 and
 1982.
 The housing shortage is one of Poland's main social
 problems. The average wait for an apartment is
 between five and ten years. This situation is
 further aggravated by priority accorded persons who
 have hard currency, thus leading to an unjust system
 of distribution. This system of making goods
 availableto hard currency holders has recently been
 amended somewhat by the government, by withdrawing
 Polish-produced goods from the special hard currency
 stores. Even so, many necessities of life are
 readily obtained by those who have hard currency, in
 practice almost always dollars, while the mass of
 people must do without, or wait for years to buy with
 Polish currency. Health care in Poland is free, but
 medicine must be purchased at state-run pharmacies
 which frequently do not have the more sophisticated
 drugs, many of which have to be imported from the
 West. Some domestically-produced medicines are also
 in short supply. Hospital facilities are limited and
 overcrowded fqr all but privileged members of
 society. The medical profession, however, is staffed
 by well-trained physicians. Infant mortality,
 according to official statistics, has declined
 steadily for the last ten years. In 1979 it stood at
 22 deaths for 1,000 live births. Life expectancy at
 birth was 72 in 1979. The average annual population
 growth rate between 1970 and 1979 was 0.9 percent
 while the 1979 total fertility rate was 2.3 percent.
 Poland suffered a two percent negative growth rate in
 1979, and a four percent negative growth rate in
 1980. The 1981 growth rate is now estimated at minus
 15 to 18 percent..
 'Within the context of this unprecedented postwar
 declining rate of economic growth, the Polish
 Government has been faced with difficult decisions on
 how much of its available fuuids to invest in
 long-term projects and how much to spend on meeting
 urgent consumer needs. Following the strikes bf the
 summer, of 1980, the government made a commitment to
 redirect available investment money into programs
 designed to meet the most urgent and vital needs of
 the population: housing, medical care and food. The
 housing industry is currently plagued by materials
 shortages,. but the government has greatly increased
 its 1982 budgetary allotments for social services and
 social insurance.
 Private property ownership is widespread in Poland',
 especially in the agricultural sector, where in 1979
 75 percent of the land was in private hands,
 according to official statistics.
 
 
 847
 Working conditions in the state sector have been
 improved. Salary increases over the past year have
 averaged 25 percent. As a result of the 1980
 agreements signed between the government and the
 striking workers, Polish workers and farmers now have
 the right to form trade unions independent of
 government or party control. At present, it is still
 not clear what the long-term impact of this new
 development will be. Some of the demands made by the
 workers in addition to the right to form independent
 trade unions, however, have been met, including a
 shorter work week, improved salaries and an end to
 the four-shift system in Polish mining, which
 required miners to work seven days without a break
 followed by a two-day rest and then another seven
 days of work.
 Education in Poland is universal and free, but of
 widely varying quality in various parts of the
 country. The adult literacy rate was 98 percent in
 1976. The adjusted primary school enrollment rate in
 1978 was 100 (102 for males and 99 for females).
 University education is more widely available than
 ever before. Admission to higher education
 institutions is on the basis of competitive
 examinations, although instances of political
 favoritism were common. The position of women in the
 economy is generally inferior to that of men, but
 there are wide variations depending on the type of
 work involved. Low salaries and poor working
 conditions in health services, for instance, impact
 particularly on women, who fill a disproportionate
 share of the jobs in this sector.
 Political discrimination, however, is a ubiquitous
 fact of life. Advancement to managerial positions
 was traditionally conditioned on membership in the
 Polish United Workers' Party. The church has long
 claimed that such advancement is denied to its own
 members. Thus, in effect, the most satisfying jobs
 and those which are most remunerative go to party
 members, often to the exclusion of more highly
 qualified persons who do not belong to the party.
 The striking workers in Gdansk demanded an end to
 this system of reserving managerial jobs for party
 members and the government agreed to promotions based
 on merit. Again, it is too soon to make any
 definitive statement on how this agreement will be
 implemented.
 
 
 ADDENDUM
 Poland's progress towards a freer and more open
 society ceased on December 13 when the regime
 initiated martial law throughout the country. There
 is reason to believe that Polish authorities acted
 under strong pressure from the Soviet Union. The
 regime acknowledged a severe curtailment of
 individual freedom in the proclamation issued on
 December 13:  "The introduction of the state of
 martial law causes, among other things, a temporary
 suspension or limitation of the basic rights of
 citizens, defined in the constitution of the Polish
 People's Republic and other laws as well as
 international agreements to which Poland is a
 signatory, and, in particular, personal immunity, the
 inviolability of residences and the secrecy of
 correspondence, the right of association, freedom of
 speech, publications, meetings, rallies, public
 marches and demonstrations."
 Since December 13, the state security organs have
 undertaken a far-reaching and concerted campaign of
 harassment and intimidation against major segments of
 Polish society. Security forces are carrying out a
 harsh punitive effort against members and
 sympathizers of Solidarity. The government has
 admitted to the forcible detention of over 6,000
 persons suspected of hostility towards the regime,
 including most of the national leadership of
 Solidarity. At least 2,000 people have been arrested
 as a result of martial law. Unofficial estimates of
 detentions are much higher. Formal charges have been
 pressed against only a few detainees. They are being
 held for an indefinite period, possibly as long as
 martial law remains in effect. Many of these
 prisoners have not been permitted personal contact or
 correspondence with their families. Representatives
 of the church and other non-official agencies have
 been granted access to some of the 49 detention
 centers reported to be in operation throughout
 Poland. Theseindependent observers have reported
 generally humane conditions in the facilities they
 were able to visit, but there are also reports of far
 worse conditions in those to which observers were
 denied access.
 A process called "verification" has been taking place
 at work places through the country at all leyels of
 the economy. Government officials are demanding that
 workers sign oaths of loyalty to the regime and
 renounce all allegiance to Solidarity. Failure to
 comply normally results in the dismissal from work.
 Church officials, including the Primate, have
 bitterly denounded this practice which makes a
 mockery of the government's professed policy of
 tolerance and conciliation towards Solidarity and its
 members.
 
 
 849
 The regime used force to crush peaceful or passive
 resistance. The authorities have employed tanks,
 small arms, clubs, tear gas, rubber bullets, and
 water cannon to break up non-violent strikes and
 demonstrations. Official statements so far have
 acknowledged nine deaths as a result of government
 suppression of protest actions, but unofficial and
 unconfirmed reports indicate a higher number of
 fatalities. No firm estimates have been made of the
 number of persons injured and wounded in the course
 of government "pacification" actions. The statements
 of the regime's leaders have been filled with
 abhorrence of inflicting death or injury on fellow
 Poles. The decision to implement martial law in the
 first place, they insist, resulted from their
 revulsion at the thought of Polish blood being shed
 in fratricidal strife. It is difficult to reconcile
 such a statement with the employment of special
 heavily armed riot police and elite international
 security troops of the Interior Ministry to quell the
 actions of unarmed workers and students.
 Freedom of Poles to travel inside their own country
 and abroad has largely been curtailed. Before
 martial law, Poles could travel freely inside Poland
 and had relatively ready access to passports for
 travel to the west. Since December 13, they have
 been restricted to their home districts unless they
 obtain special permission from the authorities. The
 government has revoked the passports of all its
 citizens not actually abroad. It has indicated that,
 under martial law, it will issue passports only for
 travel on business or in grave emergencies and to
 persons who have been given permission to emigrate.
 This addendum was completed at a time when an ability
 to analyze the human rights situation in Poland is
 severely limited by martial law restrictions. It is
 therefore preliminary and will be dealt with in
 greater depth in the 1982 human rights report.
 
 
 850
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANT.- UdLItATIUNS ANO LOAN AUTHUKIZATIUNN
 (U.S.FISC'AL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: PULAND
 1979     1980     1981
 
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL...
 LOANS ...............
 GKANTS..............
 A.AID .................
 LOANS:..............
 GRANTS...............
 (SEL.SuPP.ASS1TJ...
 B.FOUO FUR PLACt......
 LOANS ..............
 GRANTS...............
 TITLE I-TOIAL ..........
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS....
 PAY. IN FOR. CuKR.....
 TITLE I-TOTAL .........
 E.RELIEF.EC.OEV E WFP.
 VOL.RELIEH AGENLY...
 C.OTHER ECON. AS.SIST...
 LOANS...............
 GRANTS ..............
 PEACE CORPSo...
 NARCOTICS........
 OTHER.............
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-IOTAL...
 LOANS ...............
 GRANTS...............
 A.MAP GRANTS ..........
 B.CREDIT SALES1-MS....
 C.INTL MIL.EO.TRNG....
 D.TRAN-EXCSS STOCK...
 E.OTHER GRANTS........
 III.TOTAL ECON. & MIL...
 LUANS-.............
 GRANTS...........
 OTHER US LOANS..........       3
 EX--14 BANK LOANS.....
 ALL OTHER..............3J
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTEKNATIONAL A(,
 1979     1980
 TOTAL........      1.7      0.0
 I8RO               0.0      0.0
 IFC                0.0      0.0
 IDA                0.0      0.0
 108                (.0      0.0
 ADB                0.0      0.0
 APDB               0.0      0.0
 UNOP               1.7      0.0
 OTHER-UN           0.0      0.0
 EEC                0.0      0.0
 
 0.0      0.0    47.6
 0.0      0.0    47.6
 0.0      0.0     0.0
 0.0      0.0     0. 0
 0.0      0.0     0.0
 0.0      0.0     0.0
 0.0      0.0     0.00
 0.0      0.0    47.6
 0.0      0.0    47.6
 0.0      0.0     0.0
 0.0      0.0    47.6
 0.0      0.0    47.6
 0.0      0.0     01.0
 0.0      0.0      ). 0
 o.0      0.0     0.0
 0.0      0.0     0.0
 0.0      0.0     0.0
 0.0      0.0     0.0
 0.0      ..0 0i.0o
 0.0      0.0     L. i
 0.0      0.0     0.0
 0.0      0.0     0.0
 0.0      0.0     0.0
 0.0      0.0     6.0
 0.0      0.0     0.0
 0.0      0.0     0.0
 0.0      0.0     0.0
 0.0      0.0     0.0
 0.0      0.0     0.0
 0.0      0.0     0.0
 0.0      0.0    4?. 0
 0.0      0.0    47.6
 0.0      0.0    4 7.6
 0.0      0.0     0.0
 91.7    12.0     0.0
 6.2     31.6     0. 0
 a to.!)  180.4    O.0
 
 ENCIES
 1981     1946-81
 0.2     21.0
 0.0      0.0
 0.0      0.0
 0.0      0.0
 0.0      0.0
 0.0      0.0
 0.0      0.0
 0.2     16.6
 0.0      2.*
 0.0      0.0
 
 
