POLAND
For the second year m a row, the report on Poland provides a fairly complete overview of the hnman rights situation. The consistent improvement in the State Department's reporting may result from increased contacts between the United States and Poland, foUovsing several years of strained relations after the U.S. imposed economic sanctions in response to the establishment of martial law in Poland. With decisions regarding possible economic aid for Poland now approaching, the State Department has made a conmiendable effort to stay abreast of human rights developments. The report contains a few inaccuracies and omissions, however, some of which create an overly favorable portrayal of human rights conditions.
The most serious error in the report appears in the section on arbitrary arrest and detention. The State Department asserts that temporary legislation, which provided for detainees charged with certain offenses to be tried within 48 hours of arrest under special, accelerated procedures, expired on July 1,1988 and was not renewed. In fact, this le^slation, with only slight modifications, was permanently incorporated into the Polish Legal Code by an amendment enacted on June 17,1988. This law, passed with unusual speed, was promulgated despite the vigorous opposition of almost the entire Polish legal community, and the appearance of extensive criticism in the official and unofficial press. This move is the most recent in a series of legislative changes that have made permanent several of the most repressive (and supposedly temporary) measures of the martial-law era and its aftermath.
The report also presents an incomplete picture in asserting that most cases in Poland are tried in open court. The report fails to mention that in the majority of political cases, the courtrooms are routinely packed with plainclothes policemen, with only a few spaces reserved for the defendant's closest relatives. In discussing trials in misdemeanor tribunals — the forum now used in many political cases •• the report fails to note that although the penal-
145
Critique
ties are more lenient than those imposed in the felony courts, the number of political cases tried compared with the period before the 1986 amnesty has increased substantially because cases that previously would not have been deemed serious enough to be tried at all are now dealt with by the misdemeanor tribunals. Although the manmum penalty imposed by these tribunals seems relatively modest in terms of its dollar equivalent — especially because the State Department uses the black-market exchange rate for the dollar ~ that amount is higher than most monthly salaries in Poland. In addition, the report states that there were no confiscations of cars ordered by the misdemeanor tribunals in 1988. According to human rights activists in Poland, several such confiscations occiu-red.
In a few places, the report seems to downplay the seriousness of human rights violations. Little space is devoted to cruel, inhimian or degrading treatment or pimishment. Yet police violence, especially against young and little known activists, was reported frequently in 1988 and it increased dramatically in the fall. The police also used violence against strikers in the April/May strikes and against peaceful demonstrators in early May.
The report acknowledges that an international human rights conference organized by the opposition was allowed to proceed in August without government interference. It does not mention that several of the foreign participants were searched as they were lea\ing Poland and had some material confiscated.
Finally, the report is out of date in referring to the Polish Helsinki Committee as "anonymous." In fact, it published a list of its 12 members in July 1988 and has since operated openly, although mthout official permission.
146
