 POLAND
 For the first time since World War II, Poland is ruled by a
 coalition government led and dominated by non-Communists.
 This far-reaching and fundamental change stemmed from the
 so-called roundtable talks in early 1989 between the Communist
 authorities and the opposition led by Lech Walesa, the leader
 of the Solidarity movement. The agreements reached provided,
 among other things, for legalization of the Solidarity trade
 union, establishment of the post of President of the Republic,
 creation of a freely elected upper house of parliament or
 Senate, partially free elections to the lower house or Sejm,
 permission for the publication of opposition periodicals, the
 easing of censorship, access for the opposition to the
 Communist-controlled radio and television, and an independent'
 judicial system.
 Parliamentary elections in June produced an overwhelming
 Solidarity victory, and General Wojciech Jaruzelski, the
 Communist President, was compelled in September to appoint a
 non-Communist, Tadeusz Mazowiecki, a Solidarity adviser, as
 the first non-Communist Prime Minister to head a Warsaw Pact
 government. This event marked the end of the de facto
 one-party system.
 The Minister of Internal Affairs, a Communist, continued to
 supervise the uniformed police, the powerful security
 apparatus, and the militarized riot police. However, in
 October he announced the dissolution of the riot police, which
 had been responsible for serious human rights violations.
 The new Government inherited an extremely difficult economic
 situation characterized by spiraling inflation, a deepening
 budget deficit, and nagging consumer shortages. In addition,
 the Government must deal with industrial obsolescence, a weak
 infrastructure, bad management, and low labor productivity.
 Its plans include stabilization- measures to rein in inflation
 and longer-term institutional reforms aimed at restructuring
 the centrally planned economy into a market economy and
 encouraging private enterprise.
 The transformation of Polish society includes the lifting of
 many previous restrictions on a citizents right to free speech
 and free assembly. For example, in September the 1939 Soviet
 invasion of Poland was marked by wreathlaying and anti-Soviet
 street demonstrations without police interference. Freedom of
 association is being pursued pending passage of a liberal law
 on associations. Political crimes are. to be eliminated from
 the criminal code. A non-Communist was appointed head of the
 Polish Radio and Television Committee, and censorship was
 significantly reduced.
 In sum, Poland made dramatic progress in human rights in
 1989. In a few months, the.country overturned 40 years of
 domination by the communist party and formed a government
 which is pledged to respect human rights and civil liberties.
 RESPECT FOR HU4AN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing
 No conclusive instances of political killing were reported.
 However, three Catholic priests known for their opposition
 
 
 1210
 POUND
 activity died under suspicious circumstances in the first half
 of 1989. Some Poles fear that security forces acting either
 under orders or unofficially in some kind of vigilante "death-
 squad" operation were responsible for the priests, deaths.
 Preliminary investigations by the police suggest accidental
 circumstances (e.g., fire, burglary), but official
 investigations into these alleged political murders are
 continuing, and a parliamentary committee has been created for
 this purpose.
 b. Disappearance
 Instances of prolonged or permanent disappearance were not
 reported.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 There were no reported allegations of torture during 1989.
 There were a few reported instances of police beating people
 in melees following demonstrations in the first months of
 1989. A particularly violent protest action occurred in
 Krakow in May. Youth activists, staging an anti-Soviet
 demonstration in front of the Soviet Consulate General, began
 pelting the building and the responding police forces with
 bricks, bottles, and stones. The police resorted to heavy use
 of tear gas and water cannon, and a number of demonstrators
 were injured in the clash. However, more recent
 demonstrations and protest actions have met with no police
 resistance.
 The Minister of Internal Affairs in October announced the
 dissolution of the Zomo units, riot police that were most
 closely associated with the martial law crackdown. In its
 place, the Minister plans to establish a special unit of the
 civil militia to perform crowd control and other similar
 activities.
 Demonstrations and riots by inmates of Polish prisons became
 increasingly frequent and violent in 1989. The convicts are
 demanding improved health care and living conditions,
 amendments to the criminal law, and the abolition of the death
 penalty. Solidarity legislators have acted as mediators in
 the ongoing negotiations between the Government and the
 prisoners.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Polish law allows for a 48-hour detention period before the
 authorities are required to bring formal charges. Before the
 signing of the roundtable accords, the detention provision was
 used as a preventative or deterrent measure against prominent
 opposition-activists. Since April, however, this provision
 has not been used in practice and is being reviewed.
 In theory, the law provides that once a prosecutor presents
 the legal basis for a formal investigation, a detainee may be
 held in indefinite !investigatory" or "temporary" arrest until
 an indictment is filed. During this period, access to counsel
 is not guaranteed. Legal provisions for bail are rarely used,
 but suspects, as well as those already convicted, sometimes
 are furloughed for humanitarian reasons.
 Those elements of the Criminal Code that had been used in the
 past for political purposes were the focus of attention at the
 
 
 1211
 POLAND
 roundtable working group set up to negotiate legal and
 judicial reforms. The -roundtable reached agreement on
 eliminating these provisions, but the actual amendment of the
 criminal code was deferred until a later date when a thorough
 redrafting of the code would be possible.
 Polish law contains no provision for forced exile. In 1989
 many prominent opposition leaders traveled to the West and
 returned without incident.
 With regard to forced or compulsory labor, see Section 6.c.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Most cases are tried in open court. The court having
 jurisdiction over a case, however, retains the option of
 closing a trial to the public in some circumstances, such as
 divorce cases and trials in which state secrets may be
 disclosed. Once a f6rmal indictment is filed, the defendant
 is allowed ample time to study the charges and consult with up
 to three.attorneys of his or her choice. A defendant who
 cannot afford to pay is provided an attorney at public
 expense. Once the defendant is prepared, a trial date is
 .set. Defendantsmust be present during the trial and may
 present evidence in their own defense. All are presumed
 innocent until proven guilty.
 The court bf original jurisdiction has 7-days from the date of
 the 6oal.decision in which to prepare a written decision.
 'Under Polish law, defendants have the'right to appeal within
 14'days from the time that the court issues a written
 decision. Appeals may be made on the basis, among other
 grounds, of new evidence, procedural irregularities, or a
 perceived offense against the law.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The Government allegedly no longer monitors mail and telephone
 calls. Postal workers may inspect packages to be mailed
 abroad for customs purposes. The slowness of postal and
 telecommunications services result from an inefficient system
 coupled with a chronic lack of resources rather than from
 direct interference by the Government.
 P6lih citizens are not forced to participate in any political
 organizations.,.The Government. does not interfere with the
 right to marry or to have children as one chooses, nor does it
 prevent the teaching of religion to children at home or in
 churches. In early 1989, some searches without warrants
 ,occurred in violation of.the law requiring warrants.
 The Government.does not jam Western radio broadcasts. More
 and more Western dailies and periodicals are available in
 outlets frequented by tourists, such as hotel kiosks and
 interdtinal eading.rooms.- Pexsonal and-institutional
 subsdriptions'may be ordered but are-limited severely by the
 4vailability of hard currency.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 The Constitution of 1952 provides for freedom of speech.
 Since the signing of the~roundtable accords in April, Polish
 
 
 1212
 POLAND
 citizens have been able to express their opinions publicly or
 privately without restraint. Poles likewise have been openly
 distributing pamphlets and speaking publicly at antigovernment
 and anti-Soviet demonstrations without reprisals.
 The roundtable accords also granted the opposition full access
 to the mass media. While censorship laws thus far remain on
 the books, the Solidarity-led Government has effectively
 narrowed their application. Many of the former underground
 periodicals surfaced with legal publications: 1 month after
 the signing of the accords, for example, a Solidarity daily,
 Gazeta Wyborcza began publication, and a Solidarity weekly,
 Tygodnik Solidarnosc, which was launched in 1981 and closed
 down by martial law , resumed publication. Gazeta Wyborcza
 reaches over 500,000 readers, almost double the circulation of
 the Communist party daily. To compete, party journals have
 begun to carry differing opinions on a variety of issues,
 contributing thereby to an invigorated and vibrant press.
 The current journalistic atmosphere also has fostered open
 discussions in Poland of what has come to be referred to as
 the numerous "blank spots" in Polish history, especially with
 respect to its relations with the Soviet Union. Many
 heretofore taboo episodes in bilateral relations are now being
 debated in journals and newspapers and on the airwaves.
 Both television and radio have taken on a new character, as
 opposition figures regularly appear on the state-run media.
 Under the roundtable agreement, Solidarity's Citizens'
 Committee has guaranteed full access to both television and
 radio. Accordingly, "Studio Solidarnosc," a weekly opposition
 television program, began on May 9. Radio Solidarity
 similarly originated a daily broadcast in May. The newly
 appointed head of the Polish Radio and Television Committee, a
 Solidarity supporter, stated his intention to establish a
 politically independent and pluralist television and radio
 service based on competence, not political affiliation. In
 one of his first steps, he removed three newscasters most
 closely associated with martial law. Moreover, the new
 government spokesman, another opposition activist, declared
 that her role is to provide information, not block it as in
 the past.
 The Main Office for the Control of Press, Publishing, and
 Public Performances continues to exist but has greatly reduced
 its activity in light of legislative changes implemented by
 the roundtable agreement. Formally, the office oversees
 censorship of all media and deletes material which it
 considers libelous or detrimental to national security
 interests. The new Government, however, intends to amend the
 law by eliminating censorship of books, monthlies, and less
 frequently issued periodicals.
 Poland is the home of the only independent university in
 Eastern Europe, the Catholic University of Lublin. Its very
 existence, as well as its extensive ties to institutions and
 persons in the West (it counts Pope John Paul II among former
 faculty members), is-visible evidence of the national and
 religious traditions which still help to shape Polish higher
 education. There are also a number of diocesan seminaries,
 independently administered by the Bishop Ordinary of Poland's
 dioceses.
 Amendments adopted in 1985 to the 1982 Higher Education Law
 increased governmental control over universities and other
 
 
 1213
 POLAND
 college-level institutions. Hence, the Minister of Science,
 HighEr Education, and Technology must approve all candidates
 for university rector and other high offices before their
 names can be submitted to university senates for election.
 The new Government and the new Minister have indicated an
 intention to move rapidly to restore greater autonomy to
 educational institutions. An association that aims to
 establish private schools in Poland successfully registered
 with the courts, and a group of teachers was granted
 permission to found a private high school in Warsaw.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Since April, most groups and associations have been free to
 organize and assemble. Major rallies were held during the
 national electoral campaign, and peaceful demonstrations were
 staged without police interference.
 May Day observances in Warsaw turned into a Solidarity
 election campaign parade and rally, drawing perhaps as many as
 100,000 people. The May Day celebration in Gdansk featured a
 a campaign rally led by Solidarity leader Lech'Walesa.
 Neither of these parades encountered government intervention.
 Many protests by young people also took place. The Freedom
 and Peace Movement held rallies, set up picket lines in front
 of the Parliament building, and staged a 2-week hunger strike
 to press for changes in military service requirements. The
 group also led violent anti-Soviet demonstrations in the
 southern city of Krakow, which resulted in some clashes with
 police and some short detentions. But the most recent
 anti-Soviet demonstrations--those that took place after the
 Solidarity Prime Minister took control of the Government--met
 with no police response.
 Since the signing of the roundtable agreement, the
 opportunities for Poles to engage in political and professional
 association activity are virtually unrestricted. Although
 associations and clubs by law must register with the courts,
 in practice most groups seeking legal status have been
 approved. Among the most significant of Poland's new
 independent associations is the Citizens, Committee, a brain
 trust of Solidarity activists. In June a Warsaw court
 registered the Association of Polish Writers (SPP), which more
 than 500 writers reportedly joined. A week later, the
 Association of Polish Journalists, comprising journalists
 associated with Solidarity, was reestablished. A group
 dedicated to exposing the truth about the massacre at Katyn of
 Polish military officers by the Soviet secret police applied
 for and received legal status, and the Independent Association
 of Students, denied permission in May to register, later won a
 4-month struggle to organize legally.
 Although the roundtable agreement did not resolve the question
 of the legalization of political parties, subsequent events
 rendered the issue moot. Pluralism in the form of competing
 political parties became a fact, and new parties were formed
 or planned. The National Alliance of Trade Unions (OPZZ),
 heretofore affiliated with the Communists, announced its
 intention to form a new party. Rural Solidarity has called
 for the establishment of a new rural-based political party,
 the Polish Peasants' Party-Solidarity, to address more
 specifically the concerns of agriculture-based workers.
 Finally, a group of Catholic activists formed a new political
 
 
 1214
 POADm
 party, the Christian-National Union. The party's organizers
 reportedly enjoy a close relationship with Poland's Primate.
 For a discussion of freedom of association as it applies to
 labor unions, see Section 6.a.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 The Constitution ensures "freedom of conscience and belief,"
 and Polish citizens enjoy freedom to practice their religious
 beliefs. Churches may organize, select and train personnel,
 solicit and receive contributions, publish, and engage in
 consultations with coreligionists without government
 interference. There are no restrictions on establishing and
 maintaining places of worship.
 Poland is predominantly Roman Catholic. The Catholic Church
 maintains over 16,000 churches, schools, and other institutions
 and continues a vigorous program of building new churches. It
 regularly organizes religious gatherings, such as pilgrimages
 and conferences, without interference. It also publishes
 significant numbers of books and periodicals, as does the
 independent Catholic press. Sunday Catholic mass and services
 of other religions are broadcast regularly on the state-run
 radio. In July the Government established diplomatic
 relations with the Vatican after years of negotiations-
 Earlier in the year, negotiations led to a new legal status
 for the Catholic Church, the first such agreement in the Warsaw
 Pact area. The Church has been a stout defender of human
 rights and took an active role in bringing about the historic
 roundtable talks, in which the Church participated as mediator.
 There is no government-sponsored discrimination against
 minority religions.- Eastern Orthodox, Ukrainian Catholic, and
 the much smaller Protestant, Jewish, and Muslim congregations
 meet without interference but find it difficult to maintain
 their places of worship and train their clergy, mainly because
 of their small size, wide dispersion, and limited financial
 resources. Jehovah's Witnesses held an international congress
 in Poland in August, attracting 40,000 delegates from 22
 countries.
 The largest minority is the Orthodox faith, with between
 800,000 and 1.5 million faithful concentrated in Poland's
 eastern provinces. The Orthodox Church maintains 350 places
 of worship and continues to build churches and renovate
 monasteries. It sponsors the publication of a number of books
 and several periodicals and broadcasts its masses on Polish
 radio four times a year. Some Orthodox believers complain of
 Polish ethnic prejudice (most of the Orthodox faithful in
 Poland are of Byelorussian, Ukrainian, or Russian origin).
 World attention focused on Polish-Jewish relations after a
 group of Americans protesting the presence of a Carmelite
 Convent adjacent to the Oswiecim (Auschwitz) death camp
 scuffled with Polish workmen. The June incident gained
 momentum after the Primate of Poland, Cardinal Jozef Glemp,
 delivered a homily at-a religious celebration at Czestochowa
 on August 26, in which he called on the Jews not to look down
 on Poles and not to use their control over mass media to
 inflame anti-Polish feelings. Opinion leaders immediately
 condemned the Cardinal's position; the Solidarity daily
 published a highly critical front-page editorial deploring the
 language and sentiments expressed by the Primate. The Church
 has since confirmed its intention to move the Convent.
 
 1215
 POLAJN
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel,-Emigration, and Repatriation
 Theti are'no legal restrictions on travel within Poland.
 Thei also are no-legal restrictions on changing one's
 resi.ence, but in- practice--the acute housing shortage makes
 this difficult; and in zome areas virtually impossible.
 Althcugh Polish citizens and Legal permanent residents in
 Polard are required to register-with the local police each
 time they .change their piece of residence, this regulation is
 rarely followed and-even more rarely enforced.
 With the 1.iberalization of policies governing passport
 issu ncein July.1987 and again in January 1989, the vast
 maj6oity  f, PoLikh passport applicants now are able to obtain
 passqorts-alid !6r up to 10 years for travel to the West.
 Foreign travel is not restricted,-and it is no longer a
 punishable offense for Polish citizens to remain abroad
 "illegally" after their tourist exit permission has expired.
 .Poled who emigrated on passports issued for tourist travel,
 whether as a tourist or through a refugee camp in Europe, may
 return to Poland with no sanctions or limitations on future
 travel. ,Many Poles who obtained refugee or asylee status
 abroad are now returning to Poland t6 visit family and
 friends, and some are. choosing to remain in Poland.
 As of July 1, 1989, there were no unresolved cases on the list
 of divided families-maintained by the U.S. Embassy.
 Under laws dating back to 1962, only the Council of State may
 revoke citizenshi-p. ; Involuntary revocationmust be based on
 one of..the~following ctivites:- actions violating the duty
 of allegiance to the Polish State; actiofis detrimental to the
 substantial interests of Pohand;-departure from Poland after
 May"9, 1954, and failure to return when so requested by the
 .Polsh-Government; evasion of military service; or conviction
 absoad. ofa crime also recognized as a felony under Polish
 criminal law. The Government rarely revokes citizenship.
 Legislation is being drafted which would revise the statutes
 concrnnag. the accurisiti-on, loss, -nd 'revocation of
 ci'tizenship.
 Section-3 -Respect-for Political Rights: The-Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Poland was mled for more than.40-'years by- the-Polish United
 Workers' (Communist) Party (PZPR)-. Forced-by a series of
 crippling labor strikes in 1988 and a;-rapidly deteriorating
 economy, govefrnment authorities in February met with
 representatives of the opposition to debate questions
 concerning the-uture political, economic, and social
 configuration bf Poland. -The'resulting agreement, signed in
 April, provided for a wide range of measures aimed at creating
 a more-pluralidtic and democratic po-litical.and economic order.
 In the 'political tarea, the opposi-ton obtained the right to
 contest 35 pdrcent of the seats in the lower house or Sejm as
 well as all 100 seats in the resurrected upper house or
 Senate. In the June elections, Solidarity won 99 of the 100
 seats in the Senate and all 161 seats it contested in the Sejm.
 Solidarity's resounding victory at the polls forced a
 ,rersolution of the issues of power sharing and Poland's
 political future. Although the PZPR, together with its
 coalition partners, the United Peasant Party and the Democratic
 
 
 1216
 
 Party, still had a working majority in the Sejm, it quickly
 began to lose control of the political situation. General
 Wojciech Jaruzelski, Communist Party First Secretary since
 1981, stood for the new post of President of the Republic and
 was elected by the Sejm by a margin of one vote. After the
 inability of Jaruzelski's nominee, General Czeslaw Kiszczak,
 the Minister of Internal Affairs, to form a government because
 of the defection of the PZPR's coalition partners to the
 Solidarity side, Jaruzelski nominated Tadeusz Mazowiecki, a
 Solidarity adviser, who was confirmed as Prime Minister.
 Mazowiecki formed a government based on a broad coalition in
 which the PZPR continues to control two vital portfolios, the
 Ministry of Internal Affairs, with authority over the police
 and security apparatus, and the Ministry of Defense, with
 control over the armed forces. Moreover, the PZPR will
 continue to exert influence in the government and throughout
 the bureaucracy through its past control over key
 administrative positions. Free local elections are scheduled
 for the summer of 1990, and free multiparty parliamentary
 elections are anticipated in 1993 at the latest.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights.
 There is no government-controlled or sponsored organization in
 Poland devoted exclusively to human rights issues, although
 there are reports that some are being formed. As yet, no
 independent human rights groups have sought to register with
 the courts.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status.
 There i-s no legally sanctioned discrimination against women,
 and women's rights have not become a major public issue in
 Poland. Spouse abuse is a criminal offense; reported
 incidents are often attributed to alcoholism. Persons
 convicted of spouse abuse are subject to imprisonment from 6
 months to 5 years. As spouse abuse is not discussed openly,
 and most women do not report such incidents to the police, the
 extent to which it occurs is not known.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 The roundtable agreement, implemented by the Act of April 7
 amending the Trade Union Act of 1982, cleared the way for Poles
 to be represented by trade unions or professional associations
 of their choice by agreeing to eliminate laws that conflict
 with International Labor Organization (ILO) conventions,
 particularly 87 and 98 regarding basic trade union rights.
 However, many laws infringing on ILO conventions, including
 the law on compulsory labor, have not yet been repealed. The
 Mazowiecki Government, in cooperation with Solidarity deputies
 in the Polish Parliament, has begun preparation of new labor
 legislation including a draft labor code.
 After more than 6 years of illegal status, the Independent
 Self-Governing Trade Union Solidarity was registered on April
 20. Affiliated with the International Confederation of Free
 Trade Unions and the World Confederation of Labor, Solidarity
 currently has a membership of 2.2 million, compared to 9.5
 million members in 1981 before martial law. The Communist-
 
 
 1217
 POLAND
 inspired trade union organized in 1982, the National Alliance
 of Trade Unions (OPZZ), is affiliated with the Communist-
 controlled World Federation of Trade Unions. As heir to
 traditional state-sponsored unions, the OPZZ "owns" or controls
 state assets and allocates benefits and perquisites, including
 vacations, sanatoria visits, and, in many regions, preferential
 access to housing; it claims 6.5 million members,
 approximately 3 million of whom are white-collar administrators
 and pensioners. .The Trade Union Act of April 7, 1989,
 abolishes restrictions on the establishment and functioning of
 trade unions, especially the limit of one union per enterprise.
 In addition, the law: ensures the equality of all unions;
 grants the freedom to choose the principles of union structure,
 including the right to establish unions on a territorial basis;
 establishes principles of cooperation between unions in matters
 related to the representation of workers' individual and
 collective rights and interests vis-a-vis management and the
 organs of workers' self-management. A law adopted on the same
 day implements constitutional guarantees of equal rights of
 all citizens to participate in the public life of the
 country. The May 29 amnesty annulled convictions related to
 strikes or protests occurring after August 31, 1980.
 A number of "illegal" strikes occurred in 1989, largely to
 protest deteriorating living standards and to press wage
 demands, but also to protest.unsafe working conditions. The
 Communist Government's policy of allowing state firms to set
 prices, thereby dramatically increasing food prices in August,
 met with strikes in the transportation service, shipyards,
 steel mills, and mining, among other industries. For the most
 part, demands for increased wages were met.
 b. The Right to Organize and pargain Collectively
 An amendment to the Labor Code which came into force in 1987
 and is still on the books, enshrines the right to collective
 bargaining at the industry.level and the right to conclude
 wage agreements at the enterprise level, but in the context of
 a planned*Socialist economy. According to this system,
 collective agreements had to be submitted to the Ministry of
 Labor, Wages, and Social Affairs for registration in order to
 ensure that their contents were in conformity.with the 5-year
 nat pnal socioeconomic plan adopted by the Sejm. If they were
 not, the dispute was submitted to arbitration by the Supreme
 Court, or, at the request of one Qf the parties to the
 agreement, to arbitration by a mixed commission of government
 and trade union representatives. -This issue, among others
 involving freedom of association, has been under review by
 supervisory bodies of the ILO for a number of yeais. In its
 1989 report, the ILO Committee of Experts requested the
 Government to clarify the current status of the centralized
 wage policy and the requirements to register negotiated wage
 schedules, which had been the subject of longstanding
 allegations of government interference in the collective
 bargaining process, in violation of Convention 98 on
 colleftive bargaining.
 Polish wage.levels have been calculated according to a very
 complex formula based on a theoretical base wage, extensive
 bonuses and overtime, and production quotas. Specific
 industrial sectbrs and enterprises are increasingly expected
 to accept responsibility for setting wage levels. Throughout
 1989 wage tables were generally negotiated at the enterprise
 or sectoral level--instead of through a national plan.
 
 
 1218
 POLANDQ
 In keeping with the roundtable agreement, the new Polish
 Parliament passed legislation in July 1989 requiring state and
 private firms to index wage levels to offset increases in
 retail prices. The formula for calculating indexation assured
 that workers were compensated for at least 80 percent of the
 inflation rate for the relevant period. During the strikes in
 August, the Rakowski Government met with leaders of both
 Solidarity and the OPZZ union to reach wage agreements. The
 Mazowiecki Government amended the indexation law in October to
 provide for monthly rather than quarterly compensation, but
 wage adjustments were not to exceed the inflation rate.
 Polish law provides guarantees against antiunion
 discrimination, backed by civil and penal sanctions. However,
 ILO supervisory bodies criticized and queried the Government
 in 1988 and 1989 regarding job dismissals on grounds related
 to participation in social activities or acts of protest
 against the authorities and also with respect to difficulties
 encountered by interned, arrested, or sentenced Solidarity
 trade unionists, who were subsequently amnestied, in finding
 employment. In May 1989, as a result of the roundtable
 agreement, an Act was adopted which provides that such persons
 may apply to establishments which had dismissed them for
 reemployment in accordance with their skills and professional
 experience. Under the Act, all workers whose employment was
 terminated after December 13, 1981, due to their trade union
 activity carried on in contradiction with the then-existing
 laws are ensured continuity of employment regardless of
 whether they return to the previous enterprise or not.
 There are no special economic incentive areas or export
 processing zones in Poland as yet, but their establishment is
 under consideration by the new Government.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 Under legislation dating from the early 1980's, persons who
 are registered as unemployed and who refuse to seek employment
 without adequate justification, may be listed as "habitual
 parasites" and compelled to accept assigned employment,
 usually in street cleaning, park maintenance, or garbage
 collection, under threat of penal sanction. Sanctions under
 this law have not been implemented in the current political
 climate. Moreover, the law has never specifically been
 applied as a means of political coercion, curtailment of the
 free expression of political or ideological opinions, or
 racial or social discrimination. The new Government plans to
 review the law.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 The labor code generally forbids the employment of a person
 who has not reached the age of 15. The employment of a young
 person, defined as someone aged 15 to 18, is permitted,
 provided that person has completed basic schooling- Special
 exceptions sometimes are required if a particular job might
 pose a health danger. The labor code specifies that a young
 person without professional qualifications may be employed
 only for the purpose of vocational preparation, although again
 there is provision for special exceptions. These laws are
 enforced effectively.
 
 
 1219
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 A 6-day workweek was introduced at the end of 1985, canceling
 the 5-day workweek which was conceded to Solidarity in
 principle in 1981 but never implemented. In practice, most
 families find that both the husband and wife must be employed
 in order to sustain an acceptable standard of living. In 1989
 the base wage, used primarily for statistical purposes, was
 about $20 to $35 per month. The structure of the wage scale
 throughout Polish industry, however, is a major irritant to
 workers. Polish workers earn most bf their pay from overtime
 and bonuses (basic pay is approximately only 30 to 50 percent
 of average pay), thereby increasing pressure on workers to
 work overtime to keep pace with inflation. As a result, less'
 than'10 percent of workers work as few as 8 hours per day.
 Indeed, where employment is deemed the most unsafe--in the
 coal mining-industry,1for example--workers generally work more
 than 10-hours per daytand.6 days a week.
 The Polish legal code spells out minimum conditions for the
 protection of workers' health and safety, and the Council of
 Safety at Work was set up in May. Although in-most respects
 these standardt meet the international norm, several Western
 and other independent observers reported substandard safety
 conditions and work environments, most' notably in the mining
 sector. The -Social Labor Inspectorate (SLI), the compliance
 arm of the Government, is empoweidd to monitor the
 implementation of collective agreements and insure that
 regulations concerning safety and the employment of women and
 children are followed. Both the Council of Safety at Work and
 the SLI are frequently criticized for a lack of efficiency and
 being.too close to management; its representatives have been
 appointed by state and party authorities.
 
 
 1220
