 POLAND
 
 Poland's Communist government is modeled on the lines of other
 Warsaw Pact states, and the exercise of most civil and political
 rights is therefore closely regulated by the authorities. Over
 the past two years, the ruling group--composed of top layers of
 the Communist party, the military establishment, civil
 administrators, the security apparatus, and others--has shown its
 will and ability to maintain its power to prevent the growth of
 independent organizations that might challenge it by seeking
 broader participation in the running of the country. The free
 trade union Solidarity remains banned, and other professional
 organizations and unions (including those of writers,
 journalists, and filmmakers) have been dissolved, harassed, or
 reorganized. At the same time, reflecting the nation's history
 and traditions, some of the institutions of Polish
 society--especially the Roman Catholic Church--have been able to
 preserve a greater measure of autonomy (and in rare cases to
 increase it) than in any other East European country.
 With the lifting of martial law on July 22, 1983, Poland formally
 returned to civilian rule although authority apparently remains
 in the same hands. The Military Council of National Salvation
 dissolved itself and returned the Government to the Council of
 Ministers and the Council of State. General Jaruzelski remains
 not only the Premier and First Secretary of the Polish United
 Workers (Communist) Party but, since November 1983, he also
 serves as Supreme Commander of the Armed Forces in his newly
 acquired position as Chairman of the National Defense Committee.
 Authority appears to derive from Jaruzelski's key positions in
 the military, party, and government. The national police
 (MO-Milicja Obywatelska), the riot police (Zomo), and the
 security service (SB-Sluzba Bezpieczenstwa), remain vital
 instruments in imposing control.
 While the economic system is based upon central control over
 resource management, production, and distribution, some efforts
 have been made at greater decentralization and diversification in
 economic decision-making and ownership of economic resources.
 Furthermore, the country has a strong private agricultural
 sector. The right to private property and land ownership is
 permitted and private small crafts and businesses can be
 organized under certain conditions. These rights exist in the
 face of substantial economic difficulties, including large debts
 to Western creditors.
 With the declaration of martial law on December 13, 1981, the
 Polish Government imposed strict curfews and deployed military
 and police forces in key areas around the country. It suspended
 all labor union activity, and imposed restrictions on
 communications, photography, publication, foreign and domestic
 travel, assembly, and access to diplomatic establishments. It
 also militarized workplaces in essential industries and
 communications, and cancelled military discharges and leaves.
 After approximately three months, some of these restrictions were
 loosened--telephone and telex services were restored, curfews
 lifted, internal travel permitted as before and foreign travel
 restrictions eased. Most newspapers gradually resumed
 publication. With the suspension of martial law in December
 1982, the following areas returned essentially to their
 pre-martial law status: internal travel, movement and residence
 in border areas, possession of personal identification cards, use
 of insignia and uniforms which had been banned under martial law,
 
 (1060)
 
 
 1061
 overt monitoring of telephones and censorship of mail, newspapers
 and other mass media, regulations on photography, the possession
 of arms and ammunition, public assemblies, military service,
 access for Poles to Western embassies, and mobility of Western
 diplomats. Changes were made in the role of the Military Council
 of National Salvation and in militarization of workplaces, and
 restrictions on hard currency were loosened. The practice of
 internment was discontinued, and government-controlled trade
 unions were established. All previously existing unions,
 including Solidarity, were dissolved in October 1982, and the new
 regulations maintained the legal ban on previous unions.
 The formal end of martial law in July 1983 saw the dissolution of
 the Military Council, which General Jaruzelski had headed. It
 did not bring a dramatic improvement in personal freedom, since
 most of the martial law restrictions had been lifted earlier.
 Other martial law restrictions were included as statutes in the
 legislative package which ended martial law, while some new
 restrictions were adopted. These various restrictions currently
 include: limitations on the right of workers to organize unions
 freely and to change jobs, the right of students to organize, and
 the power of university faculties to administer their
 universities, as well as varying types of censorship of mass
 media, books, and films. Some of the restrictions are permanent,
 others are due to expire by the end of 1985.
 Despite the current restrictions, Poles retain a degree of
 freedom of expression. Thus, the country's theater and cabaret
 are guardedly critical of the system, limited discussion of the
 party's role and economic issues appears in the press, and
 historically independent universities continue to be shelters of
 some dissent even in the face of restrictive laws. The Roman
 Catholic Church, the most powerful institution independent of
 state control in Poland, fosters human rights and spiritual
 concerns. The suppression of Solidarity has further enhanced the
 influence of the Church, which couches its criticism of the
 Government in moral rather than political terms.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a.   Unlawful or Arbitrary Deprivation of Life
 There have been two instances of death caused by official
 personnel acting against unarmed civilians in the past year and a
 half. In October 1982 a twenty year old electrician was shot
 during a day of demonstrations in Nowa Huta, although apparently
 not during an actual demonstration. There have been no public
 proceedings against the security official who reportedly shot
 him. In May 1983, a young Warsaw student, Grzegorz Przemyk, was
 taken into militia custody and reportedly beaten, then taken by
 ambulance to a hospital and possibly beaten further in the
 ambulance. Less than 48 hours later he died. Six persons
 involved in Przemyk's death have been indicted. The unusual
 investigation into the case has received much publicity in Poland.
 b.   Disappearance
 No known cases of disappearance occurred in 1983.
 
 
 1062
 c.   Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 Torture is forbidden by the Polish penal code. There have,
 however, been reports of beatings and other mistreatment at the
 hands of the militia or security personnel. Limited access by
 third parties to prisoners and places of detention makes
 verifying individual reports difficult, but there is no doubt
 that such incidents have occurred. Poor conditions also exist in
 some prisons. There have been some reports of inadequate medical
 attention to prisoners, but it is unclear whether such incidents
 were deliberately caused or are the result of an inadequately
 supplied medical system. There have been cases in which
 prisoners have been furloughed in order to obtain medical care
 and even to care for an ill family member. Beatings, sprayings
 by water cannon, and similar behavior on the part of the militia
 and Zomo during anti-government demonstrations have occurred.
 The number of such incidents has decreased significantly during
 1983, reflecting the parallel decrease in the number of public
 demonstrations.
 d.   Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 The number of political prisoners held during and after the
 martial law period is a controversial question because of
 problems of definition of the term political prisoner and the
 difficulty of verifying official Polish Government figures.
 Various independent sources within Poland have asserted
 throughout the martial law period and its aftermath that there
 have been more political prisoners behind bars than the Polish
 authorities admit. Other independent sources have indicated
 general agreement with official figures. All sources confirm a
 sharp downward trend. Estimates of the number of people interned
 during martial law range from 10,000 (Polish Government) to
 40,000 (underground Solidarity). According to the Polish
 Government, a maximum of 5,000-6,000 people were interned at any
 one time. With the suspension of martial law in December 1982,
 the internment phase ended. Less than a thousand (official
 government figures) remained under arrest or serving sentences at
 the turn of 1983.
 A partial amnesty declared when martial law was formally ended in
 July 1983, valid, with extensions, until the end of 1983, led to
 release of certain categories of prisoners serving sentences of
 less than three years while halving the prison terms of those
 sentenced for more than three years. In addition, those not
 arrested or convicted of crimes committed during martial law were
 made exempt from punishment if they came forward and confessed
 their crimes. Amnesty is revoked, however, if a person granted
 amnesty commits a deliberate offense before December 31, 1985,
 similar to the one for which he received a prison sentence.
 According to the Minister of Justice, amnesty "benefited" 3,068
 political offenders and about 11,000 people sentenced for other
 types of crimes.
 A recent Government statement (December 5, 1983) on political
 prisoners said that there were 217 political prisoners in Poland,
 including 42 not covered by terms of the amnesty, 41 serving out
 halved sentences, and 134 arrested or convicted of post-martial
 law offenses. The International Confederation of Free Trade
 Unions (ICFTU) recently stated that it has a list containing the
 names of some 300 trade unionists still in prison. The numbers
 of political prisoners fluctuate as some prisoners are released
 and other individuals are arrested. Among political prisoners
 
 
 1063
 released between June and August 1983 were mathematician Ryszard
 Herczynski, Solidarity spokesman Janusz Onyszkiewicz, and
 Solidarity advisor Bronislaw Geremek. Most of the prominent
 prisoners in December 1982, such as the Committee for Defense of
 Workers (KOR/KSS) and Solidarity Seven prisoners, had, however,
 not been released by the end of 1983.
 With the release of internees in December 1982 the practice of
 indefinite internment ended. Polish law allows for a 48 hour
 detention period before charges must be presented to the
 detainee. After the legal basis for an investigation is made
 known to the detainee, he can then be held under "investigatory!'
 or "temporary" arrest with no time limit. During this period
 access to an attorney or other visitors is not guaranteed. Once
 an indictment is presented, as much time as is needed to study
 the indictment is granted the defendant, as is the right to
 consult with an attorney of his choice. Only after the defendant
 expresses his readiness is a trial date set. The law does not
 have provisions for bail, but a suspect can be furloughed for
 humanitarian or even educational reasons (as can prisoners).
 Forty-eight hour detentions have been used by the authorities
 before significant anniversary dates (e.g., May 3, the
 anniversary of the Polish Constitution of 1791; August 31, the
 date of the signing of the Gdansk Agreement in 1980) and in
 connection with the Papal visit. In 1982 on several occasions,
 the Government used military reserve call-ups to send Solidarity
 activists to military camps. There is no evidence that this
 device was used in 1983 to neutralize opposition to the regime.
 The Government is continuing the practice of offering emigration
 passports to politically "inconvenient" persons--mostly to former
 internees and Solidarity activists. While maintaining Polish
 citizenship, these persons are often subject to strong pressure
 to emigrate from Poland. Only one case of forced exile was
 reported in 1983, however--an academic and translator associated
 with Solidarity--who was actually stripped of Polish citizenship
 and told to leave Poland within four days.
 A "parasite" (or work shirkers) law was passed in October 1982,
 and included in the omnibus bill of July 21, 1983. The law
 requires compulsory registration of males between the ages of 18
 and 45 who have been unemployed for three months. Failure to
 register or to perform the assigned work on public projects is
 subject to up to one year of imprisonment involving labor.  The
 law provides penalties which are tough in most cases--e.g.,
 requirement that taxes be paid on the "invisible means of
 support," confiscation of ration cards, or possible loss of
 housing. According to official figures released on September 20,
 1983 30,000 men were registered as unemployed under the law and
 20,000 of them did join the workforce. Only 800 refused work
 after meeting with appropriate administrative organs. There have
 been no reported convictions under this law, which also allows
 certain groups (e.g., invalids, those caring for minors or
 disabled family members) to remain unemployed and collect various
 support payments. Despite initial concerns that it might be so
 employed, this law does not appear to have been used to punish
 politically "inconvenient" persons, although it may have had an
 intimidating effect. The law seems to be aimed primarily at two
 groups: those with large illegal incomes (speculators and
 persons supported from abroad) and those who have "dropped out"
 of the system. It does not appear to have been used against
 politically unemployable individuals.
 
 30-231 0 - 84 - 68
 
 
 1064
 e.   Denial of Fair Public Trial
 During the first year of martial law, the process of internment
 denied fair, public trials to thousands who were detained without
 charges. However, virtually all internees were released by the
 end of 1982. Summary tribunals early in the martial law period
 assessed penalties not subject to appeal for martial law
 offenses. Both military and civilian courts heard cases in this
 period with considerable resistance shown in some civilian courts
 to Government pressures on certain cases. With the suspension of
 martial law in December 1982, emphasis was gradually shifted from
 military to civilian courts for the trying of cases related to
 alleged martial law offenses. The ending of martial law in July
 1983 marked a further decrease of such cases in military courts,
 although the cases begun earlier in military courts evidently
 have remained in their jurisdiction for completion. (See section
 l-d regarding numbers of political prisoners.)
 Dozens of Solidarity activists were tried in 1983 for political
 offenses. There was some, although limited, access by public
 observers, including Western representatives. Well known
 Solidarity activist Anna Walentynowicz received a suspended
 sentence and was released. However, Walentynowicz, Kazimierz
 Switon, and Stanislaw Wygleda, were detained on December 4, 1983
 in Katowice for trying to place a plaque in memory of miners
 killed shortly after the imposition of martial law. There has
 been no report of their release. A majority of the Solidarity
 activists, particularly those without a national following,
 received sentences of less than two years which were frequently
 suspended. Wladyslaw Frasyniuk, head of the Wroclaw regional
 chapter of Solidarity, received a seven year sentence which the
 amnesty bill halved. Edmund Baluka, a leader of strikes that
 toppled the Gomulka government in 1970, was sentenced to five
 years for "attempt at forcible overthrow of the Government" and
 is not eligible for amnesty according to a government spokesman.
 Two groups of defendants (four leaders from the Committee for
 Defense of Workers: Jacek Kuron, Adam Michnik, Henryk Wujec, and
 Zbigniew Romaszewski; and seven from the Solidarity leadership:
 Andrzej Gwiazda, Seweryn Jaworski, Karol Modzelewski, Grzegorz
 Palka, Andrzej Rozplochowski, Marian Jurczyk, Jan Rulewski) are
 under arrest and awaiting trial. Indictments were filed and
 publicly announced in 1983 against the Committee defendants and
 against the Solidarity Seven in the Warsaw region military
 court. The original charges against the two sets of defendants
 carried a possible death sentence but charges against both have
 been reduced. If the trials take place, and convictions are
 obtained, possible sentences range from one to ten years in
 jail. No trial dates have been set. A Government spokesman
 indicated in November 1983 that these eleven defendants could
 have charges dropped and be released if they agreed to go
 voluntarily into exile for an unspecified period. In addition,
 trials of several hundred government figures (at various levels)
 were reported in a January 1983 statement by the authorities. Of
 six top government officials from the Gierek era in the 1970's
 under investigation, a parliamentary commission proposed that two
 be tried but found no legal basis for recommending a trial of the
 other four. No trial has so far been started in this case.
 f.   Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 With suspension of martial law in December 1982 the announced,
 overt censorship of mail and monitoring of telephone
 
 
 1065
 conversations ceased.  The authorities ended the practice of
 playing a tape recording when telephone calls were placed stating
 that the conversation was being monitored. Also ended was the
 practice of stamping letters with a note stating the date of
 censorship of the correspondence in question. However, it is
 widely assumed that mail and telephones are still selectively
 monitored. Packages mailed from abroad via international mails
 sometimes arrive in Poland with only partial contents. Any
 package that a Pole may wish to mail abroad has to be assembled
 at the post office in the presence of a customs official or
 postal worker.
 The Government does not interfere with the right to marry or have
 children as one chooses. No forced resettlement of populations
 has occurred in Poland in the reporting period. Although
 membership in the Party is advisable for those who wish to pursue
 careers in certain fields, particularly in government, forced
 membership in a political organization is not prevalent in Poland.
 As previously reported, warrantless searches of homes and offices
 and confiscation of personal documents and personal property had
 occurred before and during martial law and are continuing. In
 May 1983, several men--evidently plainclothes police--entered the
 Church aid office of St. Martin's Church in Warsaw, disrupting
 the office and manhandling several people present. The Church
 protested this action to the Polish Government.
 Section 2   Respect for Civil Rights, Including:
 a.   Freedom of Speech and Press
 Press censorship is practiced and many articles are self-censored
 before they reach official eyes--in order to gain publication
 rather than to avoid specific reprisals. Even many
 "establishment" journalists privately but freely discuss the
 process, e.g., noting the number of lines removed from a given
 piece. Radio, television, and publishing houses are state-owned,
 as are most newspapers and journals. There are restraints, and
 the controversial articles which appear are often the result of
 prolonged bargaining with the censors. The underground press
 remains active despite government attempts to suppress its
 activities. In some cases underground publishing houses are able
 to turn out a finished book, professionally done, in a much
 shorter time than it takes the state publishing firms.
 Approximately 75-80 percent of Voice of America Polish service
 shortwave broadcasts continued to be jammed, but medium wave
 broadcasts and English-language service have not been jammed and
 one can hear them on car radios. Eighty percent of Polish Radio
 Free Europe broadcasts were also jammed.
 Although not as open as during the Solidarity era, the Polish
 press is still the least controlled among Warsaw Pact countries.
 While following the approved Government line on international
 issues, and attacking Voice of America (VOA) and Radio Free
 Europe (RFE), the press continues to be a forum for some lively
 debate on certain domestic issues. Long articles, appearing in
 periodicals such as the independent Catholic weekly Tygodnik
 Powszechny, the Government cultural weekly Tu I Teraz, and the
 "liberal" party weekly Polityka, present contending views on
 economic reform, certain aspects of public policy and cadre
 matters, the extent of dialogue with various spheres of society,
 the role of the Church, and administrative reforms such as the
 proposed territorial self-management councils. Well-known
 
 
 1066
 officials and journalists participate in these vigorous
 discussions. Many journalists dismissed after "verification" for
 political orthodoxy, or who resigned in protest over martial law,
 are now active in small-circulation periodicals. Government
 authorities attempt to retain tight control over the most
 influential print and electronic media. They have not succeeded
 in much of the print media, however, and often have to be
 satisfied with an absence of criticism as opposed to enthusiastic
 backing.
 Post-martial law legislation empowers local and national
 authorities to increase substantially their power over
 universities. This legislation, if enforced, could significantly
 curb freedom of inquiry at Polish institutes of higher learning.
 The Government's control over education was increased through the
 July 21 measures which gave Cabinet members the right to suspend
 university senates, councils and other collegial bodies and
 allowed ministers to fire deans, rectors and institute directors,
 as well as authorizing them to dismiss faculty members;
 authorized only those student associations and organizations
 which already exist; authorized Cabinet ministers and rectors to
 suspend or remove students for abuses of public order or for
 actions against the interests of the state; gave to provincial
 governors the right to fire, transfer, or suspend primary and
 secondary school teachers for abuses of public order.
 b.   Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Freedom of association is severely limited in Poland. Every
 association or club needs either official permission or
 sponsorship. The Solidarity union, which had contained millions
 of members, has, like many other organizations, been banned.
 Since the end of martial law, some organizations, including
 Catholic intelligentsia clubs in 37 cities, have obtained
 permission to resume activities. Professional associations that
 achieved a considerable degree of independence during the
 Solidarity era such as the Writers' Union were disbanded and
 replaced by organizations more subservient to the Government.
 These associations must be registered with the courts, which in
 some cases have refused to grant legal recognition to an
 association or union because its charter did not conform to the
 statutes of October 1982.
 In that month the Government passed a law delegalizing existing
 labor unions, including Solidarity, and organized new labor
 unions, largely under government control, to replace them. The
 law stipulates that in 1983 unions could be formed at the
 enterprise (factory, shop, or some other single unit of business)
 level only, while in 1984 the unions could form federations of
 unions within single professional groups (e.g., factory unions of
 steel workers can federate only with each other, not with any
 other skill or profession). This process, however, has been
 speeded up, with over 30 federations already registered by the
 fall of 1983. These new unions are in theory supposed to
 represent the workers in matters affecting conditions of work and
 "social matters," e.g., allocation of spaces in factory resorts,
 and fair distribution of appliances or household furnishings
 allocated to the factory's workers.
 The unions' right to strike theoretically exists but is severely
 limited and subject to criminal punishment if abused. Political
 activity by trade unions is specifically forbidden by law. The
 right to collective bargaining for wages and improved working
 conditions has been considerably restricted since the prohibition
 of Solidarity.
 
 
 1067
 So far, the officially-sponsored unions reportedly have over
 three million members--far short of the Solidarity membership of
 10 million before martial law. A significant percentage of the
 total union membership appears to be composed of retirees.
 Efforts have been made both to encourage and coerce membership in
 the new unions through the use of employment incentives such as
 promotions, access to day care centers, factory-owned resorts,
 reduced rates on merchandise and access to scarce goods.
 Moreover, there is evidence that some workers released from
 internment or imprisonment are being denied the right to return
 to their previous place of employment or demoted to lower paying
 or lower skill jobs. Past involvement in Solidarity activities
 deters management from hiring an applicant, thus curtailing
 worker mobility and possibilities for union activity.
 Since the lifting of martial law, there is also evidence that
 workers, particularly ex-internees or imprisoned workers,
 continue to be dismissed from their jobs for reason of their
 previous or continued association with Solidarity. The
 Government has stated that it is withdrawing from active
 participation in the International Labor Organization because of
 the ILO's investigation into charges that the Polish Government
 has contravened the spirit and letter of ILO Conventions 87 and
 98 concerning the workers' basic right to form and maintain free
 trade unions.
 Cultural associations and professional organizations have
 suffered much the same fate as trade unions, with the dissolution
 of the most "troublesome" and independent-minded
 associations--the Polish Writers' Union in August 1983, the
 Plastic Artists' Union in June 1983, and the Actors' Union in
 December 1982. "Troublesome" directors, producers, and
 screenwriters have been purged from the ranks of the filmmakers'
 union. These government actions were usually accompanied by
 sharp press attacks on both the association and individual
 members. An exception to the general rule of suppression of
 independent minded organizations has been the relative tolerance
 of the Catholic intelligentsia clubs, which had been suspended
 during martial law. Some 37 of the 51 previously existing clubs
 have been given permission to resume activities and serve again
 as relatively open forums for the discussion of current issues.
 c.   Freedom of Religion
 Poland is overwhelmingly a Roman Catholic country and enjoys more
 freedom of religion than any other Communist-ruled East European
 country. Church-state relations continue to show aspects of
 cooperation. For example, the Papal visit demonstrated close
 cooperation between the Government and the Roman Catholic Church
 on the management of the visit. The Pope was seen in person by
 approximately one-third of Poland's population without
 significant incidents of violence or public disturbance. The
 security forces did not respond to Solidarity chants and slogans
 and other anti-Government sentiments. There was extensive live
 radio and television coverage of the Pope's entire visit, as well
 as broad coverage in the press. Some papal speeches were
 initially censored, but after some weeks all were printed, even
 those critical of the Government.
 Church-state discussions over the past year have included the
 possible restoration of diplomatic relations between Poland and
 the Vatican, legalization of the status of the Church in Poland,
 and a proposed Church-sponsored fund to channel Western aid to
 private agriculture. The Church seems to have had some influence
 upon the legislation lifting martial law and granting amnesty.
 
 
 1068
 Church sermons and letters from the Episcopate still echo calls
 by the Primate and the Episcopate for greater individual freedom
 and respect for human rights. A specific complaint issued by the
 Church has concerned the Government's removal of crosses placed
 in schoolrooms and factory halls by lay Catholics during the
 Solidarity period. The Government responded that the Polish
 Constitution specifies separation between Church and state. The
 Government said, however, that it has no intention of removing
 traditional religious items such as chapels in mines, or roadside
 icons. The Polish press has published a number of articles
 attacking what it sees as direct Church involvement in politics.
 At least four politically active priests are under police
 investigation for alleged abuse of religious freedom. At the
 same time, the army has a chaplaincy, soldiers are guaranteed by
 law freedom to practice their religion, substantial Church
 construction continues, a postage stamp has just been issued
 bearing the portrait of the Pope, and Sunday mass is still
 broadcast on Polish radio--one of the few gains still left from
 the Solidarity era.
 The situation for minority religions in Poland is considerably
 more difficult. The extremely small Jewish, Muslim, Orthodox,
 Uniate, and various Protestant congregations lack the means to
 train an adequate number of clergy. Furthermore, as is the case
 with the Roman Catholic Church, censorship and shortages of paper
 restrict their ability to publish. Government permission is
 required to build places of worship.
 d.   Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel,
 Emigration, and Repatriation
 There are no restrictions on travel within the country, although
 each person intending to stay more than one day outside his
 normal place of residence (e.g., spending a vacation at a resort)
 is supposed to register with the local militia. This can be done
 in person or by the hotel or hosts. There are no legal
 restrictions on changing one's residence, but the housing
 shortage makes this-nearly impossible in practice. Cases of
 persons working in one location and legally "residing" hundreds
 of kilometers away are not uncommon. The law of July 21, 1983
 permits a plant manager in an "essential industry" (in all, about
 2,000 enterprises) to prolong by six months the employment of any
 worker who gives notice to terminate employment and sets up
 compulsory labor exchanges which provide the basis for
 restricting the mobility of workers connected with the dissolved
 Solidarity union or involved in new trade union activities
 considered undesirable by the State. In conjunction with the
 lifting of martial law, the Government announced a policy of
 liberalized passport issuance.
 Passport offices must now accept all applications for passports
 and give written reasons for any denials of issuance, a
 significant improvement from previous times when the offices
 simply refused to accept applications. However, the authorities
 still require a notarized invitation from a relative or friend
 outside of Poland before passport issuance can be considered for
 individual travel to the West. There are also restrictions on
 the amount of hard currency that a Pole may take out of Poland.
 A passport must be returned after completion of travel and a new
 application submitted for each trip abroad.
 In order to receive an emigration passport, a Pole must divest
 himself of all property and obtain customs permission for any
 personal items which he wishes to take. An emigration passport
 
 
 1069
 must be exchanged for a consular passport (one issued by a Polish
 Consulate abroad) for return trips to Poland. Otherwise there
 are no formal restrictions on an emigrant's return to Poland. In
 at least two cases, the Government took no action against
 refugees who returned to assist their families in leaving
 Poland.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to
 Change Their Government
 General Jaruzelski governs the country along with his close
 advisors including trusted colleagues from the Polish United
 Workers' (Communist) Party, technocrats, military, and security
 personnel. The population at large has no institutionalized role
 in politics. The Military Council of National Salvation
 dissolved itself with the ending of martial law, but the military
 continues to have unusually strong influence. Although
 technically the Polish United Workers' Party shares power with
 two other parties, the United Peasants' Party and the Democratic
 Party, in fact the latter two are dominated by the former. The
 Constitution names the Sejm (Polish parliament) as the chief
 legislative body of the country. While in practice the Sejm
 approves bills presented to it by the executive with only token
 dissent, occasionally a substantial minority of opposition votes
 has been recorded, usually on economic issues, since 1980.
 Although Sejm elections to be held in 1984 have been indefinitely
 postponed, in the past the procedures adopted for Sejm elections
 assured the party of a majority of seats. The Polish Government
 claims that 99 percent of the population participates in
 elections (to the Sejm as well as to local administrative
 bodies), but the ballot contains only the Government-approved
 slate. Until 1980 the top levels of the party selected
 lower-ranking officials. For a brief period (1980-81) there was
 significant debate within the party and genuine elections with
 split votes in some party bodies took place.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Non-governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 Although the Government participates in the CSCE process, it
 generally maintains that foreign human rights investigations of
 Poland are interference in Poland's internal affairs. The
 current International Labor Organization investigation may be a
 valuable litmus test of the Government's attitude in this regard
 but to date no evidence has been made public of Polish Government
 cooperation with the ILO Commission of Inquiry.
 Domestic human rights organizations are no longer tolerated. The
 1982 banning of the Helsinki Watch Committee was the most recent
 of several actions by the Polish Government. For more than a
 year, Poland has not had a legal private human rights agency
 functioning within the state, although the Catholic Church has
 often investigated charges of human rights violations, interceded
 with the Polish authorities, and sometimes publicly called for
 specific improvements. In addition, illegal Solidarity
 underground publications give some prominent attention to reports
 of human rights violations, but the Government shuts down these
 publications whenever uncovered.
 Amnesty International's 1983 Report cites Poland for its
 political prisoners, reports ill-treatment of prisoners, and
 condemns its abrogation of the rights of individuals detained
 
 
 1070
 under martial law provisions. Freedom House upgraded Poland from
 "not free" to "partly free," on the basis of protest activities
 by citizens.
 ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND CULTURAL SITUATION
 Poland has not yet emerged from its four year old economic crisis
 which has brought a 30 percent drop in the standard of living.
 The economy continues to founder with little prospect for rapid
 improvement.
 Although market supplies have increased somewhat in 1983, the
 economy is still characterized by severe shortages of many
 consumer goods. For people with access to hard currency, the
 hardship can be lessened by shopping at special hard currency
 stores. For those without hard currency, access to such items as
 aspirin can be very problematic. Hard currency can be purchased
 on the black market for six times the official rate. Housing
 remains in critically short supply. The average wait for an
 apartment is approximately 15 years. As with consumer goods,
 access to hard currency can eliminate the wait.
 Both within and outside the Government, it is widely argued that
 the economic system. which has been based on centralized planning
 and command, must be substantially reformed to improve efficiency
 and to reduce the sense of worker alienation. Largely on paper,
 economic reforms address these issues and envision a
 democratization of economic life with the creation of new trade
 unions and worker self-management in the form of workers'
 councils. How far the Government is willing to go in
 implementing these reforms and thereby democratizing economic
 decisionmaking is a topic of intense debate.
 Poland's population in 1983 reached 36.6 million. With a growth
 rate of just under one percent (one of the highest in Europe) it
 is expected that the population will exceed 40 million by 1990.
 Life expectancy is approximately 73 years. Poland's system of
 primary education reaches virtually the entire population with 99
 percent of the school age population enrolled and with nearly
 universal adult literacy. Poland has a broad-scale system of
 rural health care, although imported medicines have been limited
 by the economic crisis of recent years and health care in general
 has declined sharply.
 Culturally, Poland has managed to retain a fair degree of
 openness. This is especially evident in terms of popular music
 and entertainment, where American and other Western influence is
 strong (particularly among Poland's youth), where government
 control is relatively relaxed, and where market forces (i.e.,
 popular demand) reign much more than elsewhere in Polish
 society. Occasionally, authorities have restrained performers
 whose message is too political, e.g., one of Poland's most
 popular rock bands was banned from performing in Warsaw and other
 cities and some groups have been attacked in the press.
 Women's rights have not become a public issue in Poland. Voting
 and other civil and human rights are not denied to women.
 Historical circumstances, including the loss of a greater
 percentage of males than females during World War II, helped open
 access for women into many previously closed professions. Women
 work in all blue collar trades, except for heavy mining and
 steel, and in all professional fields. Compared to their
 presence in the workforce, however, only a very small proportion
 are present in the higher levels of government, national or
 local. While women have some temporary benefits (pregnant women
 get rations of chocolate, visibly pregnant women and mothers with
 small children have priority in queues), press discussion
 indicates that they also suffer economic disadvantages based on
 their perceived inability to work as long or hard as men and
 their culturally supported importance as prime nurturers of
 children.
 
 
 1071
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: POLAND
 1981     1982     1983
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL ...       47.6     35.5     24.8
 LOANS ................    47.6      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................    0.0     35.5     24.8
 A.AID  ....  ..................  0.0    5.0      0.0
 LOANS ........ .......      0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................    0.0      5.0      0.0
 (SEC.SUPP.ASSIST.)...         0.0      5.0      0.0
 B.FOOD  FOR  PEACE .......     47.6     30.5     24.8
 LOANS ................    47.6      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................    0.0     30.5     24.8
 TITLE  I-TOT L ..........      47.6      0.0      0.0
 REPAY.  IN  S-LOANS .....     47.6      0.0      0.0
 PAY.  IN  FOR.  CURR .....     0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE  1I-TOTAL .........       0.0     30.5     24.8
 E.PELIEF.EC.DEV & WFP.         0.0      0.0      0.0
 VOL.RELIEF  AGENCY .....       0.0     30.5     24.8
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST...         0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS ...............       0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................    0.0      0.0      0.0
 PEACE  CORPS ......       0.0      0.0      0.0
 NARCOTICS ........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 OTHER ......... ....     0.0      0.0      0.0
 IIMIL.  ASSIST.-TOTAL...        0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS .................     0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................    0.0      0.0      0.0
 A.!.*AP  GRANTS ..........     0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.CREDIT  FINANCING ....       0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.INTL  MIL.ED.TRNG ....       0.0      0.0      0.0
 O.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK..          0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER  GRANTS ........       0.0      0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON, & MIL.,.        47.6     35.5     24.8
 LOANS ................    47.6      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................    0.0     35.5     24.8
 OTHER  US  LOANS ..........      0.0    360.2      0.0
 EX-IM BANK LOANS .......        0.0      0.0      0.0
 ALL  OTHER ...............      0.0    360.2      0.0
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1981     1982     1983     1946-83
 TOTAL ........     0.2      1.1      0.0     22.1
 IBRD               0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 IFC                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 IDA                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 ICB                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 ADD                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 AFOB               0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 UNOP               0.2      1.1      0.0     19.
 OTHER-UN           0.0      0.0      0.0      2.4
 EEC                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 
 
