 POLAND
 Poland is ruled by the Polish United Workers Party (Communist
 party), at the head of which, as First Secretary, stands
 General Jaruzelski, who is also the Premier and the Supreme
 Commander of' the Armed Forces in his capacity as Chairman of
 the National Defense Committee. Two other parties, the United
 Peasants Party and the Democratic Party, are represented in
 the Government and the Sejm (Parliament) but are completely
 subservient to the Communist leadership.
 The Polish Constitution and legal code provide for a wide
 spectrum of civil and political rights. However, other
 legislation makes it clear that these rights are subordinate
 to the self-defined interests of the state.
 In the human rights field, two especially significant events
 occurred during 1984. After the number of officially
 acknowledged political prisoners grew from 161 in October 1983
 to 652 in mid-1984, the Polish Government enacted a
 wide-ranging amnesty on July 22. Under its terms, to date 632
 political prisoners have been released, including all known
 incarcerated leaders of the independent Solidarity trade union
 movement and the Workers Defense Committee, a prominent human
 rights group active between 1976 and 1981. A few political
 prisoners remain in jail on the grounds that they were also
 convicted for criminal offenses not covered by the amnesty.
 The other significant event was the political kidnapping and
 murder in October of Father Jerzy Popieluszko, a Catholic
 priest active on the human rights scene and with close ties to
 the Solidarity movement. Four officers in the Ministry of
 Internal Affairs were arrested in connection with his murder,
 which mobilized public protests in many cities. The four went
 on trial in late December 1984. Subsequently, it was learned
 that unknown persons had intruded into the homes of two other
 priests and had brutally beaten and tortured them for reasons
 that were not clear. Despite the Government's professed
 desire for national reconciliation, serious human rights
 problems remain.
 In its determination to establish control over independent
 associations, the Government during the past 3 years has not
 only banned the Solidarity trade union and its counterpart in
 the countryside, Rural Solidarity, but it has dissolved,
 reorganized, or harassed into submission other organizations
 and unions, including those of students, writers, journalists,
 and filmmakers. Only a few institutions, the Roman Catholic
 Church in particular, have been able to maintain their
 autonomy and to exercise the right of free speech.
 Poland's economic recovery continues slowly under the burden
 of substantial economic difficulties, including large debts to
 foreign creditors. Efforts at greater decentralization of
 decisionmaking have not altered the economic system's basic
 dependence on central control over resource management,
 production, and distribution. Poland has a strong, private
 agricultural sector in which the right to own property is
 provided. Small private businesses in the crafts and service
 areas are also permitted.
 
 
 1057
 POLAND
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 Several deaths in 1984 and the trial of those accused of
 involvement in a death that occurred in 1983 were particularly
 noteworthy. On October 19, 1984 Father Jerzy Popieluszko, a
 noted human rights activist and outspoken Solidarity
 supporter, was abducted near Torun and later murdered. The
 perpetrators of the crime have been identified as officers of
 the Ministry of Internal Affairs. The three men charged with
 the murder and their supervisor were put on trial on December
 27. The trial was expected to last a month. To date, the
 Government's inquiries into the question of a conspiracy
 reaching into the higher levels of the party or Government
 have been inconclusive.
 In 1984, the deaths of several Solidarity activists, including
 that of Piotr Bartoszcze, were widely regarded as politically
 motivated. Official reports on the cause of Bartoszcze's
 death state that he crashed his car, possibly while under the
 influence of alcohol, and then wandered into a nearby field
 where he fell into an irrigation ditch and suffocated to
 death. Independent observers say there is reason to believe
 that Bartoszcze was strangled.
 In the controversial case of the suspicious May 1983 death of
 Grzegorz Przemyk, a young Warsaw student and son of a
 prominent human rights activist, militia officers indicted in
 the case were acquitted following a trial. Ambulance drivers
 also charged in the case were convicted, but released under
 the provisions of the July amnesty law.
 The report of the International Labor Organization's
 Commission of Inquiry on Poland (June 1984) states that as
 many as 60 members of trade unions died during the period of
 martial law. Most of these deaths occurred during strikes or
 demonstrations, but some, according to information available
 to the Commission, were said to have been due to mistreatment
 after arrest. The Commission concluded that 'rights connected
 with life and security of persons were violated in Poland
 while martial law was in force' and called for "impartial and
 independent inquiries...to establish the facts, to determine
 responsibilities and to punish any persons found guilty.'
 b. Disappearance
 Instances of prolonged or permanent disappearance do not
 generally occur. However, Father Jerzy Popieluszko's (see
 Section l.a.) disappearance was resolved within 2 weeks of his
 abduction when his body was found in a reservoir.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 There is no evidence that the Polish authorities
 systematically use torture to extract information or to punish
 or intimidate. However, the militia (police) and security
 personnel have been accused of beatings and mistreatment of
 persons in their custody.
 
 
 1058.
 POLAND
 Both the militia and the riot police have employed unwarranted
 force, such as beatings and the use of water cannon, against
 anti-government demonstrators. The decrease in the frequency
 and scale of demonstrations in 1984 could, of course, account
 for fewer reports of the use of excessive police force.
 Before the release of most political prisoners following the
 July 22 amnesty, there were repeated reports of poor prison
 conditions for political prisoners. According to these
 reports, prisons often served virtually inedible food, and
 some prisoners suffered from food poisoning or even hepatitis
 as a result of eating the prison fare. Health conditions
 reportedly were also poor at many of the prisons, although
 conditions are said to have improved during the last few
 months before the amnesty. It is unclear whether the poor
 medical service at some prisons was deliberate or a byproduct
 of more general problems in the inadequate national medical
 system. Some prisoners have been furloughed in order to
 obtain necessary medical care.
 Prisoners who engaged in hunger strikes, either to protest
 poor prison conditions or to gain governmental recognition as
 political prisoners, were subjected to force-feeding by prison
 authorities, often administered so crudely as to cause
 injury.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Polish law allows for a 48-hour detention period before
 charges must be presented to the detainee. After this
 presentation of the legal basis for formal investigation, the
 suspect may be held in indefinite "investigatory" or
 "temporary" arrest. During this period there is no guarantee
 of access to a-lawyer, but once a formal indictment is filed,
 the defendant is allowed ample time to study the charges in
 consultation with an attorney of his or her choice. A trial
 date is set only after the defendant expresses readiness.
 Legal provisions for bail are rarely used, but suspects, as
 well as those already convicted, are sometimes furloughed for
 humanitarian reasons.
 Polish law does not contain any provision for forced exile.
 In September 1984 the gdvernment spokesman said that
 government experts were studying the merits of a bill which
 would legalize forced exile for a limited period of time. No
 steps have been taken to introduce legislation on the
 subject. The idea of "voluntary" exile for adversaries of the
 regime was explored during 1982 and 1983 when security police
 told many arrestees and detainees that they had no future in
 Poland and that the Government would place no obstacles in the
 way of their emigration.
 a. Denial of Pair Public Trial
 The period of martial law in Poland (December 1981-December
 1982) was marked by mass internment without trial and by the
 use of summary military tribunals to try the cases of those
 who had allegedly violated martial law regulations. These
 practices have now disappeared. Four leaders of the Workers
 Defense Committee (KOR), founded in 1976 and voluntarily
 disbanded in 1981, and seven leaders of the Solidarity trade
 union were held for more than two and one-half years without
 trial. The trial of the KOR leaders finally began in July
 
 
 1059
 POLAND
 1984 after one of the four, Jacek Kuron, undertook a hunger
 strike. However, the trial was interrupted by the amnesty
 decree, which resulted in the release of the four KOR
 defendants and the seven Solidarity leaders.
 Throughout early 1984, the number of political prisoners grew,
 including both those who had been convicted and those who were
 under temporary arrest.   The number of political prisoners
 was 161 in late October 1983, according to official Polish
 Government count. At the time of the July 1984 amnesty, the
 Government announced that 652 prisoners stood accused or
 convicted of crimes of a political nature  At the end of
 August the Government announced that all but 22 of these
 prisoners had been released under the terms of the amnesty law.
 Only 2 of the remaining 22 political prisoners acknowledged by
 the Government, Bogdan Lis and Piotr Mierzewski, were
 identified publicly by the Government. They were arrested in
 June and were in investigative custody on charges of treason,
 a crime not covered by the amnesty. The charges against them
 were dropped "for lack of evidence," and they were released in
 early December. About 20 political prisoners remain in jail
 because the amnesty did not cover the criminal offenses for
 which they had also been convicted.
 Many knowledgeable human rights activists in Poland agree that
 the Government's figures on remaining political prisoners are
 approximately accurate. These independent observers maintain
 strongly that Lis and Mierzejewski were political prisoners in
 the normal meaning of this term, but there is less certainty
 about the remaining 20 prisoners.
 Frequent government harassment of attorneys involved in the
 defense of political prisoners was noted. In the first half
 of 1984, several attorneys connected with political cases were
 interrogated, banned from pleading, dismissed from cases, and
 even threatened with dismissal from their law practices.
 Judges who refused to hear cases under accelerated, summary
 procedures (involving harsher sentencing and lack of the right
 of appeal) were sometimes forced off the bench.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 It is generally assumed that mail and phone calls are
 selectively monitored in Poland, although overt censorship of
 the mail and announced monitoring of telephone calls ceased
 with the suspension of martial law. Packages to be mailed
 abroad must be assembled at the post office in the presence of
 a customs official or postal worker. The Government does not
 interfere with the right to marry or to have children as one
 chooses, nor does it prevent the teaching of religion to
 children at home or in churches. However, the Government
 often views as suspect the contacts of its citizens with
 foreigners and with domestic political opponents. Warrantless
 searches of homes and offices and confiscation of personal
 documents and property continue in Poland. Warrants are
 sometimes required under Polish law, although the
 circumstances under which the warrant requirement applies are
 ambiguous'.
 
 
 1060
 POLAND
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Although the Constitution provides for freedom of speech, this
 right is frequently abridged. In August 1984 a Warsaw
 resident, Wojciech Ziembinski, was sentenced to 3 months in
 jail for making a patriotic speech and laying a wreath at the
 Tomb of the Unknown Soldier commemorating the anniversary of
 the Polish victory over the Red Army in 1920. In Szczecin,
 according to the press, two persons were sentenced for
 shouting anti-state slogans during a street gathering on the
 anniversary of the 1981 signing of the agreement between the
 Government and striking workers in that city. Two Solidarity
 leaders, freed under the amnesty, were arrested for trying to
 organize a demonstration in Wroclaw on August 31, the
 anniversary of the 1981 Gdansk agreement between the
 Government and the strikers, and sentenced to 2 months'
 imprisonment on misdemeanor charges. They have since been
 released.
 On December 16,.riot police used tear gas and water cannon to
 break up a peaceful, orderly march by more than 10,000 people
 to attend a wreathlaying at the Gdansk monument to workers
 killed by government forces in 1970. Three participants,
 including one Solidarity leader released under the amnesty,
 were sentenced to 3 months' imprisonment on misdemeanor
 charges..
 Although not free, the Polish printed press (as opposed to the
 more tightly run radio and television system) offers a broader
 variety of opinion than is found in other Warsaw Pact
 countries. Some non-governmental but officially tolerated
 publications, including several which generally reflect the
 views of the Roman Catholic Church, offer a limited
 alternative voice to the government-run media, although they
 are also subject to frequent and extensive government
 censorship. Their impact is also reduced by government limits
 on circulation.
 The vast majority of newspapers and journals in Poland,
 however, are state-owned, as are publishing houses and the
 national television and radio. While the state-owned press
 follows the approved government line on all essential isaues,
 it provides a forum for debate on certain domestic issues and
 even on some foreign policy questions. Though this is usually
 a debate of nuance rather than of fundamental principles,
 goals, or policies, a certain range of opinion is, in fact,
 reflected within carefully controlled parameters. The
 distinct interests of each element of the ruling
 elite--Government, Communist party, and armed forces--are
 often reflected in the newspapers they sponsor. Contending
 views on economic and administrative reform, aspects of public
 policy and party cadre matters, the nature and extent of
 dialogue with various segments of Polish society, and the role
 of the Church and labor unions are sometimes presented in the
 press.
 The Government censors all the media. Censorship generally
 assumes one of three basic forms. First, many articles are
 self-censored by their authors before submission, more often
 to increase the chances for publication than to avoid specific
 
 
 1061
 POLAND
 reprisals. Even 'establishment" journalists freely but
 privately discuss the inhibitions which the system places on
 them. Second, editors of state-run publications may kill an
 article if they feel its content is too controversial.
 Controversial articles which do appear are often the result of
 prolonged bargaining among writers, editors, and censors.
 Finally, there is the formal government censorship apparatus
 which clearly strives to maintain tight control over the most
 influential print and electronic media.
 It is frequently impossible to detect the exact impact of the
 formal censorship process in state-controlled media, but some
 Catholic publications such as the monthly of the Catholic
 Intelligentsia Club, Wiez, indicate to their readers, by
 brackets, where the censors have deleted material and which
 particular provision of the censorship laws has been invoked.
 A recent example in the press was an obituary devoted to the
 late Ukrainian Cardinal Jozef Slipyj. The obituary discussed
 the Cardinal's early career up to World War II, and then was
 interrupted by brackets containing the censorship citation.
 The article resumed with the Cardinal's activities in Rome
 after 1963. The account of his decades in Soviet imprisonment
 was entirely deleted.
 Some journalists who resigned in protest during the martial
 law period or who were dismissed from major publications
 during the process of "verification' of political orthodoxy
 have now resumed their journalistic activity in
 smaller-circulation periodicals.
 The underground press, chiefly reflecting the views of the
 banned Solidarity union and its supporters, is still
 surprisingly successful in turning out timely and
 professionally produced newspapers, periodicals, and even
 books, despite government efforts to stamp it out.
 Post-martial law legislation gives local and national
 authorities substantially increased power over universities.
 This legislation, if enforced, could significantly curb
 freedom of inquiry at Polish institutions of higher learning.
 The July 21, 1983 measures gave the central Government the
 formal right to suspend university senates, councils, and
 other collegial bodies, and allowed ministers to fire deans,
 rectors, institute directors, and faculty members. According
 to tne legislation, only those student organizations and
 associations already in existence and officially sanctioned
 are approved. The legislation also empowered certain cabinet
 ministers and rectors to suspend or expel students for
 disruption of public order or for actions against the
 interests of the state, and gave to provincial governors the
 power to fire, transfer, or suspend primary and secondary
 school teachers for abuses of public order.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Freedom of peaceful assembly and association are severely
 restricted in Poland. Public meetings and rallies require
 official sponsorship or permission, and permission is not
 granted for meetings of opposition groups such as Solidarity.
 Unauthorized protest meetings and demonstrations continued to
 occur in 1984, but in fewer cities and with less participation
 than in 1982. Small gatherings, usually of students or
 workers, take place in private homes for the purpose of
 
 
 1062
 POLAND
 participating in 'free university' courses and seminars on
 Polish history, sociology, economics, and other subjects. The
 authorities have generally not interfered with these meetings.
 A new "law on foundations," enacted in spring 1984,
 established a judicial basis for the formation of private,
 non-profit institutions to conduct certain charitable, social,
 and health-related activities. As of autumn 1984, two such
 foundations had been registered by the courts. Both are
 concerned with medical research and services. During the
 summer and autumn, church and government representatives
 continued to discuss details of a projected Church-sponsored
 foundation to assist Polish private farmers.
 Every association or club needs either official permission or
 sponsorship. Since the end of martial law, some
 organizations, notably Catholic Intelligentsia Clubs, have
 been permitted to resume activities. Professional
 associations, such as the Writers' Union, were disbanded under
 martial law and replaced by organizations more subservient to
 the Government. These associations must be registered with
 the courts, which in some cases have refused to grant legal
 recognition to an association or union because its charter did
 not conform to legal requirements.
 On October 8, 1982, the Government passed a law delegalizing
 Solidarity and other labor unions and associations and
 providing for the formation of new unions, under government
 auspices, to replace them. The law stipulated that in 1983
 unions could be formed only at the enterprise level (factory,
 shop, or other single unit of business), while in 1984 the
 unions could form federations of unions within single
 occupational groups (i.e., factory unions of steel workers can
 federate only with each other). There were 116 federations
 registered by the fall of 1984, and the Government launched a
 public-relations and organizational drive to integrate the
 federations into a new national labor confederation. A
 national labor congress, consisting of delegates of the
 official unions, took place in late November 1984. The new
 unions are in theory supposed to represent the workers in
 matters affecting wages, conditions of work, and such fringe
 benefits as allocation of spaces in factory-owned vacation
 resorts and fair distribution of permits to purchase cars,
 appliances, or household furnishings.
 The right to strike theoretically exists, but it is severely
 limited. Those who, in the opinion of the authorities, abuse
 the right are subject to criminal punishment. Unofficial
 observers believe that hundreds of local unauthorized strikes
 occurred in 1984, most of which concerned local issues and
 were settled quickly through conciliatory actions by
 management. There are reports, however, that the organizers
 of unauthorized strikes sometimes suffer subsequent
 discrimination. Political activity by trade unions is
 specifically forbidden by law. The right to collective
 bargaining for wages and improved working conditions has been
 considerably restricted since the suspension and subsequent
 prohibition of Solidarity.
 According to figures provided at the national labor congress,
 the officially sponsored unions have about 4.9 million
 members--far short of the Solidarity membership of 10 million
 before martial law. Active workers are said to make up 60 to
 70 percent of official trade union membership, i.e., between
 
 
 1063
 POLAND
 2.9 and 3.3 million people. These percentages are roughly
 similar with those reported by the ILO Commission of Inquiry,
 which said that a third of the new unions' membership appears
 to consist of retirees. The Government has stepped up efforts
 to promote membership in the new unions through the use of
 incentives such as promotions, access to day-care centers and
 factory-owned vacation facilities, reduced rates on
 merchandise, and access to scarce goods.
 Some workers released from internment or imprisonment have
 been denied jobs at their previous places of employment or
 demoted to lower paying or less skilled jobs. Some have been
 unable to find work anywhere in the fields for which they are
 trained. Previous involvement in Solidarity activities deters
 management from hiring an applicant, thus curtailing both
 worker mobility and possibilities for union activity. Since
 the lifting of martial law, there is also evidence that
 workers, particularly ex-internees or workers released from
 prison, continue to be dismissed from their jobs because of
 their previous or continued association with Solidarity.
 In its June 1984 report, an International Labor Organization
 (ILO) Commission of Inquiry concluded that the Polish
 Government had infringed ILO conventions 87 and 98 concerning
 the workers' basic rights to form and maintain free trade
 unions and to bargain collectively. The Commission called for
 resumption of union activity based on the standards of the ILO
 conventions. In November 1984 a substantial majority of the
 Governing Board of the ILO voted to note the Commission's
 report, thus turning the case over to the ILO's normal
 executive machinery. In response, the Polish Government
 announced its intention to withdraw from the ILO (see Section
 4).
 c. Freedom of Religion
 There is considerable freedom of religion in Poland. In this
 overwhelmingly Roman Catholic country, Poles are able to
 gather freely to worship. The army has a chaplaincy, and
 soldiers are guaranteed by law the freedom to practice their
 religion. The Catholic Church maintains over 3,300 churches,
 schools, and other institutions in Poland; more than 1,200
 building projects are under way. The Catholic University of
 Lublin is the only privately controlled university in the
 Communist bloc. Seminary studies flourish, and the Church
 continues to ordain large numbers of priests annually. The
 Catholic Church maintains significant publishing activities
 devoted primarily to books and periodicals of a religious
 nature. The independent Catholic press also publishes
 extensive religious material. Sunday mass and Protestant
 worship services are broadcast on Polish radio--one of the few
 gains remaining from the Solidarity era.
 Relations between the Roman Catholic Church and the Polish
 Government show aspects of cooperation as well as conflict.
 Their dialogue on problems of mutual concern, for example,
 facilitated resolution in the spring of 1984 of the question
 of crosses in schoolrooms in a small town south of Warsaw.
 Church-state discussions over the past year have continued on
 the question of the legal status of the Catholic Church in
 Poland. Church and government discussion has also continued
 on a proposed Church-sponsored autonomous fund to channel
 public and private contributions from the West to private
 agriculture.
 
 40-387 0 - 85 - 67
 
 
 1064
 POLAND
 The Primate, the Episcopate as a whole, and the clergy
 continue to call for greater individual freedom and respect
 for human rights. The Government and the
 government-controlled press have often been critical of what
 they consider unwarranted church involvement in political
 affairs and the alleged use of churches, shrines, and
 pilgrimages for political purposes. A few members of the
 clergy have been singled out for special criticism and have
 been the subject of police investigations and public
 admonitions. Father Jerzy Popieluszko, kidnapped and murdered
 in October 1984, was one of the priests most frequently
 attacked for human rights activism, and in the first half of
 1984 he was the target of an official investigation. Father
 Henryk Jankowski, a priest in Gdansk, was the subject of a
 similar investigation. In addition, two priests were
 separately assaulted, beaten, and tortured by unknown persons
 who intruded into their homes in what was widely believed to
 be an attempt at intimidating the Church.
 There is no official discrimination against minority religions
 in Poland. However, the Eastern Orthodox, Uniate, Muslim, and
 Jewish faiths, and the various Protestant denominations,
 experience varying degrees of difficulty in maintaining places
 of worship and in providing training for their clergy both
 because of the number and distribution of their adherents and
 their limited financial resources. On balance, however, their
 situation, like that of the Roman Catholic Church, is better
 than that of their counterparts in other Communist countries.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation.
 There are no restrictions on travel within Poland, although
 each person intending to stay more than one day outside his
 normal place of residence (e.g., at a vacation spot) is
 supposed to register with the local militia. This can be done
 in person or by the hotel or hosts. There are no legal
 restrictions on changing one's residence, but the housing
 shortage makes this nearly impossible in practice. Cases of
 persons working in one location and legally *residing"
 hundreds of kilometers away are not uncommon.
 A law of July 21, 1983, permits a plant manager in an
 .essential industry' to prolong by 6 months the employment of
 any worker who gives notice to terminate employment. It also
 sets up compulsory labor exchanges which provide a potential
 basis for restricting the mobility of workers connected with
 the dissolved Solidarity union or involved in new trade union
 activities considered undesirable by the state.
 In conjunction with the lifting of martial law, the Government
 announced a policy of liberalized passport issuance, and a new
 law went into effect in late 1983. Passport offices must now
 accept all applications for passports and give written reasons
 for any denials of issuance, a significant improvement from
 previous times when offices could and often did simply refuse
 to accept applications. However, the authorities still
 require a notarized invitation from a relative or friend
 outside of Poland before passport issuance can be considered
 for individual travel to the West. A passport must be
 returned after completion of travel, and a new application
 submitted for each trip abroad.
 
 
 1065
 POLAND
 In order to receive an emigration passport, a Pole must divest
 himself of all property and obtain customs permission for any
 personal items he or she wishes to take. Once residing
 abroad, a Polish citizen must exchange an emigration passport
 for a consular passport (one issued by a Polish consulate
 abroad) for return trips to Poland. Otherwise there are no
 formal restrictions on an emigrant's return to Poland.
 Only Polish citizens who have been issued emigration passports
 are legally permitted to take up residence in another
 country. Polish citizens who depart Poland on tourist
 passports and take up residence abroad without the permission
 of the Polish Government may, should they return to Poland for
 a temporary stay, experience difficulties departing again.
 Polish citizens who emigrate legally from Poland and who
 desire to-return for brief visits on consular passports
 generally experience few difficulties with the authorities.
 Under Polish citizenship law, only the Council of State may
 revoke citizenship. According to the law, involuntary
 revocation must be based on one of the following illegal
 activities: actions violating the duty of allegiance to the
 Polish state; actions detrimental to the substantial interests
 of Poland; departure from Poland after May 9, 1945, and
 failure to return when so requested by the Polish Government;
 evasion of military service; or conviction abroad of a crime
 also recognized as a felony under Polish criminal law. The
 Government has rarely invoked any of the foregoing provisions.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 General Jaruzelski governs the country along with his close
 advisors, including trusted colleagues usually from the armed
 forces, but also from the Polish United Workers (Communist)
 Party, the technocracy, and the security apparatus. The
 Military Council of National Salvation dissolved itself with
 the ending of martial law, but the military continues to have
 unusually strong influence. Although technically the
 Communists share power with two other parties, the United
 Peasants Party and the Democratic Party, in fact the latter
 two are dominated by the former.
 The Constitution specifies that the Sejm (Parliament) is the
 chief legislative body of the country. While in practice the
 Sejm approves bills presented to it by the executive with only
 token dissent, since 1980 a substantial minority of opposition
 votes has occasionally been recorded, usually on economic
 issues. Sejm elections to be held in 1984 have been postponed
 at least until late 1985. In the past, election procedures
 assured the Communists of a majority of seats.
 After public consultations the Sejm enacted a new local
 election law in February 1984. This law introduced the
 principle that two candidates may contest each seat, but the
 method of selecting these candidates and of pairing them
 virtually assured that the result would be acceptable to the
 ruling elite. The government-sponsored Patriotic Movement for
 National Renewal was made the focus of this electoral
 process. A round of public appearances and media
 presentations by various candidates preceded the first
 elections of the post-martial law period, held in June for
 
 
 1066
 POLAND
 people's councils, local-level deliberative bodies. Following
 a call by underground Solidarity leaders for a boycott, voter
 turnout was well below previous levels in such elections.
 Elections may be invalidated if fraud is demonstrated. In the
 1984 elections, one result was challenged by a poll watcher on
 the grounds that some individuals had cast many votes on
 behalf of persons who had not come personally to the polls.
 The Supreme Court agreed with the poll watcher and invalidated
 that result. A new election will be held.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Von-governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 Although the Government participates in the Conference on
 Security and Cooperation in Europe, it generally maintains
 that international inquiries into the human rights situation
 in Poland constitute interference in Poland's internal
 affairs. This attitude has been evident throughout the
 International Labor organization's (ILO) investigation of
 violations of international labor standards in Poland. In
 June 1983 the-ILO established a Commission of Inquiry
 -following the Polish Government's failure to meet ILO requests
 for Information and for an on-the-spot visit to verify the
 accuracy of allegations of such violations. The Polish
 Government then decided to. suspend cooperation with the ILO,
 of which it is a founding member. The report of the
 Commission, published in June 1984, noted that the Polish
 Government "systematically abstained from participating in the
 procedure and from replying to the various communications
 addressed to it concerning the complaint." The ILO found that
 "the basic objection advanced by the Government of Poland to
 justify its attitude of non-cooperation was... that the
 procedure of the complaint constituted 'interference in
 Poland ,internal affairs'.    The ILO found the Government's
 objection "devoid of any legal validity." As a result, in
 November 1984 Poland announced its intention to withdraw from
 the ILO.
 During its 1983 session the United Nations Commission on Human
 Rights adopted a resolution requesting the Secretary-General
 or his designee to update and complete a comprehensive study
 of the human rights situation in Poland originally called for
 by the Commission during its 1982 session. The Polish
 Government refused to cooperate in the implementation of
 either resolution and refused to allow the Secretary-General's
 special representative to visit Poland in preparation of his
 report. The Secretary-General visited Poland in February
 1984, but his visit took place outside the scope of the
 Commission resolution. In March 1984, the Commission voted to
 postpone to its 1985 session a resolution calling for
 continuing the inquiry into the human rights situation in
 Poland.
 Domestic human rights organizations are not officially
 tolerated in Poland. The Polish Helsinki Committee, which
 operates anonymously, issues reports from time to time on the
 human rights situation in Poland. Following the murder of
 Father Popieluszko, groups of prominent intellectuals
 undertook to form several open committees on human rights.
 The Government declared such organizations illegal and warned
 foreign news correspondents that they risked prosecution if
 they attended news conferences called by such committees.
 
 
 1067
 POLAND
 The Catholic Church has interceded with the Polish authorities
 on human rights matters and has frequently issued public
 appeals for improvements. Underground Solidarity publications
 also call attention to reports of human rights violations.
 The Government shuts down these publications whenever it
 uncovers them.
 Amnesty International's 1984 report (covering 1983) expressed
 concern about imprisonment of prisoners of conscience,
 allegations of mistreatment of political prisoners, and the
 use of the death penalty. Freedom House rates Poland 'partly
 free.*
 ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND CULTURAL SITUATION
 The Polish economy has continued to perform poorly, although
 some improvement has been registered in 1984. Living
 standards remain about on the level of 1973, and there are few
 prospects for rapid recovery.
 Market supplies are gradually improving, reflecting increased
 production as well as price rises for farmers. Many consumer
 goods, however, remain in critically short supply. To ensure
 the availability of basic food items, the Government rations
 such staples as flour, sugar, butter, animal fats, and meats.
 The rationed amounts, however, tend to be less than adequate,
 requiring those who can afford it to turn to the expensive
 black market to supplement their monthly consumption; At the
 same time, the availability of unrationed consumer items
 continues to be very limited, forcing consumers either to
 spend time in long lines or to rely on the black market. For
 persons with-access to hard currency, the market situation is
 entirely different: The Government maintains a chain of
 dollar stores where virtually every consumer item can be
 purchased by anyone with hard currency. For those without
 access, hard currency can be obtained illegally for four or
 five times the official rate. Housing is in short supply,
 especially in urban areas where the average waiting time for
 state-funded housing is about 15 years.
 The Government remains formally committed to an economic
 reform program aimed at decentralizing the economy and giving
 Poland's alienated work force a greater voice in economic
 decisionmaking. Despite obstacles posed by a reluctant
 bureaucracy and by the need to manage a struggling economy,
 the Government has made some progress in implementing the
 reforms and in increasing the role of market forces.
 Poland's population in 1984 reached 37 million. Life
 expectancy at birth is about 73 years. Poland's primary
 education system reaches virtually the entire population with
 99 percent of the school age population enrolled. Literacy is
 almost universal. Poland has a wide-scale system of rural
 health care, although access to safe drinking water for the
 rural population remains a problem.
 Culturally, Poland has managed to retain a fair degree of
 openness in art, the theater, music, and dance. Political
 messages are frequently not very far beneath the surface of
 Polish theater and film productions. Many leading actors and
 film makers, however, have had to curtail their activities or
 work abroad in the post-Solidarity period. OccasionallyT--
 Polish authorities have restrained local music performers and
 
 
 1068
 POLAND
 entertainers whose message is too overtly political. One of
 Poland's most popular rock bands was banned from performing in
 Warsaw in 1983, and other groups have been criticized in the
 press.
 Unofficial cultural life in homes and churches in Poland is
 very active. In addition, American and other Western films
 and popular music are readily available in Polish theaters and
 on radio programs.
 Women's rights have not become a public issue in Poland.
 Voting and other civil and human rights are not denied on the
 basis of sex. Historical circumstances, including World
 War II losses, helped open access for women into many
 previously closed professions. Women work in all blue-collar
 trades, except for heavy mining and steel, and in all
 professional fields. Compared to their presence in the work
 force, however, a small proportion of women are found in the
 higher levels of local and national government. According to
 articles in the official press, women also suffer some
 economic disadvantages because of their perceived inability to
 work as long or as hard as men and their traditional
 importance as nurturers of children.
 Poland has a liberal maternity and childcare leave policy.
 Women are entitled to 4 months of paid maternity leave and may
 then opt for up to 3 years of unpaid child-care leave, after
 which they are guaranteed a job at the same level of pay.
 Such a policy has obvious social benefits in terms of
 child-rearing and strengthening of the familyl it also takes
 pressure off Poland's inadequate day-care system for -young
 children. The negative economic consequences can be very
 serious, especially in certain female-dominated industries,
 such as textiles. Because Poland is experiencing both a baby
 boom and a labor shortage due to inefficient use of available
 labor, and because prolonged child-care leave is very popular,
 many jobs remain unfilled.
 
 
 1069
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: POLAND
 1982     1983    1984
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL...       35.5     24.8     20.9
 LOANS .............. .... 0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............  ... 35.5    24.8     20.9
 A.AID ....................... 5.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS .............. ... 0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS.............         5.0     0.0      0.0
 (SEC.SUPP.ASSIST.)...        5.0      0.0      0.0
 B.FOOO FOR PEACE .......       30.5    24.8     20.9
 LOANS .............. ... 0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............  ... 30.5    24.8     20.9
 TITLE I-TOTAL ..........        0.0     0.0      0.0
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS .....        0.0     0.0      0.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR .....        0.0     0.0      0.0
 TITLE I-TOTAL .........       30.5    24.8     20.9
 E.RELIEF.EC.DEV & WFP.        0.0      0.0      0.0
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY .....       30.5    24.8     20.9
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST...         0.0     0.0      0.0
 LOANS .............. .... 0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............       0.0      0.0      0.0
 PEACE CORPS ......       0.0      0.0      0.0
 NARCOTICS ........        0.0     0.0      0.0
 OTHER ............      . .0.0    0.0      0.0
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL...        0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS .............. ... .0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............       0.0      0.0      0.0
 A.MAP GRANTS ..........        0.0     0.0      0.0
 B.CREDIT FINANCING ....        0.0     0.0      0.0
 C.INTL MIL.ED.TRNG ....        0.0     0.0      0.0
 D.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK...         0.0     0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS ........        0.0     0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. & MIL...        35.5    24.8     20.9
 LOANS .............. ... .0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ............    ...35.5     24.8    20.9
 OTHER US LOANS ............   360.2     0.0      0.0
 EX-IM BANK LOANS .......       0.0      0.0      0.0
 ALL  OTHER ................  360.2     0.0      0.0
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1982     1983     1984    1946-84
 ---------------------------------------------------------
 TOTAL ........     1.1      1.2     0.0     23.2
 IBRD               0.0      0.0     0.0      0.0
 IFC                0.0      0.0     0.0      0.0
 IDA                0.0      0.0     0.0      0.0
 IDB                0.0      0.0     0.0      0.0
 ADB                0.0      0.0      0.0     0.0
 AFOB               0.0      0.0     0.0      0.0
 UNDP               1.1      1.2     0.0     20.8
 OTHER-UN           0.0      0.0     0.0      2.4
 EEC                0.0      0.0     0.0      0.0
 
 
 1070
