 POLAND
 Poland is a parliamentary democracy based on a multiparty political system and
 free and fair elections. The President shares power with the Prime Minister, the
 Council of Ministers, and the bicameral Parliament (Senate and Sejm). Poland has
 held two presidential and three parliamentary elections in the 8 years since the end
 of communism. For much of the year, the governing coalition, composed of the
 Democratic Left Alliance (SLD), a successor to the former Communist Party, and
 the Polish Peasant Party (PSL), a successor to the Peasant Party of the Communist
 era, had a nearly two-thirds majority in both houses of Parliament. In parliamen-
 tary elections held on September 21, Solidarity Electoral Action (AWS)-a broad co-
 alition of rightist, center-right, and Christian-national parties anchored by the Soli-
 darity trade union-gained 33.9 percent of the vote. The new Government is a two-
 r arty coalition composed of AWS and its junior partner, the centrist Freedom Union
 UW). The judiciary is independent.
 The internal security forces and armed forces are subject to effective civilian con-
 trol by the Government. Since 1996 the civilian Minister of Defense has clear com-
 mand and control authority over the military chief of the general staff as well as
 oversight of military intelligence. The Government continues actively to reform the
 military to prepare for full membership in NATO.
 Poland has made a successful transition to a free market economy. A large and
 growing private sector and increasing exports to Western Europe have helped fuel
 a 6.1 percent rate of growth in 1996 and an estimated 6.3 percent rate of growth
 in 1997. Inflation at the end of the year (at 13.3 percent) and unemployment (at
 10.6 percent) remained high but were declining. Since 1989 most small- and me-
 dium-sized, state-owned enterprises have been privatized. The new Government has
 pledged to speed the long-delayed privatization of many of the larest enterprises
 (e.g., the telephone company, power plants; the national airline). Generous social
 and retirement programs place an enormous strain on the budget and impede eco-
 nomic growth. The Government intends to implement pension reform in 1999. The
 fiscal and monetary authorities are pursuin more restrictive policies to deal with
 a growing current account deficit that, if leg unchecked, could create the risk of a
 financial crisis.
 The Government generally respected the human rights of its citizens, but there
 were some problems. Prison conditions are poor. Lack of public confidence as well
 as a cumbersome legal process and an inadequate budget plague the court system.
 Court decisions are frequently not implemented, particularly those of the adminis-
 trative courts, and simple civil cases can take as long as 2 or 3 years. Many poorly
 paid prosecutors and judges left public service for more lucrative employment. The
 threat of organized crime has provoked legislative responses that could pose a
 threat to the right to privacy. Freedom of speech and the press were subject to some
 minor limitations. Women continue to experience serious discrimination in the labor
 market and are subject to various legal inequities as a consequence of paternalistic
 laws. Trafficking in women is a growing problem, as is spousal abuse, and there is
 some societal discrimination against ethnic minorities. The President and the Gov-
 ernment have worked constructively toward resolving issues of concern to the Jew-
 ish community. Although the right to organize unions and bargain collectively was
 largely observed, some employers violated worker rights provided by law, particu-
 larly in the growing private sector.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no reports of political or
 other extrajudicial killings.
 However, in March an off duty police officer in Brodno, a suburb of Warsaw, was
 arrested in connection with the shooting deaths of two unarmed civilians and the
 wounding of another in unclear circumstances. The officer was suspended from the
 police force and was forced to undergo psychiatric evaluation to determine his abil-
 ity to stand trial. He was indicted on murder and reckless endangerment charges
 in December. A trial date had not been set by year's end. In May the regional pros-
 ecutor in Biala Podlaska opened an investigation into the possible murder of a 19-
 year-old man who was shot during police questioning. In November a provincial
 court in Lublin indicted the Lomazy police chief in the case. Three additional
 Lomazy police officers were indicted for assault, false arrest, and failure to follow
 proper police procedure in connection with the detention and beating of the 19-year-
 old s companion.
 
 
 1213
 In November a Wroclaw court sentenced two police officers, one to 7 years in pris-
 on and the other to 4 years, in connection with the 1995 murder of a 17-year-old
 boy and the attempted murder of another man. Both were shot when the two off-
 duty officers, intoxicated and angry after being rejected by a prostitute, began firing
 their service revolvers.
 In March two police officers accused in the 1983 beating death of high school stu-
 dent Grzegorz Przemyk were convicted and sentenced to 10 years in prison. The po-
 lice were accused of covering up the death and blaming it on the ambulance drivers
 who took Przemyk to the hospital. Both men appealed their convictions. A third po-
 lice officer, accused of obstructing the investigation by hiding documents, was sen-
 tenced to 3 years in prison.
 Trials relating to extrajudicial killings during the Communist period, including
 the deaths of striking shipyard workers in December 1970 and the deaths and
 jailing of activists after the 1981 declaration of martial law, continued. During the
 1V2 years of martial law, approximately 25 citizens died in clashes between striking
 workers and riot police, and the government jailed without trial more than 13,000
 people. In July a Gdansk court ruled that martial law architect General Wojciech
 Jruzelski, for health reasons, would not have to stand trial. In November, after a
 trial that lasted nearly 4 years, a provincial court in Katowice acquitted 22 riot po-
 lice of murder charges stemming from the same incident, citing a lack of evidence
 of the officers' direct involvement in the miners' deaths. Public reaction was gen-
 erally muted. A few days later, the Warsaw Court of Appeals set aside the July
 1996 acquittal of former Interior Minister General Czeslaw Kiszczak for his role in
 the Wujek mine's pacification. Kiszczak's case was returned to the regional court for
 retrial. The trial of five former senior army and police officers charged in connection
 with the deaths of 44 demonstrators during the December 1970 riots again was
 postponed. Althoughproceedings in that case were instituted in 1995, the trial has
 not yet begun formally, as defendants continue to produce medical statements cer-
 tifying their inability to appear in court. The trial was scheduled to resume in Janu-
 ar 1998.
 b.Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Criminal Code prohibits torture, and there were no reported incidents of it.
 Several investigations into incidents of police brutality or misconduct are ongoing.
 In March three police officers in Bbytom were arrested and char ed with the rape
 of seven underage detainees, ranging in age from 11 to 17 years. The men were dis-
 charged from the police force and put in prison pending trial. In October two of the
 seven victims appeared in a Katowice provincial court to testify. Progress in the
 case has been slowed, however, due to the other girls' reluctance to testify. At year's
 end the trial was continuing.
 In November disciplinary proceedings were started against 18 riot police for their
 participation in the October beating of soccer fans attending a match in the town
 of Gdynia. By year's end, three of the officers received a verbal reprimand, two were
 declared unfit for service and placed on probation, one resigned, and one was exon-
 erated. The remaining 11 cases were still pending. The officers' activities, which
 took place before, during, and after the match, both at the stadium and at a nearby
 bar, were captured on videotape. The Gdansk prosecutor launched an official inves-
 tigation that was ongoing at ear's end.
 In May the Independent Union of Students (NZS) and the Federation of Fighting
 Youth (FMW) filed a complaint with the regional prosecutor's office against Leszek
 Miller, Minister of Internal Affairs and Administration, in connection with violence
 that broke out during a rally organized by the All-Poland Trade Union Alliance
 (OPZZ). The authors of the complaint contend that Miller, who addressed the rally,
 "must have seen and heard" participants attack two young people and journalists,
 but did nothing to stop the assault. The students also claim that the police "did not
 intervene and failed to disperse the gathering." An investigation is pending.
 In December an Olsztyn court granted the appeal of two Szczytno police officers
 found guilty of beating two men detained for questioning in September 1996. The
 case was returned to the Szczytno regional court for retrial. Four policemen in
 Legnica province were acquitted of 1995 charges that they beat underage minors.
 July the Supreme Court ruled that the law did not permit the extradition to
 China of Mr. and Mrs. Mandugeqi, a Chinese couple accused of embezzling approxi-
 mately $1 million. The Supreme Court's decision overturned the March verdict of
 the Warsaw court of appeal, which had stated that the extradition was legal. The
 Mandugeqis were apprehended in Warsaw's Okecie airport on the basis of an inter-
 national warrant on August 10, 1995. The first court that ruled on the case denied
 the extradition case filed by Chinese authorities, arguing that if extradited, the cou-
 
 
 1214
 ple might be subject to torture and other inhuman treatment forbidden under inter-
 national conventions protecting human rights and basic civil liberties.
 In May Adam Humer filed an appeal with the Warsaw district appellate court
 against his March 1996 conviction and 9-year sentence for the torture of prisoners
 when he was a security service interrogator in the 1950's.
 Prison conditions, although rapidy approaching minimum international stand-
 ards, are still generally poor, according to reports by nongovernmental organiza-
 tions. Some facilities are old and in disrepair, and many experience overcrowding.
 In a May letter to the Prime Minister, the Ombudsman for Human Rights charged
 that the condition of many detention facilities and prisons was poor and rec-
 ommended that several dozen be closed in whole or in part for renovation. The Om-
 budsman also recommended that actions be taken to reduce the prison population,
 including the decriminalization of certain offenses, such as failure to pay alimony.
 He pointed out that Poland had a very poor ratio of prisoners to rehabilitation offi-
 cers and complained about the safety of prisons, noting that inmates were often the
 victims of violence from other prisoners. In September 1996, for example, an 18-
 year-old mentally retarded boy was beaten and sodomized by fellow inmates. Those
 found guilty of the rape were convicted and sentenced to 10 additional years in pris-
 on. A civil trial against the prison administration for wrongful neglect was endig.
 Attorneys for the boy asked for approximately $30,000 (100,000 PLN) in damages.
 The Government permits human rights monitors to visit civilian prisons.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The Constitution prohibits arbitrary ar-
 rest and detention, and the Government observes this prohibition. Courts rather
 than prosecutors issue arrest warrants. The law allows a 48-hour detention period
 before authorities are required to bring a defendant before a court, during which
 access to a lawyer is normally denied. Once a prosecutor presents the legal basis
 for a formal investigation, the law provides for access to counsel. Detainees may be
 held under "temporary arrest for us to 3 months and may challenge the legality
 of an arrest through appeal to the istrict court. A court may extend this pretrial
 confinement perio eve 3 months until the trial date. Bail is available, and human
 rights organizations report that most detainees are released on bail pending trial.
 In June the Seim adopted a new Criminal Code and Code of Criminal Procedure.
 The new codes, which go into effect on September 1, 1998, are the culmination of
 an 8-year effort to restructure the criminal justice system. The new law parallels
 provisions of the new Constitution that extend the 48-hour "initial arrest" phase
 permitted under current law to 72 hours and provide detainees with a limited right
 to counsel. In this regard, arrestees currently may meet with their attorneys only
 in the presence of arresting authorities. Under the new Constitution, the right to
 counsel is provided for at all stages of a criminal proceeding. In the event arrestees
 are ordered by the court to be detained pending completion of an investigation, pros-
 ecutors may monitor all contacts between detainees and their counsel during the
 first 14 days of detention.
 In December the editor-in-chief, deputy editor-in-chief, and publisher of the week-
 ly news magazine Wprst were taken from their homes by separate police teams
 and questioned for several hours in connection with embezzlement charges. They
 were then ordered not to leave the country, deprived of their passports, and released
 on approximately $7,500 (25,000 PLN) bail pending trial. The Polish Press Freedom
 momtoring Center criticized the journalists' treatment as n threat to press freedom.
 The three men denied the charges and described the detention as a scandal and an
 instance of "Stalinist prsecutorial methods." The next day, the Poznan regional
 court ruled that the orders to detain the men were groundless and lifted the orders,
 forcing the return of their passports and bail money. The prosecutor was suspended.
 The embezzlement charges, initiated by Wprost's former business partner, are pend-
 ing. The Helsinki Foundation for Human Rights promised to monitor the prosecu-
 tor's future actions in the case.
 The Government does not employ forced exile.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The Constitution provides for an independent judi-
 ciary, and the Government respects this provision in practice.
 A three-tier court system consists of regional and provincial courts and a Supreme
 Court, which is divided into five divisions: military, civil, criminal, labor, and family.
 Judges are nominated by the National Judicial Council and appointed by the Presi-
 dent. Judges are appointed for life and can be reassigned but not dismissed, except
 by a court decision. The Constitutional Tribunal rules on the constitutionality of leg-
 islation, but its decisions may be overruled by a two-thirds majority in the Sejm.
 The new Constitution, approved by the Sejm in April, ratified in a national referen-
 dum in May, and in force as of October 16, renders Constitutional Tribunal deci-
 sions final and binding, effective after a 2-year interim period.
 
 
 1215
 The courts generally provide fair trials, and there is no evidence of significant cor-
 ruption. However, the court system continues to be plagued by a cumbersome legal
 process, por administration and an inadequate budget, all of which contribute to
 a lack of public confidence. Many effective judges an  prosecutors have left public
 service for the more lucrative private sector. Court decisions are frequently not im-
 plemented, particularly those of administrative courts. Bailiffs normally ensure the
 execution of civil verdicts such as damage payments and evictions. According to
 some observers, however, they are underpaid, subject to intimidation and bribery,
 and have a mixed record of implementing court decisions. Civil and administrative
 rulings against public institutions such as hospitals often cannot be enforced due
 to a lack of funds. Simple civil cases can take as long as 2 to 3 years before resolu-
 tion, and the pretrial waiting time in criminal cases can be several months. In 1996,
 the latest year for which figures are available, in the Warsaw district alone, 4,000
 cases (approximately 15 percent of the total caseload) were pending for over a year
 without even an initial hearing. The backlog and the costs of legal action seem to
 deter many citizens from using the justice system at all, particularly in civil matters
 such as divorce. The long wait for routine court decisions in commercial matters is
 an incentive for bribery and corruption.
 In August the European Court of Human Rights took up the first complaint
 lodged by a Polish citizen regarding protracted court proeedings. The plaintiff, a
 70-year-old woman from Stalowa Wola, was assaulted by her neighbor in 1988. In
 1990 a court found him guilty. The woman subsequently filed a civil suit in connec-
 tion with the attack. A verdict was issued in 1996, and the interest accrued from
 1988 was awarded, 6 years after the complaint was filed. The plaintiff claimed that
 the 6-year wat for the verdict violated the European human rights convention
 signed by Poland in 1991, which assures citizens the right to a just and public con-
 sideration of their case in "reasonable time." The _Europan Court ruled against the
 plaintiff on December 16 on the grounds that the plaintiff herself was partly to
 blame for the procrastination.
 All defendants are presumed innocent until proven guilty. At the end of a trial
 the court renders its decision orally and then has 7 days to prepare a written deci-
 sion. A defendant has the right to appeal within 14 days of the written decision.
 Appeals may be made on the basis of new evidence or procedural irregularities.
 Criminal cases are tried in regional and provincial courts by a panel consisting
 of a professional judge and two lay assessors. The seriousness of the offense deter-
 mines which is the court of first instance. Once formal charges are filed, the defend-
 ant is allowed to study the charges and consult with an attorney, who is provided
 at public expense if necessary. Once the defendant is prepared, a trial date is set.
 Defendants are required to be present during trial and may present evidence and
 confront witnesses in their own defense. Since 1995 prosecutors have had the au-
 thority to grant witnesses anonymity at trial if they express fear of retribution from
 the defendant. This law, designed to help combat organized crime, seriously impairs
 defendants' right to confront their accusers. In 1996 reforms were made that provide
 for a two-level appeal process in most civil and criminal matters; previously, citizens
 enjoyed access only to a one-step appeal process.
 Trials are normally public. The courts, however, reserve the right to close a trial
 to the public in some circumstances, such as divorce cases, trials in which state se-
 crets may be disclosed, or cases whose content might offend "public morality." The
 courts rarely invoke this prerogative.
 In 1996 the Sejm accepted a select committee report concluding that the intel-
 ligence services may have acted illegally in gathering evidence in the investigation
 of former premier Jozef Oleksy. The report recommended that these findings be
 passed to the prosecutor's office, which would decide whether to investigate the in-
 telligence officers involved in the case. Although the office of the Speaker of the
 Sejm officially passed the findings to the Warsaw prosecutor in January, the pros-
 ecutor decided not to pursue criminal investigations against the officers involved.
 Sejm deputies also collected the number of signatures necessary to eventually
 launch state tribunal proceedings against former interior minister Andrzej
 Milczanowski for his role in the case. The signatures were passed to the Sejm com-
 mittee for constitutional responsibility for further action; however, no additional ac-
 tion occurred by year's end.
 There were no reports of political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Constitution provides for the right to privacy of correspondence. There is no legisla-
 tion that provides for the general right to privacy. In response to the growing threat
 of organized crime and money laundering, Parliament has permitted the plice and
 intelligence services to monitor private correspondence and to use wiretaps and elec-
 tronic monitoring devices in cases involving a serious crime, narcotics, money laun-
 
 
 1216
 dering, or illegal arms sales. The Minister of Justice and the Minister of Interior,
 both political appointees, must authorize these investigative methods. In emergency
 cases, the police may initiate an investigation that utilizes wiretaps or the opening
 of private correspondence at the same time that they seek permission from the min-
 isters.
 Parliamentarians and human rights groups have expressed concern about the lack
 of control over this type of surveillance. There is no independent judicial review of
 surveillance activities, nor is there any control over how the information derived
 from these investigations is used. A growing number of agencies have access to
 wiretap information, and a recent law allows electronic surveillance to be used for
 the prevention of crime as well as for investigative purposes. In the first half of
 1996, the latest period for which statistics are available, the Justice Minister agreed
 to the surveillance of 727 individuals. Also in 1996, the Minister of Interior con-
 firmed that Office of State Protection (UOP) intelligence employees pose as post and
 telecommunications employees.
 In September the special Sejm Committee on Security Services announced that
 the UOP "may have" acted illegally against rightwing politicians in 1993, adding
 that only an independent court could rule if the law was violated at that time. The
 Committee made the announcement after examining documents submitted by UOP
 head Andrzej Kapkowski. Investigations were launched when Minister for Special
 Services Zbigniew Siemiatkowski alleged that the UOP carried out illegal activities
 in the spring of 1993, including the forging of documents, in order to discredit right-
 wing parliamentary candidates. Siemiatkowski also alleged that these activities
 were conducted with the knowledge of then Internal Affairs Minister Andrezej
 Milczanowski and then UOP head Jerzy Konieczny. Both Milczanowski and
 Konieczny have denied the accusations. Siemiatkowski then turned the-case over to
 the prosecutor's office for further investigation. The Warsaw prosecutor's office offi-
 cially opened proceedings against five UOP officers in October.
 The law forbids arbitrary forced entry into homes. Search warrants issued by a
 prosecutor are required in order to enter private residences. In emergency cases,
 when a prosecutor is not immediately available, police may enter a residence with
 the approval of the local police commander. In the most urgent cases, in which there
 is no time to consult with the police commander, police may enter a private resi-
 dence after showing their official identification. There were no reports that police
 abused search warrant procedures.
 The Ombudsman for Human Rights advocates reform of the rules governing how
 citizens are registered in their official places of residence. Current law requires all
 adults to be officially registered at a given address and allows them access to public
 services established in that locality. However, the law also permits property owners
 to "unregister" tenants from rented residences, effectively cutting citizens off from
 public services if they cannot immediately find another landlord willing to let them
 register.
 A new law compelling political leaders to reveal past collaboration with Com-
 munist era secret police-the so-called "lustracja" or vetting/lustration law-took ef-
 fect in August. The law requires candidates for high government office, including
 those for President, the Sejm, the Senate, Prime Minister, or other office that re-
 quires nomination by the President or Prime Minister, to sign a declaration stating
 whether or not they cooperated with Poland's secret services at any time between
 1944 and 1990. Although the law does not provide for the punishment of those who
 admit to having collaborated, any Sejm or Senate candidate found to have lied in
 his or her declaration is to be removed from office. Any other government official
 found to have made false statements is to be excluded from public office for 10
 years. The attempt to establish the special vetting court called for in the legislation
 failed, however, when only 20 candidates could be found for the 21 seats on the
 court. The vetting'lustration law is expected to be amended.
 In December the Sejm passed a draft law requiring similar vetting/lustration of
 judges. The law envisages the possible removal from service of judges proven to
 have violated judicial independence by issuing unjust verdicts between 1944 and
 1989 at the request of the Communist authorities. Disciplinary proceedings against
 the judges in question could be initiated by the Minister of Justice, the presidents
 of the appellate or regional courts, the National Judiciary Council, or individuals
 who feel wronged by court verdicts. The draft law awaits Senate consideration.
 Men are not permitted to marry until the age of 21, whereas women may marry
 at the age of 18 (see Section 5).
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of speech
 and the press, and the Government generally respects this right. The press is lively
 
 
 1217
 
 and independent. However, there are some marginal restrictions in law and prac-
 tice.
 The print media are uncensored and independent, although they may be subject
 to prosecution under the provisions of the Penal Code.
 The Penal Code states that acts that "publicly insult, ridicule, and deride the Pol-
 ish nation, the Polish Republic, its political system, or its principal organs are pun-
 ishable by between 6 months and 8 years of imprisonment." The coae calls for a
 prison term of up to 10 years for a person who commits any of the prohibited acts
 in print or through the mass media. In 1995 presidential candidate Leszek Bubel
 was charged with violating this law, and his case remains before a judge. Bubel
 claimed on a radio program that when he served as deputy prosecutor general, a
 former head of the presidential Chancellery protected a group of criminals. The
 Gdansk prosecutor announced an investigation into 1996 remarks by talk show host
 Wojciech Cejrowski, who is alleged to have publicly insulted president Kwasniewski.
 The case is still pending before a judge. In September President Kwasniewski filed
 a private lawsuit against the Zycie and Dziefnik Baltycki newspapers, which ac-
 cused him of contacts with Russian spy Vladimir Alganov during his 1994 vacations.
 Although Kwasniewski withdrew the suit against Dziennik Baltycki when its editor-
 in-chief retracted the newspaper's charges, the suit against Zycie is still pending.
 Kwasniewski claims that Zycie's articles violated his good name and demands that
 the newspaper apologize to him and pay approximately $76,000 (2.5 million PLN)
 for flood victims. Zycie denies that the law has been violated and maintains that
 its journalists acted in the public interest.
 In November the Torun regional prosecutor issued an order for controversial
 Catholic radio priest Father Tadeusz Rydzyk to be brought to the office by force.
 Ryczyk, the prsecutor charged, ignored five sets of summonses to appear for ques-
 tioning for ofending supreme state bodies. The prosecutor's office carried out an in-
 vestigation of Rydzyk at the request of a group of Parliamentarians who voted for
 the liberalization of the abortion law. The parliamentarians were offended when
 they were compared on the air to criminals who collaborated with the Nazis during
 World War II. Father Rydyk eventually presented himself at the prosecutor's office
 on his own initiative. An investigation of Rydzyk, who currently faces the lesser
 charge of insulting public functionaries, was ongoing at year's end.
 The Penal Code provides for punishment of anyone who uses print or other mass
 media to "advocate discord" on national, ethnic, racial, or religious grounds. The In-
 vestigation continues in the case of Mikolaj Siwicki, a Warsaw pensioner. In 1996
 the Warsaw prosecutor's office brought charges against Siwicki for publication of a
 hate-mongering book, which, the prosecutor charged, "could seriously damage the
 interests of the Polish Republic in international affairs." The book allegedly con-
 dones crimes committed by Poles during the World War 11, makes historically dubi-
 ous claims about Polish crimes against the Ukrainian nation, and calls for lands in
 southeastern Poland to be given to Ukraine.
 The Penal Code also stipulates that offending religious sentiment through public
 speech is punishable by a fine or a 2-year prison term. In 1995 a provincial court
 charged presidential candidate Leszek Bubel with violating this article by publish-
 ing a pamphlet containing anti-Semitic humor. A verdict was pending at year's end.
 In July Ryszard Bender filed a complaint against Jerzy Urban, editor-in-chief of the
 leftist tabloid Nie, for insulting the Pope during his visit. The complaint stemmed
 from a Nie article entitled "We welcome Brezhnev of the Holy See." Bender claimed
 that associating the Pope with Leonid Brezhnev was offensive. The prosecutor even-
 tually decided not to pursue the case. Catholic organizations also have used the pro-
 vision. In December Tadeusz Rydzyk and All-Polish Youth director Roman Giertych,
 both acting on behalf of the Council for the Coordination of the Defense of the Dig-
 nity of Poland and Poles, filed charges against the leftist daily Trybuna for insulting
 the Pope in one of its November articles. Rydzyk and Giertych were particularly of-
 fended by the characterization of the Pope as a "boorish vicar," by the reference to
 one of his statements as "dirty and mumbling," and by the suggestion that he used
 his position to make slanderous statements. According to one press report, the news-
 paper's editor-in-chief already apologized for the article twice. The Ministry of Jus-
 tice is conducting an investigation.
 The State Secrets Act allows for prosecution of private citizens who have pub-
 lished or otherwise betrayed state secrets. Human rights groups have criticized this
 law, since it restricts the right of free speech of private citizens who have not sworn
 freely to uphold state secrets.
 In 1995 the Supreme Court ruled that a prosecutor or a judge, in the context of
 a criminal trial, may order a journalist to divulge the name of a source. The penalty
 for noncompliance is a fine of approximately $2,000 (5,000 PLN) and 1 month in
 jail. In January a case was brought against Gazeta Wyborcza journalist Jerzy
 
 
 1218
 Jachowicz for refusing to reveal a source who had given him secret court informa-
 tion regarding the Oleksy affair. Similar charges were brought against Aleksander
 Checko and Karol Malcuzynski-then editors of the Zycie Warszawy-in March.
 Their case has since been dismissed. A new Criminal Code scheduled to take effect
 on September 1, 1998, however, regulates the protection of journalistic sources. The
 new code grants news sources absolute protection, except in cases involving national
 security, murder, and terrorist acts. Pursuant to the law, statutory provisions are
 appliedretroactively if their terns are beneficial to the accused. Journalists who re-
 fused to divulge sources prior to the new code's enactment can avoid sanctions by
 invoking "journalistic privilege" after the new code's entry into force.
 There is no restriction on the establishment of private newspapers or distribution
 of journals; private newspapers and magazines flourish. While RUCH the national
 network of newspaper kiosks, remains in state hands, there is no evidence that the
 Government has used its control over distribution to suppress any publications.
 Progres on government plans to privatize the company in 1996 slowed when the
 bidding process was reopened after having reached near completion. A civil suit ini-
 tiated  the oriial winner of the bidding pcess was pening at years end.
 The National Radio and Television Broadcasting Council (KRRiTV) has broad in-
 trpretive powers in monitoring and regulating programming on public radio and
 television, allocating broadcasting frequencies and licenses, and apportioning sub-
 scription revenues,   or er to encourage the KRRiTV'S apolitical character, the
 nine KRRiTV members are legally obliged to suspend any membership in political
 parties or public associations. They are, however, chosen for their political alle-
 gianes andnominated by the Sejm, the Senate, and the President following politi-
 cal bargaining, raising serious questions about the independence of broadcasting
 oversight from political influence. In April, for example, SLD party member Adam
 Halber was elected to the council. Five of the KRRiTV'S nine members now have
 political ties to either the SLD or the PSL.
 The broadcasting law stipulates that programs should not promote activities that
 are illegal or against state policy, morelity, or the common good. The law also re-
 quires that all broadcasts "respect the religious feelings of the audiences and in par-
 ticular respect the Christian system of values." The law, however, does not fully de-
 fine the term "Christian values." The Constitutional Tribunal has confirmed the
 constitutionality of this provision. Since the KRRiTV has the ultimate brsponsibility
 for supervising the content of programs, these restrictions could be used as a means
 of censorship if enforced, but they were not in 1997. The penalty for violating this
 provision of the law is a fine of up to 50 prcent of the annual fee for the trans-
 mission freouency or suspension of the broadaster's license.
 Private televisi on broadcasters operate on frequencies selected by the Ministry of
 Communications and auctioned by the KRRiTV. The first auction in 1994 gave
 Polsat Corporation and some smaller local and religious stations licenses to broad-
 cast. In February additional licenses were ganted to TVN and Nasza Telewizja.
 TVN began broadcasting in October while Nasza Telewizja is expected to begin
 transmissions in January 1998. Private radio flourishes on the local, regional, and
 national levels alongside public radio. A new radio station, Radio Trefi, began broad-
 casting in September.
 The Government owns the two largest television channels and many local sta-
 tions, as well as five national radio networks. PAP, the national wire service, was
 partially privatized in December. Former Reuters journalist Robert Bogdanski heads
 a five-member supervisory board that has 2 years in which to prepare the service
 for full privatization. Although public television remains the largest source of news
 and information, satellite television and private cable services (domestic and for-
 eign) are widely available. Cable services carry the main public channels, Polsat,
 local and regional stations, and a variety of foreign stations.
 The law on radio and television requires public television to provide direct media
 access to the main state organs, including the presidency, "o make presentations
 or explanations of public policy." The Government scommes gomplains of a lack of
 attention to its point of view, particulariy that of the President and Prime Minister,
 but there is a history of charge and counter-charge. Both public and private radio
 and television provide coverage of all ranges of political opinion. Nevertheless, politi-
 cal patronage i filling key position  ntinues to threaten the professional credibil-
 ity of public television, still the most influential broadcast media.
 Government or partisan efforts to exert influence in public television were szen-
 erally more indirect: it is unclear what the effect, if any, has been on programming.
 In March, for example, Jacek Bochenek, then Television Information Agency (TA)
 programming chair, transferred under pressure to a correspondent position in Brus-
 sels. The head of the main television news program also aciesd to a lateral
 move, although his replacement is regarded as a neutral professional. The
 
 
 1219
 KRRiTV'S August 7 election of new supervisory boards for public radio (PR) and
 public television (TVP), intermediary bodies between the KRRIfTV and the respective
 managing boards, was clearly political. Seven of the nine positions on both boards
 are now occupied by persons from either the SLD or the PSL. The remaining two
 members of the TP supervisory board, Marek Zdrojewski of the Solidarity Elec-
 toral Action (AWS) and Wociech Marczewski of the Freedom Union (UW), resigned
 their positions in protest. They were replaced in November by Lech Jaworski, sup-
 ported by the right, and Marcin Krzyzanowski supported by the Freedom Union
 (UW). The final composition of the new boards led KRRiTV chairman Boleslaw
 Sulik to declare August 7 a "black day" for the public media in Poland.
 Evidence of overt political tampering in pubic broadcasting remains scarce, and
 watchdog organizations are alert to expose quickly any such tampering. There was
 one incident in which the Government sought to influence media reporting. In
 March government press spokeswoman Aleksandra Jakubowska accused public tele-
 vision's news desk of manipulating its coverage of a protest by Solidarity members
 that had occurred at the Treasury Ministry building days before. The incident was
 filmed by the police, but public television cameramen were not allowed to enter the
 building. The day after the event, the government press office supplied a 6-minute
 videocassette with police footage to both public television and a private station. Pub-
 lic television broadcast the tape, but edited out several minutes from its broadcast.
 Jakubowska complained of "deliberate misinformation of the public by showing a
 distorted picture of the developments." Jacek Snopkiewicz, the recently appointed
 head of TVP news, countered that the 6-minute tape itself presented a distorted
 view of the events and accused Jakubowska of attempting to exert pressure on pub-
 lic media.
 Books expressing a wide range of political and social viewpoints are widely avail-
 able, as are foreign periodicals and other publications from abroad.
 In August billboards that carried the message "Stay cool. It's O.K. Condoms pre-
 vent AIDS" were taken down in several towns and small cities throughout the coun-
 try under public pressure. The billboards, which were intended as a public service
 campaign against AIDS, pictured a black and white drawing of a mans hand in the
 "thumbs up  position. The man's up-stretched thumb sported a bright pink condom.
 Those objecting to the advertisements purported to do so on scientific grounds,
 claiming that the advertisement suggested that condoms were a sure way to prevent
 AIDS wnen studies have shown that they are not 100 percent reliable. In March
 complaints were filed with bth the Warsaw prosecutor's and the Krakow prosecu-
 tr's offices in connection with a billbard advertising the American film "The Peo-
 ple vs. Larry Flynt." The complaints argued that the billboards offended religious
 sentiment. The advertisement pictured a drawing of a man, his arms and legs out-
 stretched in a crucifixion position, superimposed on a larger drawing of a woman's
 lower half. The Krakow prosecutor is pursuing an investigation.
 Academic freedom is respected.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The law provides for freedom
 of assembly, and the Government generally respects this right in practice. Permits
 are not necessary for public meetings but are required for public demonstrations;
 demonstration organizers must obtain these permits from local authorities if the
 demonstration might block a public road. For large demonstrations, organizers are
 also required to inform the local police of the time and place of their activities and
 their planned route. Every gathering must have a chairman who is required to open
 the demonstration, preside over it, and close it.
 In March city authorities for the first time in years denied the Solidarity trade
 union permission to demonstrate along a central thoroughfare traditionally used for
 labor protests. Marchers determined to proceed along their usual demonstration
 route then clashed with police cordons that blocked the way.
 The law provides for freedom of association, and the Government generally re-
 spects this right in practice. Private associations need governmental approval to or-
 ganize and must register with their district court. The procedure essentially re-
 quires the organization to sign a declaration to abide by the law. In practice, how-
 ever, the procedure itself is complicated and may be subject to the discretion of the
 judge in charge.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for freedom of religion, and the
 Government respects this right in practice. Citizens enjoy the freedom to practice
 any faith they choose. Religious groups may organize, select and train personnel, s-
 licit and receive contributions, publish, andengage in consultations without govern-
 ment interference. There are no government restrictions on establishing and main-
 taining places of worship. More than 95 percent of Poles are Roman Catholic, but
 Eastern Orthodox, Greek Catholic, and much smaller Protestant, Jewish, and Mus-
 lim congregations meet freely. Although the Constitution provides for the separation
 
 
 1220
 of church and state, state-run radio broadcasts Catholic mass on Sundays. The
 Catholic Church is authorized to relicense radio and television stations to operate
 on frequencies assigned to the Church, the only body outside the KRRiTV allowed
 to do so.
 The Ombudsman continued his investigation into the human rights implications
 of the "Soldier's Prayer Book," a 1995 book authored by General Kazimierz
 Tomaszewski, chief of the Warsaw Military District. The book states that members
 of a special honor guard who do not take part in military mass are considered to
 be disobeying orders. While this publication does not constitute law, it bears the
 same weight.
 Although the new Constitution gives parents the right to bring up their children
 in compliance with their own religious and philosophical beliefs, religious education
 classes continue to be taught in the public schools at public expense. While children
 are supposed to have the choice between religious instruction and ethics, the Om-
 budsman's office states that in most schools ethics courses are not offered due to
 financial constraints. Although Catholic Church representatives teach the vast ma-
 jority of religious classes in the schools, parents can request religious classes in any
 of the religions legally registered, including Protestant, Orthodox, and Jewish reli-
 gious instruction. Such non-Catholic religious instruction exists in practice, and the
 instructors are paid by the Ministry of Education. The joint State-Episcopate Com-
 mission announced in 1996 that priests would receive salaries from the state budget
 for teaching religion in public schools; payment of such salaries began in September.
 Church representatives are included on a commission that determines whether
 books qualify for school use.
 A government-proposed resolution on ratification of the Concordat, a treaty regu-
 lating relations between the Government and the Vatican signed in 1993, as well
 as a number of Concordat-related bills, remained under consideration in the Sejm
 at year's end. Critics of the Concordat have called for legislation requiring the
 Church to register all church marriages with civil authorities and forbidding the
 church from denying burial to non-Catholics in cemeteries that it controls.
 In August the Senate rejected an amendment to the Law on Education that
 banned grades in religion from appearing on school report cards. Proponents of the
 amendment argued that knowledge of a student's attendance or lack of attendance
 in religion courses could be cause for discrimination when a graduate applied to a
 university or undertakes employment. The bill, which also limited religious instruc-
 tion in kindergartens, was returned to the Sejm for further action.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-Although the Constitution does not address freedom of movement, the
 Government does not restrict internal or foreign travel. Citizens who leave Poland
 have no trouble returning. There are no restrictions on emigration.
 The Government generally cooperates with the United Nations High Commis-
 sioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and other humanitarian organizations in assisting ref-
 ugees. There are no reports of forced repatriation of those having a valid claim to
 refugee status. Foreigners recognized as refugees under the 1951 U.N. Convention
 Relating to the Status of Refugees are granted full refugee status and permission
 to remain permanently. According to UNHCR figures, approximately 2,900 individ-
 uals applied for refugee status during the first three quarters of 1997. Of the 4,000
 applications awaiting decision (including the 1,100 applications carried over from
 1996), 121 were approved and 404 were denied, while 2,349 were discontinued due
 to the applicant's failure to appear for a hearing. The remaining cases are pending.
 In September the President signed a new law on immigration, which human
 rights organizations generally view as a positive development. Initiated 2 years ago,
 the new law gives all prospective refugees access to a procedure for adjudicating ref-
 ugee status and establishes an independent council to which prospective refugees
 can appeal negative status decisions by the Ministry of Internal Affairs. The law
 does not recognize the concept of first asylum or any other form of temporary protec-
 tion.
 Although some observers have criticized the authorities for using deportation cen-
 ters in lieu of refugee centers (when the latter are full), as well as for long delays
 in the initial review of refugee status applications, the Government cites a lack of
 resources as a major cause of the problems. Deputy Minister of Internal Affairs
 Katarzyna Piekarska admitted in April that the time taken to review refugee status
 applications was too long. She noted, however, that only nine people were reviewing
 several thousand applications.
 
 
 1221
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens have the right and ability to change their government peacefully. This
 right is provided for in the Constitution and exists in practice. Poland is a
 multiparty democracy in which all citizens 18 years of age and older have the right
 to vote and to cast secret ballots.
 Executive power is divided between the President and a government chosen by
 the Sejm, or lower house of Parliament. There is also an upper house (the Senate).
 The Constitution provides for parliamentary elections at least every 4 years. The
 President, elected for 5 years, has the right to dissolve Parliament following a vote
 of no confidence or when Parliament fails to pass a budget within 3 months after
 the government submits it. Parliament may impeach the President. The electoral
 law exempts ethnic minority parties from the requirement to win 5 percent of the
 vote nationwide in order to qualify for seats in individual districts.
 A permanent, democratic Constitution was passed by the Sejm in April and ap-
 proved in a nationwide referendum on May 25. The new document came into force
 on October 16. The interim Constitution consisted of the "Small Constitution" of
 1992, governing the structure of government, and several sections of the 1952 Com-
 munist-era Constitution, including a Bill of Rights. The latter includes so-called eco-
 nomic rights.
 Women are underrepresented in government and politics. Only 13 percent of par-
 liamentarians are women while only 3 of the 23 cabinet ministers are women. The
 Speaker of the Senate is the only female parliamentary leader, while none of the
 leaders of the nation's largest political parties are women. Prime Minister
 Wlodzimierz Cimoszewicz chose a team of 40 advisers early in 1996, which included
 only 2 women.
 Two members of the German Minority Party are members of Parliament.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 A number of human rights groups operate without government restriction, inves-
 tigating and publishing their findings on human rights cases. Government officials
 are generally cooperative and responsive to their views.
 The Helsinki Committee, a major nongovernmental organization (NGO), con-
 ducted human rights investigations without government interference. Members of
 the Committee report that the Government displays a generally positive and helpful
 attitude towards human rights investigations. Some local NGO a, however, believe
 that a hostile regulatory climate is developing in parts of the government bureauc-
 racy.
 The Office of the Commissioner for Civil Rights Protection (the Ombudsman), es-
 tablished in 1987, is the Government's watchdog for human rights. The Ombuds-
 man's office is an independent body with broad authority to investigate alleged vio-
 lations of civil rights and liberties. The Ombudsman registers each reported case
 and files grievances, where appropriate, with the relevant government office. He has
 no legislative authority and is sworn to act apolitically.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The interim Constitution calls for equal rights "irrespective of sex, birth, edu-
 cation, profession, nationality, race, religion, social status and origin." Other clauses
 provide equal rights to women and religious minorities. The new Constitution states
 only that "no one shall be discriminated against in political, social or economic life
 for any reason whatsoever."
 Women.-Violence against women continues to be a problem, with occasional re-
 ports in the press of wife beating and spousal rape. According to statistics released
 by the Public Research Center in January, 9ercent of women polled admitted to
 being repeatedly beaten by their husbands an another 8 percent admitted to being
 spradically beaten. Women's organizations warn, however, that the number of
 those suffering from domestic abuse is probably much higher. They explain that,
 commonly, battered women refuse to admit abuse even to themselves. Government
 and police statistics do not differentiate between male and female victims of vio-
 lence. In addition the Government has not provided public information on the prob-
 lem. Police do intervene in cases of domestic violence, and husbands can be con-
 victed for beating their wives, but statistics provided by the Women's Rights Center
 suggest that a large majority of convictions result in suspended sentences. In No-
 vember, for example, a provincial court in Opole sentenced a man to only 2 years
 in prison and a fine of $1,000 (3,500 PLN) for the brutal beating death of his wife.
 
 
 1222
 The court ruled that the man had not planned to kill his wife and that her death
 was an unintended result of the beating.
 The law has no provision for restraining orders to protect battered women against
 potential abuse. Women's advocacy groups have complained about the small number
 of state-supported shelters for battered women.
 Trafficking in women is illegal, and two specific provisions in the Criminal Code
 address this problem. Those convicted of trafficking in women or children may be
 sentenced to prison for 3 to 10 years. Incidents of trafficking, however, are on the
 rise. According to a recent report published by La Strada's First Central and East
 European Program on Prevention of Traffic in Women, 70 cases of trafficking in
 women were reported during the first 4 months of 1996. The La Strada report
 noted, however, that available data on trafficking in women is only "the tip of the
 iceberg." Most victims do not want to speak about their experiences out of fear or
 shame, and the real scale of the crime is estimated to be at least twice the number
 of reported cases. The bulk of these cases involve women induced to work as pros-
 titutes in Western Europe after being promised work as domestic workers, nurses,
 nannies, or teachers. The perpetrators are most often the acquaintances of family
 or friends, but have been known to include job agencies, talent scouts, and match-
 making services. Poland also serves more and more frequently as a transit country
 for the trafficking in women from other countries, particularly the former Soviet
 Union. Women from this area are often forced into prostitution in Poland, then sent
 on to countries within the European Union as well as Switzerland and Israel.
 The problem of sexual harassment is a relatively new one, but women are increas-
 ingly talking about it and speaking out against it. While laws specifically addressing
 sexual harassment do not exist, social awareness is increasing, as are mechanisms
 with the potential to deal with the problem. The new Criminal Code, for example,
 states that whoever takes advantage of a position of power in a relationship to gain
 sexual gratification may be sentenced to prison for 6 months to 5 years. According
 to a Supreme Court advisory opinion, such a relationship can occur between employ-
 ers an employees, between supervsors and subordinates, or between teachers and
 students. This provision can only be used, however, when sexual harassment occurs
 between a supervisor and an individual in a subordinate position. It may not be
 used when the harassment occurs between persons of equal rank.
 The Constitution provides for equal rights regardless of sex and grants women
 equal rights with men in all fields of family poitical, social, and economic life, in-
 cluding equal compensation for work of similar value. In practice, however, women
 are frequently paid less for equivalent work, mainly hold lower level positions, are
 discharged more quickly, and are less likely to be pro mated than men. Ministry of
 Labor statistics indicate that 57 percent of the unemployed were women and that
 despite a generally higher level of education, women earn on average 25 percent less
 Women are employed in a broad variety of professions and occupations, and a
 tha mdn
 number of women occupy high positions in Government and in the private sector.
 However, legal barriers, such as clauses in social insurance law limiting child sick
 care benefits to women only and mandating earlier retirement for women, encourage
 discrimination in hiring. The law does not address equality in hiring practices (there
 are no legal penalties for discriminatory behavior in this area), and advertisements
 for jobs frequently indicate a gender preference. Although women have access to a
 number of previously forbidden careers since the Labor Code was modified in 1996,
 they are still prevented from working underground or in jobs that require heavy lift-
 he Ombudsman for Human Rights monitors the rights of women within the
 Ibroader context of human rights. Observers note that the brad scope of the office's
 mandate dilutes its ability~ to function as an effective advocate of women's issues.
 Within the Cabinet, the "Government Plenipotentiary for Women and the Family"
 is responsible for providing relevant information to the Government as it formulates
 policy. Several women's rights NGO's exist. Among the most notable are the Polish
 Foundation for Women and Family Planning and the Women's Rights Center. These
 groups are active advocates of gender equality and advance their goals through re-
 search, monitoring, and publication. Several church-sponsored women's advocacy or-
 ganizations also exist, but their cooperation with other women's NGO's is limited.
 No progress occurred during the year in amending the 1962 Citizenship Law,
 which discriminates against women by refusing them the same right as men to
 transmit citizenship to their foreign-born spouses. In 1994 the average life span for
 women was 76.8 years; it has been dropping ever since.
 Chiidren.-The Constitution extends some state protection to the family and chil-
 dren and provides for the appointment of an Ombudsman for children's rights. The
 Ombudsman had not been appointed by year's end. Education is now mandatory
 
 
 1223
 
 until the age of 18, and public schools are free of charge. -The Government sponsors
 some health programs targeted specifically at children, including a vaccination pro-
 gram and periodic checkups conducted through the schools. However, budget shoit-
 falls prevent complete implementation of these programs. The school system does
 not provide health education classes for children. Some NGO's have tried to fill this
 gap: the Batory foundation set up a program to provide health education for chil-
 dren by providing training and instructional materials to a group of teachers, but
 a spokesperson has acknowledged that the scope of the problem far outstrips this
 small program.
 There are no procedures in schools to protect children from abuse by teachers; in
 fact, the teachers' work code provides legal immunity from prosecution for the use
 of corporal punishment in classrooms.
 Prostitution among 12- and 13-year-olds is increasing, and unemployment, alco-
 holism, and housing shortages have affected the quality of life of children. Moreover,
 there are no laws explicitly addressing violence against children or corporal punish-
 ment. Abuse is rarely reported, and convictions for child abuse are even rarer. There
 is no societal pattern of abuse of children. Parents have the right to make all deci-
 sions concerning their children's medical treatment and education.
 There is unequal treatment of young men and women in terms of the age of ma-
 jority. Youths reach majority at the age of 18 under the Civil Code. However, a
 young woman can reach majority at the age of 16 if she has entered into marriage
 with the consent of her parents and the guardianship court. In addition, men are
 not permitted to marry without parental consent until the age of 21, whereas
 women may do so at the age of 18. Lawmakers' rationale for this difference in treat-
 ment is the assumption that it is better that men entering compulsory military serv-
 ice not be encumbered with families.
 People With Disabilities.-There are approximately 4.5 million disabled persons
 and the number is expected to reach 6 million by the year 2010. In 1995 the Central
 Bureau of Statistics (GUS) reported that 17 percent of disabled persons able to work
 are unemployed. Advocacy groups claim that the percentage is much higher. The
 latest GUS data indicate that 57.3 percent of the disabled have ho more than an
 elementary education, compared with 30 percent of those without disabilities and
 that only 3.5 percent have a university education, compared with 7.7 percent of the
 nondisshled.
 The Constitution provides for aid to disabled persons "to ensure their subsistence,
 professional t       and social communication," and a number of laws protect the
 rights of people with disabilities. Implementation, however, falls short of rights set
 forth in the legislation. Public buildings and transportation are generally not acces-
 sible to people with disabiities; the law provides only that such buildings 'should
 be accessible." The National Museum in Warsaw became the first museum to be
 adapted to the needs of disabled visitors during the year.
 The law creates a state fund for the rehabilitation of the disabled that derives its
 assets from a tax on employers of over 50 persons, unless 6 percent of the employ-
 er's work force are disabled persons. While the fund has adequate resources, its
 management has been fraught with difficulties, including frequent changes in lead-
 ership. Accordingto press reports, the fund has 4,000 grant applications pending.
 In addition, the fundby law cannot be used to assist disabled chidrn, that is, per-
 sons under 16 ears of age.
 A 1996 law that took effect in September allows individuals from certain disability
 groups to take up gainful employment without the risk of losing their disability ben-
 efits. Previously, disabled individuals from those groups lost their benefits once they
 began to work.
 Religious Minorities.-Current law places Protestant, Catholic, Orthodox, and
 Jewish religions on the same legal footing.
 The Sjm on February 20 passed a law on Jewish communal property restitution
 to allow the local Jewish community to submit claims for property owned prior to
 World War . Possible communal property claims include synagogues, cemeteries,
 and Jewish community headquarters, as well as buildings that were used for other
 religious, educational, or charitable activities. However, the law does not address
 the private property of any group or Jewish communal properties to which third
 parties now have ti~tle, leaving several controversial and complicated issues unre-
 solved.
 In February an arsonist set fire to the vestibule of the Nozyk synagogue in War-
 saw by throwing an incendiary device through the window over the former main en-
 trance. Both the vestibule and the door leading to the synagogue's main hall were
 gutted. One person who had been sleeping in a nearb aartment was treated for
 smoke inhalation, but there were no other injuries. Officials quickly condemned the
 attack as "an act of barbarism." In a statement issued that day, President
 
 
 1224
 Aleksander Kwasniewski emphasized that "the Polish people and state authorities
 condemn all acts of racism, anti-Semitism, and xenophobia." A memorial service
 held in the Warsaw synagogue that evening was well attended by individuals of sev-
 eral faiths. No arrests hav ebeen made.
 In March vandals broke some windows at a Jewish cultural center in Zary, and
 in May vandals defaced a memorial at a Jewish cemetery in Staszow with swastikas
 and the German phrase "Juden Raus" (Jews out). The memorial had been unveiled
 just a week earlier. Although the police were initially unable to identify the per-
 petrators, increased international pressure ultimately led to the arrest of two youths
 who are members of "The Historical Society," a local skinhead group. The press
 early in the year reported tombstone defacings in the Jewish cemeteries of Legmca
 and Proszowice, as well as similar defacings in three Catholic cemeteries and one
 Catholic church during the same time period.
 In January the Gdansk prosecutor reinstated charges against controversial priest
 Henryk Jankowski for an allegedly anti-Semitic sermon that he gave in June 1995.
 The charges had previously b~een dropped twice. Responding to the latest indict-
 ment, Jankowski commented that the Jewish minority was ruling the country and
 complained that he should have the right to express himself freely. "I have nothing
 against Jews," he said, "but when it comes to those who are involved in this, one
 should not tolerate such a situation." Under an arrangement with the prosecutor,
 Jankowski was sentenced to 2 years' probation and fined approximately $300 (1,000
 PLN) in connection with these charges in March.
 In November Father Jankowski made headlines again when Gdansk Archbishop
 Tadeusz Goclowski suspended him from his position as pastor of St. Brigitte's
 church for 1 year as punishment for using his pulpit to make political remarks. The
 suspension followed directly a sermon Jankowski delivered during which he warned
 against the presence of Jews in the Government. Jankowski was allowed, however,
 to live in his parish house and to serve as assistant chaplain. In separate interviews
 given shortly after his suspension, both Goclowski and Cardinal Jozef Glemp em-
 phasized that Jankowski was punished for expressing political views that should not
 be expressed in church, while denying charges that Jankowski was an anti-Semite.
 Approximately a week after Jankowski's October sermon, a 14-year-old Jewish
 boy was beaten up and kicked into the street in Gdansk by a 17-year-old skinhead.
 The assault was widely believed to be motivated by anti-Semitism. While the
 attacker was released after questioning, indictments in the case are expected in
 1998. The prosecutor's investigation is pending. The victim's father, a Gdansk rabbi,
 is convinced that Jankowski contributed to the attack through his sermon.
 National/Racial/Ethnic Minorities.-The law provides for the educational rights
 of ethnic minorities, including the right to be taught in their own language. Poland's
 bilateral treaties with Germany and Belarus contain provisions relating to the
 rights of those national minorities, and human rights groups have described these
 provisions as "close to ideal." A program was initiated during the 1996-97 school
 year to teach Lithuanian to pupils of Lithuanian descent in 12 schools in north-
 eastern Poland. Some 4,000 students began learning Belarusian in the Bialystok re-
 gion in 1996.
 In 1996 a Greek Catholic cupola was torn down in Przemysl, reportedly for safety
 reasons but without the consent of the city's Ukrainian  reek  atholic minority.
 The event fueled ongoing tension between the Roman Catholic majority and the
 Ukrainian minority there. In June Ukrainian community leaders in Przemysl com-
 plained that authorities there unnecessarily delayed permission to use a city sta-
 dium for a Ukrainian cultural festival. The city eventually granted permission 10
 days before the event, and the festival took place without incident.
 The Romani community, numbering around 40,000, faced disproportionately high
 unemployment and was harder hit by economic changes and restructuring than
 were ethnic Poles, according to its leaders. The national Government does not overt-
 ly discriminate against Roma; however, some local officials have been known to dis-
 criminate by not providing services in a timely manner or at all. Some schools have
 experimented with separate special classes for Romani children, stating that be-
 cause of economic disadvantage, language barriers, and parental illiteracy, Romani
 children are behind their non-Romani counterparts when starting school. One teach-
 er in the province of Nowy Sacz referred to Romani students in her classroom as
 "retarded" when speaking to a group of Romani advocates.
 Individuals of African, Asian, or Arab descent continue to experience occasional
 verbal abuse or other types of aggression.
 In September the registry department of the Katowice provincial court began its
 consideration of the Silesian registration issue. A small number of Silesians in this
 area have sought to register themselves as a national minority. The Katowice pro-
 vincial office has opposed their registration on the grounds that Silesians do not
 
 
 1225
 
 constitute a separate nation. Official registration would allow representatives of the
 Association of the Population of Silesian Nationality, as the group calls itself, to run
 for Parliament under the preferences accorded national minorities under electoral
 law.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The law provides that all civilian workers, as well
 as military employees, police, and frontier guards, have the right to establish and
 join trade unions of their own choosing. Unions also have the right to join labor fed-
 erations and confederations and to affiliate with international labor organizations.
 Independent labor leaders reported that these rights were largely observed in prac-
 tice.
 The law sets minimum size requirements for establishing a trade union: 10 per-
 sons may form a local union, and 30 may establish a national union. Unions, includ-
 ing interbranch national unions and national interbranch federations, must be reg-
 istered with the courts. A court decision refusing registration may be appealed to
 a higher court. In 1997 the number of re gstered national-level unions rose to 350
 from 318. No precise data exists on work force unionization, but some estimates put
 membership at some 40 percent of state/public sector employees, with the figure at
 about 5 percent in the private sector. As a rule, newly established small- and me-
 dium-sized firms were nonunion, while union activity in most cases carried over into
 privatized (former state-owned) enterprises. The Independent Self-governing Trade
 Union (NSZZ) Solidarity has a verified, regular dues-paying membership of about
 1.4 million. Small spin-offs from mainstream Solidarity include the rival factions
 Solidarity '80, August '80 and Christian Trade Union Solidarity (Popieluszko). There
 are no reliable estimates of their membership.
 The other principal national unions are those affiliated with the All-Poland Trade
 Union Alliance (OPZ), the Communist-inspired confederation 'established in 1984
 as the sole legal alternative to then-repressed NSZZ Solidarity, and its teachers' af-
 filiate, the Polish Union of Teachers (ZNP). The OPZZ reports that its membership
 has dropped by more than 50 percent in recent years to about 3 million, but this
 figure is unverified, and independent sociological surveys suggest that its regular
 dues-paying membership may be similar to or less than Solidarity's.
 The law on collective bargaining, in force since 1994, does not require union mem-
 bership figures to be verified or based on dues-paying members in order for unions
 to be considered "representative" negotiating partners for management and govern-
 ment. Solidarity protested some unions' (largely OPZZ affiliates) participation in ne-
 gotiations with the Government on the grounds that their membership figures re-
 main unproven.
 In 1997 there was some movement in the long-running dispute between the OPZZ
 and Solidarity over Communist-era trade union property administered by the OPZZ.
 In June the Ministry of Labor divided 12 properties between Solidarity and the
 OPZZ. These had belonged to the Communist-era trade union organization Associa-
 tion of Trade Unions/Central Council of Trade Unions (ZZ7JCRZZ) until 1984, after
 which the OPZZ administered them. Solidarity charged that the OPZZ received the
 choicest properties, including the former headquarters building located in downtown
 Warsaw. In July President Kwasniewski signed a bill that transferred as many as
 400 properties (the exact number is still unknown) in the nationwide "FWP" holiday
 home system (workers' vacation houses/hotels) to a new limited liability company
 controlled entirely by the OPZZ. Solidarity announced that it would challenge this
 law in the Constitutional Tribunal. The ownership and future of scores of other
 trade union assets belonging to branch unions remain under dispute. The continuing
 dispute over assets remains a major reason behind International Confederation of
 Free Trade Unions (ICFTU) and European Trade Union confederation (ETUC) un-
 willingness to affiliate the OPZZ.
 Most trade unions were active in politics at all levels. Scores of union activists
 were parliamentarians and several became senior government officials. During the
 1993-97 Sejm term that ended in September, more than two-thirds of the 169 depu-
 ties of the governing SLD were or had been OPZZ members. Of these OPZZ formally
 sponsored 63 as "trade union deputies," but many left the OPZZ during the term
 and ran on the Social Democracy of the Republic of Poland (SdRP) ticket in the Sep-
 tember elections. The number of OPZZ deputies fell to 42 after the elections, about
 one-quarter of the 164-member SLD caucus.
 Solidarity had a 13-member caucus in the Senate during the 1993-1997'term and
 became even more involved in politics following the unions decision to enter the fall
 1997 parliamentary elections via Solidarity Electoral Action (AWS), a union-bro-
 kered coalition of some 35 center-right political groups. On the AWS ticket 216 Soli-
 darity activists ran for Parliament (representing about 28 percent of all AWS can-
 
 
 1226
 didates), and 62 were elected (representing almost one-third of the 200 AWS seats).
 The trade union Kontra, the labor wing of the Confederation of Independent Poland
 (KPN), was represented in the 1993-1997 Parliament, and several of its leaders ran
 again on the AVS ticket but failed to win any seats.
 Unions have the right to strike except in "essential services." However, labor lead-
 ers charge that the 1991 Act on Collective Dispute Resolution prescribes an overly
 lengthy process before a strike may be called. Employers consider the law too le-
 nient, since it allows only one-quarter of the work force to vote to call a strike. As
 a result, as many as 60 to 90 percent of strikes called in recent years have been
 technically "illegal" because one or both of the sides did not follow each step exactly
 as required by law. Labor courts act slowly on deciding the legality of strikes while
 sanctions against unions for calling illegal strikes, or against employers for provok-
 ing them, are minimal. Arbitration is not obligatory and depends on the will of dis-
 puting parties. Unions charge that laws prohibiting retribution against strikers are
 not consistently enforced and that fines imposed as punishment are so minimal that
 they are ineffective deterrents to illegal activity. Workers who strike in accordance
 wit the law retain their right to social insurance but not pay. If a court rules a
 strike "illegal," however, workers may lose social benefits, and organizers are liable
 for damages and may face civil charges and fines.
 The number of strikes continued to fall (30 as of September, down from a high
 of several thousand per year in the early 1990's). The social partners (unions, em-
 ployers, and the Government) continued to work out ambiguities in dispute resolu-
 tion mechanisms in the new Labor Code, which went into effect on June 1, 1996,
 and which represent a major overhaul of Communist-era labor regulations.
 Solidarity is a full member of the ICFTU, the World Confederation of Labor, and
 the ETUC.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The 1991 Law on Trade
 Unions sought to create a favorable environment for trade union activity.
 Labor leaders, however, report that the 1991 law has not prevented employers
 from discriminating against workers who attempt to organize or join unions, par-
 . ticularly in the growing private sector. The law also has not prevented employer
 harassment of union members for their labor activity.
 The 1991 law provides for parties to take disputes first to labor courts, then to
 the prosecutor general, and, in the last resort, to the Supreme Court. In a typical
 year, Solidarity takes several thousand cases to labor courts, several hundred to the
 prosecutor general, and dozens to _the Supreme Court for resolution. In an over-
 whelming majority of these cases, the courts ordered employers to correct practices
 or reinstate dismissed workers or unions to reimburse employers for activity found
 to be illegal. Penalties, however, are minimal and are not an effective deterrent.
 Enterprise-level collective bargaining over wages and working conditions increas-
 ingly characterized the labor relations system. Labor and management are adapting
 their relationship to the demands of a market economy, but experience in modern
 labor relations is still in its early stages. Many enterprises rolled over agreements
 concluded in early years.
 Since its formation in early 1994, the Tripartite Commission (unions, employers,
 Government), chaired by Labor Minister Longin Komolowski, has become the main
 forum that determines national-level wage and benefit increases in such politically
 sensitive areas as the so-called budget sector (health, education, and public employ-
 ees), while rendering opinions on pension indexation, energy pricing, and other im-
 portant aspects of social policy. The Commission serves as an important forum by
 which the social partners air differences, discuss grievances, and often negotiate
 agreements before problems erupt into social conflict.
 Many disputes arose because of the weakness of the employer side of the union/
 employer/Government triangle. Key state sector employers (largely in heavy indus-
 try and the budget sector) still were unable to negotiate independently with orga-
 nized labor without the extensive involvement of central government ministries to
 which they are subordinate, although the Government repeatedly stated its inten-
 tion not to be drawn into labor disputes. This complicated and politicized the Gov-
 ernment's new labor relations paradigm.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.--Compulsory labor does not exist,
 except for prisoners convicted of criminal offenses, and is otherwise prohibited by
 law, including by children. There were no reports of forced or compulsory labor by
 children:
 d. Status of Child Labor Practices and Minimum Age for Employment.-The law
 contains strict legal prescriptions about the conditions in which children may work.
 The Labor Code forbids the emplo  ent of persons under the age of 15. Those be-
 tween the ages of 15 and 18 may be employed only if they have completed primary
 
 
 1227
 school and if the proposed employment constitutes vocational training and is not
 harmful to their health. The age floor rises to 18 if a particular job might pose a
 health danger.
 Child labor is not a problem, although the state Labor Inspectorate reported that
 increasing numbers of minors now work and that many employers violate labor
 rules in employing them (by underpaying workers, paying them late, etc.). Inspec-
 tors found violations on stud farms, in restaurants, and, in some instances, in small
 private sector businesses and factories.
 The law prohibits forced and bonded child labor, and the Government enforces
 this prohibition effectively (see Section 6.c.).
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The Ministry of Labor, the unions, and employ-
 ers' organizations negotiate a revised national minimum wage every 3 months. The
 minimum monthly wage for employees in state-owned enterprises is approximately
 $150 (450 PLN). While this represented a real increase over 1996, it was insufficient
 to provide a worker and family with a decent standard of living in view of rapidly
 rising prices. A large percentage of construction workers and seasonal agricultural
 laborers from the former Soviet Union earn less than the minimum wage. The large
 size of the informal economy and the small number of state labor inspectors make
 enforcement of the mimmum wage very difficult. As long as unemployment remains
 high, workers often agree to inferior working conditions and lower pay in order to
 obtain or keep their jobs.
 The standard legal workweek is 42 hours, which allows 6 or 7 hour days, includ-
 ing at least one 24-hour rest period. The law requires overtime payment for hours
 in excess of the standard workweek. The new Labor Code defines minimum condi-
 tions for the protection of workers' health and safety. Provisions are strict and ex-
 tensive, and trade unions have the right to stop production or extract a worker from
 dangerous working conditions without jeopardy to continued employment (there
 were reports that such fears prompt some to stay). Enforcement, however, is a major
 problem, because the state Labor Inspectorate is unable to monitor the state sector
 sufficiently, or the private sector, where a growing percentage of accidents take
 place. In addition, there is a lack of clarity concerning which government or legisla-
 tive body has responsibility for enforcing the law.
 Of the 117,119 work-related accidents reported during 1996, 647 involved deaths,
 slightly more than in 1995. This represents roughly 10 accidents per 1,000 workers,
 slightly more than in 1995. GUS reported that most accidents were in the public
 sector, while most serious accidents were in the private sector, where proportionally
 more deaths also occurred. Solidarity contends that the problem lies not in the law,
 which establishes safe standards, but in enforcement, as employer sanctions for ille-
 gal behavior are minimal. Standards for exposure to chemicals, dust, and noise are
 routinely exceeded.
