 POLAND
 Poland is ruled by the leadership of the Polish United
 Workers' (Communist) Party (PZPR), headed-by General Wojciech
 Jaruzelski. Jaruzelski is also the Supreme Commander of the
 Armed Forces in his capacity as Chairman of the National
 Defense Committee, as well as the-Chairman of the Council of
 State. Following the resignation of Zbigniew Messner on
 September 19, Mieczyslaw Rakowski, a former journalist and
 member of the Politburo, was designated Chairman of the
 Council of Ministers on September 27.
 The Ministry of Internal Affairs supervises the uniformed
 police, the powerful security apparatus, and the militarized
 riot police. The security service and the judiciary retain
 immense powers to deal with political opposition. These were
 exercised with decreasing frequency in 1988.
 The Polish authorities have made internal economic reform and
 market stabilization a priority but found it difficult to
 achieve tangible results in 1988. The so-called second stage
 of economic reform, launched in October 1987, was designed to
 reduce bureaucratic control over the economy, encourage
 initiative both within the state and private sectors, and
 increase reliance on market mechanisms. However, the
 Government maintains a number of direct controls, and much of
 the reform has yet to take hold. A new set of economic reforms
 introduced toward the end of 1988 provided for greater latitude
 for the private sector. The focal points for private economic
 activity are small private farms, which form 75 percent of
 total agricultural land, and the growing small-business
 sector, which accounts for approximately 8, percent of the
 nonagricultural economy. Meanwhile, inefficiency, shortages,
 worker discontent, and a heavy debt-servicing burden continue
 to plague the economy. The Government's loose credit policy,
 failure to restrain income growth, and attempt to adjust
 prices for food and energy have again sent the rate of
 inflation up to at least 70 percent. On two occasions during
 1988, price and income issues were at the center of labor
 unrest and strikes.
 As a result of a wave of strikes in August, the Government
 began a high-level dialog with Lech Walesa, the leader of the
 independent trade union Solidarity, and other key opposition
 figures. This dialog, including several sets of direct talks
 and an uncensored, live television debate between Walesa and
 the head of the official trade unions, Alfred Miodowicz,
 created the basis for possible "roundtable" negotiations
 between the authorities and the opposition to consider
 political and economic change in Poland. At the end of the
 year, however, the "roundtable" had not been held.
 The exercise of human rights remains restricted. The right of
 workers to be represented by a trade union of their choice is
 still denied. The right to freedom from arbitrary detention,
 the right to a fair trial, and the right of citizens to choose
 their own government remain limited. Nevertheless, freedom of
 speech has continued to grow unevenly, opposition views are
 increasingly read in the official press despite censorship,
 and Poles have access to a wide range of independent (including
 Catholic Church) publications. In late 1988, the Solidarity
 leadership and other opposition elements were able to meet
 openly without harassment. A number of independent
 associations, some with declared opposition leanings, were
 legalized during 1988. Poles worship freely and, with
 
 
 1148
 POLAND
 exceptions, travel freely. Lech Walesa and other Solidarity
 leaders were allowed to travel to the West for the first time
 since martial law was declared in 1981.
 There are no political prisoners in Poland at this time,
 according to both government and opposition sources. With the
 introduction in 1988 of the possibility of alternative service
 (there is mandatory military service in Poland) and the
 alteration of the Polish military oath, all those in jail for
 refusing military service were released.
 Under a 1986 law which allows certain political offenses to be
 treated as misdemeanors, opposition activists in 1988 were
 still being fined, and sometimes detained for short periods of
 time, for their activities. These activists frequently did
 not pay their fines and usually did not incur further
 penalties as a result. The strikes of May and August resulted
 in many strikers losing their jobs and apartments. Some were
 drafted into the military. Some of those fired or drafted
 were not rehired, despite the Government's insistence that
 employers were encouraged to rehire them. Most, though not
 all, of those drafted into the military were released.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 No instances of political killing were reported.
 b. Disappearance
 Instances of prolonged or permanent disappearance were not
 reported.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 There were numerous reported instances of police beating
 people with rubber truncheons in melees following
 demonstrations and, in some cases, after persons had been
 taken into custody. Many persons active in the opposition or
 taking part in strikes or demonstrations reported that, while
 detained by the police, usually for periods ranging from
 several hours to 2 days, they were subjected to mistreatment
 ranging from verbal abuse to blows with truncheons. There
 were no reported allegations of torture during 1988.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Polish law allows for a 48-hour detention period before the
 authorities are required to bring formal charges. Legislation
 which provided for certain offenses to be tried within 48
 hours of arrest under special, accelerated procedures expired
 on July 1 and was not renewed. In Polish practice, after
 presentation of the legal basis of formal investigation,
 arrestees may be held in indefinite "investigatory" or
 "temporary" arrest until the investigation is completed and an
 indictment filed. During this period, there is no guarantee
 of access to a lawyer, and visits are frequently denied. Once
 a formal indictment is filed, the defendant is allowed ample
 time to study the charges in consultation with an attorney of
 his or her choice. A trial date is set only after the
 
 
 1149
 POLAND
 defendant expresses readiness. Legal provisions for bail are
 rarely used, but suspects, as well as those already convicted,
 are sometimes furloughed for humanitarian reasons.
 After the 1986 amnesty, fewer persons were detained for long
 periods on vague or unspecified grounds. However, the number
 of brief detentions, usually up to 48 hours, remains high.
 The 48-hour detention period is often used as a preventative
 or deterrent measure against prominent opposition activists.
 For example, several Warsaw-based Solidarity trade union
 leaders were detained in a successful effort by the police to
 prevent them from organizing sympathy strikes in the Warsaw
 area during the August strike wave. The legal, 48-hour
 detention period is sometimes effectively extended by the
 police into periods of 96 hours or longer, often by "releasing"
 a person for an hour and then re-detaining that person for a
 second 48-hour period. Polish authorities continue to make
 use of "warning talks," in which they summon known opposition
 members on the eve of major anniversaries or other events that
 are likely to be rallying points for antigovernment
 displays and reportedly threaten them with reprisals if they
 participate in any form of demonstration.
 Polish law contains no provision for forced exile. However,
 some labor and political activists expressed fears that they
 would be refused reentry if they were to travel abroad,
 particularly to the West. Several prominent activists
 traveled abroad this year, including Solidarity leader Lech
 Walesa. One dissident, Kornel Morawiecki, leader of Fighting
 Solidarity (not affiliated with the Solidarity trade union),
 was turned back at the Warsaw airport when he sought to
 reenter the country a few days after he had been allowed to
 depart for medical treatment. This decision was reversed
 quickly thereafter, although criminal charges against him
 remain outstanding.
 With regard to forced or compulsory labor, see Section 6.c.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Most cases in Poland are tried in open court. However, the
 court having jurisdiction over a case retains the option of
 closing a trial to the public in some circumstances, for
 example, when state secrets may be disclosed and in most
 divorce cases. Defendants are required to be present during
 trial and may be represented by up to three attorneys.
 Attorneys are provided at public expense if a defendant is
 unable to pay. Defendants- may present evidence in their own
 defense and are presumed to be innocent until proven guilty.
 The court of original jurisdiction has 7 days in which to
 prepare a written decision from the date of the oral decision.
 The defendant has 14 days from the date of the written decision
 in which to appeal. Appeals may be made, among other grounds,
 on the basis of new evidence, procedural irregularities, or a
 perceived offense against the law. A law enacted in May 1985,
 providing for specially accelerated trial procedures which
 severely limited the rights of defendants, expired on July 1
 and was not renewed.
 In October 1986, the Sejm (parliament) passed legislation that
 allows certain crimes against public order (political offenses)
 to be treated as misdemeanors subject to a maximum penalty of
 about $100 at the exchange rate of late 1988. This legislation
 gives the authorities the option of handling certain crimes
 either as felonies or as misdemeanors, depending on the
 
 
 1150
 POLAND
 perceived seriousness of the offense. In the latter case, the
 accused often does not have the benefit of a defense counsel.
 This law, utilized extensively during late 1986 and 1987, was
 decreasingly used during 1988. For example, although
 15 automobiles were reported confiscated under the provisions
 of this law in 1986 and 1987, none was reported confiscated
 during 1988. One opposition group reported that its members,
 although frequently convicted and ordered to pay fines under
 the provisions of this law, seldom pay their fines (partly out
 of principle and partly out of necessity), and to date none
 has been required to serve a prison sentence in lieu of
 payment, as required by the law.
 For the first time since martial law, according to both the
 Government and the opposition, Poland has no political
 prisoners. A very small number of persons are serving
 sentences on criminal charges which many consider to be
 spurious and politically motivated. Adam Hodysz, a former
 police captain who had been convicted on criminal charges
 which some believe to have been politically motivated, was
 released from prison at the end of 1988. Since the 1986
 amnesty, some members of the opposition were sentenced to jail
 terms and served just a week or two of their short sentences.
 All persons imprisoned on charges stemming from their refusal
 to serve in the military or take the military oath of
 allegiance were released in July, following the passage of a
 law which authorized alternative service. The wording of the
 military oath had been changed earlier. At year's end two
 persons were taken into custody and reportedly face charges
 connected with their earlier refusals to perform either
 military or alternative service.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Mail and telephone calls are selectively monitored. Overt
 censorship of the mail and announced monitoring of telephone
 calls ceased with the suspension of martial law in 1983.
 Packages to be mailed abroad are subject to inspection by
 postal workers. It is generally assumed that the secret
 police use an extensive network of informers.
 Polish citizens are not forced to participate in any political
 organizations, although it is understood that membership in
 the PZPR is advisable for advancement in certain professions.
 Active affiliation with the regime may provide privileged
 access to some items in very short supply, e.g., housing. The
 Government does not interfere with the right to marry or to
 have children as one chooses, nor does it prevent the teaching
 of religion to children at home or in churches. In certain
 cases, the Government may view as suspect the contact of its
 citizens with members of the opposition or with foreigners.
 Although warrants are required under Polish law in some
 circumstances, searches without warrants do occur in violation
 of the law.
 The Government officially announced and implemented the
 cessation of all jamming of Western radio broadcasts in
 January. Access to foreign periodicals is limited, more the
 result of a lack of available hard currency than of active
 government censorship.
 
 
 1151
 POLAND
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 The Polish Constitution of 1952 provides for freedom of
 speech. The freedom to express one's opinion in a private
 conversation, whether or not in a public place, is generally
 tolerated. The freedom to distribute opposition pamphlets or
 deliver an antigovernment speech in a public place is
 sometimes, but not always, impeded. However, the limits to
 public expression are clearly becoming wider. An apt
 illustration was the human rights conference sponsored by
 Solidarity and the Freedom and Peace movement in August and
 attended by 800 people from Eastern Europe and the West.
 Government interference with the conference was minimal. Some
 Westerners were denied visas, but most of those wh6 applied
 and persisted were granted visas, although many at the last
 minute. There was no attempt made to restrict debate during
 the 4-day conference, which was held in a Catholic church, and
 opposition publications were openly distributed and sold.
 Many churches sponsor or permit alternative cultural and other
 activities on their premises which are free from government
 interference. Such events also take place in private homes.
 Several Catholic congregations in Warsaw, Gdansk, Krakow, and
 elsewhere openly sponsor programs sympathetic to the opposition
 with little direct reprisal.
 The Main Office for the Control of Press, Publishing, and
 Public Performances oversees censorship of all media and
 deletes material which it considers inimical to state
 interests. Polish citizens may be arrested.and fined for
 writing, printing, distributing, or possessing publications
 not approved by the authorities. However, in 1988 censors
 permitted a very wide range of opinion to be printed and
 broadcast on previously forbidden topics. Even in the areas
 where censorship is traditionally the most rigid--in rooting
 out direct or implied criticism of the Soviet Union or other
 Warsaw Pact states--the cracks which began to appear in 1987
 on such topics as the Katyn Forest massacre of Polish Army
 officers by the Red Army and the Soviet invasion of Poland in
 1939 widened in 1988.
 Within the framework of official censorship, Poland has a
 diversified press.   While following the approved government
 line on international issues, the press continues to be a
 forum for lively debate on domestic issues. The broad range
 of views found in the Polish press reflects an equally wide
 diversity of philosophical positions maintained by individual
 publications. For example, the independent Catholic weekly
 Tygodnik Powszechny and the independent, private Res Publica,
 and, on the official side, the Warsaw daily Zycie Warszawy,
 the hard-line party weekly Rzeczywistosc, and the "liberal"
 party weekly Polityka, present contending views on economic
 reform, ideology, and cadre policy, the extent of dialog
 within various spheres of society, social, and cultural issues,
 the role of the Church, and the role of the intellectual in
 society. Independent above-ground publications, while subtly
 addressing a wide range of issues, customarily indicate within
 printed texts where censors have deleted material and which
 provision of the censorship law has been invoked. A brand-new
 official monthly, Konfrontacja, loosely connected with the
 Patriotic Movement for National Rebirth (PRON), broke new
 ground by soliciting articles and interviews with prominent
 opposition figures, including Solidarity leader Lech Walesa.
 
 
 1152
 POLAND
 Adam Michnik, a prominent opposition historian, published in
 the above-ground press for the first time since 1981.
 The underground press continues to thrive, amid uneven levels
 of repression, producing a multitude of products varying from
 shop-floor leaflets to relatively high-quality editions of
 books not published officially. Despite chronic shortages of
 materials and equipment, and periodic harassment raids and
 confiscations, many opposition publications appear in a
 regular and timely fashion. Many are sold openly at boutiques
 at the universities. Also thriving is an underground video
 market (supplemented by underground productions on a variety
 of subjects). Satellite television has come to Poland:
 according to a February 1986 statement of the government
 spokesman, 2,100 authorizations have been issued for satellite
 dishes. There are no reports of an application for
 authorization being denied. Satellite television is such an
 accepted part of life that the daily newspaper of the Military
 Political Administration, Zolnierz Wolnosci, publishes program
 listings at the beginning of each month.
 Continuing the trend begun in 1987, additional, controversial
 films on political topics previously withheld from public
 release appeared in the theaters. A television serial, filmed
 in the late 1970's, which dealt, albeit gingerly, with
 Stalin-era abuses was shown with considerable fanfare on
 television. A radio program, begun in 1987, continued to
 broadcast without comment critical, political commentaries
 from Western radio stations, including Radio Free Europe and
 the Voice of America.
 Poland is the home of the only independent university in
 Eastern Europe, the Catholic University of Lublin. Its very
 existence, is well as its extensive ties to institutions and
 persons in the West (it counts Pope John Paul II among former
 faculty members), is visible evidence of the national and
 religious traditions which still help to shape Polish higher
 education. There are also a number of diocesan seminaries,
 independently administered by the Bishop ordinary of Poland's
 dioceses.
 Amendments adopted in 1985 to the 1982 higher education law
 increased governmental control over universities and other
 college-level institutions. One of the most substantial
 measures empowered the Minister of Science, Higher Education,
 and Technology to approve all candidates for university rector
 and other high offices before the names of the candidates
 could be submitted to university senates for elections. The
 other major governmental intrusion on academic freedom was the
 "verification process," a program announced in 1985 ostensibly
 to weed out less productive academics in midlevel positions.
 However, despite the fear that the program would be used to
 strip selected faculty of their tenure and teaching
 responsibilities, there was no wide scale purge, and some
 opposition activists passed through the verification process
 successfully.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Freedom of peaceful assembly and association is at government
 sufferance and subject to tight restrictions. Permits are
 required to hold public meetings or rallies. Requests for
 permits for protest meetings are routinely denied, but
 unofficial discussion groups and alternative cultural events
 take place in private homes and churches with the acquiescence,
 
 
 1153
 POLAND
 if not the approval, of the authorities. Demonstrators are
 sometimes detained for 1 or more days, while other protest
 demonstrations occur without official interference.
 The most pervasive outpourings of unrest in Poland since
 martial law took place in 1988. The two major strike waves,
 in April/May and in August, engendered numerous accompanying
 demonstrations, such as the May demonstration in Warsaw at St.
 Stanislaw's church and the August 14 demonstration at St.
 Brygida's church in Gdansk. Many demonstrations took place
 during the course of the strikes and some, such as the
 demonstration at Stalowa Wola Steel Works, took place at the
 conclusion of the strikes as an expression of continued
 resolve.
 In September thousands of workers assembled at the Jasna Gora
 Monastery for a religious event at which there were
 antigovernment and anti-Communist banners and speeches. The
 government spokesman and others expressed official unhappiness
 with the event, bat there apparently were no other
 repercussions. Some demonstrations on the December 13
 anniversary of martial law were disruptive, with demonstrators
 throwing objects. Clashes with the police ensued, resulting
 in some injuries and some detentions.
 Under Polish law, associations-and clubs need official
 permission or sponsorship to function legally. Among the most
 significant of Poland's many independent clubs is the Catholic
 Intellectuals' Club (KIK), particularly the Warsaw chapter.
 KIK sponsors lecture series and other independent activities
 open to the public with little or no interference from the
 authorities. KIK has also been actively engaged in persuading
 the Government to adopt a new law on associations which would
 drop the "social utility" standard which has been routinely
 used to prevent the organization of new clubs and associations.
 Although the proposed law has not yet passed, at least two
 associations officially disbanded during martial law
 reorganized in 1988 above ground and received registration--
 the Gdansk chapter of KIK and the Polish Pen Club. Among new
 independent associations registered in 1988 are Warsaw's
 "Dziekania" political club and "Young Poland," an independent
 youth group.
 Some officially sponsored professional associations were
 formed after the Government's dissolution in 1983 of the
 writers' and journalists' unions and other organizations which
 had obtained considerable independence during the-1980-81
 period. These successor groups have failed to earn-the
 support of a significant proportion of Poland's intellectuals,
 despite material incentives to join. The law permitting the
 formation of nonprofit, independent foundations for certain
 charitable, social, and health purposes remains in effect.
 One new organization of this type is a Solidarity-connected
 foundation to assist families with many children. The Warsaw
 regional Solidarity leader Zbigniew Bujak created the
 organization, which functions legally.
 The August human rights conference. cosponsored by Solidarity
 and the Freedom and Peace movement demonstrated that while
 neither organization is officially recognized, both operate
 with some tacit official acquiescence. Neither group can
 legally maintain contacts with human rights organizations in
 the West, but despite this restriction, the two groups were
 able to invite, receive, and freely exchange views with human
 
 
 1154
 POLAND
 rights activists from the West and from other Warsaw Pact
 countries.
 For a discussion of freedom of association as it applies to
 labor unions, see Section 6.a.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 The Constitution ensures "freedom of conscience and belief,"
 and Polish citizens (other than party members, who are
 discouraged from overt religious practice) enjoy considerable
 freedom to profess their religious beliefs.
 Poland is predominantly Roman Catholic. The Church maintains
 over 3,300 churches, schools, and other institutions, and a
 vigorous program of building new churches is going on with
 state permission. The Catholic Church publishes significant
 numbers of books and periodicals, as does the independent
 Catholic press, though in practice there are some restrictions,
 such as limited access to printing equipment and government-
 allotted paper. Sunday Catholic Mass and services of other
 religions are broadcast.
 Discussions continued in 1988 concerning the establishment of
 diplomatic relations with the Vatican, with both sides
 continuing to express optimism about the prospects. Despite
 the relatively businesslike church-state relations, however,
 the world views of the Communist authorities and the Church
 remain antithetical. Individual clergy and Catholic lay
 leaders carried on their at times vigorous campaigns for
 greater personal freedom and respect for human rights.
 There is no government-sponsored discrimination against
 minority religions. Eastern Orthodox, Ukrainian Catholic, and
 the much smaller Protestant, Jewish, and Muslim congregations
 meet without interference but find it difficult to maintain
 their places of worship and train their clergy, mainly because
 of their small size, wide dispersion, and limited financial
 resources. A number of Jehovah's Witnesses, who were jailed
 for refusing to perform Poland's obligatory military service,
 were released in July with the passage of Poland's alternative
 service law.
 The largest minority is the Orthodox faith, with between
 800,000 and 1.5 million faithful concentrated in Poland's
 eastern provinces. The Orthodox Church maintains 350 places
 of worship and has continued a recently begun program of
 church building and monastery renovation. It sponsors the
 publication of a number of books and several periodicals, and
 broadcasts its masses on Polish radio four times a year. As a
 result of recent administrative action, it has obtained the
 return of some religious buildings previously under government
 control. Apart from financial difficulties, there have been
 complaints of Polish ethnic prejudice (most of the Orthodox
 faithful in Poland are of Byelorussian, Ukrainian, or Russian
 origin). Orthodox believers face a major problem in
 maintaining contact with their religious brethren in the
 Soviet Union because of restrictions on their movements across
 the border by both the Polish and Soviet Governments.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 There are no legal restrictions on travel within Poland.
 There are also no legal restrictions on changing one's
 
 
 1155
 POLAND
 residence, but in practice the acute housing shortage makes
 this difficult and in some areas, such as Warsaw, virtually
 impossible to do. Cases of people working in one location and
 legally residing hundreds of miles away are known.
 With the liberalization of Poland's passport issuance policy
 in July 1987, the Polish Government states that 97 percent of
 all passport applications are granted. Criminals, persons
 with access to military and other secrets, and some opposition
 activists were among the categories of persons most likely to
 be denied permission to travel abroad in 1988. Some prominent
 opposition activists who for years have been denied permission
 to travel were allowed in 1988 to travel to the West and
 return with relatively little harassment. Opposition
 activists who are less well known, however, continue to have
 difficulties.
 The 1987 liberalization also made it easier for Poles who
 traveled or remained abroad "illegally," that is, Poles who
 emigrated on passports issued for tourist travel or Poles who
 remained abroad beyond the validity of their exit permission,
 to return to Poland with no sanctions or limitations on future
 travel. Many Poles who previously refused to return to Poland
 to visit families for fear of reprisals by the Government did
 so during 1988 without incident. A few persons, primarily
 opposition activists or those with family or financial
 complications, still experience difficulty in obtaining
 permission to travel abroad again after their return to Poland.
 Most applicants for emigrant passports eventually obtain them.
 However, the requirement that all real property must be
 disposed of and customs permission obtained for any personal
 items they wish to take with them prior to issuance remains a
 difficulty for many would-be applicants. Such applicants,
 howeveri frequently emigrate on tourist passports. After
 establishing a legal residence abroad, a Polish citizen can
 obtain a consular passport to return to Poland or revalidate
 the tourist passport for visits to Poland. During 1988 the
 Polish Government reduced the list of divided families
 maintained on the U.S. list by more than two-thirds.
 Under Polish law, only the Council of State may revoke
 citizenship. Involuntary revocation must be based on one of
 the following activities: actions violating the duty of
 allegiance to the Polish State; actions detrimental to the
 substantial interests of Poland; departure from Poland after
 May 9, 1954, and failure to return when so requested by the
 Polish Government; evasion of military service; or conviction
 abroad of a crime also recognized as a felony under Polish
 criminal law. The Government rarely revokes citizenship.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Poles do not have the right to change their leaders or the
 system of government. Poland is ruled by the PZPR (Polish
 United Workers' Party) or Communist party, which, through its
 head, General Jaruzelski, and a small group of his advisers,
 determines national policy goals. Policy is normally
 implemented through the government ministries and through a
 parallel party bureaucracy that complements and interacts with
 the ministries. The party is not always clearly the dominant
 force. The military and security services, as well as various
 economic ministries, often play key roles not only in the
 exercise of power but also in policy formulation. The two
 
 
 1156
 POLAND
 coalition partners, the United Peasants' Party and the
 Democratic Party, collaborate closely with the PZPR and are
 responsive to its guidance. The Patriotic Movement for
 National Rebirth (PRON), an umbrella group of political,
 economic, and social organizations, is directed by the
 authorities.
 The Constitution specifies that the Sejm (parliament) is the
 chief legislative body of Poland. The Sejm can be counted on
 to pass, nearly but not completely unanimously, any legislation
 that the Chairman of the Council of Ministers and relevant
 bureaucracies propose, and does not, as a rule, generate
 legislation itself. Nevertheless, during 1988, and especially
 since the August strike wave, rumblings of significant change
 in the actual structure of government have surfaced.
 The Consultative Council, formed by the Government in December
 1986, continued to meet occasionally throughout 1988 to discuss
 a variety of topics. The July meeting, for example, took up
 environmental issues. Uncensored transcripts of portions of
 the debates are published in the official press and provide a
 wider commentary on government policies and current domestic
 issues than has been available in official sources in the past.
 Legislation creating the office of the Ombudsman or Spokesman
 for Citizens Rights was passed by the Sejm in July 1987 and
 went into effect in January 1988. The Ombudsman has the right
 in theory to review and reverse administrative and legal
 decisions appealed to her by individual Polish citizens. The
 office of the Ombudsman has played a limited role in Poland's
 political life during 1988. Although the Ombudsman has made
 some progress in the areas of pension benefits and compensation
 for land expropriated in the post-World War II period, this
 progress has been insufficient even for the government-
 affiliated PRON, which has complained publicly about the
 Ombudsman's performance. The Ombudsman has been deluged with
 requests, further hampering her ability to take effective
 action. Moreover, when she found in favor of a petition by
 the nascent Polish Socialist*Party (IS), which contended that
 no article of Polish law required that newly formed political
 parties register with the State, the government press
 spokesman noted that the Government did not agree with this
 finding and would continue to regard the PPS as an illegal
 organization.
 A new electoral law was passed in March, the main features of
 which were: multiple candidates; the candidates to be listed
 alphabetically (rather than in descending order of official
 desirability); and voters had to mark their ballots (a change
 from previous practice) in order for their votes to be
 counted. Although in theory this law represented a move
 toward more genuinely democratic elections, the reality fell
 short of expectations, resulting in a notably low (56 percent
 according to government reports, lower by opposition
 estimates) voter turnout for the local elections in June.
 Women in general do not play a major role in politics and
 government. There is one woman in the PZPR Politburo and one
 female minister in the Government.
 
 
 1157
 POLAND
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights.
 There is no government-controlled or sponsored organization in
 Poland devoted exclusively to human rights issues, and
 independent human rights groups have no official permission to
 exist. However, there is an anonymous chapter of the Helsinki
 Committee in Poland, which compiles occasional reports
 evaluating the human rights situation in Poland.
 Representatives of Poland's unofficial human rights groups met
 and exchanged views with Western and East European counterparts
 at the human rights conference noted in Section 2.b.
 Undergr6und publications persistently raise questions about
 human rights practices in Poland, focusing primarily on labor,
 ecological, and police-related issues.
 The Government is a signatory or party to many international
 agreements and instruments with human rights components,
 including the Final Act of the Conference on Security and
 Cooperation in Europe. Government authorities typically
 contend, however, that international and nongovernmental
 inquiries into the state of human rights in Poland based on
 these agreements constitute interference in Poland's internal
 affairs. The Government did not cooperate in the
 implementation of the 1983 resolution of the U.N. Human Rights
 Commission asking the U.N. Secretary General, or his designee,
 to prepare a comprehensive report on the human rights
 situation in Poland.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status.
 Women's rights have not become a major public issue in
 Poland. Historical circumstances, including World War II
 losses of manpower, helped open many professions to women.
 Women work in nearly all blue-collar trades, other than mining
 and steel, and in all professional fields. However, despite
 their major presence in the work force and government figures
 which show they are generally better educated than men, women
 usually earn less than their male colleagues. Only a small
 proportion of positions at the higher levels of local and
 national government is filled by women.
 Poland has a liberal maternity and child care leave policy
 dating from the Solidarity-inspired Gdansk accords. Women are
 entitled to 4 months' paid maternity leave and up to 3 years'
 unpaid leave with guarantees of returning to the same or a
 comparable position. Depending on the family income, support
 is sometimes provided for the entire duration of the leave'
 period. The Government and some places of employment offer
 child-care services; however, these activities do not come
 close to meeting the work force's child-care needs.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 Poles do not have the right to be represented by the trade
 union or professional association of their choice. The
 Government agreed following the August strike wave to
 negotiate with the opposition, specifically with Lech Walesa
 and other leaders of the banned trade union Solidarity, on the
 issue of trade union pluralism. No substantive progress has
 
 
 1158
 POLAND
 been made on this issue thus far. Currently, only government-
 controlled unions are permitted.
 Leaders of the official unions, the vast majority of which are
 grouped under the umbrella of the National Alliance of Trade
 Unions (OPZZ) formally established in November 1984, have
 vehemently opposed trade union pluralism, i.e., more than one
 union in an individual enterprise. The OPZZ acknowledges the
 right of unions not formally affiliated with it to exist as
 long as they are registered with the courts, a qualification
 that excludes Solidarity unions from consideration. Alfred
 Miodowicz, the leader of the OPZZ, is a member of the PZPR
 Politburo.
 The 1982 trade union law severely circumscribes the right to
 strike, making legal work stoppage next to impossible.
 Nevertheless, work stoppages ranging from a few hours to
 full-scale strikes at the docks of Szczecin, the shipyards of
 Gdansk, the mines of Silesia, and other places occurred in
 1988. Lower level activists of the OPZZ themselves initiated
 several illegal strikes, and the OPZZ has called for a more
 liberal definition of "legal" strikes.
 However, strike leaders still frequently face discrimination
 in the workplace and even dismissal. Of the workers fired
 from the coal mines that struck in August, many have not yet
 been rehired. The entire strike committee of one of the
 shipyards in Gdansk was fired during the strikes. Although
 the Government, in preparation for the roundtable discussions
 with Solidarity, offered general assurances that fired workers
 would be rehired, many of these cases remain unresolved.
 Since the declaration of martial law in 1981 and the legal
 dissolution of Solidarity, Poland has been the subject of
 complaints in the International Labor Organization (ILO),
 alleging infringement of ILO Conventions No 87 on Freedom of
 Association and No. 98 on the Right to Organize and Collective
 Bargaining. In 1984 an ILO Commission of Inquiry concluded
 that the Polish Government should restore trade union freedoms,
 including relegalize Solidarity. In response, Poland gave
 notice of its intent to withdraw from the ILO. Three years
 later, it vacated its decision to withdraw and resumed
 participation in ILO meetings without, however, recognizing or
 implementing the major part of the recommendations contained
 in the 1984 report. In 1988 these issues were again reviewed
 by several ILO committees. Among the issues and complaints
 reviewed were the system of obligatory trade union unity
 imposed by the trade union law of 1982, under which only one
 trade union organization may exist in any enterprise;
 restrictions on the right to strike; the dismissal of workers
 for reasons related to their participation in trade union
 activities or to acts of social protest; the difficulties
 allegedly encountered by former trade unionists who had been
 interned, arrested, or sentenced, and then amnestied, in
 recovering their employment; and restrictive legislative
 requirements for the registration of collective agreements.
 The Government did not deny there was a discrepancy between
 the provision of the 1982 law suspending trade union pluralism
 and Convention No. 87, but asked for the ILO's patience while
 it undertook to review its labor legislation to bring it into
 conformity with Poland's obligations under the ILO conventions.
 The ILO's supervisory bodies again urged the Polish Government
 to take the necessary steps to ensure that the provisions of
 the conventions are fully applied in law and practice.
 
 
 1159
 POLAND
 The OPZZ is affiliated with the Soviet-controlled World
 Federation of Trade Unions. Solidarity is affiliated with the
 International Confederation of Free Trade Unions (ICFTU) and
 the World Confederation of Labor. While the Government for
 some years interfered with Solidarity leader Lech Walesa's
 ability to maintain direct contacts with free trade unions and
 in the spring denied him a passport to travel to an ICFTU
 conference in Australia, in December it allowed Walesa to
 travel to Paris for a conference on human rights sponsored by
 the French Government.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 As noted above, Polish workers are still denied the right to
 be represented by a trade union of their choice. The OPZZ
 maintains that it represents the interests of the workers to
 the greatest degree possible. Solidarity activists and
 sympathizers strongly disagree. Solidarity maintains that
 workers have no right to bargain collectively as long as they
 cannot legally be represented by the union of their choice.
 There are no economic incentive zones or special industries
 where labor standards differ from those elsewhere in the
 country.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.
 Under legislation dating from the early 1980's, persons who
 are registered as unemployed and who refuse to seek employment
 without adequate justification, may be listed as "habitual
 parasites" and compelled to accept assigned employment,
 usually in street cleaning, park maintenance, or garbage
 collection, under threat of penal sanction. Implementation of
 sanctions under this law is rare, however, and to date the law
 has not been specifically applied as a means of political
 coercion, curtailment of the free expression of political or
 ideological opinions, or racial or social discrimination.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 The Polish labor code generally forbids the employment of a
 person who has not reached the age of 15. The employment of a
 young person, defined as someone aged 15 to 18, is permitted,
 provided that person has completed basic schooling. Special
 exceptions are sometimes required if a particular job might
 pose a health danger. The labor code specifies that a young
 person without professional qualifications may be employed
 only for the purpose of vocational preparation, although again
 there is provision for special exceptions. These laws are
 effectively enforced.
 e- Acceptable Conditions of Work
 The length and distribution of hours of work are regulated by
 the Polish labor code and meet generally accepted international
 standards. Paid annual holidays are provided. In practice,
 most families find that both the husband and wife must be
 employed in order to sustain an acceptable standard of living.
 Polish wage levels are calculated according to a very complex
 formula based on a theoretical base wage, extensive bonuses
 and overtime, and production quotas. In 1988 the base wage,
 used primarily for statistical purposes, was about $35-50 per
 month, depending on the exchange rate.
 The Polish legal code spells out minimum conditions for the
 protection of workers' health and safety. Although in most
 
 
 1160
 POLAND
 respects these standards meet the international norm, several
 Western and other independent observers reported substandard
 safety conditions and work environments, most notably in the
 Silesian mines where the August strike wave began. Among the
 strikers' demands were improved safety conditions and a
 cessation of the requirement that miners work a 6-day or 7-day
 workweek in order to earn a full salary. There are also
 frequent allegations that some factories fail to maintain
 government-regulated work, health, and safety standards, and
 the official media occasionally publicize such eases.
 
 
 1161
