POLAND
The Report on Poland is excellent, providing an accurate and comprehensive analysis of'the way in which martial law has been incorporated into civilian legislation and continues to oppress the Polish people. A number of human rights abuses are described in full.
In certain instances, however, we have found errors or noted ways in which the Report might be strengthened. For example, the Report states that there were two instances of death caused by official personnel acting against unarmed civilians in the past year and a half, i.e., since about June 1982. According to the Polish Helsinki Committee, an anonymous group of human rights monitors working under the auspices of Solidarity's Temporary Coordinating Commission, during 1983 alone there were 10 documented cases of deaths caused by direct action of official personnel against unarmed citizens, and six instances where people died from beatings inflicted upon their arrest or while they were in custody.
The discussion of the "poor conditions that also exist in some prisons" would benefit from greater specificity. In this regard, the Report could have noted that the wife of KOR defendant Jacek Kuron died of tuberculosis after leaving prison in November 1982.
The Report's discussion of interference with correspondence might have mentioned that all printed material sent to Poland is subject to censorship and that issues of
-49-
foreign magazines are confiscated before reaching subscribers if they contain material critical of the Warsaw Bloc.
The description of an incident' in St. Martin's Church in which plainclothes police broke into the Church Aid to Solidarity office is somewhat softened. In addition to "manhandling" aid workers, the police severely beat several people, including Barbara Sadowska, whose son Grzegorz Przemyk was killed in May 1983, and then took the individuals to a remote area outside Warsaw where they were left to fend for themselves.
The Report refers to the 1982 banning of the Polish Helsinki Committee. It is not clear what this means. To our knowledge, the Polish Helsinki Committee was never officially recognized, nor were any government actions concerning "banning" ever taken.
-50-
