 POLAND
 Martial law Poland is basically a Marxist police state
 disguised as a military dictatorship. Since the imposition of
 martial law on December 13, 1981, ultimate political authority
 has nominally been in the hands of a group of senior military
 officers called the "Military Council for National Salvation"
 (WRON), and large segments of the party, industrial sector and
 civil administration have been placed under military control.
 The ostensible purpose of this military takeover was to end the
 "anarchy" supposedly characteristic of the period August 1980
 through December, 1981, and to provide a temporary framework
 for economic recovery and major reforms in all areas of
 national Mife. Military rule has become a facade for the
 exercise of power by General Wojciech Jaruzelski and a small
 group of close associates. The WRON appears to do little more
 than endorse the decisions presented to it by Jaruzelski; the
 military commissars who now reign over many institutions in
 Polish life seem to be mainly figureheads.
 In December 1981, the military was the only official
 institution which still enjoyed some measure of popular
 esteem. Since then the military has been used mainly for show
 of force purposes, but has done little more than reinforce the
 police who are the shock troops in enforcing martial law and
 dispersing protests. Policy implementation on a day-to-day
 basis -- identification, immobilization, and suppression of
 political opponents -- seems to reside with the Ministry of
 Internal Affairs (MSW) which controls both the national police
 force, the "citizens' militia", and the security service (SB).
 The MSW and its various components have gone far towards
 regaining the authority they had prior to August 1980. The
 resurgence of the MSW accounts in large part for the
 deterioration of human rights in Poland since December 1981.
 Martial law has proven-to be primarily a security operation,
 both in its long-and short-term objectives. Its real function
 has been an attempt to revoke the changes in Polish national
 life which occurred as a result of popular pressure during the
 Solidarnosc period and to prevent the recurrence of pluralism
 by eliminating from Polish society the flexibility which made
 the Solidarnosc movement possible.
 The regime's declared goal for martial law has been an end to
 political unrest and economic decline and the continuation of
 reform. Through its Martial Law Decree, the regime took away
 the human and civil rights which the Polish, people had won,
 slowly and bitterly, since 1945 and more quickly and
 explosively, during the period August 1980 - December 1981. It
 coupled this with a promise, symbolized by the arrests of
 Gierek and other discredited Party and government leaders, to
 correct the mistakes of the past. But while summary tribunals
 dealt out harsh prison sentences for even minor martial law
 violations, the prosecution of former Party and government
 leaders proceeded lackadaisically. Although martial law has
 .been suspended, its basic repressive features have been
 preserved in the form of emergency powers legislation.
 The martial law regime has so far been unable to realize
 Jaruzelski's pledges to restore the Communist Party's leading
 role. The Party remains as divided, disorganized, and
 ineffectual as it was prior to December 13, 1981. Some
 prominent personalities from both liberal and hard-line wings
 have been removed, but no consensus has yet emerged within the
 
 
 965
 party's ranks. The Politburo and Central Committee seem to
 have been relegated to the role of providing token ratification
 for the policy initiatives of Jaruzelski and his advisers,
 Industrial production remains significantly below the level of
 November 1981, the last month before martial law. Production
 in coal mining and other extractive industries has risen
 somewhat, partly because miners must again work a six-day
 week. Although the steep price rises of February 1982 have
 helped to stabilize the market situation somewhat, there are
 continuing problems in supplying manufactured consumer goods
 and in coaxing farmers to sell their crops to the state.
 Worker alienation is an important and growing economic
 problem. According to official statistics, the net increase in
 worker absenteeism in the first five months of 1982, as
 compared with the same period during the preceding year,
 exceeded the total of manhours lost through strikes in all of
 1981. Martial law was a technical success in suppressing open
 resistance and in frustrating attempts to form an effective
 underground opposition movement. One mark of its success was
 the regime's ability to pass legislation outlawing Solidarnosc
 in early October without suffering an unmanageable backlash
 from the Polish people. Yet this tight control only seems to
 have sharpened resentment toward the regime, and continuing
 unrest is probable. To date, the most the regime has managed
 to achieve through its repressive policies is the passive
 acceptance of its demands by the majority of citizens.
 This report is based on the United States Government's own
 sources of information and on statistics and reports published
 by the Polish Government and by political opposition groups.
 The picture which is provided of human rights violations in
 Poland is less complete and exact than last year's report
 because of:
 --   The regime's resumption of the habitual secrecy
 characteristic of its behavior prior to August 1980;
 --   the suppression of independent groups which previously
 sought to compile full and accurate information about regime
 human rights abuses.
 1.   Respect for the Integrity of the Person Including
 Freedom from:
 a.   Killing
 There is no available information to indicate that the
 authorities have made regular use of premeditated murder to
 deal with their enemies. The authorities themselves, however,
 have acknowledged killings of strikers and demonstrators in the
 course of pacification actions. On December 17, 1981, for
 example, the regime announced that nine coal miners were shot
 to death by security forces breaking a strike in the Wujek coal
 mine near Katowice. Following the nationwide disturbances on
 August 31, 1982, the official media reported the deaths of two
 demonstrators in the town of Lubin, one in Wroclaw, and one in
 Gdansk. Unofficial and unconfirmed reports indicate a higher
 number of fatalities than the regime has hitherto reported.
 According to unconfirmed reports from credible observers, the
 authorities have sometimes sought to avoid blame for the deaths
 of people in police custody, or during police street actions,
 by arranging for the secret disposal of the victim's remains
 and providing false or sketchy information about the demise to
 the deceased's family.
 
 
 966
 b.   Disappearance
 There is no evidence that persons are abducted, secretly
 arrested, or held in clandestine detention in Poland contrary
 to law and established legal procedures. The wide powers of
 summary arrest and internment which security organs now enjoy
 allow them openly to detain and hold virtually incommunicado
 for indefinite periods anyone against whom they harbor
 suspicions (see e. below).
 c.   Torture
 Torture is prohibited under the Polish penal code. Many such
 observers have expressed the conviction that beatings, often
 carried out by riot police brought in for this specific
 purpose, are a routine part of the regimen of at least some
 detention facilities. There have also been reliable reports of
 mistreatment of newly arrested demonstrators upon their initial
 confinement at police stations. A Western news team reported,
 for example, that while temporarily detained at a Warsaw
 district police station in the course of the May 3
 demonstrations, they heard severe beatings being administered
 to a number of people. A Western European news team detained
 while covering August 31 disturbances, and subsequently held
 two days in a police jail, reported a similar experience. Each
 member was housed in a separate cell with over a dozen other
 prisoners awaiting interrogation. Although none of the newsmen
 was mistreated during his interrogation, all reported that
 their cellmates returning from interrogation bore unmistakable
 signs of physical abuse.
 d.   Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 Yet, in connection with the forcible confinement of thousands
 of real and suspected opponents of the martial law regime,
 there have been increasing reports from credible sources that
 large numbers of prisoners have suffered beatings and other
 forms of-deliberate mistreatment. Some well placed observers
 have pointed out that even when the regime has permitted
 outside inspection teams to visit confinement facilities, such
 visitors are rarely able to obtain a full and accurate picture
 of the most critical element of prison life -- the treatment of
 prisoners by their wardens. Reportedly, internees were
 systematically assaulted at Zaleze Prison near Rzeszow in
 January, at the Wierzchowo Camp in February, at Zomo (elite
 motorized police) Headquarters in Katowice, and at Ilawa Prison
 in northern Poland at the end of March.
 There are no firm estimates of the number of persons wounded
 and injured in the course of police actions since the start of
 martial law, but the total figure is probably in the
 thousands. A principal reason for the lack of reliable
 statistics is that injured people often avoid seeking treatment
 at public hospitals out of fear of again falling into the hands
 of the police. There have been numerous eyewitness reports of
 excessive use of police force in the past year to suppress
 public manifestations of dissatisfaction with martial law.
 Common police practice has been to use water cannon and tear
 gas for initial dispersal of crowds. This often is followed by
 a charge of club-wielding riot police who sometimes have
 administered severe beatings to individual members of the crowd
 unlucky enough to be caught. During large-scale demonstrations
 on August 31, police appeared largely to refrain from beatings,
 while vigorously using tear gas and other means. However,.
 
 
 967
 there have been cases under martial law where two or three
 policemen have ganged up on a victim, pommelled him/her until
 he/she drops to the ground, and then kicked the victim
 repeatedly.
 Information about the conditions of confinement of martial law
 political prisoners remains limited and fragmentary. As with
 the reports of beatings and physical abuse of prisoners (see c.
 above), there has been enough testimony from responsible
 sources to warrant grave concern. Various humanitarian
 institutions continue to make strenuous efforts to visit
 martial law prisoners in various prisons and detention centers,
 but the regime has generally done what it could to inhibit such
 endeavors. Some possible indications of deliberate
 mistreatment of prisoners are reports of hunger strikes and
 other prisoner protest actions in different confinement
 facilities. In August, for example, heavily armed "Zomos"
 (specially trained riot police) were brought in to put down one
 such disturbance in an internment camp near Gdansk.
 e.   Arbitrary Arrest and Imprisonment
 Martial law regulations permitted the authorities to detain
 "those against whom there existed a well-founded suspicion that
 they would carry out activity injurious to state security if
 allowed to remain at large." Such persons could be interned
 "in isolation centers for the period of martial law on the
 basis of a decision of the Voivodship (Provincial) Military
 Commandant." Internment usually did not involve charges, and
 thus no court proceedings were necessary.
 Following its July-21-an-ouncement of the release or
 furloughing of about 1,200 internees (including all women
 internees) the regime claimed that only 600-700 of those
 interned at the start of martial law now remained in custody.
 The regime itself never presented a full list of internees. In
 a July newspaper interview, the Minister of Internal Affairs
 justified this failure by the claim that internees themselves
 had protested releasing their names as violation of their
 privacy. There also have been reliable reports of arrests of
 former internees shortly after this initial release, as well as
 mass roundups of ex-internees and other suspected regime
 opponents before August 31 (the anniversary of the Government's
 recognition of Solidarity) and other sensitive occasions.
 Since November 1982 there have been reports that persons
 suspected of Solidarity activities have been called up for army
 reserve duty and sent to special military installations where
 they are held under conditions'differing in no substantial way
 from internment.
 Much of the Western concern about Polish political prisoners
 previously focused on the category of internees, which,
 whatever its true size, constituted only a minority of those
 confined in connection with martial law or opposition to the
 regime. Thousands have been convicted of martial law
 violations by summary military and civilian tribunals, and many
 others are under arrest awaiting trial. Over 5,000 people were
 arrested or detained in the wake of the August 31
 disturbances. Sentences for martial law violations have been
 swift and severe. Even minor offenses, such as printing and
 distributing underground news bulletins, have sometimes
 entailed sentences of three to five years' imprisonment. There
 is an additional category of detainees who are being "held
 without charge at the pleasure of the Ministry of Interior."
 This status is similar to internment in that it involves
 
 15-480 0 - 83 - 62
 
 
 968
 confinement without charge for an indefinite period, but it
 entails more restricted visitation access. All assessments of
 the total number of current political prisoners remain highly
 tentative, given the regime's ability to shift confinees from
 one category to another, its repeated revisions of the numbers
 involved, and its manifest refusal to cooperate with
 independent groups trying to count them.
 Some of Poland's leading mathematicians (Janusz Onyszkiewicz,
 Ryszard Herczynski), historians (Bronislaw Geremek, Karol
 Modzelewski), economists (Gregorz Palka) were or are detained.
 Some were arrested, some interned; and others are awaiting
 trial. Also under arrest and now awaiting trial are twelve top
 leaders of Solidarity and KOR (Workers Self-Defense Committee)
 including, Jacek-Kuron, Jan Jozef Lipski, and Adam Michnik.
 With the exception of the three latter men and Herczynski (see
 note above) none of these were detained for offenses under
 martial law. Rather, all have been accused of the "suspicion
 of becoming a danger to the state." Their fate, like that of
 the thousands of other political prisoners in Poland, is of
 concern, since they have been deprived of the due process of
 law prevailing in Poland at the time they became famous. The
 regime continues to assert that these political prisoners are a
 menace to the security of the state.
 f.   Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The demand for legal reform was widespread and intense from
 August 1980 to December 1981. In response to popular pressure
 for recognizable standards of legality in the administration of
 civil and criminal justice, the Ninth Extraordinary Party
 Congress called in June of 1981 for "strengthening judicial
 independence as the fundamental guarantee of legality." Since
 implementation of martial law, however, the judiciary system
 has increasingly become an instrument of regime repression.
 This has been accomplished principally by the establishment of
 summary tribunals which have dispensed swift and severe
 penalties (not subject to appeal) for breaches of martial law.
 In the early days of martial law, at least, there appears to
 have been considerable resistance by attorneys, judges, and
 even prosecutors, to regime pressures to reduce their
 independence. In early January, civilian courts in Warsaw
 acquitted six workers and suspended the sentence of a seventh
 who were accused of organizing strikes at the Warsaw steel mill
 and Zeran auto plant. The judges accepted defense arguments
 that the protest strikes were a spontaneous reaction by workers
 to the proclamation of martial law. There have been numerous
 indications of the regime's displeasure at what it regards as
 overscrupulous concern for individual rights in the
 administration of justice. In Lodz the authorities interned
 attorneys who defended the organizers of strikes in textile
 factories. In Katowice and Bytom judges were fined for
 refusing to participate in summary tribunals. Despite the
 regime's pressures, sentences for martial law violations have
 often been significantly lower than the prosecution demanded.
 In many such cases, however, stiffer sentences have been
 decreed when the decisions were referred to higher authority
 for review. The case of mathematician Ryszard Herczynski is a
 case in point: three times arrested, he has been acquitted by
 Appeals' Courts three times. The regime has now obtained a
 fourth conviction.
 
 
 969
 g.   Invasion of the Home
 Warrantless searches of homes and offices, confiscation of
 personal documents and property, monitoring of telephones, and
 other forms of "bugging" -- all were standard police and
 security service practice before martial law, although prior
 approval from the appropriate authorities was theoretically
 required before such actions could be taken. The preamble of
 the Martial Law Decree, however, announced "the suspension of
 restriction of basic civil rights defined in the Constitution
 of the Polish People's Republic, in particulars personal
 liberty and inviolability of homes." Whatever legal grounds
 Polish citizens previously had for contesting government
 invasion of their privacy were therefore abolished. Given the
 ongoing campaign to ferret out and crush real and putative
 political opponents, it is correct to say that the scale of
 such police actions since December has been massive.
 2.   Respect for Civil and Political Rights Including:
 a.   Freedom of Speech and Press
 The Martial Law Decree explicitly prohibits "all forms of
 publication, printing, and copying of materials, and
 dissemination of information without the agreement of the
 proper organs of authority." This was a sharp setback to
 Poland's pre-martial law progress in implementing information
 provisions of the Helsinki Final Act. Much of the Polish media
 from August 1980 to December 1981 provided relatively open,
 frank, and lively treatment of issues, including explicit
 criticism of government actions. Few major events went
 unreported, including many which were highly unflattering to
 the authorities. Martial law has meant tight regime control
 over print and electronic media, and the Polish press, radio,
 and television have resumed practices often recalling the
 1950's. News is mentioned rather than reported; passive
 constructions obscure responsibility for actions. Ritual
 phrases, exhortations, and polemics predominate. The pluralism
 of viewpoints, regard for factual accuracy, and candor which
 previously characterized much of the Polish media have largely
 given way to an effort to portray a society returned to peace,
 order, and harmony. A relatively open debate on economic
 issues is the main exception to this glut of propaganda.
 The lively, informative and commercially successful Solidarnosc
 weekly newspaper has been shut down, as have other journals
 connected with Solidarnosc. Respected church periodicals, the
 weekly Tygodnik Powszechny and the monthly Wiez, have had their
 fights with the censors -- winning some and losing some. The
 most informative and interesting domestically produced sources
 of information about martial law Poland have been clandestinely
 printed flyers and news bulletins, thousands of which have
 appeared in almost every part of the country since December
 1981. The regime has mounted a concerted effort to stamp out
 these underground publications, and has routinely imposed jail
 sentences of three to five years on persons convicted of
 producing or distributing such material.
 Martial law also eviscerated the Polish media by removing many
 of its leading figures. A system of ideological "verification"
 largely silenced those who remained at their jobs and who now
 produce a uniform media line conforming to the military
 dictates. According to a key official of the dissolved
 journalists' association, and to Western press reports, more
 than 1,200 print and media journalists lost their positions in
 
 
 970
 the ideological purge. In late March, the authorities gave
 their blessing to the creation of a new and more malleable
 organization, the Association of Journalists of the Polish
 People's Republic. This development culminated a long campaign
 of criticism directed by the authorities at increasingly
 independent journalists. It also demonstrated the regime's
 determination to eradicate all vestiges of public autonomy and
 reinforce official dominance over public life. The head of the
 new association admitted to Western reporters that at least 700
 journalists lost their jobs because of opposition to martial
 law and that 21 publications were closed permanently.
 The availability of Western publications continues to decline.
 This is a result of both the ongoing political crackdown and
 the lack of hard currency. Even the very limited copies of
 Newsweek and the International Herald Tribune once available at
 newsstands are no longer found, a process already well under
 way before the martial law. Libraries, including university
 libraries, have for all intents and purposes no hard-currency
 budgets for the purchase of new Western books and periodicals.
 Western books and periodicals already in library collections
 are still, with a few exceptions, available to users. Hard
 currency expenditure outside of Poland is so controlled and
 limited that it is now almost impossible for an individual to
 purchase a subscription to a Western periodical.
 Polish university life and academic inquiry have a reputation
 for independence. In the month preceding martial law many
 universities were at least partially paralyzed by student
 strikes which reflected impatience with intentional government
 delays in adopting a higher education bill embodying long
 awaited academic reforms. Polish universities were closed
 December 13 upon the imposition of martial law, and most did
 not reopen until February.
 Before martial law, there was increasing regional and local
 autonomy in the administration of higher education. Since then
 the Ministry of Higher.Education, prompted by the security
 organs, has resumed central direction of educational policy.
 The effects of renewed centralization, however, are still
 vitiated by the absence of clear, consistent policies and by
 haphazard implementation. Despite the continuing lack of a
 clear regime educational policy, severe restrictions have been
 imposed to keep campuses under tight control. In most
 universities students and faculty may only visit the campus for
 classes or to use the library. The threat of expulsion
 followed by immediate induction into the military is used to
 stifle student political protests. Military commissars have
 been assigned to oversee the operation of universities. In
 December 1981, almost all university rectors had been freely
 elected by members of their universities rather than imposed
 from above. As of September 1982, only two elected rectors
 were still in place. The rest were removed by regime pressure
 or decree. Although a political "verification" process has
 taken place on campuses, only a few university instructors have
 so far been fired. The regime eliminated most of the
 curriculum reforms it agreed to in February 1981. Students are
 again required to take courses in Russian language,
 Marxism-Leninism, and "military science." In mid-September
 1982, a directive from the Ministry of Higher Education (dated
 May 1982) instructed universities to raise required class hours
 and reduce elective courses.
 
 
 971
 b.   Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 The Martial Law Decree expressly banned "all types of public
 assembly and demonstrations without prior permission of the
 authorities, except for religious celebrations in churches and
 other places exclusively for that purpose." Since December,
 there have been cosmetic "relaxations" of this ban to permit
 officially controlled civic action groups to meet without prior
 authorization. The regime has also allowed the Church to
 conduct religious processions on certain holidays, as well as
 the traditional August pilgrimage to the Jasna Gora monastery
 by over a hundred thousand people from all across the country
 On the other hand, it has repeatedly employed police force to
 suppress strikes, demonstrations, and other open manifestations
 of popular unrest. Elite internal security troops and riot
 police have routinely used armored cars, water cannon, tear
 gas, clubs, and, in at least two documented instances, small
 arms, to crush what have almost always been non-violent protest
 actions. Although there have been confirmed reports of crowd
 violence against police during some disturbances, such violence
 has occurred after the authorities forcibly suppressed attempts
 to hold peaceful protest actions.
 The Martial Law Decree suspended the operations of all trade
 unions, both-the official "branch" unions and the cluster of
 unions comprising Solidarnosc.   Stiff prison sentences were
 mandated for persons who persisted in trade union activities
 under martial law, particularly for those organizing and
 participating in strikes. Additionally, workers in
 "militarized" enterprises have been subject to military
 discipline. Persons thrown out of work by official fiat are
 often subsequently threatened with prosecution on charges of
 "social parasitism" under a recently enacted decree.
 Months of groping by the regime for. an acceptable alternative
 to the suspended Solidarnosc trade union ended October 9 with
 the polish Parliament's passage of official trade union
 legislation. Although the bill provides a legal framework for
 the creation by workers of what are described as independent,
 self-governing unions, its one unquestioned objective was to
 delegalize Solidarnosc and prevent a similar movement from ever
 emerging again. The bill narrowly restricts trade union
 activities to matters of wages, working conditions, and living
 conditions. The legislation bars unions from attempting to
 challenge government policies. It outlines procedures for
 compulsory government arbitration of labor-management disputes
 which very severely limit the right to strike. The bill
 initially restricts unions to the enterprise level (e.g., one
 union per factory) and prohibits them from having the kind of
 regional structure which enabled Solidarnosc to become so
 effective.
 c.   Freedom of Religion
 Despite martial law, there is still more tolerance of religion
 in Poland than in any other Warsaw Pact country, including the
 Soviet Union. There is, however, regime pressure on the
 Catholic Church to endorse official policies and to discourage
 its members from participation in opposition activities.
 Official press commentaries have accused some clergymen of
 encouraging social and political unrest. For example, the
 national party newspaper Trybuna Ludu attacked "provocative and
 politically inciting gestures by some representatives of the
 clergy." In March, one priest was arrested and subsequently
 received a three-and-one/half year prison sentence in Koazalin
 
 
 972
 province for allegedly "publicly insulting and deriding--the
 ruling authorities and.. .spreading false information." In
 October another priest was convicted and imprisoned for
 allegedly concealing the murder weapon in connection with the
 slaying of a policeman on a Warsaw tram in February. Bishop
 Tokarczuk has recently been assailed by the official press for
 his criticism of official policies in a recent sermon. In his
 October 9 Sejm address Prime Minister Jaruzelski denounced
 "political clericalism."
 Poland's small Protestant sects and Russian Orthodox churches
 continue to operate without major government obstructions. The
 small Jewish minority maintains its traditions, although there
 were indications that some Polish officials had attempted to
 incite anti-Semitic sentiment in campaigns to discredit
 political opponents. Anti-Semitic slurs have occasionally
 appeared in press articles attacking prominent figures in
 Solidarnosc and the Committee for Workers' Defense (KOR/KSS).
 The Christmas 1981 holiday issue of the leading Szczecin
 newspaper carried an article which asserted that Jews have been
 a source of trouble in Poland since 1947 and that Jews
 operating through KSS/KOR were trying to take over the
 country. The Jewish ancestry of KOR leaders Adam Michnik and
 Karl Modzelewski was mentioned in a denigrating way in the
 article. The December 17 and 18, 1981, issues of Trybuna Ludu
 accused Jacek Kuron and Bronislaw Geremek of prior involvement
 with "Zionist sabotage centers." The army newspaper Zolnierz
 Wolnosci on February 23, 1982, linked KOR with "Zionist milieus
 seeking to antagonize Polish society."
 d.   Freedom of Movement within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 The Martial Law Decree imposed severe restrictions on travel
 within Poland. In the decree's immediate aftermath, travel to
 another city for periods longer than 48 hours required advance
 approval by the authorities as well as immediate registration
 with the police in the place of stay. By spring, however, most
 of these restrictions were lifted and Poles enjoyed virtually
 the same degree of freedom of internal movement which existed
 before martial law. Martial law brought little change in
 Polish policy with respect to legally authorized emigration.
 In general, the Polish Government discourages emigration, and
 the basis on which emigration passports are issued remains
 unclear. Although the Polish authorities officially continue
 to espouse the principle of family reunification, a large
 number of unresolved reunification cases persist between the US
 and Poland. The Polish Government has normally enforced its
 emigration policies simply by denying passports valid for
 emigration, and by requiring those who do receive them to
 divest themselves of property in Poland and to repay the state
 for the cost of higher education.
 A more disturbing aspect of Polish "emigration" policy surfaced
 after the implementation of martial law. In early March the
 Ministry of Interior announced that martial law internees could
 apply to leave the country permanently along with their
 families. Although only a small fraction of the several
 thousand internees and ex-internees have expressed interest in
 obtaining emigration passports, there is considerable evidence
 that the regime is pressuring many present and former detainees
 to seek exile.
 Poland does not prevent the return of its citizens who are
 temporarily abroad, and indeed encourages them to retain their
 
 
 973
 Polish citizenship even after they have been abroad for several
 years. On the other hand, the Polish Government has a
 long-standing practice of preventing or delaying the travel of
 citizens with immediate family members abroad who prolonged
 their stays without official authorization.
 All Polish passports were invalidated upon the declaration of
 martial law, and were revalidated only in exceptional cases.
 In March, however, passport restrictions were relaxed in the
 cases of elderly and disabled persons and the
 "non-productive." A further easing of passport restrictions
 occurred in July, and was ostensibly intended to facilitate
 travel by (1) those visiting relatives abroad; (2) those
 involved in institutional, organizational and inter-city
 exchanges; and (3) those traveling abroad for training and
 education. In the first instance, the Ministry of Interior
 will permit citizens to travel abroad to visit relatives,
 provided they provide a written guarantee of support notarized
 by a Polish Consular Office abroad. Despite these measures,
 most Polish citizens still encounter extreme difficulties in
 obtaining passports for temporary travel abroad.
 e.   Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 Ever since its founding, the Polish People's Republic has
 sought to foster an impression of mass support for its policies
 by means of officially-controlled organizations which
 purportedly represent different segments of Polish society.
 Some leaders of these front organizations have come from the
 ranks of the Party Nomenklatura (a special procedure for
 ensuring that only those individuals considered politically
 reliable are appointed to key positions). Others are coopted
 non-party members who have accepted the regime's offer of
 prestige and perquisities. From August 1980 to December 1981,
 however, large and influential social organizations emerged
 whose leaders owed their positions to the support of the
 membership rather than the authorities -- e.g., the Association
 of Polish Journalists, the independent students' union, and the
 Solidarnosc trade union movement embracing both factory workers
 and farmers. Acting through these organizations, constituent
 groups were able to limit the regime's ability to manipulate
 them and, at the same time, to exert pressure on the
 authorities. The regime imposed martial law to revoke the
 political and social changes brought about through popular
 pressure and to dismantle these new elements of Polish national
 life which constituted such a clear threat to the regime's
 power and privileges. The:outlawing of Solidarnosc and other
 popular organizations makes it difficult for most Poles to
 identify their interests with the existing system. This poses
 a long-term threat to the regime's hold on power. A lack of
 worker motivation has markedly impaired productivity. The
 lowered living standards bound to result from this will likely
 be a source of continuing discontent.
 To counter the growing alienation of its citizenry, the regime
 has attempted to revitalize several long-discredited front
 groups, including the Peasants' Party, the Democratic Party,
 the League of Women, the Union of Polish Socialist Youth, and
 the Official Veterans' Organization. It has also fostered
 institutions designed to provide a framework for coordinating
 the varied efforts of these revitalized organizations toward
 the overreaching goal of national renewal and reconciliation.
 In December "Citizen Committees for National Salvation"
 (OKON's) were established to provide such a framework at the
 local level. In July, the regime unveiled the "Patriotic Front
 
 
 974
 for National Renewal" (PRON), which is meant to provide such a
 framework at the regional and national level.
 Although PRON and OKON gatherings receive considerable press
 attention, there is no evidence that any of these bodies have
 any popular appeal or have ever accomplished any substantive
 task. Their real function seems to be to provide an
 appropriate forum and suitable applause for policy statements,
 and to create the impression of a groundswell of support for
 the government. The vast majority of Poles evidently regard
 the PRON and OKON's with derision or indifference.
 In the months from September 1980 to December 1981 the Sejm
 (Polish Parliament) showed signs of functioning as an
 independent and representative legislative body. Since martial
 law, however, it has settled back into its more subservient
 role of providing ceremonial endorsement to policies determined
 by higher authority. Symbolic of this capitulation was the
 Sejm's endorsement in late January, with only a handful of
 deputies abstaining or voting against, of Jaruzelski's
 imposition of martial law. The Sejm's most important action
 since martial law was passing on October 8 the regime-authored
 trade union legislation banning Solidarnosc and effectively
 eliminating the right to strike. The Sejm deputies were not
 shown the actual text of the bill until three days before the
 measure came up for a vote. Ten deputies voted against the
 bill, and nine others abstained.
 3.   Government Attitude Regarding International and Non-
 governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations of
 Human Rights
 The Polish Government does what it can to obstruct the
 investigation of human rights violations in Poland and their
 discussion in international forums. It has vigorously objected
 to discussions of such violations at the Conference on Security
 and Cooperation in Europe'(CSCE) review conferences as a breach
 of the Final Act's principle of non-interference. At the
 Madrid Conference in February and March 1981, Deputy Foreign
 Minister Wiejacz and other Polish Government representatives
 opposed discussion of Poland's human rights violations. A
 Polish Ministry of Foreign Affairs representative subsequently
 called in a US Embassy officer to denounce the section on
 Poland in the "Twelfth Semiannual Report to the Commission of
 the CSCE on the Implementation of the Helsinki Final Act" as
 interference in Poland's internal affairs and its relations
 with other countries, specifically the Soviet Union.
 There is considerable belief that the act delegalizing
 Solidarnosc violates Poland's obligations under the
 International Labor Organization convention. The Government
 has insisted it is in full compliance.
 Amnesty International and the Committee in Support of
 Solidarity are two human rights groups which have been
 circulating lists of people interned without charge and
 arrested and charged under martial law. Among the charges,
 Amnesty notes, have been trying to organize meetings, strikes,
 or sit-ins, or distributing leaflets. Freedom House in 1982
 has judged Poland "not free."
 Expressing its deep concern at the continued reports of
 widespread violations of human rights and fundamental freedoms
 in Poland, the UN Human Rights Commission at its 38th session
 during February/March, 1982, requested that the UN Secretary
 
 
 975
 General undertake a thorough study of the human rights
 situation in Poland and to present a comprehensive report to
 the 39th session of the commission.
 On December 21, 1982, the UN Secretary General appointed
 Ambassador Hugo J. Gobbi as Special Rapporteur to undertake
 this study. There will be a very limited time to compile the
 full report requested since the 39th session of the UN Human
 Rights Commission is scheduled for the period January 31 to
 March 11, 1983. It has been reported that the Polish
 Government has refused to cooperate with this investigation on
 the grounds that it was interference in Poland's internal
 affairs.
 4.   Economic, Social, and Cultural Situation
 During 1982 the Polish economy continued to perform poorly in
 almost all sectors. While food supplies remained above
 subsistence level, such staples as flour, meat, butter, and
 sugar were all rationed. The shoe ration was one pair per
 year. Retail price reforms were instituted in February 1982,
 when prices of most foodstuffs and other consumables were
 increased by 300 to 400 percent. The steep rises in prices
 shortened lines for consumables, but have not yet stimulated
 production sufficiently to meet pent-up demand. Compensation
 geared to income level and family size has softened the blow of
 the price rises for some persons, at least in the short run.
 Increases in disability and retirement pensions have provided
 additional support for the lowest income groups.
 The housing shortage remains a major social problem. The
 average wait for an apartment is around 15 years. The priority
 accorded persons with hard currency aggravates inequities in
 the distribution system. In addition to housing, many
 necessities are more easily obtained by those with hard
 currency, while the mass of people must do without, or wait for
 years to buy. Health care is free, but medicine must be
 purchased from state-run pharmacies which frequently lack
 drugs, many of which must be imported from the West. Most
 domestically produced medicines are also in short supply.
 Hospital facilities are limited and overcrowded. The medical
 profession, however, is staffed by well-trained physicians.
 The infant mortality rate in 1980 was 21.1 deaths per 1000
 births. Life expectancy at birth in 1980 was 71.6 years. The
 population growth rate in 1980 was one percent.
 Poland's 1979 GNP per capita in 1979 dollars was $3,830. It is
 in its fourth year of a precipitate drop in national income,
 having suffered a two percent decline in 1979, four percent in
 1980, and 13 percent in 1981. Official forecasts project a six
 to seven percent decline in national income for 1982, but
 unofficial sources suggest this figure may be overly
 optimistic. Within the context of this unprecedented
 post-World War II declining rate of economic growth, a major
 debate is continuing about the allocation of scarce resources
 between long-term investment projects and urgent consumer needs.
 Private property ownership is widespread in Poland,
 particularly in agriculture, where, in 1979, 75 percent of the
 land was in private hands, according to official statistics.
 During the past spring, the Polish Parliament passed a farm
 bill which, among other things, permitted increases in the size
 of holdings and codified rights of inheritance.
 
 
 976
 Nominal salary increases during 1982, together with
 compensation for price hikes, have averaged 40 percent. The
 regime has withdrawn many of the concessions it made to workers
 between August 1980 and December 1981, most notably the right
 to strike and to form unions independent of official control.
 The six-day work week, abolished in 1980, has been restored in
 the mining industry and other militarized enterprises.
 Basic and secondary education in Poland is universal and free,
 but of widely varying quality in various parts of the country.
 There is, for example, a marked difference in the quality of
 instruction provided in urban and rural schools. The adult
 literacy rate was 98 percent in 1976. The primary school
 enrollment rate in 1979 was 99 percent. Admission to higher
 education is on the basis of competitive examination, but
 instances of political favoritism are still reported. The
 position of women in the economy is generally inferior to that
 of men, but there are wide variations depending on the type of
 work involved. Recent government legislation improving the
 salaries and working conditions of health service personnel was
 mainly an attempt to improve abysmal standards of medical
 care. But it may also have provided a slight boost to the
 overall professional situation of women, who fill a
 disproportionate share of the jobs in this sector.
 
 
 977
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OP DOLLARS)
 C6UNTRY: POLAND'
 1980     19s1     1912
 ---       --------------------------------------------------
 IiECON. AS$IST.-TOTAL.o.          0.0     47.6     35.5
 LOANS...............         0.0     47.6      0.0
 GRANTS.............         0.0      0.0     35.5
 A.AID .........        .         0.0      0.0      5.0
 LOANS..............          0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS 0......a.....         0       0.0      S.0
 (SEC.SUPPASSIST.).           0.0       9.0"     5.0
 B.FOOo FOR PEACE .....           0.0     47.6     30M5
 LOANS.....   .....          0.0     47.6      0.0
 GRANTS...........           0.0      0.0     30.5
 TITLE  -T   T    AL             0.0     47.6      0.0
 :REPAY. ZN S-LOANS.....         0.0      47.6      0.0
 PAT. ZN POR. CUR....           0.0       0.0      0.0
 ,TITLE IZ-TOTAL.L........        0.0      0.0     30.S
 E.RELIEF.EC.OEV S W P.          0.0      0.0      0.0
 VOL.RELIEP AGENCY,..,.          0.0      0.0     30.5
 C#OTHER kCON. ASSIST...          0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS. ................    0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTSo.*......          o0.0      0.0      0;0
 PEACE CORPS......         0.0       0.0      0.0
 NARCOTICS.....           0.0       0.0      0.0
 eTMEN.. .........          0.0      0.0      0.0
 II.NIL. ASSZST.-TOTAL...          0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS............        .. 0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............  .. 0.0       0.0      0.0
 A.AP .GRANT0 ...... ...0 0.             0.0      0.0
 S.CREOIT SALES-PHM ....         0.0      0.0      0.0
 C. INTL NIL.EO.TRNGs...        10.0      0.0      0.0
 DO.TRAN-EXCE$S'STOCK...         0.0      0.0       0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS......           0.0      0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. 9 NIL...          0.0     47.6     35.5
 'LOANS...............          0.0"    47.6       0.0
 GRANTS.....1......           0.0      0.0     35.5
 ------------   .,,. --- -- --   ..- .  ---- ---  - ----------------------.
 OTHER US LOANS.N........        212.0      0.0      0.0
 EX-IN BANK LOANS...;...         31.6      0.0      0.0
 ALL OTHER      ......         140.4      0.0      0.0
 ASSISTANCE PROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1960     1931      1982     1946-92
 TTAL,..         :  0.0       0.      0.0     21.0
 ISRO               0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 IPC'               0.0       0.0      0.0      0.0
 IA0. 0.0                    0.0       0.0      0.0
 IBS                0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 ADS                0.0       0.0      0.0     0.3
 APORB               0.0  _   0.0      0.0      0.0
 UNOP              ..0.0     .O.z      0.0     18.6
 OTHER-UN            0.0      O.Q       0.0      2.4
 EEC                0.0       0.0      d0.      0.0
 
 
 978
