 POLAND
 Poland is a parliamentary democracy based on a multiparty political system and
 free and fair elections. Executive power is shared by the Prime Minister, the Council
 of Ministers, and, to a lesser extent, the President. The Parliament is bicameral
 (Senate and SeJm). The Government, elected in October 1997, is a two-party coali-
 tion composed of Solidarity Electoral Action (AWS)-itself a broad coalition an-
 chored by the Solidarity labor union-and its junior partner, the centrist Freedom
 Union (UW), also with origins in Solidarity. The judiciary is independent.
 
 
 1406
 
 The internal security forces and the armed forces are subject to effective civilian
 control by the government. Since 1996 the civilian Minister of Defense has had clear
 command and control authority over the military chief of the general staff as well
 as oversight of military intelligence. The Government continues actively to reform
 the military to prepare for full membership in NATO.
 The country has made a successful transition to a free market economy. Growth
 slowed during the year to about 5 percent. Inflation was about 9 percent, down from
 13 percent at the end of 1997. Unemployment during the last half of the year was
 in single digits for the first time during the transition. Since 1989 most small- and
 medium-sized, state-owned enterprises have been privatized, and several major
 privatizations were launched during the year, including two of the few remaining
 state-owned banks and the telephone company. Significant reforms were under way
 in other sectors, including pensions, health, decentralization of government, and the
 restructuring of industries such as coal and defense.
 The Government generally respects the human rights of its citizens, but there
 were some problems. Prison conditions are generally poor. A cumbersome legal proc-
 ess, poor administration, 'and an inadequate budget hamper the court system. Court
 decisions frequently are not implemented, particularly those of the administrative
 courts, and simple civil cases can take as long as 2 or 3 years. As a result, public
 confidence in the judicial system is lacking. Many poorly paid prosecutors and
 judges have left public service-for more lucrative employment. The threat of orga-
 nized crime has provoked legislative responses that raise questions regarding the
 right to privacy. A large number of wiretaps were authorized, without any independ-
 ent review, although the number of warrants later was curtailed after intervention
 by the human rights Ombudsman.
 Freedom of speech and of the press generally are respected in theory and practice
 but were subject to some minor limitations concerning insults to state officials and
 institutions, among others. However, with few exceptions, the new Criminal Code
 provides protection for journalists' sources. Spousal abuse continues to affect many
 women. Trafficking in women to and through the country is a growing problem.
 Women continue to experience serious discrimination in the labor market and are
 subject to various legal inequities as a consequence of paternalistic laws. There is
 some societal discrimination against ethnic minorities. The Government has worked
 constructively toward resolving issues of concern to the Jewish community. Al-
 though the right to organize unions and bargain collectively largely was observed,
 some employers violated worker rights provided for by law, particularly in the grow-
 ing private sector.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no reports of political
 killings.
 In January a police officer was charged with the beating death of 13-year-old
 Przemek Czaja following a basketball game in the Baltic coast city of Slupsk. The
 boy's death, caused when local police charged a group of sports fans, touched off 4
 nights of riots and caused scores of additional injuries. In August the Supreme
 Court decided to grant the regional prosecutor's request for a change in venue. The
 officer's trial is to be moved from Slupsk to Koszalin. A trial date had not been set
 by year's end.
 A police officer indicted in connection with the shooting deaths of two unarmed
 civilians and the wounding of another in Brodno, a suburb of Warsaw, continues to
 await trial. The officer was suspended from the police force and was charged with
 excessive use of force.
 In April a provincial court in Lublin sentenced the former Lomazy police chief to
 15 years in prison in connection with the 1997 shooting death of a 19-year-old man
 who was held for police questioning. Lawyers for the defense appealed the decision
 in September.
 No date has been set for hearing the appeal of two police officers convicted in
 1997 of the 1983 beating death of high school student Grzegorz Przemyk. The pair
 remain free pending the appeal.
 Trials related to extrajudicial killings during the Communist period continued
 during the year. In November the Katowice court of appeals decided to annul the
 1997 acquittals of 11 riot policemen accused of killing miners during martial law,
 citing legal defects in the handling of the case. No action was taken by year's end
 on the retrial of former, Communist Interior Minister Czeslaw Kiszczak, ordered in
 1997.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 
 
 1407
 
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Criminal Code prohibits torture, and there were no reported incidents of it.
 In January a police officer was charged with beating a 13-year-old to death (see
 Section L.a.). Several investigations into incidents of police brutality or misconduct
 are ongoing. The trial of three police officers from Bytom, arrested and charged with
 the rape of seven underage detainees in 1994, continues. The men were discharged
 from the police force.
 In June a Gdansk court indicted 11 riot police for their participation in the Octo-
 ber 1997 beating of soccer fans attending a match in the town of Gdynia. The offi-
 cers' activities, which took place before, during, and after the match, both at the sta-
 dium and at a nearby bar, were captured on videotape. A civil case against the offi-
 cers, launched by the father of one of the teenage victims, also is pending. Both civil
 and criminal cases stemming from the incident were pending at year's end.
 Citing a lack of evidence, prosecutors in May dropped a case filed by a pair of
 student groups against former Internal Affairs and Administration Minister Leszek
 Miller relating to his actions during a 1997 rally organized by the all-Poland Trade
 Union Alliance (OPZZ) that was disrupted by violence.
 In December an Olsztyn court granted the appeal of two Szczytno police officers
 found guilty of beating two men detained for questioning in September 1996. One
 policeman's case remains under appeal; the other was again convicted, but his pun-
 ishment is unknown.
 Prison conditions, although rapidly approaching minimum international stand-
 ards, are still generally poor, according to reports by nongovernmental organizations
 (NGO's). Many facilities are old, in disrepair and overcrowded. According to a July
 report by the National Penitentiary Authority, the prison system is in desperate
 need of additional funding. Of 156 detention facilities, 100 require considerable ren-
 ovation. At the same time, the National Penitentiary Authority's annual budget con-
 tinued to fall; it declined approximately 34 percent since 1991. The Ombudsman for
 Human Rights complained about the safety of prisoners, noting that inmates are
 often the victims of violence from other prisoners. In 1996, for example, an 18-year-
 old mentally retarded boy was beaten and sodomized by fellow inmates. Those found
 guilty of the rape were convicted and sentenced to 10 additional years in prison. A
 civil trial against the prison administration for wrongful neglect is pending. Attor-
 neys for the boy asked for approximately $30,000 (100,000 PLN) in damages. The
 Ombudsman also suggested that the prison population be reduced, including by de-
 criminalizing certain offenses, pointing out that the ratio of prisoners to rehabilita-
 tion officers is very poor.
 The Government permits human rights monitors to visit prisons.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The Constitution prohibits arbitrary ar-
 rest and detention, and the Government observes this prohibition. Courts rather
 than prosecutors issue arrest warrants. The law allows a 48-hour detention period
 before authorities are required to bring a defendant before a court and an additional
 24 hours for the court to decide whether to issue a pretrial detention order. During
 this period, access to a lawyer normally is limited. Once a prosecutor presents the
 legal basis for a formal investigation, the law provides for access to counsel. Detain-
 ees may be held in pretrial detention for up to 3 months and may challenge the le-
 gality of an arrest through appeal to the district court. A court may extend this pre-
 trial confinement period every 3 months for up to 18 months until the trial date.
 Bail is available, and most detainees are released on bail pending trial.
 The Government does not employ forced exile.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The Constitution provides for an independent judi-
 ciary, and the Government respects this provision.
 The Government is restructuring the court system in order to streamline and ac-
 celerate the legal process. At present, there is a four-tiered court and prosecutorial'
 structure. The courts comprise regional, provincial, and appellate divisions, as well
 as a Supreme Court. These tiers are subdivided further into five parts: Military,
 civil, criminal, labor, and family. Regional courts are courts of first instance, while
 appellate courts are charged solely with appeals. Provincial courts have a dual re-
 sponsibility, handling appeals from    regional courts while enjoying    original
 jurisidiction for the most serious types of offenses. Appellate courts handle appeals
 tried at the provincial level, and the Supreme Court handles appeals only about
 questions of law. The prosecutorial system mirrors the court structure with na-
 tional, provincial, appellate, and regional offices.
 Judges are nominated by the National Judicial Council and appointed by the
 President. They are appointed for life and can be reassigned but not dismissed, ex-
 cept by a court decision. The Constitutional Tribunal rules on the constitutionality
 of legislation, but at present a two-thirds majority in the Sejm may overrule its deci-
 sions. Beginning in 1999, Constitutional Tribunal decisions are to become final and
 
 
 1408
 binding, after a 2-year interim period following the entry into force of the new Con-
 stitution.
 The court system is cumbersome, poorly administered; and underfunded. There
 are numerous inefficiencies, most notably that many districts have more criminal
 judges than prosecutors. These factors contribute to a lack of public confidence.
 Many effective judges and prosecutors have left public service for the more lucrative
 private sector. Court decisions frequently are not implemented. Bailiffs normally en-
 sure the execution of civil verdicts such as damage payments and evictions. How-
 ever, according to some observers, they are underpaid, subject to intimidation and
 bribery, and have a mixed record of implementing court decisions. Civil and admin-
 istrative rulings against public institutions such as hospitals often cannot be en-
 forced due to a lack of funds. Simple civil cases can take as long as 2 to 3 years
 before resolution, and the pretrial waiting time in criminal cases can be several
 months. The backlog and the costs of legal action seem to deter many citizens from
 using the justice system at all, particularly in civil matters such as divorce. The
 long wait for routine court decisions in commercial matters is an incentive for brib-
 ery and corruption.
 All defendants are presumed innocent until proven guilty. At the end of a trial
 the court renders its decision orally and then has 7 days to prepare a written deci-
 sion. A defendant has the right to appeal within 14 days of the written decision.
 Appeals may be made on the basis of new evidence or procedural irregularities.
 Criminal cases are tried in regional and provincial courts by a panel consisting
 of a professional judge and two lay assessors. The seriousness of the offense deter-
 mines which is the court of first instance. Once formal charges are filed, the defend-
 ant is allowed to study the charges and consult with an attorney, who is provided
 at public expense if necessary. Once the defendant is prepared, a trial date is set.
 Defendants are required to be present during trial and may present evidence and
 confront witnesses in their own defense. Since 1995 prosecutors have had the au-
 thority to grant witnesses anonymity at trial if they express fear of retribution from
 the defendant. This law, designed to help combat organized crime, impairs defend-
 ants' right to confront their accusers. In 1996 reforms were made that provide for
 a two-level appeal process in most civil and criminal matters; previously, citizens
 enjoyed access, only to a one-step appeal process.
 Trials are normally public. However, the courts reserve the right to close a trial
 to the public in some circumstances, such as divorce cases, trials in which state se-
 crets may be disclosed, or cases whose content might offend "public morality." The
 courts rarely invoke this prerogative.
 A new Criminal Code and Code of Criminal Procedure went into effect in Septem-
 ber. However, a March ruling by the European Court of Human Rights already may
 necessitate changes. The case was brought before the Court by Antoni Belziuk, who
 was accused of attempted car theft in the early 1990's. Sentenced to 3 years' impris-
 onment, Belziuk lodged an appeal with a provincial appellate court. The court sub-
 sequently examined the verdict in the presence of the prosecutor, but not the de-
 fendant or his representative. (In line with local regulations, law enforcement agen-
 cies are not required to escort imprisoned defendants to court when their appeals
 are examined, and Belziuk had not appointed an attorney to represent him.) The
 European Court of Human Rights unanimously ruled- that the lack of defense pres-
 ence in that case infringed on the European Convention on Human Rights provi-
 sions concerning fair trial.
 There were no reports of political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Constitution provides for the right to privacy of correspondence, but the Government
 maintains, without outside review, a large number of wiretaps. There is no legisla-
 tion that provides for the general right to privacy. However, a law passed in August
 prohibits the collection of information about a person's ethnic origin, religious con-
 victions, health condition, political views, or membership in religious, political, or
 trade union organizations. The law allows for certain exceptions, specifically, the
 gathering of information without a person's permission by courts, hospitals, or orga-
 nizations if the information pertains to their members. All exceptions are subject to
 some restrictions. A few continuing practices (such as a requirement to fill out
 "creed" or "nationality" items in some questionnaires) are to become illegal effective
 April 30, 1999. Violators of these provisions are subject to imprisonment for up to
 3 years.
 In May the Constitutional Tribunal ruled in favor of an Ombudsman's complaint
 regarding provisions requiring doctors to include statistical information about a pa-
 tient's illness on sick leave certificates. The Tribunal concluded that the nature of
 an employee's illness was confidential and should not be disclosed to- employers
 
 
 1409
 since this infringed on a patient's right to privacy and conflicted with international
 conventions to which Poland is a party.
 In response to the growing threat of organized crime and money laundering, Par-
 liament permitted the police and intelligence services to monitor private correspond-
 ence and to use wiretaps and electronic monitoring devices in cases involving seri-
 ous crimes, narcotics, money laundering, or illegal arms sales. Under the Criminal
 Code, the Minister of Justice and the Minister of Interior, both political appointees,
 must authorize these investigative methods. In emergency cases, the police may ini-
 tiate an investigation that utilizes wiretaps or the opening of private correspondence
 at the same time that they seek permission from the ministers. Estimates on the
 number of wiretapping devices installed annually at the request of the police vary
 widely; however, a high-ranking public prosecutor in 1998 put the number at 4,000.
 After interventions by the human rights Ombudsman, the Prosecutor General cur-
 tailed the number of warrants for wiretapping.
 Parliamentarians and human rights groups expressed concern about the lack of
 control over this type of surveillance. There is no independent judicial review of sur-
 veillance activities, nor is there any control over how the information derived from
 these investigations is used. A growing number of agencies have access to wiretap
 information, and the Police Code allows electronic surveillance to be used for the
 prevention of crime as well as for investigative purposes. As is the case under the
 Criminal Code, police must obtain permission from the Ministers of Justice and In-
 terior before initiating wiretap procedures.
 In September 1997, the special Sejm Committee on Security Services announced
 that the Office of State Protection (UOP) "may have" acted illegally against right-
 wing politicians in 1993, adding that only an independent court could rule if the law
 was violated at that time. The Committee made the announcement after examining
 documents submitted by UOP head Andrzej Kapkowski. Investigations were
 launched when then-Minister for Special Services Zbigniew Siemiatkowski alleged
 that the UOP carried out illegal activities in the spring of 1993, including the forg-
 ing of documents, in order to discredit rightwing parliamentary candidates.
 Siemiatkowski also alleged that these activities were conducted with the knowledge
 of then Internal Affairs Minister Andrzej Milczanowski and then-UOP head Jerzy
 Konieczny. Both Milczanowski and Konieczny have denied the accusations.
 Siemiatkowski then turned the case over to the prosecutor's office for further inves-
 tigation. The Warsaw prosecutor's office continues to pursue its case against five
 UOP officers; no charges were filed by year's end.
 The law forbids arbitrary forced entry into homes. Search warrants issued by a
 prosecutor are required in order to enter private residences. In emergency cases,
 when a prosecutor is not immediately available, police may enter a residence with
 the approval of the local police commander. In the most urgent cases, in which there
 is no time to consult with the police commander, police may enter a private resi-
 dence after showing their official identification. There were no reports that police
 abused search warrant procedures.
 A law on "lustration" or vetting went into effect in November. The law is designed
 to expose former government officials and parliamentarians who collaborated with
 the Communist-era secret police, and it bans from office for 10 years those caught
 lying about their past. The law requires officials to provide sworn affidavits concern-
 ing their possible cooperation with the secret police; an ombudsman then verifies
 the affidavits and brings suspected cases of misrepresentation before the Court of
 Appeals. The law was judged constitutional by the Constitutional Tribunal, but
 human rights groups and some opposition politicians have expressed concern that
 the procedures may be unfair, in view of the likelihood that records were subject
 to loss or tampering.
 In June the Constitutional Tribunal ruled unconstitutional a 1997 draft law envi-
 sioning the possible removal from service of judges proven to have violated judicial
 independence by issuing unjust verdicts between 1944 and 1989 at the request of
 the Communist authorities. Disciplinary proceedings against the judges in question
 would have been initiated by the Minister of Justice, the presidents of the appellate
 or regional courts, the National Judiciary Council, or individuals who feel wronged
 by court verdicts. In December the Sejm adopted amendments to the law requiring
 that procedures against accused judges be initiated before December 31, 2002. At
 year's end, the bill was with the Senate.
 In December President Aleksander Kwasniewski vetoed a bill on the establish-
 ment of a National Remembrance Institute that would permit those subject to inves-
 tigation by the Communist-era secret police to view their police files. Later that
 month, following the Parliament's overriding of his veto, the President signed the
 bill into law.
 
 
 1410
 
 Men are not permitted to marry, without parental permission until the age of 21,
 whereas women may marry at the -age of 18 (see Section 5).
 Section 2. Respect -for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for-freedom of speech
 and the press, and the Government generally respects this right- however, there are
 some marginal restrictions- in law and practice.- Nonetheless, the press is vigorous
 and independent.
 - The new Criminal-Code states that an individual who "publicly insultsor humili-
 ates a constitutional institution of the Republic of Poland" is subject to a fine or im-
 prisonmeht of up to 2 years, while an individual who insults a public functionary
 is -subject to a fine or imprisonment of up to 1 year. In September 1997, President
 Kwasniewski filed a private lawsuit against the Zycie and Dziennik Baltycki news-
 papers, which had-accused him of contacts with Russian spy Vladimir Alganov dur-
 ing his 1994 vacations. Although Kwasniewski withdrew the suit against Dziennik
 Baltycki when its editor in chief retracted the newspaper's charges, the court pro-
 ceedings in the case against Zycie are ongoing. Kwasniewski claimed that Zycie's
 articles violated hig good name and- demanded that the newspaper apologize to him
 and pay approximately $76,000 (2.5 million PLN), which he intended to use for flood
 victims. Zycie denied that the law was violated and maintained that its journalists
 acted in the public interest. -
 This provision of the Criminal Code also can be used by individual citizens and
 businesses "to protect their good name." In March Network Twenty 'One, which sells
 Amway products, and seven-of its employees used-the provision to prevent the
 broadcast, showing, or copying of a 1-hour documentary critical of the company and
 its practices. The documentary originally was shown at a film festival in December
 1997, winning the festival's higlest award for a documentary. When Public Tele-
 vision Channel One announced plaiis to broadcast the film, Network Twenty One
 took the matter to court and won a temporary re~training order. On March 25, the
 leading daily newspapers carried an open letter to th  President and Parliament
 signed by 48 of the country's most noted journalists,_ which condemned the court's
 decision. A popular biweekly television public affairs program criticized the court's
 temporary injunction as a form of censorship. The court 'subsequently made its in-
 junction permanent and prohibited distribution of the program.
 The case against talk show host Wojciech Cejrowski, charged with publicly insult-
 ing President Kwasniewski, was postponed several times and was still pending at
 year's end. Also pending was a 1995 case against presidential candidate Leszek
 Bubel for violating a section of the Penal Code which prohibits acts that "publicly
 insult, ridicule, and deride the Polish nation, the Polish Republic, its political sys-
 tem, or its principal organs." Bubel had claimed'-publicly that a former head of the
 presidential Chancellery protected a group of criminals.
 In February the Torun regionial prosecutor officially dropped pending charges
 against controversial Catholic radio priest Father Tadeusz Rydzyk. The prosecutor's
 office had been carrying out an investigation of Rydzyk at the request of a group
 of Parliamentarians who voted for the liberalization of the abortion law. The Parlia-
 mentarians were offended when they were compared on the air to criminals who col-
 laborated with the Nazis during World War II.
 The investigation continues in the case of Mikolaj Siwicki, a Warsaw pensioner.
 In 1996 the Warsaw prosecutor's office brought charges against Siwicki for publica-
 tion of a hate-mongering book, which, the prosecutor charged, "could seriously dam-
 age the interests of the Polish Republic in international affairs." The book allegedly
 condones crimes committed by Poles during World War II, makes historically dubi-
 ous claims about Polish crimes against the Ukrainian nation, and calls for lands in
 southeastern Poland to be given to Ukraine.
 The new Criminal Code also stipulates that offending religious sentiment through
 public speech is punishable by a fine or a 3-year prison term. In 1995 a provincial
 court charged presidential candidate Leszek Bubel with violating this article by pub-
 lishing a pamphlet containing anti-Semitic "humor." A verdict still is pending.
 Catholic organizations also have used the provision. In December 1997 Tadeusz
 Rydzyk and All-Polish Youth director Roman Giertych, both acting on behalf of the
 Council for the Coordination of the Defense of the Dignity of Poland and Poles, filed
 charges against the leftist daily Trybuna for insulting the Pope in one of its articles.
 Rydzyk and Giertych were offended particularly by the characterization of the Pope
 as a "boorish vicar," by the reference to one of his statements as "dirty and mum-
 bling," and by the suggestion that he used his position to make slanderous state-
 ments. According to one press report, the newspaper's editor in chief apologized for
 the article twice. In April the Warsaw prosecutor's office decided to drop the case.
 
 
 1411
 
 The State Secrets Act allows for the prosecution of citizens who publish or other-
 wise betray state secrets. Human rights groups criticize this law, since it restricts
 the right of free speech of private citizens.
 The new Criminal Code regulates the protection of journalistic sources. The code
 grants news sources absolute protection, except in cases involving national security,
 murder, and terrorist acts. Pursuant to the law, statutory provisions are applied
 retroactively if their terms are beneficial to the accused. Journalists who refused to
 divulge sources prior to the new code's enactment can avoid sanctions by invoking
 "journalistic privilege" after the new code's entry into force.
 There is no restriction on the establishment of private newspapers or distribution
 of journals; private newspapers and magazines flourish. Whie RUCH, a national
 network of newspaper kiosks, still remains in state hands, the Government has not
 used its control over distribution to suppress any publications. Progress on govern-
 ment plans to privatize the company in 1996 slowed when the bidding process was
 reopened after having reached near completion. In March a Warsaw court dismissed
 a civil suit initiated in 1997 by the original winner of the bidding process. An appel-
 late court later upheld the provincial court's decision.
 The National Radio and Television Broadcasting Council (KRRiTV) has broad in-
 terpretive powers in monitoring and regulating programming on public radio and
 television, allocating broadcasting frequencies and licenses, and apportioning sub-
 scription revenues. In order to encourage the KRRiTVS apolitical character, the
 nine KRRiTV members are obliged legally to suspend any membership in political
 parties or public associations. However, they are chosen for their politi6al alle-
 giances andnominated by the Sejm, the Senate, and the President following politi-
 cal bargaining, thus raising serious questions about the independence of broadcast-
 ing oversight from political (although not necessarily government) influence.
 The broadcasting law stipulates that programs should not promote activities that
 are illegal or against state policy, morality, or the common good. The law also re-
 quires that all broadcasts "respect the religious feelings of the audiences and in par-
 ticular respect the Christian system of values." However, the law does not fully de-
 fine the term "Christian values." The Constitutional Tribunal has confirmed the
 constitutionality of this provision. This provision was not used as a means of censor-
 ship during he year. However, since the KRRiTV has the ultimate responsibility
 for supervising the content of programs, these restrictions theoretically could be
 used. The penalty for violating this provision of the law is a fine of up to 50 percent
 of the annual fee for the transmission frequency or suspension of the broadcaster's
 license.
 Private television broadcasters operate on frequencies selected by the Ministry of
 Communications and auctioned by the KRRiTV. The first auction in 1994 gave
 Polsat Corporation and some smaller local and religious stations licenses to broad-
 cast, while additional licenses were granted to TVN and Nasza Telewizja last year.
 Private radio flourishes on the local, regional, and national levels alongside public
 radio.
 The Government owns the 2 of the 3 most widely viewed television channels and
 17 regional stations, as well as 5 national radio networks. PAP, the national wire
 service, was privatized partially in December 1997. Former Reuters journalist Rob-
 ert Bogdanski heads a five-member supervisory board that is preparing the service
 for full privatization. Although public television remains the major source of news
 and information, satellite television and private cable services (domestic and for-
 eign) are widely available. Cable services carry the main public channels, Polsat,
 local and regional stations, and a variety of foreign stations.
 The law on radio and television requires public television to provide direct media
 access to the main state institutions, including the presidency, "to make presen-
 tations or explanations of public policy." The Government sometimes complains of
 a lack of attention to its point of view, but there is a history of charge and counter-
 charge. In September, for example, AWS accused public television of manipulating
 information about its election campaign and criticized the Channel One nightly
 news for its dishonest reporting on an AWS convention. Program chief Jacek
 Maziarski responded that the accusations were groundless, describing them as yet
 another element of the AWS election campaign. Both public and private radio and
 television provide coverage of all ranges of political opinion. Evidence of overt politi-
 cal tampering in public broadcasting remains scarce, and watchdog organizations
 are alert to expose quickly any such tampering.
 Books expressing a wide range of political and social viewpoints are widely avail-
 able, as are foreign periodicals and other publications from abroad.
 In 1997 complaints were filed with both the Warsaw and the Krakow prosecutor's
 offices in connection with a billboard advertising the American film "The People vs.
 Larry Flynt." The complaints argued that the billboards offended religious senti-
 
 
 1412
 ment. The advertisement pictured a drawing of a man, his arms and legs out-
 stretched in a crucifixion position, superimposed on a larger drawing of a woman's
 lower half. The Krakow prosecutor (the only prosecutor to have pursued an inves-
 tigation) dropped the case in August. In September Krakow Cardinal Franciszek
 Micharski announced that he would appeal the prosecutor's decision.
 Academic freedom is respected.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The law provides for freedom
 of assembly, and the Government respects this right. Permits are not necessary for
 public meetings but are required for public demonstrations; demonstration organiz-
 ers must obtain these permits from local authorities if the demonstration might
 block a public road. For large demonstrations, organizers also are required to inform
 the local police of the time and 'placo of'their activities and their planned route.
 Every gathering must have a 'chairpebsh who is required to open the demonstra-
 tion, preside over it, and close it.  o
 , InJuly a parade to be held as part of the  grstgay pride festival was called off
 after Warsaw municipal ,authorities denied approval, arguing that it was not a cul-
 tural event. Gay rights activists view the denial as discrimination. The parade orga-
 nizers plan to appeal the decisi6n.
 The law provides for freedom of association, and. the Government generally re-
 spects this right. Private associations need government approval toforganize and
 must register with their district court The procedure .essentially requires the orga-
 nization to sign a, declaration that it will abide-by the law. However, in practice the
 procedure is complicatedand'may be subject to the discretion'of the'judge in charge.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for'freedom of religion, and the
 Government respects this' right. Citizens enjoy the freedom to prnictice any faith
 they choose. Religious groups may organize, select, and train personnel, solicit and
 receive contributions,'publish, and engage. in consultations without government, in-
 terference. There are no government restrictions.oi establishing and maintaining
 places of worship. More than. 95 percent of Poles are Roman Catholic, but Eastern
 Orthodox, Greek Catholic, and much smaller Protestant, Jewish, and Muslim con-
 gregations meet freely. Although the Constitution provides for the separation of
 Church and State,'a crucifix hangs in both the upper and lower houses of Par-
 liament. In June a provincial court decided that a cxucifix hung in the meeting room
 of the Lodz city council in 1990 could remain, denying the complaint of a city resi-
 dent. An atheist complained that the crucifix threatened religious freedom and dis-
 .criminated against him. State-run, radio broadcasts Catholic mass on Sundays, and
 the Catholic Church is authorized to relicense radio and television stations to oper-
 ate on frequencies assigned to the Church, the only,body outside the KRRiTV al-
 lowed to do so.
 Although the Constitution gives parents the right to bring up their. children in
 compliance, with their. own religious'and philosophical beliefs, religious education
 classes continue to be 'taught in the public schools at public expense. While children
 are supposed to have the-choice bietween religious instruction and ethics, the Om-
 budsman's office states that in most schools ethics courses -are not offered due to
 financial constraints. Although Catholic Church representatives teach the vast ma-
 jority of religious classes in the schools, parents can request religious classes in any
 of the religions legally registeied, including Protestant,. Orthodox, and Jewish reli-
 gious instruction. Such non-Catholic religious instruction exists in practice, although
 it is not common, and the Ministry of Education pays the instructors-Priests receive
 salaries from the state budget for teaching religion in public schools, and Church
 representatives are included on a commission that deternilnes whether books qual-
 ify-for school use.
 In January Sejm deputies voted 273 to 161 in favor of ratifyhng the Concordat,
 a treaty, reglating relations between the Government and the Vatican' which was
 signed in 1993. The vote came after years of bitter disputes between Concordat sup-
 orters an& opponents over"whether the treaty_,simply ensures Church rights or
 blurs the line between Church and-State. Subsequently passed by the Senate. and
 signed.by th  President, the Concordat took effect in April.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-Although the Constitution-'does. not address freedom of movement, the
 Government does not restrict internal or foreign travel. Citizens who leave the coun-
 try have no trouble returning. There are no restrictions on emigration-
 The Governnent- generally cooperates with the United Nations High Commis-
 sioner for Refugees  UNHCR) and other humanitarian organizations in assisting ref-
 ugees. There were no reports of forced repatriation of those having a'valid claim to
 refugee status. Foreigners recognized as refugees under the 1951 U.N. Convention
 Relating to the Status of Refugees are granted full refugee status and permission
 to remain permanently. According to UNHCR figures, approximately 964 individ-
 
 
 1413
 uals applied for refugee status during the first half of the year. Of the total number
 of applications awaiting decision (including applications carried over from 1997), 29
 were approved, 367 were denied, and 619 were discontinued due to the applicant's
 failure to appear for a hearing. The remaining cases are pending.
 A new law on immigration, initiated in 1995 and signed by the President in 1997,
 took effect in December of that year. Human rights organizations generally view the
 new Aliens Act as positive. The new law gives all prospective refugees access to a
 procedure for adjudicating refugee status and establishes an independent council to
 which prospective refugees can appeal negative status decisions by the Ministry of
 Internal Affairs. The law does not recognize the concept of first asylum or any other
 form of temporary protection.
 A Helsinki Foundation report, drafted after extensive monitoring of eight of the
 country's major border crossings, provided a generally favorable assessment of the
 country's treatment of refugees. While critical of the general unavailability of inter-
 preters and informational leaflets printed in different languages, the report points
 out that border officials were acquainted with the contents of the new aliens law,
 particularly those provisions relating to the application for refugee status, and were
 well prepared for their duties.
 Although some observers have criticized the authorities for using deportation cen-
 ters in place of refugee centers (when the latter are full), as well as for long delays
 in the initial review of refugee status applications, the Government cites a lack of
 resources as a major cause of the problems. Then-Deputy Minister of Internal Af-
 fairs Katarzyna Piekarska acknowledged in 1997 that the time taken to review refu-
 gee status applications was too long. However, she noted that only nine offcials were
 reviewing several thousand applications.
 In April responsibility for the administration of the program that helps refugees
 integrate into Polish society was transferred from the Office for Migration and Refu-
 gee Affairs at the Ministry of Internal Affairs to the Department of Social Assist-
 ance at the Ministry of Labor. The Ministry of Labor, in turn, passed responsibility
 for the program's implementation to authorities at the local level but, thus far, has
 failed to provide local officials with the information or personnel resources necessary
 to carry out the task effectively. Advocates for refugees complain that as a result
 of the transfer, the program has come to a halt, leaving many recently recognized
 refugees without even the basic necessities of daily life.
 In June the Warsaw High Administrative Court ruled in favor of a complainant
 who was denied refugee status in January. The Ministry of Internal Affairs had re-
 fused the complainant's application on the grounds that it had not been submitted
 "upon" crossing the border (as required under Article 27 of the Aliens Act) but 2
 days later. The High Court declared this original ruling invalid, noting that the arti-
 cle fails to define a specific time period and that neither the Aliens Act nor the Ad-
 ministrative Code concerning the documentation of aliens addresses the legal con-
 sequences of failing to submit a refugee status application at the border. Advocates
 for refugees welcomed the ruling.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens have the right and ability to change their government peacefully. This
 right is provided for in the Constitution and exists in practice. Poland is a
 multiparty democracy in which all citizens 18 years of age and older have the right
 to vote and to cast secret ballots. A permanent, democratic Constitution entered into
 force in 1997.
 Executive power is divided between the President and a government chosen by
 the Sejm, or lower house of Parliament. There is also an upper house (the Senate).
 The Constitution provides for parliamentary elections at least every 4 years. The
 President, elected for 5 years, has the right, in certain cases and after seeking the
 opinion of the Speakers of the Sejm and the Senate, to shorten the Sejm's term of
 office. Whenever the Sejm's term of office is shortened, the Senate's term is auto-
 matically shortened as well. Parliament may impeach the president.
 Women are underrepresented in government and politics. Only 13 percent of par-
 liamentarians are women, while only 3 of the 23 cabinet ministers are women. The
 Speaker of the Senate is the only female parliamentary leader, and none of the lead-
 ers of the nation's largest political parties are women.
 Two members of the German minority party are members of Parliament The elec-
 toral law exempts ethnic minority parties from the requirement to win 5 percent
 of the vote nationwide in order to qualify for seats in individual districts.
 
 
 1414
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 A number of human rights groups operate without government restriction, ives-
 tigating and publishing their findings on human rights cases. Government officials
 generafly are cooperative and responsive- to their views.
 The Helsinki Foundation, a major NGO, conducts human rights investigations
 without government interference. Members of the Foundation report that the Gov-
 ernment displays a generally positive and helpful attitude towards human rights in-
 vestigations. However, some local NGO's believe that a hostile regulatory climate is
 developing in parts of the g6vernment bureaucracy.
 The Office of the Commissioner for Civil Rights Protection (the Ombudsman), es-
 tablished in 1987, is the Government's watchdog for human rights. The Ombuds-
 man's office is an effective, independent body with broad authority to investigate al-
 leged violations of civil rights and liberties. The Ombudsman registers each reported
 case and files grievances, where appropriate, with the relevant government office.
 He has no legislative authority and is sworn to act apolitically. The Government co-
 operates with his office.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution states that "no one shall be discriminated against in political,
 social, or economic life for any reason whatsoever." The Government attempts to en-
 sure that these provisions are observed; however, violence and societal discrimina-
 tion against women and ethnic minorities -persist.
 Women.-Violence against women continues to be a problem. According to statis-
 tics released by the Public Research Center in October 1997, 9 percent of women
 polled admitted to being repeatedly beaten by their husbands. Approximately 11
 percent of respondents admitted to knowing women who were beaten repeatedly
 while approximately 60 percent admitted to knowing women who were beaten on
 at least one occasion. However, women's organizations warn that the number of
 women suffering from domestic abuse is probably much higher. They explain that
 battered women usually refuse to admit abuse even to themselves. Violence against
 women remains hidden, surrounded by taboos and accom panied by shame and guilt,
 particularly in small towns and villages. Government and police statistics do not dif-
 erentiate between male and female victims of violence. In addition the Government
 has not supplied public information on the problem. Police intervene in cases of do-
 mestic violence, and husbands can be convicted for beating their wives. Sentences
 for abuse of family members range from 3 months to 5 years (raised from a maxi-
 mum sentence of 6 months under the previous Criminal Code) or from 2 to 10 years
 if the victim attempts suicide as a result of the abuse. However, statistics suggest
 that a large majority of convictions result in suspended sentences.
 A 1997 seminar on combating violence against women organized by the Women's
 Rights Center revealed that law enforcement officials and prosecutors rarely treat
 domestic violence seriously. Former victims of violence participating in the seminar
 complained about investigations that dragged on for several months, as well as
 about procedures that were intimidating, unfamiliar, and unfriendly.
 The law has no provision for restraining orders to protect battered women against
 further abuse. For example, in divorce cases for example, courts frequently grant
 a divorce but do not issue a property settlement, sending the woman back to live
 with the abusive husband. This problem is exacerbated by the lack of alternative
 housing. Women's advocacy groups also have complained about the small number
 of state-supported shelters for battered women. Minister of Family Affairs
 Kazimierz Kapera stated in the spring that scarce money for family services should
 be spent on keeping families together rather than helping battered women. In No-
 vember 1997, he suspended a program offered by the U.N. Development Program
 for training of psychologists and lawyers who treat victims of family violence.
 Trafficking in women is illegal, and several specific provisions in the Criminal
 Code address this problem. Those convicted of trafficking in women or children may
 be sentenced to prison for 3 to 10 years. A provision of the new Criminal Code
 threatens those- convicted of luring individuals to work as prostitutes abroad with
 a prison sentence of 1 to 10 years. However, incidents of trafficking are on the rise.
 According to police statistics, 84 cases of such trafficking were reported in 1997. The
 bulk of these cases involved women being induced to work as prostitutes in Western
 Europe after being promised work as domestic workers, nurses, nannies, or teach-
 ers. The perpetrators are most often the acquaintances of family or friends but have
 been known also to include job agencies, talent scouts, and matchmaking services.
 Verdicts have been delivered in 20 of the 84 cases, with the courts sentencing per-
 petrators to, on average, 10 years' imprisonment. However, the actual number of
 
 
 1415
 
 trafficking cases is likely much higher as most victims do not want to speak about
 their experiences out of fear or shame. Poland also serves more and more frequently
 as a transit country for trafficking in women from other countries, particularly the
 former Soviet Union and Bulgaria. Women from these countries often are forced into
 prostitution in Poland, then sent on to European Union countries as well as Switzer-
 land and Israel. According to unofficial estimates, approximately 3,000 Bulgarian
 women "work" in Poland, in most cases under the control of international criminal
 networks.
 Public discussion of the problem of sexual harassment is relatively new, but
 women increasingly are talking about the problem and speaking out against it.
 While laws specifically addressing sexual harassment do not exist, social awareness
 is increasing, as are mechanisms with the potential to deal with the problem. For
 example, the new Criminal Code, states that whoever takes advantage of a position
 of power in a relationship to gain sexual gratification may be sentenced to prison
 for up to 5 years. According to a Supreme Court advisory opinion, such a relation-
 ship can occur between employers and employees, between supervisors and subordi-
 nates, or between teachers and students. However, this provision can only be used
 when sexual harassment occurs between a supervisor and an individual in a subor-
 dinate position. It may not be used when harassment occurs between persons of
 equal rank.
 The Constitution provides for equal rights regardless of sex and grants women
 equal rights with men in all fields of family, political, social, and economic life, in-
 cluding equal compensation for work of similar value. However, in practice women
 frequently are paid less for equivalent work, mainly hold lower level positions, are
 discharged more quickly, and are less likely to be promoted than men. Ministry of
 Labor statistics indicate that 60 percent of the unemployed are women and that, de-
 spite a generally higher level of education, women earn on average 25 percent less
 than men.
 Women are employed in a wide variety of professions and occupations, and a num-
 ber of women occupy high positions in government and in the private sector. How-
 ever, legal barriers, such as clauses in social insurance law limiting child sick care
 benefits to women only and mandating earlier retirement for women, can encourage
 discrimination in hiring. The law does not address equality in hiring practices (there
 are no legal penalties for discriminatory behavior in this area), and advertisements
 for jobs frequently indicate a gender preference. Although women have access to a
 number of previously forbidden careers since the Labor Code was modified in 1996,
 they still are prevented from working underground or in jobs that require heavy lift-
 ing.
 The Ombudsman for Human Rights monitors the rights of women within the
 broader context of human rights. Observers note that the broad scope of the office's
 mandate dilutes is ability to function as an effective advocate of womens issues.
 Within the Cabinet, the Government Plenipotentiary for Family Affairs replaced the
 Government Plenipotentiary for Women and the Family, a change that many wom-
 en's rights groups perceived as an example of discrimination. Several women's
 rights NGO's exist. Among the most notable are the Polish Foundation for Women
 and Family Planning and the Women's Rights Center. These groups are active advo-
 cates of gender equality and advance their goals through research, monitoring, and
 publishing. Several church-sponsored women's advocacy organizations also exist, but
 their cooperation with other women's NGO's is limited.
 No progress occurred during the year in amending the 1962 Citizenship Law,
 which discriminates against women by refusing them the same right as men to
 transmit citizenship to their foreign-born spouses.
 Children.-The Constitution extends some state protection to the family and chil-
 dren and provides for the appointment of an Ombudsman for children's rights. How-
 ever, an Ombudsman had not been appointed by year's end. Education is mandatory
 until age 18, and public schools are free of charge. The Government sponsors some
 health programs targeted specifically at children, including a vaccination program
 and periodic checkups conducted through the schools. However in reality budget
 shortfalls prevent complete implementation of these programs. There are no proce-
 dures in schools to protect children from abuse by teachers; in fact, the teachers'
 work code provides legal immunity from prosecution for the use of corporal punish-
 ment in classrooms.
 Prostitution among 12- and 13-year-olds is increasing, and unemployment, alco-
 holism, and housing shortages affect the quality of life of children. Moreover, there
 are no laws that explicitly address violence against children or corporal punishment.
 Abuse rarely is reported, and convictions for child abuse are even rarer. There is
 no societal pattern of abuse of children.
 
 
 1416
 Young men and women are treated unequally in terms of the age of majority. Men
 and women reach majority at the age of 18 under the Civil Code. However, a young
 woman can reach majority at the age of 16 if she has entered into marriage with
 the consent of her parents and the guardianship c6urt. In addition, men are not per-
 mitted to marry without parental consent until the age of 21, whereas women may
 do so at the age of 18. Lawmakers' rationale for this difference in treatment is the
 assumption that it is better that men entering compulsory military service not be
 encumbered with families.
 People With Disabilities.-There were approximately 5 million disabled persons in
 1996, and the number is expected to reach 6 million by the year 2010. In 1995 the
 Central Bureau of Statistics (GUS) reported that 17 percent of disabled persons able
 to work are unemployed. Advocacy groups claim that the percentage is much higher.
 The latest GUS data indicate that 57 percent of the disabled have no more than
 an elementary school education, compared with 30 percent of those without disabil-
 ities and that only 3.5 percent have a university education, compared with 7.7 per-
 cent of the nondisabled.
 The Constitution provides for aid to disabled persons "to ensure their subsistence,
 professional training, and social communication," and a number of laws protect the
 rights of the disabled. However, implementation falls short of rights set forth in the
 legislation. Public buildings and transportation generally are not accessible to the
 disabled. Current law provides only that buildings "should be accessible."
 The law creates a state fund for the rehabilitation of the disabled that derives its
 assets from a tax on employers of over 50 persons, uhless 6 percent of the employ-
 er's work force are disabled persons. While the fund has adequate resources, its
 management has encountered difficulties, including frequent changes in leadership.
 According to press reports, the fund has 4,000 grant applications pending. In addi-
 tion, the fund by law cannot be used to assist disabled children, that is, persons
 under 16 years of age.
 A 1996 law allows individuals from certain disability groups to take up gainful
 employment without the risk of losing their disability benefits. Previously, disabled
 individuals from those groups lost their benefits once they began to work.
 Religious Minorities.-Current law places, Protestant, Catholic, Orthodox, and
 Jewish communities on the same legal -footing, and the Government attempted to
 address the problems that minority religious groups face. Progress was made, for
 example, in implementing a 1997 law permitting the local Jewish community to
 submit claims for property owned prior to World War II. The law, which mirrors
 legislation benefiting other religious communities, allows for the return of syna-
 gogues, cemeteries, and community headquarters, as well as buildings that were
 used for other religious, educational, or charitable activities. Under the 1997 law,
 claims must be made by 2002. Of the thousands of potential claims, only 224 had
 been filed by December 10, mainly because the local Jewish community lacks the
 information and financial resources to prepare claims more quickly. Of the 224
 claims, the Commission on Property Restitution had processed 80 claims. It consid-
 ered and closed 30 cases; in 50 cases the Commission directed the parties to reach
 a settlement or submit new documentation; and in 20 of those cases a settlement
 was reached.
 However, the law does not address the private property of any group. Nor does
 it address the issue of Jewish communal properties to which third parties now have
 title, leaving several controversial and complicated cases unresolved. In, a number
 of cases over the years, buildings and residences were built on land that included
 Jewish cemeteries that were destroyed during or after World War II. For example,
 a school for disabled children now-stands on the site of a completely destroyed Jew-
 ish cemetery in Kalisz. The existence of the school complicated the issue of return-
 ing the cemetery to the Jewish community. Efforts were under way at year's end
 to reach a resolution acceptable to all concerned.
 Anti-Semitic feelings persist among certain sectors of the population, occasionally
 manifesting themselves in acts of vandalism and physical or verbal abuse. However,
 surveys in recent years show a continuing decline in anti-Semitic sentiment, and
 avowedly anti-Semitic candidates fare very poorly in elections.
 In January a rock was thrown through the window of the Jewish community
 headquarters in Katowice, hitting the doors of an adjacent prayer room. Imme-
 diately following the incident, then National Police Chief Marek Papala instructed
 the Katowice provincial police chief.to work with the Jewish community to tighten
 security around the property. Papala also sent a letter to the other province-level
 police commanders instructing them to make themselves available to discuss Jewish
 community security concerns. Local police continue to work with Jewish community
 leaders to resolve the case.
 
 
 1417
 In May vandals desecrated 27 Jewish graves in the Warsaw Jewish cemetery in
 two separate incidents. Police investigated the attacks but have been unable to iden-
 tify any suspects. Jewish graves also were vandalized at the Palmiry cemetery near
 Warsaw, which houses the graves of victims of Nazi executions during World War
 II. The grave of pre-World War II Sejm speaker Maciej Rataj-a Polish Catholic-
 also was vandalized in that attack. Within days of the incident, both Prime Minister
 Jerzy Buzek and Sejm Speaker Maciej Plazynski visited the cemetery and laid flow-
 ers on the desecrated graves. In a public address, the Prime Minister condemned
 the act and stressed that society must do all it can to prevent similar acts in the
 future. He also pledged government funds to restore the vandalized graves. The van-
 dals responsible for both incidents are still at large.
 In July unknown perpetrators vandalized a plaque commemorating Rzeszow Jews
 killed in the Holocaust. The vandals spray-painted anti-Semitic and anti-German
 slogans below the plaque, which hangs on the wall of a Rzeszow synagogue. Rzeszow
 city officials reacted swiftly and cleaned up the plaque upon discovery of the vandal-
 ism. Vandals in that area previously had targeted Catholic churches and cemeteries
 as well as a statue-of a World War II hero. Police continue to search for those re-
 sponsible.
 The Gdansk prosecutor's investigation into the 1997 beating of a 14-year-old Jew-
 ish boy by a 17-year-old skinhead is ongoing. The attack, which occurred a week
 after controversial Gdansk priest Henryk Jankowski delivered a sermon warning
 against the presence of Jews in the Government, was widely believed to have been
 motivated by anti-Semitism.
 The President's Office announced in March that it would make every effort to
 speed the process of restoring citizenship to Jews who were forced to emigrate dur-
 ing a Communist anti-Semitic campaign in 1968. Between 12,000 and 20,000 per-
 sons of Jewish descent are believed to have fled the country as a result of the cam-
 paign-
 In March a controversy arose over the "Pope's Cross," located on the grounds of
 a former Carmelite convent in Oswiecim adjacent to the Auschwitz concentration
 camp museum. The cross originally adorned the altar at a mass conducted by Pope
 John Paul II near Birkenau in 1979 and was erected at the site of the Carmelite
 mission in 1989. The Plenipotentiary for Relations with the Jewish Diaspora,
 Krzystof Sliwiniski, was quoted in a French newspaper as saying that the cross
 would be removed, as being disrespectful of the Jewish legacy at Auschwitz. By the
 end of March a large group of government and nongoverament leaders, including
 Chief of the Prime Minister's Cabinet Wieslaw Walendziak, 130 Sejm deputies, 16
 Senators, former President Lech Walesa, Cardinal Jozef Glemp, Bishop Tadeusz
 Rokoczy, and Gdansk Archbishop Tadeusz Goclowski went on record as opposing the
 removal of the cross. The cross is clearly visible from the former camp's Block 11
 and marks the site where Polish iolitical prisoners (possibly including Catholic
 priests) and later Jewish prisoners were murdered by the Nazis. Two radical right-
 wing groups also emerged that oppose the plan to remove the cross. The leader of
 the Defenders of the Pope's Cross, Kazimierz Switon, and Mieczyslaw Janosz, leader
 of the Association of War Victims, which leased the land on which the crosses stand,
 distributed inflammatory anti-Semitic leaflets opposing the removal of the crosses.
 In August radical nationalist anti-Semites erected dozens of additional large crosses
 outside Auschwitz, despite the opposition of the country's bishops. At year's end
 there were over 250 crosses.
 In September the Government revoked the lease on the land held by the Associa-
 tion of War Victims. The Government wanted the local courts to agree to appoint
 an administrator for the former convent site pending a legal decision on the validity
 of the lease revocation. In October the local court refused the request to appoint
 such an administrator, a decision upheld in December by an appeals court in
 Bielsko Biala, which returned the lease issue to the local court. At year's end, com-
 plicated legal maneuverings were continuing, and two separate cases were before
 the local court-the Government's effort to break the lease and the tenants' effort
 to have the government action ruled illegal.
 NationallRaciallEthnic Minorities.-The law provides for the educational rights
 of ethnic minorities, including the right to be taught in their own language. How-
 ever, controversy has arisen over the publishing of Lithuanian textbooks. In Feb-
 ruary the Lithuanian Ambassador to Poland, Antanas Valionis, complained to Pol-
 ish Minister of Education Miroslaw Handke that since 1991, 172 editions of text-
 books in Polish had been published in Lithuania while only 4 textbooks in Lithua-
 nian had been published in Poland since 1989. Valionis also noted that during 1997
 Lithuania, despite significantly more modest financial resources, published 27 dif-
 ferent textbooks for the 20,000 Polish pupils in Lithuania, while Poland published
 only 3 for Lithuanian pupils in Poland. There are 792 ethnic Lithuanian students
 
 
 1418
 in 18 schools of various levels ranging from preschool -to high school. and vocational
 school.
 The Romani community, numbering around 40,000, faced disproportionately high
 unemployment and was harder hit by economic change. and restructuring than
 were ethnic Poles, according to its l6aders. The national Government does not dis-
 -criminate overtly against Roma; however,- some local officials have been known to
 discriminate by not providing services in a timely manner or at all. Some schools
 have experimented with separate special classes for Romani children, stating that
 because of economic disadvantage, language barriers, and parental illiteracy,
 Romani children are behind their non-Romani counterparts when starting school. In
 April in Kety, a small town in southern Poland, local skinheads and Roma-clashed
 over a period of several weeks. In September a 14-year-old Romani girl from Bytom
 was injured seriously  when ,skinhead threw a Molotov. cocktail into the apartment
 where she was sleeping. Police immediately made an arrest in the case andare pur-
 suing an indictment.
 The small Ukrainian and Belarsian minoiies occasionally experience petty har-
 assment and discrimination. Individuals of African, Asian, or Arab descent.continue
 to experience verbal abuse or other typ~es of aggression, including physical abuse,
 usually in nonurban areas. In-July in downtown Krakow, two skinheads beat a
 black South African student following a nationalist demonstration. Prosecutors
 dropped the case because the police were unable to find the skinheads involved.
 The Warsaw Supreme Court rejected in March the attempt.by a small number
 of Silesians in Katowice to register themselves as a national minority. The Silesians
 appealed their case to the European Court of Human Righti. Official registration
 would allow 'representatives of the League of Silesian National -Identity, as the
 group calls itself, to run for Parliament under the preferences accorded national mi-
 norities under electoral law.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The law provides that all civilian workers, including
 military employees, police, and frontier guards have the right to establish and join
 trade unions of their own choosing. The law sets minimum size requirements for
 establishing a trade union: 10 persons may form a local union, and 30 may establish
 a national union. Unions, including interbranch national unions and national inter-
 branch federations, must be registered with the courts. A court decision refusing
 registration may be appealed to an appeals court. In 1998 the number of officially
 registered national-level unions remained about the same as in 1997, about 350. No
 precise data exist on work force unionization, although the trend continues to be
 downward. Recent studies suggest that only some 13 percent of workers belong to
 a union. As a rule, newly established small- and medium-sized firms were nonunion,
 while union activity in most cases-carried over into privatized (former state-owned)
 enterprises. The Independent Self-governing Trade Union (NSZZ) Solidarity has a
 verified regular dues-paying membership of about 1 million. Small spin-offs from
 mainstream Solidarity include the rival factions Solidarity '80, August '80, and the
 Christian Trade -Jnion Solidarity (Popieluszko). There are no reliable estimates of
 their membership.
 The other principal national unions are those affiliated with the All-Poland Trade
 Union Alliance (OPZZ), the Communist-aligned confederation established in 1984 as
 the sole legal alternative to'then-outlawed NSZZ Solidarity, and its teachers' affili-
 ate, the Polish Union of Teachers (ZNP). The OPZZ reports that its membership has
 dropped by more than 50 percent in recent-years to about 3 million, but this figure
 is unverified, and independent sociological surveys suggest that its regular dues-
 paying membership is considerably less than Solidarity's; a recent survey found that
 Solidarity represents some 6.3 percent of all Polish workers while the OPZZ rep-
 resents only 3.6 percent.
 The law on collective bargaining, in force since 1994, does not require union mem-
 bership figures to be verified or based on dues-paying members in order for unions
 to be considered "representative" negotiating partners for management and govern-
 ment. Solidarity protested some unions' (largely OPZZ affiliates) participation in ne-
 gotiations with the Government on the grounds that their membership figures re-
 main unproved..
 In 1997 there was some movement in the long-running dispute between the OPZZ
 and Solidarity over Communist-era trade union property administered by the OPZZ,
 but Solidarity charged that these steps favored the OPZZ. In 1997 the Ministry of
 Labor dividedl 12 properties between Soidarity and the OPZZ. These had belonged
 to the Communist-era trade Union organization Association of Trade Unions/Central
 Council of Trade Unions (ZZZ/CRZZ) until 1984, after which the OPZZ administered
 them. Solidarity charged that the OPZZ received the best properties, including the
 
 
 1419
 
 former headquarters building located in downtown Warsaw. In 1997 President
 Kwasniewski signed a bill that transferred as many as 400 properties (the exact
 number is still unknown) in the nationwide system of workers' vacation houses/ho-
 tels to a new limited liability company controlled entirely by the OPZZ. Solidarity
 announced that it would challenge this law in the Constitutional Tribunal, which
 in June struck down the bill as unconstitutional. The ownership and future of scores
 of other trade union assets belonging to branch unions remain under dispute. The
 continuing dispute over assets remains a major reason behind International Confed-
 eration of Free Trade Unions (ICFTU) and European Trade Union Confederation
 (ETUC) unwillingness to affiliate with the OPZZ. Neither the ICFTU nor the ETUC
 attended the OPZZ's Fourth Congress in May. In December legislation was passed
 requiring that trade unions that lost property worth some $40 million during mar-
 tial law be compensated either through restitution of the property or through other
 compensation.
 Most trade unions were active in politics at all levels. Scores of union activists
 were parliamentarians, and several became senior government officials. Solidarity
 plays a key role in political life. With 62 deputies, 27 senators, dozens of ministers,
 governors, and other senior national and local officials, the union serves as the back-
 bone of the ruling AWS coalition. The OPZZ has 42 deputies, about one-quarter of
 the opposition Democratic Left Alliance (SLD) caucus.
 Unions have the right to strike except in "essential services." However, labor lead-
 ers complain that the 1991 Act on Collective Dispute Resolution prescribes an overly
 lengthy process before a strike may be called. Employers consider the law too le-
 nient, since it allows only one-quarter of the work force to vote to call a strike. As
 a result, as many as 60 to 90 percent of strikes called in recent years have been
 technically "illegal" because one or both of the sides did not follow each step exactly
 as required by law. Labor courts act slowly on deciding the legality of strikes, while
 sanctions against unions for calling illegal strikes, or against employers for provok-
 ing them, are minimal. Arbitration is not obligatory and depends on the agreement
 of disputing parties. Unions allege that laws prohibiting retribution against strikers
 are not enforced consistently and that fines imposed as punishment are so minimal
 that they are ineffective sanctions to illegal activity. Workers who strike in accord-
 anqp with the law retain their right to social insurance but not to pay. However,
 if a court rules a strike "illegal," workers may lose social benefits, and organizers
 are liable for damages and may face civil charges and fines. The social partners
 (unions, employers, and the Government) continued to work out ambiguities in dis-
 pute resolution mechanisms in the new Labor Code, which went into effect in 1996,
 -atnd which represented a major overhaul of Communist-era labor regulations.
 The number of strikes remained relatively low (31 in the first 6 months of 1998),
 down from a high of several thousand per year in the early 1990's. Workers in the
 bankrupt Gdansk shipyard went on strike in March to protest its sale to the neigh-
 boring and more successful Gdynia yard. Anesthesiologists staged a lengthy work
 stoppage late in 1997 to protest low pay and poor working conditions, which com-
 plicated medical treatment for an extended period of time. Work slowdowns and
 other work protests occurred throughout the year.
 Unions have the right to join labor federations and confederations and to affiliate
 with international labor organizations. Independent labor leaders reported that
 these rights were observed in practice. Solidarity is a full member of the ICFTU,
 the World Confederation of Labor, and the ETUC.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The 1991 Law on Trade
 Unions created a favorable environment for trade union activity. However, labor
 leaders report that the 1991 law has not prevented employers from discriminating
 against workers who attempt to organize or join unions, particularly in the growing
 private sector. The law also has not prevented employer harassment of union mem-
 bers for labor activity.
 The 1991 law provides for parties to take disputes first to labor courts, then to
 the prosecutor general, and, in the last resort, to the Supreme-Court In a typical
 year, Solidarity takes several thousand cases to labor courts, several hundred to the
 prosecutor general, and dozens to the Supreme Court for resolution. In an over-
 whelming majority of these cases, the courts ordered employers to correct practices
 or reinstate dismissed workers or unions to reimburse employers for activity found
 to be illegal. However, penaties are minimal and are not an effctive deterrent.
 Enterprise-level collective bargaining over wages and working conditions increas-
 ingly characterized the labor relations system. Labor and management are adapting
 their relationship to the demands of a market economy, but experience in modern
 labor relations is still in its early stages. Many enterprises rolled over agreements
 concluded in earlier years.
 
 
 1420
 
 Since its formation in early 1994, the Tripartite Commission (unions, employers,
 government), currently chaired by Labor Minister Longin Komolowski, has become
 the main forum that determines national-level wage and benefit increases in such
 politically sensitive areas as the so-called budget sector (health, education, and pub-
 lic employees), while rendering opinions on pension indexation, energy pricing, and
 other important aspects of social policy. The Commission serves as an important
 forum in which the social partners air differences, discuss grievances, and often ne-
 gotiate agreements before problems erupt into social conflict.
 Many disputes arose because of the weakness of the employer side of the union/
 employer/government triangle. Key state sector employers (largely in heavy industry
 and the budget sector)-still were unable to negotiate independently with organized
 labor without the extensive involvement of central government ministries to which
 they are subordinate, although the Government repeatedly stated that its intention
 was not to be drawn into labor disputes. This weakness complicated and politicized
 the Government's new labor relations system..
 There are'no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor--Compulsory labor does not exist,
 except- for prisoners .convicted of criminal offenses, and is otherwise prohibited by
 law, including that performed by children. There were no reports -of forced or com-
 pulsory labor by children.
 d. Status of Child Labor-Practices and Minimum Age for Employment.-The law
 contains strict legal prescriptions about the conditions in which children may work.
 The Labor Code forbids the employment of persons under the age of 15. Those be-
 tween the ages of 15 and 18 may be employed only if they have completed primary
 school and if the' proposed employment constitutes vocational training and is not
 harmful -to their health. The age requirement rises to 18 years if a particular job
 might pose a health danger.
 Child labor is not a problem, although the State Labor Inspectorate reported that
 in-creasing numbers of minors now work dnd that many employers violate'labor
 -rules in employing them (by underpaying workers, paying them late, etc.). Inspec-
 tors found violations on stud fdrms, in restaurants, and, in some instances, in small
 private sector businesses and factories. ' -....           .    .
 The law prohibits forced and bonded child labor, and the Government enforces
 this prohibition effectively (see Section 6.c.).
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The Ministry of Labor, the unions, and employ-
 ers'.organizatiohs negotiate a revised national minimum'wage every 3 months. The
 minimum   monthly wage in state-owned- enterprises is approximately $140 (500
 PLN). While this represented a real increase over 1997, it was insufficient to pro-
 vide a worker and family with. a decent standard -of living in view of rapidly rising
 prices. A large percentage of construction workers and seasonal agricultural laborers
 from the former Soviet Union earn less than -the minimum wage. The large size of
 the informal economy and the small number of state labor inspectors make enforce-
 ment of the minimum wage very difficult. As long as unemployment remains high,
 workers often agree to inferior- wrking conditios rand lower pay inf-order t6-find
 or keep their jobs.              k    cay                           e
 The standard legal workweek is 42 hours, which allows 6- or 7-hour days, includ-
 ing at least one 24-hour rest period. The law requires'overtime payment for hours
 in excess of the standad workweek. The new Labor Code defines minimum condi-
 tions for the protection of workers' health 'and safety. Provisions' are strict and ex-
 tensive, and trade unions have the right to stop'production or extract a worker from
 dangerous working conditions without jeopardy to the worker's continued employ-
 ment. However, enforcement is a major problem, because the Labor Inspectorate is
 unable to monitor the state sector sufficiently, much less the private sector, where
 a growing percentage -of accidents take place. In addition, there is a lack of clarity
 concerning which government or legislative body has responsibility for enforcing the
 law.
 In the 44,581 work-related accidents reported during the first 6 months of the
 year, 269 individuals were killed and 749 seriously injured. The government's Cen-
 tral Statistical Office reported that most accidents were in the public sect&r, while
 most serious'accidents were in the private sector, where.proportionally more deaths
 also occurred. Solidarity contends that the problem lies not in the law, which estab-
 lishes safe standards, but in enforcement, because employer sanctions for illegal be-
 havior are minimal. Standards for exposure to chemicals, dust, and noise are ex-
 ceeded routinely. Workers may remove themselves from dangerousw6rking condi-
 tions without losing their jobs, but there were reports -that fears of such loss
 prompted some to stay on the job:
 
 
 1421
