Poland
The State Department's 1992 report provides an aggressively upbeat assessment of Poland's human rights situation while refraining from describing the situation as having improved over the last year. To its credit the report provides greater accuracy and detail on a wider range of problem areas than have been seen in recent years' reports and a broader pool of sources is clearly being used. However, there are egregious omissions from the report's commentary, most notably in the area of women's rights.
Generally, while the report is correct in saying that "the typical human rights violations that characterized the former Communist rule were an exception in 1992," it evades a discussion of the economic and political crises that hampered progress in human rights reform during the year. Worse yet, the unfavorable political and economic environment once again stymied opportunities for firmly establishing fundamental human rights at exactly the same time as freedom of speech, freedom of association and women's rights were under legislative assault.
Observance of existing citizen's rights may actually have deteriorated during the year: the Civil Rights Ombudsman's office reported that citizen complaints against the government continued to rise as Poland's bureaucratic infrastructure continued to crumble. As in much of post-communist eastern Europe, many civil servants have abandoned public service for higher paying private sector jobs while leaving large numbers of anti-reform or merely incompetent former
aparatchiks to manage the government. The country's initial luster as a regional leader in reforms rapidly dimmed.
During 1992 declining support for the radical economic "shock therapy" continued to provoke a variety of crises that the report generally fails to link to the privation experienced by the Polish public. Since 1989, industrial production in Poland has dropped by one-third and real wages have fallen 30%. The lifting of price controls, elimination of most subsidies and alignment of the official rate of the zloty to the market rate guaranteed not only massive inflation (43% in 1992) and high unemployment but also widespread bankruptcies and an economy-wide recession. While these figures were not as bad as in 1990, the recession continues to exacerbate the shortages, intense pollution, dilapidated public services and other trials of daily life that color modern Polish society. Infant mortality rates, for example, are 40% higher than the average for developed countries and Poland's tuberculosis rate is double the European average.
While acknowledging that unemployment is at 14%, the report ignores pertinent details such as the continuing rise of unemployment figures; that fully half those on the dole -- mostly women and young people -- had been out of work for over a year and, worse yet, in 1992 benefits had expired for 48% of the unemployed. Workers expressed their general discontent with the government and their own deteriorating prospects with a wave of strikes mid-year: 38 in July and 35 in August. As winter set in, mining
304
Poland
strikes threatened the nation's power supply.
The report downplays the political chaos in government that hampered efforts to improve the grim economic situation. None of the 29 separate parties, ranging from hard-line communist to ultra-right-wing to the frivolously named Beer Lovers' Union, that found seats in Poland's parliament in the 1991 elections, commanded more than 13% of the vote. The report calls the result "a lively, independent Sejm," while only obliquely referring to the vicious feuds that resulted in a legislative gridlock and demolished two governments during the first six months of 1992.
Two of those parliamentary disputes were over human rights issues that the report ignores or touches on briefly: abortion and the "lustration" files revealing public officials and others as former communist agents.
The 1992 report entirely ignores the widespread debate over the legal status of abortion, despite the fact that State Department drafting guidelines require that close attention be paid to women's rights in countries reviewed.
Abortion, while legal under a 1956 statute, was sharply restricted by Health Ministry regulations in 1990 as the Catholic Church began to exercise its post-communist power over social legislation (see, e.g., discussion of religious education below). Further incursions occurred in December 1991 when, at an unscheduled late night vote, the Second Extraordinary National Conference of the Polish Medical Guild narrowly adopted a medical
ethics code that would deny licenses to doctors performing abortions in cases where the woman's life was not at stake or the pregnancy was not "the result of a crime." Birth defects, no matter how severe, were not excepted. The code, which became effective on May 3, 1992, also prohibited pre-natal testing. While the Polish Medical Guild is a private institution, it is the sole medical licensing authority for Polish physicians. Doctors' fear of license cancellation halted almost all abortions, including those that were medically necessary.
The Polish Constitutional Tribunal, pressed by the Civil Rights Ombudsman, ruled in October that the doctor's code contravenes the 1956 abortion statute. However, taking a very narrow view of its jurisdiction, the Tribunal refused to strike the Code down because it deemed the Code an "ethical norm" outside its jurisdiction.
The Sejm, prompted by intense clerical lobbying, debated a draft criminal law on abortion providing two-year prison terms for both doctor and patient while severely circumscribing prenatal tests. An Extraordinary Commission of the Sejm adopted the draft law after rejecting a preamble expressing support for "generally recognized women's rights." Advertisements by foreign health clinics of dubious medical competence began appearing in the popular press using widely recognized code words to solicit "abortion tourism." This type of travel reportedly increased as the bribes necessary for Polish abortions rose.
In early 1993 the Sejm ignored a petition reportedly signed by 780,000
305
Poland
citizens demanding a national referendum on abortion and instead adopted a bill barring nearly all abortions. Over the objections of some deputies, the Sejm adopted provisions excepting police-documented cases of incest and rape; elimination of a life-threatening condition (as certified by two doctors); or incurable genetic defects in the fetus.
However, by amending Article 8 of the Civil Code, the fetus was granted full legal capacity from conception, a provision that commentators warn may eliminate the prenatal testing that could discover defects. Prenatal tests themselves must also meet at least one of four specific criteria to qualify as legal. The law also imposes prison terms of between three months and two years for doctors who perform abortions but no penalties against women who self-induce. Other provisions mandate sex education and access to "conscious procreation," an undefined term that can imply anything from provision of information about the so-called rhythm method to non-prescrip-tion contraceptives. v
The Sejm then sent what was already the most restrictive abortion law in Eastern Europe to the Senate. It is expected that right-to-life activists will attempt to overturn the amendments exempting self-inducing women and rape or incest victims from sanctions.
When the report does discuss the continuing -- perhaps worsening -- problems with women's rights, it does so obliquely. For example, in noting that constitutional equality has not eradicated discrimination in employment, the report ignores the more salient point: apart from
the theoretical proscriptions of the Constitution, Polish law is silent on the explicit legal redress available to women who are routinely subjected to unabashed employment discrimination. However, this year's report is an improvement over the 1991 report that merely stated "these forms of discrimination are prohibited by Polish law."
The report correctly mentions the fact that certain professions bar women for health or safety reasons but neglects to mention the scope of this form of discrimination: a 1979 Decree, amended in 1984, bans women from 90 occupations in 18 fields of industry, health care, forestry, agriculture and transportation.
Other aspects of the political impotence of women in Poland despite the accession of the first woman Prime Minister, Hanna Suchocka, are absent from the report. The Minister of Justice ignored a request from the women's caucus in the Sejm asking that child support payments be linked to inflation as happens with wages and pensions. For those without the resources to contest their payments in court, monthly payments for child support continue at 5,000 zlotys -- which in 1992 is worth less than US$.50. The government's Plenipotentiary for Woman and Family Affairs, appointed by the Council of Ministers in 1991, was also dismissed in February 1992 because her objections to the draft abortion law incurred the ire of the right-leaning Christian National Party. The otherwise excellent section of the report dealing with labor issues also avoids discussion of the plight of women in the workplace.
The second major issue that frustrat-
306
Poland
ed political and economic progress in early 1992, and has grave implications for human rights, is also mostly ignored in the report: problems related to the punishment of former communists. This was most publicly evidenced in the manipulation by members of Prime Minister Olszewski's cabinet of a list of pre-1989 Secret Service informers for political ends -- an intensely controversial move that eventually backfired after publication of the obviously erroneous list triggered the collapse of the minority-coalition government in the spring of 1992.
A paradox exists for Poland: some reformers argue that former communists and secret police collaborators should be ousted from public life in retribution for the evils perpetrated by communist rule; others argue that all Poles took part in the system to some extent and that a "thick line" should be drawn to separate a hateful past from a constructive present. Adherents to this pragmatic and relativist viewpoint argue, correctly, that while justice should be meted out to those at the top who egregiously abused citizens' rights, it should occur within the rule of law and due process rights of the individual must be respected or degrees of individual innocence or culpability will be lost.
Indeed, some aspects of accounting for past human rights violations have hewed to the rule of law -- the indictments of General Jaruzelski for his 1981 martial law decree and former Interior Minister General Kiszczak for his role in the deaths of 13 striking miners, for example - but the instinct for revenge has resulted in less circumspect disbursements of justice in other cases.
The report fails to comment upon a variety of troubling developments relating to the implementation of lustration: on December 19, the Sejm passed a bill with Senate amendments to a public pensions bill to reduce dramatically the pensions of soldiers, police and security service personnel working from 1944 to 1989 if they participated in the vaguely defined "repression of opposition figures." All pension privileges for military prosecutors and other officers were also to be discontinued if the government found that the officers "persecuted Poles working toward independence" from the Soviet bloc. President Walesa vetoed the bill in early 1993. In doing so he pointed out that it violated the principle of equal protection before the law, imposed collective responsibility and vested a nonjudicial body ~ the Council of Ministers -- with judicial powers.
Prime Minister Suchocka has encouraged provincial governments not to engage in mass firings of otherwise competent staff but instead to promote formation of an apolitical civil service. However, the political debate continues as various political parties continued to argue during 1992 over at least six different draft bills on lustration exhibiting various degrees of severity toward ex-communists. The harshest would ban all former communist party office holders from public posts as well as some private professions while containing no or few safeguards against political persecution of any former state employee, regardless of what they had actually done. Some postcommunist members of the Sejm have protested that this is an attempt to remove the left-wing from politics. All drafts do, however, allow the right for
307
Poland
redress.
The report does a much better job of pointing out the problems faced by some, but not all, other groups and individuals holding unpopular views. While the report notes the conviction of a citizen for insulting the president, it does not mention that he was jailed for 10 months after refusing to apologize or pay a fine. Another protestor received a three-year suspended sentence for insults against Solidarity. Early 1993 saw continued investigations into other alleged insults by protestors still at large. The provision of the Penal Code censuring anyone who "scoffs at, criticizes or degrades" Polish state bodies appears to contravene Article 83 of the Polish Constitution that guarantees freedom of speech. As of July 1992, according to the newspaper Rzeczpospolita, eight such cases were pending.
The report does not address the issue of conscientious objectors. To placate military opposition. President Walesa supported military service and evaded pressure to pardon Roman Galuszko, a conscientious objector serving 18 months in prison for draft evasion. Two other conscientious objectors were also jailed in violation of the requirement of Article 4(b) of the European Convention on Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (European Convention) that alternative national service be made available for conscientious objectors.
The report glosses over efforts to restrict freedom of expression. A three-year debate over legalizing private television stations took a step toward resolution when the Sejm passed an electronic
media bill on October 15. A principal dispute was over a requirement that networks' programming reflect "Christian values." This provision narrowly failed in the Sejm, but the alternative provision adopted demanding "respect for viewers' religious feelings" was not limited, as the report asserts, to public stations' programming. In fact, such "respect" is a licensing requirement for private stations as well.
The report fails to note that in late December the Sejm reversed itself and ratified Senate amendments stipulating that radio and television programs should respect the "religious feelings" of viewers and the (undefined) Christian value system in particular. Furthermore, broadcast licenses would be jeopardized if programs were to promote activities that violate the law or the interests of the state or opinions that threaten Polish culture, national security or "social norms."
Yet this was an improvement over the draft broadcast bill the government initially sent to the Sejm. That draft reserved for government-controlled public television stations the exclusive right to present state policy and to explain the stands of particular political parties over the airwaves.
Other heavy-handed efforts to control media and publishing go unreported. In January, following protests of the Polish Council for Christians and Jews, a local prosecutor's office banned distribution of a Polish translation of Hitler's Mein Kampf. Subsequently, before completion of an inquiry by the local public prosecutor, the police in Krosno closed the publishing house at issue.
308
Poland
Also, gay rights organizers allege that de facto censorship of their publications occurs as both newsstand operators and Ruch, the monopoly magazine distributorship, systematically fail to distribute and display the gay press as they do other magazines.
The report otherwise touches upon most of the important issues and events affecting the rights of ethnic and religious minorities in Poland. For example, the report notes the Constitutional Tribunal has received a request from the Civil Rights Ombudsman to reconsider the Education Minister's April 14 law making religion a formal, graded -- if optional --subject in public schools. However, the report does not mention the response of Polish Cardinal Glemp who, displaying a recurring disdain for the constitutionally mandated separation of church and state, condemned the request saying that the Ombudsman should "monitor whether certain acts are in accordance with the will of the nation" rather than the rule of law. Christian National Union deputies also agitated for the dismissal of the Ombudsman because of this request. Article 82 of the Polish Constitution guarantees freedom from forced participation in religious activities. The report fails to describe fully the Catholic Church's powerful role in opposing certain rights-based initiatives.
The report also mentions attacks by skinheads and others on Gypsies and Arabs without commenting on the relatively light sentences handed down on the very few participants arrested, especially those resulting from the Mlawa anti-Gypsy riots of 1991. Assaults on Germans and even tourists driving German
rental cars are also detailed, albeit without explanation of their motivations.
The report largely fails to note signs that immigration controls were stiffening in 1992. Poland sought to defuse tensions with Germany over the (by German accounts) 100,000 residents of former communist nations that crossed the Polish-German border in 1992. Poland registered only 532 asylum requests in 1992 while Germany faced 440,000. Under a new German law to take effect in April 1993, asylum seekers from "safe" countries, including Poland, would be returned from whence they came.
In response to these concerns, as well as rising violent crime attributed to recent immigrants, the Internal Affairs Ministry announced measures to limit visitors from the former Soviet Union, Bulgaria and Romania by requiring police registration of invitations. Poles issuing the invitations would need to pay a one million zloty (about US$60) fee to cover potential deportation and health care costs.
Strangely, the report also fails to mention what may well be the most significant human rights legislation adopted in Poland during 1992: on October 2, the Sejm voted to allow presidential ratification of the European Convention. The Convention guarantees a wide range of fundamental freedoms by allowing redress to the European Court of Human Rights in Strasbourg once all domestic avenues of redress have failed.
At the close of 1992, the Sejm had not approved ratification of three protocols to the European Convention: Proto-
309
Poland
col One's rights to property, education and free elections; Protocol Four's freedom of travel, freedom from exile and prohibition of denial of liberty based merely on an inability to meet a contractual obligation; and finally, Protocol Seven's standards for review of deportations and criminal convictions as well as spouse's rights, and the prohibition of double jeopardy retrials of those previously acquitted. Protocol Six's prohibition of the death penalty was not signed.
Once the European Convention comes into force, it will become part of the continuing controversy over the need for judicial reform in Poland. Because the Constitutional Tribunal can only offer opinions on legislation, the ambiguity surrounding precedents set by Supreme Court rulings has remained. International norms will certainly run the risk of falling into the same void. The need for coherent review of cases raising constitutional questions or issues addressed by international law is exacerbated by the timidity of lower courts in applying such constitutional or international standards to the cases before them. The Constitutional Tribunal declined the opportunity to attempt an expansion of its jurisdiction and ruled in January 1992 that it was not able to rule on the supremacy of international norms over domestic law.
The Sejm has likewise been unable to act. A Constitutional Commission was to have started work on such discrepancies in October but the 36 Sejm deputies and 10 Senators found that their political differences were so deep that they were unable to draft any provisions. Instead, the Commission will wait to have drafts submitted to them.
This quandary reflects a general failure of the Sejm to engage in judicial and human rights reform. These two subjects were conspicuously absent from the interim Small Constitution, and the Sejm passed no other laws in 1992 affecting the functioning of the courts. This is not to suggest that judicial reform is a non-issue in Poland: judges raised an outcry when bills proposed by the Minister of Justice -- also absent from the report --ironically sought to grant political bodies the right to remove judges for "violating the principle of independence." Furthermore, the findings of the Constitutional Tribunal, which the Sejm elects, can also be overridden by the Sejm, thus countermanding judicial checks on the legislature.
Effective judicial sanctions against forbidden activities are a recurring problem in Polish human rights law, even when recently addressed by reformist politicians. A 1991 amendment to the Trade Union Act, for example, imposes sanctions for anti-union discrimination. However, the fines start at 50,000 zloty, roughly US$3.00, at current exchange rates.
Despite exceptional reporting in prior years on penal reform concerns, this year's report generally ignores the appalling state of the Polish prison system. While the report commendably criticizes the unsanitary, violent and psychologically brutal juvenile reformatories, it summarily concludes that "overall conditions in adult prisons improved . . . [although] . . . there are still some deficiencies."
Poland's proportion of prisoners to the populace is twice that of Western Europe, due in no small part to the pro-
310
Poland
pensity of judges to hand down lavish and sometimes nonsensical sentences. This problem is recognized by draft penal reform codes that received little attention from the Sejm in 1992.
Beyond having unusually stern minimum sentences by European standards, Polish judges retain the spirit of martial law and usually go beyond the necessary sentencing minimums with little regard for the overcrowding already existing in the prisons. While escalating violent crime certainly foments stricter penalties, penalties for nonviolent offenders can go to Kafkaesque extremes: judges routinely jail men who fail to pay alimony thus depriving ex-wives of the chance of seeing any money. Ironically, the use of fines contributes to overcrowding; those who cannot pay are jailed based on a formula that puts offenders in prison for one day for each 10,000 to 30,000 zloty owed. Since the state pays 44,000 zloty a day to maintain a prisoner, the sentence ironically exacerbates the problems faced by the system.
Furthermore, while the report mentions the Helsinki Committee's report to buttress its assertion that prison conditions are improving, it makes no mention of that report's finding that prison officials have far too much discretion to categorize prisoners on informal and extrajudicial classifications. Special treatment for "difficult" prisoners, while not acknowledged by relevant regulations, allows prison officials broad opportunities to engage in capricious activity. The Helsinki Committee's report also found that most prisons do not post prison regulations or inform prisoners of any rights of redress they might have, particu-
larly of the right to appeal prison administration decisions to a penitentiary judge. The State Department report also ignores these findings in its summary.
Prison doctors have also suggested reforms including elimination of the provisions of the Executive Penal Code that require doctors to force feed any prisoner whose life may be in danger - in contravention of the anti-torture provisions of Article 4 of the European Convention --and establishing a commission of outside doctors that could change a prisoners' sentence on medical grounds. Also, the Helsinki Committee's report found that physical aspects of Polish prison life will continue to deteriorate along with the economy at large. Renovation of portions of prisons, most of which were built in the last century, remains unfeasible despite the fact that some have been condemned as unfit for human habitation.
In December, President Walesa, as the report notes, proposed a human rights charter outlining fundamental civil rights and freedoms. The report fails to mention controversy that has already arisen over certain provisions such as one forbidding censorship. For example, Catholic deputies in the Sejm opposed the ban on censorship arguing that such prohibitions are a legitimate means to defend "religious feelings and honor." Other provisions would guarantee the right to privacy, ban the forced assimilation of ethnic minorities and enable 500,000 citizens to call a referendum to overturn legislation - a provision clearly stemming from the debate over the abortion law. The progress of this proposal will be a critical component of Poland's human rights effort in 1993.
311
