 POLAND
 Significant and sustained human rights progress occifrred in
 Poland in 1990. In little more than 1 year since Tadeusz
 Mazowiecki became Premier of the first non-Communist
 government since World War II, Poland has been transformed
 from a one-party state into a functioning democracy. The
 Communist Polish United Workers Party (PZPR) dissolved itself
 in January; its successor parties are widely regarded as
 little more than splinter groups. Lech Walesa, the head of
 the Solidarity trade union, was elected President in a direct
 popular election in December, and he appointed Jan Krzysztof
 Bielecki, a member of the Liberal Democratic Congress, as
 Premier. The Parliament agreed to dissolve itself by the
 spring-of 1991, clearing the way for free multiparty
 parliamentary elections. Elections in May established genuine
 self-government at the local level. A new constitution, which
 may be completed by 1991, is expected to codify.legal and
 institutional changes and symbolize Poland's peaceful
 revolution from a one-party state to a democracy.
 The Ministry of Internal Affairs, which oversees the security
 apparatus, underwent profound reform. The Minister of
 Internal Affairs, a former PZPR Politburo member, was replaced
 in July 1990 by a Catholic opposition activist and Solidarity
 advisor, Krzysztof Kozlowski, who appointed Solidarity members
 as his deputies and associates. The antiriot troops (ZOMO)
 were disbanded in late 1989, and during 1990 the secret police
 force (SB) was abolished, Ministry operations were ,
 decentralized, and the regular police force was restructured
 to fight crime rather than political opponents. As a result,
 the Ministry is no longer a tool of political control and
 domestic repression.
 The centrally planned economy is undergoing an-historically
 unprecedented and difficult transformation into a market
 economy. The Government's economic reform program reduced
 inflation from about 900 percent in 1989 to an average rate of
 between 4 and 5 percent a month in 1990, made the-currency
 internally convertible and stable, and restored consumer goods
 to store shelves. As a result of wage restrictions and price
 liberalization, however, the real standard of living fell in
 1990 by approximately 30 percent, and unemployment grew from a
 negligible number to over 1 million. In addition, the
 slow-moving privatization of state-owned industry and other
 government monopolies generated public criticism.
 Poland made substantial progress on major human rights issues
 in 1990. Officially sanctioned, politically-motivated police
 violence was halted; former high-ranking members-of the
 security apparatus were arrested for corruption and murder;
 investigations into political killings were reopened; all
 censorship was terminated; the print media were being
 privatized; and-the criminal code was amended to establish the
 independence of the judiciary and protect the rights of
 prisoners and detainees. Progress remained slow or
 insufficient in some areas; prison conditions are still
 substandard, and work conditions are hazardous; some political
 opposition groups contend they lack adequate access to the
 media; and minimum wage requirements are not always enforced.
 Nevertheless, the Polish Helsinki Committee praised Poland's
 human rights performance in 1990.
 
 
 1234
 POLAND
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing
 No confirmed instances of political killing were reported.
 However, the wife of a prominent pro-Solidarity journalist
 died in April as the result of jumping from her third-floor
 apartment, which was set on fire by arsonists. While the
 Polish press has speculated that the arson was related to
 articles written by the victim's husband, exposing abuses by
 the former secret police, the prosecutor's investigation of
 the case was unable to identify the arsonists.
 Inquiries into other suspicious deaths intensified in 1990.
 For example, the Government is investigating the cases of two
 priests who died under mysterious circumstances in 1989. The
 investigation of the 1984 murder of Solidarity hero Father
 Jerzy Popieluszko was reopened. These inquiries--conducted in
 many cases by long-time human rights and Solidarity activists
 now in senior positions in the Ministry of Internal Affairs-
 have already yielded concrete results. For example, two
 former Ministry generals, including the former deputy minister
 and chief of the secret police, were arrested in October and
 charged with having incited their subordinates to murder
 Popieluszko and of having directed the murder itself.
 b. Disappearance
 No instances of prolonged or permanent disappearance were
 reported.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 There were no reported allegations of torture during 1990.
 Polish human rights groups criticized prison conditions but
 asserted they were improving. Nevertheless, health care is
 poor in the prisons, crime is high, and recreational space is
 insufficient. Prisoners rioted in several prisons during
 December 1989, demanding improved living conditions and
 amendments to the criminal code. Eight prisoners were killed
 during these riots; reportedly, police opened fire in at least
 one prison. The prosecutor is investigating these deaths.
 Human rights experts reported that some prisoners were
 brutally beaten in January as punishment for rioting. The
 Senate's Office of Intervention, concerned at the failure of
 the prosecutor's investigation to identify the perpetrators of
 the beatings and wary of a possible attempt to protect prison
 guards who have been accused, has sent a team to one prison to
 explore why the prosecutor's investigation has been moving so
 slowly. Children in youth reformatory institutions were
 reportedly beaten by guards as late as May 1990. The trial of
 three guards accused of these beatings began on November 3.
 Human rights observers blame such maltreatment on the
 continued employment of Communist-era prison guards.
 Later in 1990, however, prison conoitions appeared to be
 improving. A new director of prisons was appointed, a
 sociologist specializing in prison behavior who wrote the
 Polish Helsinki Committee's 1989 report on prison conditions
 in Poland. Since the new director's appointment, there has
 
 
 1235
 POLAND
 been a sharp decline in prisoner grievances alleging
 maltreatment by prison employees. Prison management and
 staffing have also been changed in order to build a prison
 system in compliance with international human rights
 standards. During 1990, 72 percent of prison management
 officials were dismissed. The directors of 22 of Poland's 23
 regional prison system offices were replaced, while 4,000 of
 22,000 prison-employees were relieved of their duties. During
 the past year, the number of.prisoners decreased from 120,000
 to 50,000 following an amnesty and changes in the criminal
 code. Prison space allotted to each inmate has more than
 tripled since 1986 to 3 square meters.
 d, Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Numerous changes in the criminal code in 1990 eliminated most
 of the provisions used in the past for political reasons. The
 Government did not apply criminal law for political purposes
 during 1990. Polish citizens were not detained or punished
 for expressing views critical of the Government. A revised
 criminal code is currently being drafted.
 The law allows for a 48-hour detention period before the
 authorities are required to bring formal charges; current law
 does not ensure-a detainee access to a lawyer during this
 period. The Communist government often used detention against
 political opponents. There were no reported instances of such
 detention in 1990.
 The law provides that once a prosecutor presents the legal
 basis for a formal investigation, a detainee may be held under
 "temporary" arrest until the prosecutor files an indictment.
 The law guarantees the detainee access to a lawyer at this
 point. Before 1990 temporary arrest could last indefinitely.
 As of 1990, such arrest may last only 3 months and may be
 extended only by a court decision. This change limit& the
 potential authority of the prosecutor's office with respect to
 the judicial branch, thus increasing the independence of the
 judiciary,
 According to the Polish Helsinki Committee, the prosecutor
 uses temporary arrest in only the most serious criminal cases,
 such as murder, armed robbery, and repeated offenses. Bail
 may be posted for less serious crimes. The prosecutor may
 also simply require the suspect to register weekly with the
 local police. Detainees no longer are held in police jails,
 in which they may have been subject to pretrial police
 intimidation, but in Ministry of Justice detention centers.
 Another important legal change in 1990 provides that a person
 in detention has the right to a judicial determination of the
 legality of the detention and may receive compensation if that
 detention is found to have been illegal.
 Polish law contains no provision for forced exile.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Most cases are tried in open court. The court, however,
 retains the option of closing a trial to the public in some
 circumstances, such as divorce cases and trials in which state
 secrets may be disclosed. Once formal charges are filed, the
 defendant is allowed to study the charges and consult with an
 attorney, who is provided at public expense if necessary.
 Once the defendant is prepared, a trial date is set.
 
 
 1236
 POLAND
 Defendants must be present during trial and may present
 evidence and confront witnesses in their own defense. All are
 presumed innocent until proven guilty. At the end of a trial,
 the court renders a decision orally. The court of original
 jurisdiction then has 7 days to prepare a written decision. A
 defendant has the right to appeal within 14 days of the
 written decision. Appeals may be made, among other grounds,
 on the basis of new evidence or procedural irregularities.
 Under the Communist regime, the judiciary was subject to
 interference and intimidation by party authorities. The
 Polish Helsinki Committee maintains that Polish courts are now
 free of such political interference. Judges appointed by the
 Communist authorities will continue to serve until they retire
 or are dismissed due to misconduct, and Polish court decisions
 will consequently reflect the opinions of these judges for
 years to come. Nevertheless, the Senate's Office of
 Intervention received no grievances regarding politically
 motivated court decisions during 1990.
 The Polish Helsinki Committee and the Polish Senate's Office of
 Intervention agree that there are no political prisoners in
 Poland.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Search warrants are required to enter private residences. In
 extremely urgent cases when a prosecutor is not immediately
 available, police may enter a residence with the approval of
 the local police commander. In the most urgent cases in which
 there is no time to consult with the police commander, police
 may enter a private residence after showing their official
 identification. Previously, the police abused this law by
 entering houses without warrants in political cases. Such
 abuses no longer occur.
 The Government no longer monitors private mail and telephone
 calls, unless it is ordered by the prosecutor in an official
 investigation.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 These freedoms are provided for in the Constitution and
 respected in practice. The state censorship office was closed
 in the spring.
 Legislation adopted in March calls for the liquidation and
 privatization of the State's newspaper publishing empire and
 distribution network. In accordance with this law, Prime
 Minister Mazowiecki convened a Liquidation Commission of seven
 journalism experts reflecting a broad political spectrum. The
 Commission prepared a privatization plan under which both
 domestic and foreign investors are eligible to purchase
 state-published newspapers and periodicals. The Commission
 shut down 25 newspapers due to inadequate reader demand. By
 the end of 1990, 55 publications had been put up for sale (out
 of 107 which will eventually be sold) while 8 (out of 70)
 publications had been transferred to editorial cooperatives.
 Although many newspapers are still owned by the State, they
 operate independently, and editorial staffs and journalists
 work free of government interference. Many private newspapers
 
 
 1237
 
 POLAND
 and periodicals have been launched, and no barrier exists to
 the establishment of a private newspaper other than readership
 demand and capital.
 Political groups that have not established their own daily
 newspapers argue they are at a political disadvantage since
 the Government still operates most major newspapers. In
 October, partly in response to these complaints, the
 Commission appointed prominent members of two political groups
 as editors of two national dailies.
 The Government owns and operates two national television
 channels and eight local television stations, the latter
 broadcasting approximately 6 hours weekly. One private
 station began operating in 1990 in Wroclaw. The Government
 also operates 4 national radio channels and 16 regional-
 stations. Poland has two independent radio stations, Radio
 Solidarity and Radio Zet. On behalf of the Government, the
 Polish Radio and Television Committee, headed by a Solidarity
 supporter, runs the government-owned broadcast media.
 Radio and television air a wide range of political
 viewpoints. Some political groups charge, however, that the
 Government enjoys favored treatment in the electronic media
 and that they have been denied equitable access to television.
 Such charges were made in particular during the 1990
 presidential campaign.
 Academic freedom is respected.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Poles enjoy the freedom to join.together formally and
 informally to promote nonviolenit-causes and protest government
 policies. Permits are not required for public meetings.
 Permits are issued routinely for public demonstrations; the
 Government does not interfere with otherwise peaceful and
 nondisruptive demonstrations even if permits have not been
 applied for.
 With government approval, private associations are permitted
 to organize. Such approval is almost always granted. One
 notable exception in 1990 was the denial of the registration
 application of the "Solidarity '80" trade union (see Section
 6.a.).
 c. Freedom of Religion
 The Constitution provides for freedom of conscience and
 belief, and citizens enjoy the freedom to practice any
 religion. Religious groups may organize, select, and train
 personnel, solicit and receive contributions, publish, and
 engage in.consultations with coreligionists without government
 interference. There are no restrictions on establishing and
 maintaining places of worship.
 Poland is predominantly Roman Catholic. The Catholic Church
 maintains over 16,000 churches, schools, and other institutions
 and vigorously continues to build new ones. It also publishes
 significant numbers of books and periodicals, as does the
 independent Catholic press. Catholic mass is broadcast on
 Sundays by the state-run radio.
 There is no government-sponsored interference with the
 practice of minority religions. Eastern Orthodox, Ukrainian
 
 
 1238
 POLAND
 Catholic, and the much smaller Protestant, Jewish, and Muslim
 congregations meet freely.
 Some representatives of minority religions have expressed
 concern about the Catholic Church's ability to promote its
 social agenda. The Ministry of Education decreed in August
 that religious instruction be made available in public
 schools. This decision was made by the Ministry in
 consultation with the Catholic Episcopate, and some have
 expressed concern about the Ministry's lack of consultation
 with leaders of other religious groups and without a formal
 decision by the Parliament. The Polish Ecumenical Council,
 the umbrella organization for many of Poland's minority
 religions, and the national Ombudsman, an independent office
 in the judicial branch, protested the way in which the
 decision on religious education was formulated. The
 constitutionality of the decision is being determined by the
 Constitutional Court.
 Nevertheless, the vast majority of Polish schools included
 voluntary religious instruction by Catholic priests in the
 1990-91 curriculum. Senior church officials stated that this
 program is being carried out without significant controversy
 and that the rights of those students choosing not to attend
 religious instruction are fully protected. On the other hand,
 the Senate's Office of Intervention received reports from
 non-Catholic students complaining of discriminatory behavior
 by teachers and fellow-students because they did not attend
 religion classes.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 There are no legal restrictions on domestic travel.
 Foreign travel is not restricted. Virtually all Polish
 citizens are able to obtain passports for worldwide travel
 valid for up to 10 years. Poles who in years past emigrated
 on passports issued for tourist travel may return to Poland
 with no sanctions or limitations on future travel and may
 choose to remain in Poland.
 Citizenship can be revoked involuntarily only for reasons
 specifically defined by law. The Government rarely revokes
 citizenship.
 Poland has become the destination of persons fleeing the
 Soviet Union, Albania, Romania, and other countries for
 economic and political reasons. Many of these persons,
 especially from Romania, seek to enter Poland for economic
 reasons or wish merely to transit Poland on their way to
 Western countries. They consequently are permitted to remain
 in Poland only temporarily. Persons seeking political asylum,
 especially from the Soviet Union, may be granted permanent
 residence status. Refugees generally are not forced to return
 to countries in which they have a reasonable fear of
 persecution.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Polish citizens have the right to change their government
 peacefully and exercised that right in democratic elections
 for local offices and for the presidency during 1990.
 
 
 1239
 POLAND
 The Polish Constitution was amended in September to require
 direct pmular election of the President rather than election
 by Parlt~he!Vt. After an election in which six candidates
 competed, Lech Walesa, the head of the Solidarity trade union,
 was chosen'President in December, succeeding General Wojciech
 Jaruzelski, who dominated the Polish political scene from 1981
 to 1989.
 Free and democratic elections were held in May for regional
 and local offices and councils. Balloting is secret, and
 .suffrage is universal for those aged 18 and older. Former
 members of the PZPR and its satellite parties still occupy the
 65 percent of the seats of the lower house of Parliament (the-
 Sejm) that were reserved for them under the roundtable
 agreement of April 1989. Solidarity supporters won 99 of the
 Senate's 100 seats in free elections to that body.
 A new constitution to codify the democratic system of
 government which has already emerged in Poland is being
 drafted and may be ready by May 3, 1991, the 200th anniversary
 of Poland's democratic constitution of 1791.
 There is no restriction in law on the participation of women
 in government or politics. Among the prominent women in
 Polish politics are the Vice Marshals of the Sejm and the
 Senate.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The Senate's Office of Intervention, created in 1989, is
 Poland's official organization devoted to human. rights
 issues. Its members have exercised political objectivity in
 examining a wide range of grievances.
 A Helsinki Committee, established by human rights activists to
 monitor Poland's compliance with the 1975 Helsinki Final Act
 of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe, also
 operates in Poland, and its opinion is solicited by the
 Parliament.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 There is no legally sanctioned discrimination against women or
 ethnic and religious minorities. These forms of
 discrimination are prohibited by Polish law. The Senate's
 Office of Intervention has received no grievances from women
 alleging sexual-discrimination. Women's rights have not
 become a major public issue in Poland, and women's
 organizations are just emerging. Spousal abuse is a criminal
 offense, and reported incidents are often attributed to
 alcohol abuse. Persons convicted of spousal abuse are subject'
 to imprisonment from 6 months to 5 years. Because spousal
 abuse is not discussed openly and such incidents are rarely
 reported to the police, the extent to which it occurs is not
 known.
 Some Jewish groups have expressed concern that anti-Semitism
 is growing in Poland. Anti-Semitic statements were scrawled
 in public places in what appeared to be increasing numbers
 during 1990. Poland's governing bodies, however, have made
 strong efforts to combat anti-Semitism. The Government and
 Parliament have condemned it in all its forms; a government
 
 
 1240
 POLAND
 minister laid a wreath at the scene of an especially egregious
 graffiti incident. Some Jewish groups have commended local
 governments' cooperation in preserving Jewish cemeteries,
 which has in some cases required expensive alterations of
 municipal projects that could otherwise endanger sacred Jewish
 ground. At the national level, Poland and Israel resumed
 diplomatic relations early in 1990, following their severance
 by Poland in 1967. Poland willingly served as a transit point
 for Soviet Jews traveling to Israel throughout 1990.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 All workers, including police, are entitled to form or join
 unions of their own choosing. Unions are independent and
 self-governing. There are no limits on the number of unions
 that can function at a single workplace. Polish law
 stipulates that 10 members suffice for the purpose of
 registering an organization as a trade union. A new labor
 code is expected early in 1991.
 The Independent Self-Governing Trade Union Solidarity is
 affiliated with the International Confederation of Free Trade
 Unions and the World Confederation of Labor. Its current
 membership is approximately 2.7 million, compared to 9.5
 million members in 1981 before martial law. The
 Communist-inspired trade union organized in 1982 as the sole
 legal alternative to Solidarity, the National Alliance of
 Trade Unions (OPZZ), is affiliated with the Communist-
 controlled World Federation of Trade Unions. As heir to
 traditional Communist-sponsored unions, the OPZZ "owns" or
 controls state assets and allocates benefits and perquisites;
 it claims 6 million members, including a large number of
 white-collar administrators and pensioners.
 A small and rival spinoff of the Solidarity union, Solidarity
 '80, opposes Lech Walesa's union leadership and seeks to
 establish a union which its organizers believe reflects the
 principles of Solidarity's 1980 statute. Registration of
 Solidarity '80 was denied because the union's statute does not
 recognize the current Trade Union Law's provision regarding
 strikes. According to that 1982 law, the right to strike is
 highly restricted, requiring a union to undertake preliminary
 measures as early as 6 months before the proposed strike.
 Because of these restrictions, it is virtually impossible to
 conduct a legal strike. Lech Walesa's Solidarity union
 altered its statute to comply with this law when the union was
 again legalized in 1989. Consequently, when Solidarity
 supported strikes in 1990, it did so in contravention of its
 statute and the Trade Union Law. These restrictions on strikes
 are expected to be removed under Poland's new labor code.
 During the period January to September, there were 131 illegal
 strikes involving approximately 31,200 workers. The only
 major strike, however, was staged by railway workers in May.
 Rail traffic was crippled for several days in northwestern
 Poland as workers demanded pay increases. The strike was
 resolved peacefully following Solidarity Chairman Lech
 Walesa's appeal to end the protest. Strike leaders were not
 arrested.
 
 
 "1241
 POLAND
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 Polish law provides civil and penal sanctions for antiunion
 discrimination.
 According to the 1982 labor code, wages are set in
 negotiations at the enterprise level between unions,
 management, and workers' councils. Polish law does not
 require pay agreements concluded in either state-owned or
 private enterprises to be registered with the Government.
 Wages are currently indexed at a monthly rate of 60 percent of
 the increase in price of five primary consumer goods.-
 However, the Government has imposed a de facto wage ceiling in
 efforts to eliminate the wage and price spiral that led to an
 inflation rate of over 900 percent in 1989. According to this
 provision, enterprises that raise wages above a. level
 determined by the Government must pay a penalty tax equivalent
 to five times the value of the wage increase. Solidarity
 opposes this ceiling on the grounds that it is limiting the
 development of efficient enterprises by prohibiting them from
 attracting superior workers by means of higher wages.
 There are no export processing zones.
 Based on information supplied by the Government, the Committee
 of Experts (COE) of the International Labor Organization (ILO)
 concluded in 1990 that although the registration of collective
 agreements negotiated at the enterprise level is. not required,
 collective agreements negotiated at the national or'industry
 level must be registered and registration must still be
 refused in the event of divergences with the social and
 economic policies of the State. The Government stated that
 the labor code established machinery for the settlement of
 disputes in such cases, but the COE pointed out that
 government modification of the content of freely concluded
 collective agreements-through such machinery would be
 incompatible with ILO Convention 98 on the right to organize
 and collective bargaining, which Poland has ratified.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 Compulsory labor does not exist in Poland, except for
 prisoners convicted of criminal offenses. Forced labor is
 prohibited by Polish law. Legislation introduced during the
 martial law period that permits the use of police powers
 against persons inactive for "socially unjustified reasons"
 remains on the books, but the Senate's Office of Intervention
 believes that the law was never enforced and that it will
 probably be nullified in Poland's new criminal code.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 The labor-code forbids the employment of persons under the age
 of 15. The employment of persons aged 15 to 18 is permitted
 only if that/person has completed basic schooling and if the
 proposed employment constitutes vocational training. The age
 floor is raised to 18 if a particular job might pose a health
 danger. During efforts to enforce the law, government work
 inspectors recently discovered small family firms in which
 children worked.rather than attended school. The Senate's
 Office of Intervention received one grievance during 1990
 concerning a child who was working in a family business and
 not attending school. It brought the case to the attention of
 local government officials, who subsequently reported that the
 child, was now attending school regularly. It maintains,
 
 
 1242
 POLAND
 however, that the employment of children in family businesses
 is only a recent phenomenon, and that it is not expressly
 forbidden by current law. Consequently, according to the
 Senate's Office of Intervention, Polish law should be altered
 to forbid child labor in family-run firms. Existing laws on
 the employment of minors are enforced effectively. The
 Government is alert to reports of violations and interested in
 strengthening the legal protection of minors.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 The legislated minimum monthly wage is approximately $42,
 which is insufficient to provide a decent standard of living
 for a worker's family. The minimum wage is not effectively
 enforced; desperate people, especially invalids and
 pensioners, accept wages of as little as $8 dollars a month.
 The average wage in Poland is $120 a month. Most families
 find that both husband and wife must be employed in order to
 sustain an acceptable standard of living. Although the
 maximum legal workweek is 48 hours, in practice most Poles
 work 40 hours a week most of the year. Daily rest periods and
 annual paid holidays are legally required.
 The legal code defines minimum conditions for the protection
 of workers' health and safety. The Office of Work Inspection,
 created by the Sejm, monitors the implementation of collective
 agreements and ensures that regulations concerning safety and
 the employment of women and children are followed.
 The Council of Work Protection, another parliamentary body, is
 charged with overseeing the Inspection Office. Members of the
 Council admit that work conditions in Poland are poor.
 According to the State Statistical Office, 1.,5 million
 laborers are registered officially as working under hazardous
 health conditions, although it is believed that many more
 cases are not officially registered. Chemical and dust norms
 are exceeded at many workplaces. Approximately 9,000 new
 cases of work-related illnesses are reported each year; the
 most common ailments are poisoning and hearing damage,
 especially in mining and machining. It is estimated that
 1,000 fatal and 100,000 nonfatal work-related accidents occur
 annually. Safety experts believe many unreported accidents
 also occur on private farms, which are not under the purview
 of the Office of Work Inspection. These accidents result from
 improperly maintained agricultural machinery and hazardous
 chemicals.
 
 
 1243
