 POLAND
 Poland is a parliamentary democracy based on a multiparty political system and
 free and fair elections. The President shares power with the Prime Minister, the
 Council of Ministers, and the bicameral Parliament (Senate and Sejm). The coalition
 government, composed of the Democratic Left Alliance (SLD), a successor to the
 former Communist Party, and the Polish Peasant Party (PSL) a successor to the
 Peasant Party of the Communist era, has a nearly two-thirds majority in both
 houses of Parliament. Poland has held two presidential and two parliamentary elec-
 tions in the 7 years since the end of communism. The next parliamentary elections
 are due by September 1997. The judiciary is independent.
 The armed forces and the internal security apparatus are subject to governmental
 control In January President Aleksander Kwasniewski signed a bill clarifying the
 chain of command within the Ministry of Defense and placing the Chief of the Gen-
 eral Staff clearly under the authority of the civilian Minister. The law also trans-
 ferred oversight of military intelligence from the General Staff to the Ministry of
 Defense. The commission established to implement the law eliminated the General
 Staffs parallel and autonomous structure, reformed the military justice system, and
 
 
 1055
 is instituti  broad changes in the structure of the Ministry and the armed forces
 to enhance democratic oversight of the military.
 Poland has made a successful transition to a free market economy. A burgeoning
 private sector and increasing exports to Western Europe produced a 7 percent rate
 of grwth in 1995 and an estimated 6 percent in 1996. Both inflation (18.5 percent)
 and unemployment (13 percent) remained high. Since 1989, most small- and me-
 dium-sized state-owned enterprises have been privatized. Many of the largest enter-
 prises (e.., banks, the telephone company, mines, power plants, the national air-
 line) await long-promised privatization. Generous social and retirement programs
 place an enormous strain on the budget and impede economic growth. Parliament,
 however, has moved slowly on addressing the politically sensitive subject of social
 prog       reform.
 The Government generally respected the rights of its citizens, but there were
 some problems. Freedom of speech and the press were subject to some limitations,
 particularly involving political influence over state-owned television. There were
 some incidents of intolerance toward minorities, but fewer than in 1995. Lack of
 public confidence as well as an inadequate budget plague the court system. Court
 decisions are frequently not implemented, particularly those of the administrative
 courts, and simple civil cases can take as long as 2 or 3 years. Many low-paid pros-
 ecutors and judges have left public service for more lucrative employment. The
 threat of organized crime has provoked legislative responses that could threaten the
 right to privacy. Women continue to experience serious discrimination in the labor
 market, are not full participants in political life, and are subject to various legal in-
 equities as a consequence of paternalistic laws. Spousal abuse is a problem. The
 President and Government have worked constructively toward resolving issues of
 concern to the Jewish community. Although the rights to organize and bargain col-
 lectively were largely observed, there were employer violations of other worker
 rights provided by law, particularly in the growing private sector.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrjudicial KRdling.-There were no reports of political or
 other extrajudiial killin.
 The trial of two militiamen accused in the 1983 beating death of G-rzegorz
 Przemyk, a student, ontinues. The pro e     r'       expects a    e         y
 1997. The police are accused of overing up the death and blaming it on the ambu-
 lance drivers who took Przemyk to the hospital. The prosecution has been unable
 to establish the names of all militiamen involved in the incident, but charges have
 been filed against a third militiaman for obstructing the investigation by hiding doc-
 uments.
 On October 23, Parliament voted not to force General Wojciech Jaruzelski and
 other former Communist leaders to stand trial for the deaths and jailing of activ-
 ists after the 19.81 declaration of martial law. Approximately 25 Poles died in clash-
 es between str-iking workers and riot police, and the Government jailed without trial
 mre than 13,000 people during the 1  years of martial law. Investigations con-
 tinue in other cases relating to extrajudicial killings during the Communist period,
 including the shooting deaths of striking miners at the Wujek mine in 1981 and the
 December 1970 deaths of striking shipyard workers in several coastal cities.
 b. Disappaw-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Pu nshment.-
 The Criminal Code prohibits torture, and there were no reported incidents of it.
 in March a court in Warsaw sentenced Adam Humer to 9 years in prison for the
 torture of prisoners when he was a security service interrogator in the 1950s. In
 September the press reported that authorities had begun an investigation into the
 alleged beating of two men detained by police in Szt no.
 Prison condiions are generally adequate, according to reports by nongovern-
 mental organizations (NGO's), although some facilities are oin   an   in disrepair.
 Many prisons experience overcrowding in a 1995 letter to the Prime Minister, the
 Ombudsman for H          Rights charged that the condition of many detention facili-
 ties and prisons was poor and recommended that several dozen be closed in whole
 or in part for renovation. The Ombudsman also recommended that actions be taken
 to reduce the prison population, including the decriminalization of certain offenses,
 such as failure to pay alimony. A 1996 report by the Helsinki Foundation for
 Human Rights stated that Polish prisons, mental hospitals, and other "isolating in-
 stitutions neither engage in nor telerate violations of the rights of inmates. The
 Foundation did, however, observe isolated violations that were inconsistent with
 
 
 1056
 Polish and international norms, specifically cases of beating in juvenile institutions
 run by the Ministry of Education.
 The Government permits visits to civilian prisons by human rights monitors.
 d. Arbitrary Arreit, Detention, or Exile.-The Constitution pronibits arbitrary ar-
 rest and detention, and the Government observes this prohibition. The law allows
 a 48 hour detention period before authorities are required to bring formal charges,
 during which detainees are normally denied access to a lawyer. Once a prosecutor
 presents the legal basis for a formal investigation, the lawprovides that the de-
 tainee be given access to a lawyer. Detainees ma be held under ~temporary" arrest
 forup to3monthsandmay challenge the legyofanastthrough appeal to
 the district court. A court may extend this pretrial confinement period every 3
 months until the trial date. Ba is available, and human rights organizations report
 that most detainees were released on bail pending trial. A new law went into effect
 in August that requires ourts, rather than prosecutors, to issue arrest warrants.
 This law was adopted in order to comply with the European convention on human
 rights.
 ne Government does not employ forced exile.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Triat.The Constitution provides for an independent judi-
 ciary, and the Government respects this provision in practice. Poland has a three-
 tier court system consisting of regional and provincial courts and a Supreme Court,
 which is divided into five divisions: Military, civil, criminal, labor, and family.
 Judges are nominated by the National Judicial Council and appointed by the Presi-
 dent. Judges are appointed for life and can be reassigned but not dismissed, except
 by a decision of the National Judicial Council. The Constitutional Tribunal rules on
 the constitutionality of legislation, but its decisions may be overruled by an absolute
 majority in the Sejm.
 Although the pretrial waiting time in criminal courts can be several months, the
 courts generally provide fair and efficient trials, and there is no evidence of signifi-
 cant corruption. However, the court system continues to be plagued by an mad-
 equate budget, which contributes to a lack of public confidence. Many effective
 judges and prosecutors have left public service for the more lucrative private sector.
 Court decisions are frequently not implemented, particularly those of administrative
 courts. Bailiffs normally guarantee the execution of civil verdicts such as damage
 payments and evictions. However, according to some observers, they are underpaid,
 subject to intimidation and bribery, and have a mixed record of implementing court
 decisions. Civil and administrative rulings against public institutions such as hos-
 pitals often cannot be complied with due to a lack of funds. Simple civil cases can
 take as long as 2 to 3 years before resolution. For example, the wait for official court
 recognition of land ownership deeds can inhibit the sale and development of prop-
 erty for several years. Furthiermore, anecdotal evidence suggests that the judicial
 backlog and the costs of legal action deter some citizens from using the justice sys-
 tem at all, particularly in civil matters such as divorce. The long wait for routine
 court decisions in commercial matters is an incentive for bribery and corruption.
 All defendants are p resumed innocent until proven guilty. At the end of a trial
 the court renders its decision orally and then has 7 days to prep are a written deci-
 sion. A defendant has the right to appeal within 14 days ofthe written decision.
 Appeals may be made on, among other grounds, the basis of new evidence or proce-
 dural irregularities.
 Criminal cases are tried in regional and provincial courts by a panel consisting
 of a professional judge and two lay assessors. The seriousness of the offense deter-
 mines which of these is the court of first instance. Once formal charges are filed,
 the defendant is allowed to study the charges and consult with an attorney, who
 is provided at public expense if necessary. Once the defendant is prepared, a trial
 date is set. Defendants are required to be present during trial and may present evi-
 dence and confront witnesses in their own defense. The right to testify is universal.
 A law allowing for the use of incognito witnesses, designed to assist in combating
 organized crime, threatens a defendant's ability to confront witnesses. In January
 and July, successive reforms were made in the legal system that allow citizens to
 make appeals to the high courts in both civil and criminal matters. Previously, pro-
 vincial courts were the final court of appeal for individual citizens. The Ombuds-
 man's office has raised concerns that government employees, particularly those in
 uniform, should have greater access to the courts in the event of disciplinary action.
 Trials are normally public. The courts however, reserve the right to close a trial
 to the public in some circumstances, such as divorce cases, trials in which state se-
 crets may be disclosed, or cases whose content might offend "public morality." The
 courts rarely invoke this prerogative.
 n December the Parliament accepted a committee report concluding that the in-
 telligence services may have acted illegally in gathering evidence in the investiga-
 
 
 1057
 
 tion of former Premier Oleksy. The report recommended that its findings be passed
 to the prosecutor's office, which would decide whether to investigate the intelligence
 officers involved in the case. Parliamentarians also began collecting signatures nec-
 essary to launch state tribunal proceedings against former Interior Minister
 Milcmanowski for his role in the case.
 There were no reports of political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interence-With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Constitution provides for the it to privacy of correspondence. There is no le=la-
 tion that gu~arantees the generalright to priva~c  Inrsos  ote growi trat
 .)r. In esprowing tt r
 of organized crime and money laundering, Parliament has permitted the police and
 secret services to monitor private correspondence and to use wiretaps and electronic
 monitoring devices in cases involving a serious crime narcotics, money laundering,
 or illegal arms sales. The Minister ofJustice and the Minister of Interior, both polit-
 ical appointees, must authorize these investigative methods. In emergency cases,
 the o     may initiate an investigation using wiretaps or opening private cor-
 respondence at the same time that they seek pmission  m the ministries.
 Parliamentarians and human rights groups have expressed concern about the lack
 of control over this type of surveillance. There isno indepndent judicial review of
 these decisions, nor is there any control mechanism over how the information de-
 rived from these investigations is used. A growing number of agencies have access
 to wiretap information, and a recent law allows electronic surveillance to be used
 for the prevention of crime as well as for investigative purposes.
 The Justice Minister reported that in the first half of 1996, his office agreed to
 the surveillance of 727 persons, and the Minister of the Interior has confirmed that
 covert security service (UOP) employees operate as post and telecommunications
 employees. The Ombudsman for Human Rights has condemned the lack of control
 over wiretapping and is trying to determine the extent to which the Ministry of the
 Interior is author   the tapping of telephones.
 The law forbids aitray forced entry into homes. Search warrants issued by a
 prosecutor are req   d in order to enterprivate ridenes. In emergency cases,
 when a prosecutor is not immediately available, police may enter a residence with
 the approval of the local polic commander. In the most urgent cases, in which there
 is not time to consult with the police commander police may enter a private resi-
 dence after shwing their official identification. There were no reports that police
 abused search warrant procedures.
 The .Ombudsman for Human Rights is advocating reform of the rules governing
 how citizens a regstered in their official plaes of residene. The law requires all
 adults to be o ffica registered at a given address and allows them access to public
 services establishe in that locality. However, the current law permits property
 owners to "unregister" tenants from rented residences, potentially cutting citizens
 off from public services if they cannot immediately find another landlord willing to
 let them register.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of speech
 and the press, and the Government generally respects this right. However, there are
 some restrictions in law and practice.
 The Penal Code states that acts that "publicly insult, ridicule, and deride the Pol-
 ish nation, the Polish Republic, its political system, or its principal organs are pun-
 ishable by between 6 months and 8 years of imprisonment." The code imposes a
 prison term of up to 10 years for a person who commits any of the prohibited acts
 i print or through the mass media. In October 1995 presidential candidate Leszek
 Bubel was charged with violating this law, and his case is currently before a judge.
 Bubel claimed on a radio program that when he served as Deputy Prosecutor Gen-
 eral, a former head of the presidential chancellery protected a group of criminals.
 In Ast the Warsaw prosecutor refused to begin proceedings against Pawel
 Mocydowski, former head of the prison system, for publicly slandering President
 Kwasniewali and the head of the Council of Ministers Office by suggesting their
 public complicity in an espionage case. The Gdansk prosecutor has announced an
 investigation into November remarks by talk show host Wojciech Cejrowski, who is
 alleged to have publicly insulted President Kwasniewski.
 The Penal Ce also provides for punishment of anyone who uses print or other
 mass mediato"advocate disord" on national, ethnic, racial, or religious rounds.
 InJuly the Warsaw prosecutor's office brought charges against Mikolaj Siwicki, a
 arsaw pensioner, for publication of a hate-mongering book, which, the prosecutor
 charged, "could seriously damage the interests of the Polish Republic in inter-
 national affairs." The bok allegedly condones crimes committed against Poles dur-
 ing the Second World War, makes historically dubious claims about Polish crimes
 
 
 1058
 againt the Ukrainian nation, and calls for lands in southeastern Poland to be given
 to Ukraine. The case was ongoing at year's end.
 The Penal Code also stipulates that offending religious sentiment through public
 speech is punishable by a fine or a 2-year prison term. In September the Gdansk
 prosecutor reopened his investigation of Father Henryk Jankowski for violation of
 this law for an allegedly anti-Semitic sermon he save in 1995. However, the case
 was dropped in June for lack of evidence. Catholic organizations have challenged
 the legality of certain films and imapes published in the press on the basis of this
 vion. In October 1995, a provincial court charged presidential candidate Leszek
 ubel with violating this article by publishing a pamphlet containing anti-Semitic
 humor. A verdict is not expected in this case until 1997. The print media are uncen-
 sored and independent, although they may be subject to prosecution under the
 Penal Code provisions described above.
 The State Secrets Act allows for prosecution of private citizens who have pub-
 lished or otherwise betrayed state secrets. Human rights groups have criticized this
 law, since it restricts the right of free speech of private citizens who have not freely
 sworn to uphold state secrets. Jerzy Urban, editor in chief of the leftist weekly Nie,
 was found guilty of violating the State Secrets Act for his 1992 publication of the
 operational acts of the UOP concerning an agent. In June Urban was sentenced to
 1 year in prison (suspended) and 2 years' probation, banned from workingas a Jour-
 nalist for 1 year, and fined approximately $4,000 (10,000 zlotys). The Helsinki Com-
 mittee criticized the decision, alleging that it was in conflict with the European con-
 vention on human rights. Urban has appealed the decision, and the prosecutor's of-
 fice announced that it will ask for a harsher sentence when the case is reviewed.
 The Supreme Court has ruled that a prosecutor or a judge, in the context of a
 criminal trial, may order a journalist to divulge the name of a source. The penalty
 for noncompliance is a fine of approximately $2,000 (5,000 zlotys) and 1 month in
 jail. There were no reported cases of this law being applied in 1996.
 The National Broadcasting Council (NBC) has broad interpretive powers in mon-
 itoring and regulating progrmming on public television, allocating broadcasting fre-
 quencies and licenses, and apportioning subscription revenues. In order to encour-
 age the NBC's apolitical character, the nine NBC members are legally obliged to
 suspend any membership in political parties or public associations. They are, how-
 ever, chosen for their political allegiances and nominated by the Sejm, the Senate,
 and the President following political bargaining, raising serious questions about the
 independence of broadcasting oversight from political influence. The broadcasting
 law stipulates that programs should not promote activities that are illegal or
 against state policy, morality, or the common good. The law also requires that all
 broadcasts "resp  the religous feelings of the audiences and in particular respect
 the Christian System of values." The law does not fully defithe he term "Christian
 values." The Constitutional Tribunal has confirmed the constitutionality of this pro-
 vision. Since the NBC has the ultimate responsibility for supervising the content of
 programs, these restrictions could be used as a means of censorship if enforced. The
 penalty for viola    this provision of the law is a fine of up to 50 percent of the
 annual fee for the transmission frequency, a suspension of the broadcaster's license,
 or difficulty in renewal when it expires.
 Private broadcasters operate on frequencies selected by the Ministry of Commu-
 nications and auctioned by the NBC. The first auction in 1994 gave Polsat Corpora-
 tion and some smaller local and religious stations license to broadcast. Several pri-
 vate radio stations broadcast under the same licensing arrangement. A second auc-
 tion in October 1996 selected two private firms to receive two large regional broad-
 casting licenses; by year's end they had not yet begun broadcasting.
 The Government owns the two largest television channels and many local sta-
 tions, as well as five national radio networks. PAP, the national wire service, is also
 government owned. Public television is the largest source of news and information.
 Although Polsat is the only nationwide private television station available to regular
 viewers, satellite television and private cable services (domestic and foreign) are
 widely available. Cable services carry the main public channels, Polsat, local and
 regional stations, and a variety of foreign stations. RTL, a Luxembourg-based firm,
 inaugurated a Polish-language cable channel in December that provides news and
 entertainment.
 Recent actions by the government-appointed Television Managing Board raise
 concerns that public television is increasingly subject to partisan influence by the
 Government. In November the Independent Center for Monitoring Freedom of the
 Press criticized the 'evident political actions which the State authorities take to-
 wards the media." Earlier in the summer Wieslaw Walendziak, President of the
 Public Television (TVP) Managing Board, resigned and was replaced by Ryazard
 Miazek of the PSL, a governing coalition party. Miazek made controversial state-
 
 
 1059
 
 ments when first chosen, criticizing aggressive journalism and calling for strict ad-
 herence to the management line. As Piesident of TVP, he also controls TAI-the tel-
 evision news agency-and has appointed an SLD associate as programming chair.
 In August Tomasz Siemoniak was fired as director of the state-owned Channel One
 by the TVP managing board for his refusal to replace the production team of a polit-
 ical commentary program that often criticized the ruling coalition. Siemoniak's dis-
 missal prompted several other editorial and production executives to resign in pro-
 test and generated public criticism from dissenting members of the board. TVP has
 also announced that it will not broadcast political commentar prograsn that are
 not produced in-house. Although TVP management has explained this decision on
 economic grounds, critics charge that it is another partisan attempt to clamp down
 on the editorial independence of public television.
 The law on radio and television requires TVP to provide direct media access to
 the main state organs, including the presidency, 'to make presentations or expla-
 nations of public policy.' President Kwasniwaki, however, has complained through
 his spokesman that his office does not receive a ate television coverag. In Sep-
 tember the spokesman met directly with TVP head Miazek, who pledged to devote
 more attention to the activities of the President Some observers and opposition poli-
 ticians described the meeting as inappropriate pressure from the President on the
 prog      n  decisions of public television. Despite these developments evidence of
 overt political tampering in public broadcasting is scarce, and public and private tel-
 evision provide coverage of all ranges of political opinion. Political patronage in fill-
 ing key positions, however, threatens the professional credibility of this major media
 institution.
 There is no restriction on the establishment of private newspapers or distribution
 of journals; private newspapers and magazines flourish. Ruch, the national network
 of.newspap.er kiosks, remains in state hands, although the Government approved a
 privatization plan in December. However, there is no evidence that the Government
 has used this virtual monopoly on distribution to suppress any publications. Action
 has begun to privatize the operation. Books expressing a wide range of political and
 social viewpoints are widely available, as are foreign periodicals and other publica-
 tions from abroad.
 Academic freedom is generally respected.
 b. Freedom o Peaceful Assembly and Association-The law provides for these
 rights, and the Government generally respects them in practice. Permits are not
 necessary for public meetings but are required for public demonstrations; dem-
 onstration organizers must obtain these permits from-local authorities if the dem-
 onstration m  t block a public road. For large demonstrations, organizers are also
 required to inform the local police of the time and place of their activities and their
 pllanned route. Every gathering must have a chairman who is required to open the
 demonstration, preside over it, and close it.
 Private associations need governmental approval to organize and must register
 with their district court. The procedure essentially requires the organization to sign
 a declaration that it will abide by the law. In practice, however, the procedure itself
 is complicated and may be subject to the discretion of the judge in charge.
 c. Freedom of Reli'ion.-The Constitution, as amended, provides for freedom of
 conscience and belief, and the Government respects this right in practice. Citizens
 enjoy the freedom to practice any religion they choose. Religious groups may orga-
 nize, select and train personnel, solicit and receive contributions, pubih, and en-
 gage in consultations without government interference. There are no government re-
 strictions on establishing and maintaining places of worship.
 More than 95 percent of Poles are Roman Catholic but Eastern Orthodox,
 Ukrainian Catholic, and much smaller Protestant, Jewish, and Muslim congrega-
 tions meet freely. Although the Constitution provides for the separation of church
 and state, state-run radio broadcasts Catholic mass on Sundays. The Catholic
 Church is authorized to relicense radio and television stations to operate on fre-
 quencies assigned to the Church, the only body outside the NBC allowed to do so.
 In January 1995 a "Soldiefs Prayer Book, authored by General Kazimierz
 Tomaszewski, Chief of the Warsaw Mili     District, was published for the military.
 The book states that members of a specal honor guard who do not take part in mili-
 tary mass are considered to be disobeying orders While this publication does not
 constitute law, it bears the same weight. The Ombudsman is continuing his inves-
 tigation into this matter.
 Although the Sejm has ratified the human rights protocol providing parents with
 the right to bring up their children in compliance with their own religious and philo-
 sophical beliefs, religious education classes continue to be taught in the public
 schools at public expense. While children are supposed to have the choice between
 religious instruction and ethics, the Ombudaman's office states that in most schools
 
 
 1060
 ethics courses are not offered due to financial constraints. Although Catholic Church
 representatives teach the vast majority of religious classes in the schools, parents
 can request religious classes in any of the religions legally registered in Poland, in-
 cluding Protestant, Orthodox, and Jewish religious instruction. Such non-Catholic
 religious instruction exists in practice, and the instructors are paid by the Ministry
 of Education. The joint State-Episcopate Commission announced that beginning in
 September 1997, priests will receive salaries from the state budget for teaching reli-
 gion in public schools. Church representatives are included on a commission that
 determines whether books qualify for school use.
 A government-proposed resolution on ratification of the Concordat, a treaty regu-
 lating relations between the Government and the Vatican signed in 1993, remains
 under consideration in the Sejm. Critics of the Concordat have called for legislation
 requiring the Church to register all church marriags with civil authorities and for-
 bidding the Church from denying burial to non-Catholics in cemeteries it controls.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-Although the Constitution does not address freedom of movement, the
 Government does not restrict internal or foreign travel. Citizens who leave Poland
 have no trouble returning. There are no restrictions on emigration. A July initiative
 by the Social Insurance Companys (ZUS) Chairwoman Anna Bankowska would re-
 quire those who are delinquent on their ZUS payments to surrender their passports.
 This proposal could threaten a person's right to travel. Passport law entitles au-
 thorities to refuse passports to "persons failingto meet their legal obligations.*
 The Government generally cooperates with the United Nations High Commis-
 sioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and other humanitarian organizations in assisting ref-
 ugees. There are no reports of forced repatriation of those having a valid claim to
 refugee status. Foreigners recognized as refugees under the 1951 U.N. Convention
 ar     ted full refugee status and permission to remain permanently. According to
 UNHCR figures, 3,200 persns appied for refugee status in 1996, more than double
 the number for 1995. Of that number, 120 people were granted refugee status and
 380 applicants were denied. About 1,600 cases were discontinued due to the appli-
 cant's         a ear for a heag. The remaining cases are pending.
 However, some observers have criticized how the Government deals with the ever-
 increasing numbers of asylum seekers, refugees, and illegal immigrants. Poland
 does not recognize the concept of first asylum or any other form of temporary protec-
 tion.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens have the right and ability peacefully to change their government. This
 right is provided for in the Constitution and exists in practice. Poland is a
 multiparty democracy in which all citizens 18 years of age and older have the right
 to vote and to cast secret ballots.
 Executive power is divided between the President and a government chosen by
 Parliament, which is composed of an upper house (the Senate) and a lower house
 (the Sejm). The Constitution provides for pariamentary elections at least every 4
 years. The President, elected for 5 years, has the right to dissolve Parliament follow-
 ing a vote of no confidence or when Pariament fails to pass a budget within 3
 months afer the Government submits it. Parliament may impeach the President.-
 The electoral law exempts ethnic minority parties from the requirement to win 5
 percent of the vote nationwide in order to qualify for seats in individual districts.
 The current interim Constitution consists of the "Small Constitution3 of 1992, gov-
 ernin the structure of government, and several sections of the 1952 Communist-
 era Constitution, including a Bill of Rights. The latter includes s-called economic
 rights. The interim Constitution provides for an independent judiciary. The National
 Assembly's (joint Sejm and Senate) Constitutional Commission has completed its
 draft of a new constitution and plans to put it before a national referendum in early
 1997.
 Women are underrepresented in government and politics. Only 13 percent of par-
 liamentarians are women. Of a total of 15 ministries, none is headedby a woman.
 None of the leaders of theoparties represented in Pariament is a woman. One of
 the three Vice Marshals of the Sejm is a woman. Prime Minister Cimoszewicz chose
 a team of 40 advisers early in the year, which included only 2 women.
 In November the Government dismissed the Gdansk region's independent pros-
 ecutor responsible for repossessing former Communist Party assets from that party's
 successor, the SDRP (of the current governing coalition). Opposition leaders have
 cited this as government interference in the political process on behalf of SDRP in-
 terests.
 
 
 1061
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Rrgading International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged V'llations of Hwunan Rights
 A number of human rights grMps operate without government restriction, inves-
 tigating and publishing their fdings on human rights cases. Government officials
 are generally cooperative and responsive to their views.
 The Helsinki Committee, a major NGO, conducted human rights investigations
 without government interference. Members of the Committee report that the Gov-
 ernent displays a generally positive and helpful attitude toward human rights in-
 vestigations. Some local N, however, sense that there is a hostile regulatory cli-
 mate developing within the government bureaucrc.
 The office of the Commissioner for Civil Rights Protection (The Ombudsman), es-
 tablished in 1987, is the Government's watchdog for human rights. The Ombuds-
 man's office is an independent body with bread authority to investate alleged vio-
 lations of civil rights and liberties. The Ombudsman registers each reported case
 and files grievances, where appropriate, with the relevant government office. He has
 no legislative authority and is sworn to act apolitically.
 The Senate Department of Correspondence and Intervention investigates a wide
 range of grievances and refers cases to senators who will be sympatetictothe
 grievance regardless of their district or political affiliation. According to human
 rights Rd% this office has been largely inactive and generally ineffective.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution calls for equal rights ..rrespective of sex, birth, education, pro-
 fession, nationality, race, religion, social status, and origin." Other clauses provide
 equal rights to women and religious minorities. However, sufficient legislation does
 not yet exist to enforce these provisions fully.
 Women.-Violence against women continued to be a problem, with occasional re-
 ports in the press of wife beating and spousal rape. According to a 1995 government
 report, 41 percent of women questioned said that they know someone personally
 who has been beaten by her husband. The report also stated that the Government
 does not have a program addressing violence towards women, nor has it provided
 an adequate research tool to determine the extent of the problem. Government and
 police statistics do not differentiate between male and fenale victims of violence. In
 addition, the Government has not supplied public information on the problem. Police
 do intervene in cases of domestic violence, and husbands can be convicted for beat-
 ing their wives, but statistics provided by the Women's Rights Center suggest that
 a 1arge majority of convictions result in suspended sentences. Punishment for do-
 mestic violence can range from probation to 10 years in prison, depending on the
 circumstances of the crime and the harm inflicted. The law has no provision for re-
 straining orders to protect battered women against potential abuse. Women's advo-
 cacy groups have complained about the small number of state-supported shelters for
 battered women.
 Trafficking in women is illegal. Two specific provisions in the Criminal Code ad-
 dress this problem. However according to a government report, there is an increase
 in the incidence of such traicking, most often, women are induced to work as pros-
 titutes in Western Europe, often under false pretenses.
 No official statistics are available about the extent of sexual harassment or dis-
 crimination in the workplace. According to some activists, few complaints about har-
 assment or discrimination are registered because of the lack of specific provisions
 in the Labor Code that provide for redress. However, a 1996 survey published in
 a major national daily stated that 23 percent of all women believe that they face
 discrimination in the workplace. Another recent poll revealed that only 7 percent
 of women say that they have encountered sexual harassment in the workplace.
 Labor law was changed this year to grant men paternity leave in order to care for
 newborn children.
 The Constitution provides for equal rights regardless of sex and grants women
 equal rights with men in all fields of public, political, economic, social, and cultural
 life, including equal pay for equal work. However, while the Constitution calls for
 equal treatment, it contains provisions that aim at prtecting women rather than
 offering them true equality. In practice, women are frequently paid less for equiva-
 lent work, mainly hold lower level positions, are discharged more quickly, and are
 less likely to be promoted than men. A 1995 report issued by a committee of non-
 governmental organizations stated that women on average earn 30 percent less than
 men for similar work.
 Women are employed in a broad variety of professions and occupations, and a few
 women occupy high positions in government and in the private sector. However,
 legal barriers, such as clauses in social insurance law limiting child sick care bene-
 
 
 1062
 fits to women only and mandating earlier retirement for women, encourage discrimi-
 nation in hiring.
 The law does not address equality in hiin.g practices (there are no legal penalties
 for discriminatory hirin  races). Advertisements for jobs frequently indicate a
 gender preference. In Mlay the Labor Code was modified to allow women access to
 a number of previously foridden careers. However, women are still prevented from
 working underground or in jobs that require heavy lifting. The rise in unemploy-
 ment and other social changes accompanying economic reforms and restructuring
 have affected women more than men: At the end of 1995, 14.4 percent of women
 were unemployed, compared with 13.7 percent of men.
 The Ombudsman for Human Rights monitors the rights of women within the
 broader context human rights. Observers note that the broad scope of the office's
 mandate dilutes its abiliV to function as an effective advocate of women's issues.
 Within the Cabinet, the Government Plenipotentiary for Women and the Family"
 is responsible for providing relevant information to the Government as it formulates
 policy. Incumbent Plenipeentiary Jolanata Banach has taken an activist approach,
 and her office is drafting the Government's "Action Plan for Women's Issues" to
 comply with the 1995 Be-ig Declaration. Several women's rights NGO's. Among
 the most notable are the Polish Foundation for Women and Family Planning, and
 the Women's Rights Center. These groups are active advocates of gender equality
 and advance their goals through research, monitoring, and publication. There are
 also several church-sponsored women's advocacy organizations, but their cooperation
 with the above-mentioned NGO's is limited.
 The 1962 citizenship law discriminates against women by not granting them the
 same right as men to transmit citizenship to their foreign-born spouses.
 Children.-The Constitution extends some state protection to the family and chil-
 dren. Specifically, it states that children born in and out of wedlock shall be treated
 equally. It also charges the State with ensuring that alimony rights and obligations
 are implemented and tasks the Government with "devoting special attention to the
 education of youth." However, the realities of economic and social life make it dif-
 ficult for the Government to implement these mandates.
 The Government sponsors some health programs targeted specifically at children,
 including a vaccination program and periodic checkups conducted through the
 schools. In reality, however, budget shortfalls prevent complete implementation of
 these programs. The school system does not provide health education classes for
 children. Some NGO's have tried to fill this ap: the Batory Foundation has set up
 a proagr  to provide health education for children by providing training and in-
 structional materials to a group of teachers, but a spokesperson says the scope of
 the problem far outstrips this small program.
 Education is compulsory until the age of 16, although the Government has pro-
 posed raising the age to 18. There are no procedures in schools to protect children
 from abuse by teachers; in fact, the teachers' work code guarantees legal immunity
 from prosecution for the use of corporal punishment in classrooms.
 There is an increasing incidence of prostitution among 12- and 13-year-aIds, and
 unemployment, alcoholism, and housing shortages have affected the quality of life
 of children. Moreover, there are no laws explicitly addressing violence against chil-
 dren or corporal punishment. Abuse is rarely reported, and convictions for child
 abuse are even rarer. Parents have the right to make all decisions concerning their
 children's medical treatment and education.
 There is unequal treatment of young men and women in terms of the age of ma-
 jority. Men and women reach majority at the age of 18 under the Civil Code. How-
 ever, a young woman can reach majority at the age of 16 if she has entered into
 marriage with the consent of her parents and the guardianship court. In addition,
 men are not permitted to marry without parental consent until the age of 21, where-
 as women may do so at the age of 18. Lawmakers' rationale for this difference in
 treatment is the assumption that it is better that men entering compulsory military
 service not be encumbered with families.
 People With Disabilities.-There are approximately 4.5 million disabled persons in
 Poland, and it is predicted that the number will reach 6 million by the year 2010.
 In 1995 the Central Bureau of Statistics reported that 17 percent of disabled per-
 sons who can work are unemployed. Disabled persons' groups claim that the per-
 centage is much higher.
 A number of laws protect the rights of people with disabilities. Implementation,
 however, falls short of rights set forth in the legislation. Public building and trans-
 portation are generally not accessible to people with disabilities; the law provides
 only that such buildings "should be accessible." The law created a state fund for the
 rehabilitation of the disabled that derives its assets from a tax on employers of over
 50 persons, unless 6 percent of the employer's work force are disabled persons.
 
 
 1063
 While the fund has adequate resources, its management has been fraught with dif-
 fkulties, including frequent changes in leadership. According to newspaper reports,
 the fund has 4 000 applications pending. In addition, by lawthe fund cannot be
 used to assist disabled children, that is persons under 16 years of age. In October
 the Polish Union of the Blind organized a pretest in Opole to demand more acces-
 sibility to  blic buildings and the use of Braille in certain public documents and
 public wefare aecies.
 Religious Mirorities.-The law places the Protestant churches on the same legal
 footing as Catholic and Orthodox churches. Protestants have the same ability to
 claim restitution of property lost during the Communist era and have the same tax
 reduction granted to the Orthodox and Catholic churches. However, the law only
 covers church property seized by the People's Republic of Poland and does not ad-
 dress either the issue of private property or Jewish religious property taken during
 World War IL
 The President and Government made efforts during the year to improve Polish-
 Jewish relations. In July the Prime Minister and the Mayor of Kielce apologized on
 behalf of the Polish nation for the 1946 pogrom in that city in which 42 Jews were
 murdered. The President and Prime Minister opposed the building of a supermarket
 near the Auschwitz concentration camp and successfully encouraged local authori-
 ties to find alternatives to the planned development. This cooperative approach was
 praised by Jewish organizations.
 In July around 100 skinheads led by far-right politician Boleslaw Tekowski
 marched on the Auschwitz-Birkenau camp. The provincial governor was criticized
 by national and local officials for his decision to allow the demonstration, which he
 said was based on the right to free speech. A similar, though smaller, demonstration
 in Krakow by TeJkowski in May failed to elicit support from curious onlookers.
 In June 66 tombs at the Jewish cemetery in Warsaw were destroyed. The police
 presume that the perpetrators were hooligans without religious motivation, as no
 hate slurs were written on the site. However, members of the Jewish community
 believe that the attack was related to the anniversary of the Kielce pogrom On July
 6, a Jewish monument commemorating the Jews who lived at Karmen Pomorski be-
 fore World War H was vandalized. The police said that it was an act of hooliganism
 and not a hate crime. A similar event occurred in November, when vandals defaced
 some graves in the Jewish cemetery in the town of Oswiecim, near the site of the
 Auschwitz concentration camp. Police have made no arrests in the case, but the city
 council made a public statement condemning the vandalism.
 In September the Gdansk prosecutor reopened his investigation of Father Henryk
 Jankowski for an allegedly anti-Semitic sermon he gave in 1995 (see Section 2.a.).
 National RaciallEthnic Minorities.-The law provides for the educational rights
 of ethnic minorities, including the right to be taught in their own language. Poland's
 bilateral treaties with Germany and Belarus contain provisions relating to the
 rights of those national minorities, and human rights groups have praised these pro-
 visions as "close to ideal." A program was initiated at the beginning of the 1996-
 97 school year to teach Lithuanian to pupils of Lithuanian descent in 12 schools in
 northeastern Poland. Some 4,000 students also will begin learning Belarusian in the
 Bialystok region this year.
 In Przemysl a Greek Catholic cupola was torn down this spring, reportedly for
 safety reasons. This was done without the consent of the Ukrainian Greek Catholic
 minority in the city and the event fueled ongoing tension between the Roman
 Catholic majority and the Ukrainian minority there.
 The Romani community, numbering around 30,000 faced disproportionately high
 unemployment and was more negatively affected by 'the current economic changes
 and restructuring than were ethnic Poles, according to its leaders. The national
 Government does not overtly discriminate against Rma; however, some local offi-
 cials sometimes do discriminate by not providing services in a timely manner or at
 all. Some schools have experimented with separate special classes for Romani chil-
 dren, stating that because of economic disadvantage, language barriers, and paren-
 tal illiteracy, Romani children are behind their non-Romani counterparts when
 starting school. In July police raided and tore down a Romani camp in Warsaw and
 made over 100 arrests. Opposition politicians and Romani leaders protested against
 the alleged "strong-arm tactics' of the police in this action, although there was no
 evidence that the police violated any laws. After the raid, the authorities deported
 several Roma who were in Poland illegally. Human rights groups report that non-
 Polish Roma with valid visas were released immediately.
 In March a court in the south rejected the appeal of six people convicted of throw-
 ing incendiary devices into a hostel occupied by participants in a Ukranian cultural
 festival in 1995. In December, 1995, the court had reduced the original sentence of
 18 months in prison to a fine and 3 years' probation.
 
 
 1064
 According to a 1995 study conducted by the Warsaw University Sociology Insti-
 tute, 25 percent of visitors to Poland of African, Asian, or Arab descent experienced
 some type of aggression during their stay, and 60 percent experienced verbal abuse
 based on their skin color.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The law provides that all civilian workers including
 military employees, police and frontier guards, have the right to establish and join
 trade unions of their own choosing. And unions have the right to join labor federa-
 tions and confederations and to affiliate with international labor organizations.
 Independent labor leaders reported that these rights were largely observed in prac-
 tice.
 The law sets minimum size requirements for establishing a trade union: 10 per-
 sons may form a local union, and 30 may establish a national union. Unions, includ-
 ing interbranch national unions and national interbranch federations, must be reg-
 istered with the courts. A court decision refusing registration may be appealed to
 an appeals court. In 1996 the number of registered national-level unions rose to 318
 from 288. No precise data exists on work force unionization, but some estimates put
 membership at some 40 percent of state/public sector employees, with the figure at
 about 5 percent in the private sector. Newly established small- to medium-sized
 firms were as a rule nonunion, while union activity often carried over after state-
 owned enterprises were privatized.
 The Independent Self-Governing Trade Union (NSZZ) Solidarity has a verified
 dues-paying membership that stabilized in 1996 at about 1.4 million. Small spinoffs
 from mainstream Solidarity include the rival factions "Solidarity '80," "August '80"
 and "Christian Trade Union Solidarity (Popieluszko)." There are no reliable esti-
 mates of their membership. The other principal national unions are those affiliated
 with the All-Poland Trade Union Alliance (OPZZ), the Communist-inspired confed-
 eration established in 1984 as the sole legal alternative to then-repressed NSZZ Sol-
 idarity, and its teachers' affiliate, ZNP. The OPZZ claims a membership of 4.5 mil-
 lion, but these figures are unverified and recent polls suggest that its regular dues-
 paying members hip may be less than Solidarits. The 1994 collective bargaining
 law did not require union membership figures to be verified or based on dues-pag
 members to be considered a "representative" negotiating partner. As a result, Soli-
 darity has challenged the credentials of some unions (largely OPZZ affiliates) to ne-
 gotiate with the Government on the grounds that membership figures are unproven.
 In May President Kwasniewski signed a bill that could lead to partial resolution
 of the longstanding dispute over Solidarity assets seized during the martial law pe-
 riod and still administered by OPZZ. Solidarity called the law a step forward but
 stressed that it applied to only a fraction of disputed assets. The International Con-
 federation of Free Trade Unions and European Trade Union Confederation contin-
 ued to decline to cooperate with OPZZ, largely because of the outstanding assets
 issue.
 Reports that the domestic branch of the UOP intelligence service had directed its
 officials to monitor strategically important enterprises caused a storm of con-
 troversy, particularly within organized labor. Labor leaders protested that the UOP
 order sanctioned infiltration of unions and penetration by technical means to obtain
 early information on strikes and the mood of the work force. The UOP later re-
 scinded the order and clarified that any monitoring of the industrial climate would
 take place on the basis of open sources, not by recruiting agents from among the
 labor force or installing listening devices. Nevertheless, So ldarity President Marian
 Krzaklewski asserted in the fall that the UOP continued to monitor him, his family,
 and other Solidarity leaders.
 Most trade unions operate independently of-the Government, and some are par-
 ticularly active in politics. More than two-thirds of the 169 governing Democratic
 Left Alliance (SLD) Deputies are, or have been, OPZZ members. Of these, the OPZZ
 formally sponsored 63 as "trade union deputies" during the 1993 elections but many
 have since left the OPZZ. Solidarity and some OPZZ regional leaders charge that
 the OPZZ national leadership is not independent because the SLD enforces party
 discipline on important votes in the Sejm. Solidarity has a 13-member caucus in the
 Senate and in the summer brokered a coalition ("Solidarity electoral action"), a bloc
 of more than 35 center-right political groups to stand for the 1997 parliamentary
 elections. One Confederation of Independent Poland (KPN) Sejm Deputy chairs the
 KPN trade union win, "Kontra."
 Unions have the rght to strike except in "essential services." According to the
 unions, the 1991 Act on Collective Dispute Resolution prescribes an overly lengthy
 process before a strike may be called. Employers considered the law too lenient as
 it allows only one-quarter of the work force to vote to call a strike. As a result, as
 
 
 1065
 many as 60 to 90 percent of strikes called in recent years have been technically lle-
 gal" because one or bth of the sides did not follow each step exactly as required
 by law. Labor courts act slowly on deciding the legality of strikes while sanctions
 against unions for calling illegal stries, or against employers for provoking them,
 are minimal. Arbitration is not obligatory and depends on the will of disputing par-
 ties. Unions charge that laws prohlbiting retribution against strikers are not con-
 sistenty enforced and that fines imposed as punihment are so minimal that they
 are ineffective sanctions to illegal activity. Workers who strike in accordance with
 the law retain their rit to social insurance but not pay. If a court rules a strike
 "ilegal," however, workers may lose social benefits, and organizers are liable for
 damages and may face civil charges and fines.
 The number of strikes called continued to fall sharply (to a dozen by mid-1996,
 from a high of several thousand in the early 1990's). A new Labor Code went into
 effect on June 1, representing a major overhaul of Communist-era labor regulations,
 but ambiguities in dispute resolution mechanisms remain.
 Solidarity is affiliated with the ICFTU and the World Confederation of Labor
 (WCL).
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The 1991 Law on Trade
 Unions created a favorable environment to conduct trade union activity.
 Labor leaders, however, reported that the 1991 law has not prevented numerous
 cases of employer discrimination against workers seeking to organize or join unions,
 particularlyin the growing private sector. The law also has not prevented employer
 harassmeat of union members for their union activity. Union leaders say the law
 also lacks provisions to ensure that a union has continued rights of representation
 when a state-owned enterprise undergoes privatization, commercialization, bank-
 ruptcy, or sale. This contriluted to the very low unionization rate in the private sec-
 tor.
 The 1991 law provides for parties to take disputes over its implementation first
 to labor courts, then to the Prosecutor General, and, in the last resort, to the Su-
 preme Court. In a typical year, Solidarity takes several thousand cases to labor
 courts, several hundred to the Prosecutor General, and dozens to the Supreme Court
 for resolution. In an overwhelming majority of these cases, the courts ordered em-
 ployers to correct practices or reinstate dismissed workers. In other cases, the courts
 ordered unions to reimburse employers for activity found to be illegal. Penalties,
 however, are minimal and are not an effective deterrent.
 The Government sought to make enterprise-level collective bargaining over wages
 and working conditions the central element of the new labor relations system. Labor
 and management at increasing numbers of enterprises have used the law to adapt
 their relationship to the demands of a market economy, but experience in modem
 labor relations is still minimal among unionists and employers reportedly often re-
 sist entering into negtiation. Thus, a substantial minority of enterprises continued
 to operate on the basis of agreement renewed from previous years.
 Since its formation in early 1994, the Tripartite Commission (labor, employers,
 goverment) under the leadership of the Laor    nster, has become the primary
 forum that determines national-lvel wage and benefit increases in such po litically
 sensitive areas as the so-called budget sector (health, education, and public employ-
 ees), while rendering opions on pension indexation, energy pricing, and other im-
 portent aspects of social policy. The Commission serves as a very important "safety
 valve by which the socl partners air differenes and discuss grievances before
 they erupt into social conflict. Most Commission members want it to become a per-
 manent fixture on the national landscape, despite many initial doubts about its via-
 bilityany disputes arose because of the weakness of the employer side of the union/
 employer/government "triangl. Key state sector employers still were unable to nego-
 tiate independently with organized labor without the extensive involvement of
 central government ministries to which they were subordinate, while the Govern-
 ment repeatedly stated its intention not to be drawn into labor disputes. This con-
 tinued to complicate and politicize the Government's new labor relations paradigm.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.--Compulsory labor does not exist,
 except for prisoners convicted of criminal offenses, and is otherwise prohibited by
 law.
 In April the Ukrainian Government protested to the Polish Embassy in Kiev
 about a case of alleged "forced labor," in which 19 Ukrainian and Belarusian women
 were reportedly required to work in restrictive and dangerous conditions in a Polish
 agricultural firnm Journalists investigated the case and reported that pay and work-
 ing conditions at the farm, while lower than normal Polish standards, exceeded
 
 
 1066
 those in the countries of the workers' origin and therefore did not qualify as a "labor
 camp." Followin the initial report, the case attracted no more attention.
 d. Minimu      e for Employment of Children.-The law contains strict legal pre-
 scriptions about the conditions in which children may work. The Labor Code forbids
 the employment of persons under the age of 15. Those between the ages of 15 and
 18 may be employed only if they have completed primary school and if the proposed
 employment constitutes vocational training and is not harmfiul to their health. The
 age floor rises to 18 if a particular job might pose a health danger.
 Despite these prescriptions, the state Labor Inspectorate reported that increasing
 numbers of children now work and that employers often violate labor rules in em-
 ploying them (underpayment, late payment, etc.). Inspectors found violations on
 stud farms, in restaurants, and, in some instances, in factories in the private sector.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The Ministry of Labor, the unions, and employ-
 er' organizations negotiate a revised national minimum wage every 3 months. The
 minimum monthly wage for employees in state-owned enterprises rose to roughly
 $140 (370 zlotys). While this was an increase over 1995, it was insufficient to pro-
 vide a worker or family with a decent standard of living in view of rapidly rising
 prices. A large percentage of construction workers and seasonal agricultural laborers
 from the former Soviet Union earn less than the minimum. The large size of the
 informal economy, along with the insufficient numbers of state labor inspectors,
 make enforcement of the minimum wage very difficult. In late 1995, the State Labor
 Inspector concluded that as long as high unemployment perists, workers often
 agree to inferior working conditions in order to retain their jobs.
 The standard legal workweek is 42 hours, which allows 6 or 7 hour days, includ-
 ing at least one 24-hour rest period. The law requires overtime payment for hours
 in excess of the standard workweek. The new Labor Code defines minimum condi-
 tions for the protection of workers' health and safety. Prescriptions are strict and
 extensive, and trade unions have the right to stop production or extract a worker
 from dangerous working conditions without jeopardy to continued employment. En-
 forement, however, is a major problem because the State Labor Inspectorate is un-
 able to monitor the state sector sufficiently, or the private sector, where a growing
 percentage of accidents take place. In addition, there is a lack of clarity concerning
 which government or legislative body has responsibility for enforcing the law.
 Of the 112,205 work-related accidents reported in 1995, 621 involved deaths,
 sightly fewer than in 1994. This represents roughly 10 accidents per 1,000 workers,
 slightly more than in 1994. The Government reported in April that most accidents
 were in the public sector, while most serious accidents were in the private sector,
 where proportionally more deaths also occurred. Solidarity charges that the problem
 lies not in the law, which sets adequate standards, but in enforcement, as employer
 sanctions for illegal behavior are minimal. Standards for exposure to chemicals,
 dust, and noise are routinely exceeded.
