POLAND
The State Department's 1991 report on human rights in Poland describes Poland's continued progress in improving its human rights record and contains significant praise for Poland's movement towards privatization and a market economy. During this continuing period of transition, Poland's complex political climate has at times prevented progress in areas affecting human rights. Various human rights problems, mentioned only in passing in last year's report, continue to go unaddressed and in some cases have worsened. The report is misleading to the extent that it focuses only on areas where some progress has been made, ignoring other issues in which the situation has not improved, police brutality, for example, or where there is a developing problem, such as the issue of equal economic rights for women and access to abortion.
In 1991, Poland continued to struggle towards the creation of a free market system, though it should be noted that the State still controls a vast portion of Poland's economy. State-owned businesses account for more than three quarters of all industrial production and employ more than 11 million of the total 38 million population. By the end of 1991, only 1,200 of Poland's 8,000 state enterprises had been privatized.
The report praises Poland's "historically unprecedented transformation from a centrally planned to a market economy," but mentions only briefly the severe economic hardships visited on the Polish people as a result of the austerity programs designed to achieve this transformation. Not only did real incomes drop over 30% since January 1990, as the report states, but unemployment rose to more than two million by the fall of 1991. The government's failure to provide job training or to devise an economic plan to deal with unemployment -- a problem new to Poland since the demise of communism ~ has contributed to widespread hardship.
As the report states, "political disagreements delayed work on drafting a new constitution." In fact, the Poles to this date have not adopted a new constitution, despite the availability of numerous
286
Poland
completed drafts. Only a few of the drafts currently available contain provisions against discrimination, and several drafts include a provision making Catholicism the state religion. Reluctance to deal with volatile church/state issues makes it unlikely that a constitution will be ratified in 1992.
The criminal code, as well as many other major areas of legislation, is in the process of being revised. But political stalemates, as well as the complexity of the issues, have led to a situation in which many of the old laws enacted under the communist system remain in force. According to one human rights organization, "[m]any laws are often ignored on the grounds that they are a legacy of the communists, so it is considered almost patriotic to violate them." The Prime Minister of Poland, Jan Olszewski, was quoted in early 1992 as saying that Polish law does not deserve to be respected because of its internal contradictions and, above ail, its communist roots. Respect for the rule of law may prove difficult to uphold in such an environment.
The report accurately points to continuing improvement in prison conditions but tends to minimize ongoing violations of prisoners' rights. Prison guards continue to read outgoing mail, and this lack of privacy may chill the rights of inmates to complain to government authorities about prison conditions. The report completely ignores the deplorable conditions in juvenile reformatories and other detention centers for minors. Reports from the Helsinki Committee in Poland indicate that conditions in such facilities are worse than those in adult prisons. The facilities are quite old and hunger is prevalent. Conditions may violate the prohibition against cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment contained in Article 7 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (to which Poland is a signatory), and also may fall below the UN Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners.
Last year's report omitted any reference to the serious problem of police brutality during pre-trial detention periods. This year's report shows improvement by recognizing the existence of this pattern of abuse, but appears to excuse the practice or soften its criticism by offering as possible causes of the behavior "[l]ow police morale, poor training, and
287
Poland
a desire to elicit confessions from suspects in an atmosphere of increasingly frequent violent crime." Yet police brutality continues to be on the rise despite efforts to train and professionalize the police force.
The report acknowledges the incomplete revision of the criminal code and cites the continued enforcement of the provision for 48-hour detention without charge, pointing accurately to the fact that most allegations about police mistreatment of suspects in custody involve actions taken by police during this 48-hour period. The report inaccurately states that suspects are not permitted access to a lawyer during this initial detention period; in fact, the law permits suspects access to counsel during the first 48 hours. The report accurately notes the increasingly frequent extensions of pre-trial detentions during 1991.
The report describes the "temporary arrest" provisions of the criminal code under which a prosecutor can, when a formal investigation begins, hold a person for up to three months and possibly longer, until an indictment is filed. The report is misleading when it suggests that the temporary arrest power is used only in serious criminal cases. In fact, the prosecutor may arrest a suspect in cases of less serious offenses if there is a suspicion on the part of the prosecutor that the accused may attempt to impede the investigation or may go into hiding. According to human rights monitors in Poland, this "exception" to the temporary arrest provision is used frequently by prosecutors. Due to the failure of Parliament to complete the revision of the criminal code, the prosecutor still retains significant control in the criminal process. A decrease in this power is necessary to establish respect for the administration of justice and the rule of law and to enhance the rights of detainees.
Currently, there is no provision in Polish law that would prohibit civil commitment of patients to a mental institution without recourse to judicial procedure. Thus, under Polish law a person may be committed to a mental institution without due process protections. This is a recognized and well-known problem in Poland which the report fails to mention.
288
Poland
The report's characterization of Poland's court system is not entirely accurate and cites proposals for a more independent judiciary that have not yet been implemented. The report states that the Supreme Court is divided in two sections, criminal and civil. In fact, the Supreme Court has a third, military, chamber. The report fails to note that, unlike the case of prosecutors and police, the judiciary has not yet undergone a "verification" process. Thus, judges who compromised their integrity during the period of communist rule continue to preside in many courts. Concerns about the lack of professionalism and integrity of the judiciary continue and are especially acute regarding judges presiding in penitentiary and probation courts dealing with prison matters.
A free press is blossoming now in Poland, and the report accurately describes the relative ease with which new publications may enter the marketplace. However, the electronic media is still largely controlled by the government due to the failure to enact new legislation that would set forth procedures for licensing independent stations. This political stalemate, due in part to a proposal by the National Christian Union that would require "Christian values" to be promoted in all programming, has impeded Poland's progress towards significant freedom of the press for broadcast media.
In what may be an example of politically-motivated prosecution, Jerzy Urban, a previous communist minister responsible for propaganda and currently editor-in-chief of the satirical-political weekly Nie was charged with distribution of pornography. The charges stemmed from a single photograph in an edition of the magazine. The prosecutor's office declined to use die law to pursue numerous magazines devoted exclusively to pornography, targeting Urban instead, a journalist with perhaps the strongest opposition profile in the independent press. The case was dismissed by the court. The report makes no mention of this incident.
Freedom of association is generally guaranteed, although private associations must obtain government approval, as the report points out. The report fails to note, however, that the right to free association is
289
Poland
limited to those over the age of 18. This limitation contravenes the provisions of the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child, which Poland ratified on June 7, 1991.
Moreover, although the report claims that government approval for private associations is not withheld for political reasons, a recent incident omitted from the report, seems to contradict this assertion. On November 26, when the Women's Self-Defense Movement applied for registration in the provincial capital of Bydgoszcz, a government official came to the registration hearing and presented the judge with a document arguing that the applicant organization's by-laws contradicted the law on associations because they demanded unconditional obedience from members. The by-law in question stated that one of the ways the association proposed to act was by "taking a stand against the limits on women's rights to make decisions in the field of motherhood." The judge denied the petition for registration on the ground that the by-law was illegal, since Polish law protects the unborn. In reality, however, abortion is still legal under Polish law. In any event, denial of registration on the basis of an organization's stand on abortion is impermissible under the law on association. The denial of registration is being appealed.
The report woefully understates, in tone and substance, the situation with regard to discrimination against women in Poland. Although it mentions that "activists charge that female workers were more likely to be laid off first from failing concerns," that "[t]he Ministry of Labor and many state-owned firms continue to regard certain positions as being reserved for either men or women," and that "[ajnecdotal evidence suggests that women sometimes do not receive equal pay for equal work," there is no mention made in the report of laws currently in force in Poland, particularly dealing with employment issues, that discriminate against women. For example, a law enacted in 1979 and still in effect prohibits employment of women in jobs "particularly arduous and detrimental to their health" and includes occupations in the fields of industry, health care, forestry service, agriculture and transportation. Another law provides that long-term leave benefits to care for a sick child are available only to the mother
290
Poland
and not to the father, barring exceptional circumstances. This law has the effect of making employers favor employment of men over women, because women would always be the ones to take leave should a child become ill. Finally, Polish law sets the (mandatory, in some cases) retirement age for women five years lower than for men, having the effect of encouraging (and, in some cases, forcing) women to leave the work force at an earlier age. Although the Commissioner for Civil Rights won a challenge to the law on behalf of women university professors, the provision remains in force for all other professions and is still in effect for women professors at the Polish Academy of Science and the Institute for Scientific Research. This disparity in treatment, a function primarily of the resource and time limitations of the Commissioner for Civil Rights, illustrates the need for a general antidiscrimination law.
In addition to these provisions, which affirmatively discriminate against women, the report fails to address the complete absence in Polish law of any provision prohibiting sex discrimination in hiring practices. The effects of this void in the law have become more pronounced as the economy worsens and job opportunities grow more scarce. In addition to the fact, relegated by the report to the status of "anecdotal evidence," that women who work tend to make only about 70% of the pay received by men holding the same jobs, women also face barriers of discrimination when they are looking for work. Although the government form required to be completed by all businesses advertising for employment no longer distinguishes between "jobs for men" and "jobs for women," public announcements of job openings are frequently gender-specific, and the state-run employment agency through which unemployment benefits are disbursed handles men and women separately.
Abortion continues to be a matter of much debate in Poland but is not mentioned in the report. While abortion is permitted under Polish law, various measures have been taken that make it more difficult to obtain. For example, previously, women seeking an abortion in a state hospital were required only to present a note from a doctor, considered a formality, attesting to adverse social or medical circumstances. Under an administrative order issued in 1990, however, a woman must present
291
Poland
statements from two doctors and a psychologist to obtain an abortion from a state facility. An even greater barrier, however, is presented by a new provision of the medical ethics code passed in December. The code forbids any doctor from performing an abortion unless the mother's life or health is in danger or unless the pregnancy resulted from a felony, i.e., rape. The code was promulgated by the Polish Medical Association, an organization to which all doctors must belong and which has the power to revoke a doctor's license to practice in the event of non-compliance with the code.
Anti-Semitism is a persistent problem in Poland. The report details efforts taken by the government and church leaders to condemn acts motivated by anti-Semitism {e.g., the use of anti-Semitic slogans and graffiti and damage to Jewish cemeteries), but human rights monitors in Poland point out that these efforts, while helpful politically, have not led to a decrease in such incidents. The Council on Polish-Jewish Relations, referred to in the report, simply has not been active in addressing the problem. The report does note, however, that charges were filed in November against Boleslaw Tejkowski, chairman of the Polish National Alliance Party, for anti-Semitic statements he made during the parliamentary election campaign. The Polish National Alliance Party is considered to be the political expression of popular Polish anti-Semitic sentiment. Tejkowski is currently awaiting trial for violating laws against inciting racial or ethnic hatred.
As the report notes, Poland is overwhelmingly Roman Catholic in religious affiliation. Despite arguments from the Commissioner for Civil Rights that religious teaching in public schools violated the principle of equality of all denominations, the Constitutional Tribunal ruled in January that religious instruction in schools did not contradict the laws on freedom of conscience and religion and did not reflect on the secular character of the state. Most public schools provide facilities for Catholic religious instruction, as the report accurately states. However, the report is somewhat misleading in referring to such instruction as "voluntary." Significant pressure is brought to bear on a student who refuses to participate in religious instruction, and the trend has been towards making the decision not to participate increasingly onerous. A
292
Poland
Ministry of Education regulation issued in early 1992 requires that every student's report card include, under the heading of "Behaviour," a grade for either ethics or religion. Since there are virtually no teachers trained to provide "ethics" instruction, ethics courses simply are not offered. Thus, a student who declines to "voluntarily" participate in religious instruction is put in the difficult posifion of lacking a required grade on his or her report card. Religion classes in schools are ordinarily taught by Catholic priests and nuns, not by regular public school teachers.
The report accurately notes that Poland has become a destination for many persons fleeing economic and political turmoil. Poland signed the 1951 UN Convention relating to the Status of Refugees on September 2, 1991, and implemented these international standards by domestic law in December. It is too soon to tell whether Poland's accession to and implementation of this treaty will result in fair and equitable treatment of refugees seeking asylum in Poland. The fear of a mass influx of people seeking to enter Poland is still a major factor in formulating refugee policy, especially in light of the unstable economic situation.
293
