 POLAND
 Poland is a Communist country. Since 1956, there has been
 greater observance of rights of the integrity of the person.
 The exercise of most civil and political rights guaranteed in
 the Constitution has remained significantly limited; however,
 in certain periods internal controls have been relaxed.
 In 1956, following rioting and demonstrations in several
 cities which occurred in close proximity to Khrushchev's
 de-Stalinization speech, there was a significant relaxation
 of internal controls. By the early 1960's, however, the
 regime has returned to more restrictive policies. In the
 latter part of the decade internal economic difficulties
 mounted, and in 1970 the people expressed their disdatis-
 faction through massive demonstrations in the streets of
 Poland's Baltic seaports. Under the leadership of First
 Secretary Edward Gierek, who then came to power, Poland
 again experienced a lessening of internal restrictions.
 A sudden government-ordered price increase in June 1976
 led to a flurry of strikes and disorders in which hundreds
 of persons were arrested. In the face of an open dissident
 movement, which at least initially focused on the legal
 defense of the 1976 strikers, the Government has reacted
 with restraint.
 Today the Communist Party continues to dominate political
 life and to place significant limits on free expression.
 The Party and other elements of society however, have sought
 a modus vivendi with important elements of Poland's heritage
 in-cling tolerance for diverse intellectual views, respect
 for law, and a powerful and socially active Catholic Church.
 Since the people have twice forced a change in leadership, the
 Government is not indifferent to public opinion.
 There are an estimated 30,000 Soviet troops stationed in the
 country.
 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Torture
 Torture is prohibited by Polish law. There have been no
 indications of its practice by the Polish authorities.
 b. Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment of
 Punishment
 There were a few allegations of excessive violence, primarily
 severe beatings, by police officials toward arrested persons
 in 1979.
 (68)
 
 
 640
 Detention conditions, including diet, apparently are adequate,
 health care is provided, and prisoners are allowed visits
 by family members. Accused persons are allowed by law to
 choose their attorneys, and this right is normally respected.
 A 1978 Amnesty International report cited one instance in
 which this was not the case. The International Committee
 of the Red Cross has access to detainees and there is no
 evidence that political detainees are treated differently
 from other prisoners.
 Summary executions-are illegal and there is no evidence
 that any have occurred.
 c. Arbitrary Arrest or Imprisonment
 Compared to-the pre-1956 period, there were few cases of detention
 for political activities in 1979. The underground press,
 and sometimes Western media, have reported several recent
 cases of short-term detention, sometimes followed by fines
 or prison sentences of a few months for various forms of
 unsanctioned political activities.
 Under Polish law, an individual may be detained for up to
 48 hours without being charged. At the expiration ofthat
 period, the person must be charged with a crime or released.
 By law the 48-hour period may not be extended; however,
 there have been reports of dissidents being held for 48 hours,
 released, and then picked up again after a few hours or
 days. Such detentions reportedly have been used against
 Polish citizens for circulating uncensored literature,
 signing petitions on behalf of human rights causes, holding
 and attending "flying university" lectures, and belonging
 to or voicing support of dissident organizations.  (The
 "flying university" is a series of academic lectures, often
 given in private apartments, on subjects not in the authorized
 curriculum.) Persons thus detained are usually freed and not
 charged,although some leading dissidents subsequently'have
 lost their jobs as a result of their activities. The
 government typically justifies such detentions on the
 grounds of "hooliganism," obstruction of justice, or
 disturbing the peace. Polish law also provides that a
 prosecutor may issue a "sanction," under which a person may
 be held under "investigative detention" for three months
 after which another "sanction" may be issued. There has
 been one instance in which a person was jailed for five
 months before being tried for assaulting police officers and
 another in which a person is serving his second consecutive
 three month "sanction."
 d. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The right to a fair public trial is guaranteed by law. The
 judiciary is subject to the influence of the Communist
 Party, especially in cases involving political offenses. In
 political cases there have been in recent years several
 instances in which judges have thrown out charges or imposed
 substantially lesser sentences against dissidents than those
 sought by the prosecution. The judiciary appears to protect
 the rights of the accused in non-political cases. According
 to Polish law, defendants are entitled to counsel. It
 cannot be assumed that the privacy of such consultations
 is always respected. There have been no reports of specific
 instances of government harassment of defense counsel.
 
 
 641
 Defendants normally are made fully Aware of the charges
 against them, and they and their lawyers are generally
 given the opportunity to acquaint themselves with the
 evidence on which the charges are based. Special military
 courts handle security cases. Trials in these courts are
 conducted according to military law, not civilian proced-
 ures. A civilian can be tried by a military court if
 charged with a crime of a "security" nature.
 e.   Invasion of the Home
 The sanctity of the home is safeguarded by law, but not
 always respected by the authorities. Theoretically,
 judicial warrants are necessary before entering a dwell-
 ing, but reports abound of unauthorized searches and
 seizures by the security services in citizens' home,
 especially in connection with actions against dissidents.
 No case is known in which the officials carrying out
 such searches have been disciplined.
 2.   Government Policies Relating to the Ful-
 fillment of such Vital Needs as Food, Shelter,
 Health Care and Education:
 Poland's economy is centrally planned with some elements
 of private enterprise permitted. Within statutorily de-
 fined limits, property may be privately owned. All major
 industries are state-owned. Except for the 1948-56 period,
 Polish agriculture has not been collectivized; about 75
 percent of the "country's arable land is privately owned.
 In addition, sall-s-caie private enterprise is permitted,
 and occasionally encouraged, in crafts and skilled trades
 as well as in small retail establishments. The country is
 facing numerous economic difficulties including a large
 hard-currency debt.
 The distribution of income in wages and salaries is reason-
 ably even. However, total real income is determined in
 large measure by access to scarce comodities, such as hous-
 ing, which often depends on how well one goes along with the
 system. Moreover, a sizeable number of Poles in the middle
 and upper echelons of the Party and State establishments en-
 joy a living standard far in excess. of the Polish average
 in the form of direct salaries and a wide range of perqui-
 sites not available to ordinary citizens.
 Rapid urbanization, combined with the massive destruction of
 Polish cities in World War II, has put severe pressure on
 the country's housing resources throughout the post-war
 period. Although the cities have been rebuilt, and the
 government has undertaken large-scale new construction pro-
 jects, the supply of new housing has chronically fallen far
 short of the need.
 Malnutrition is not a problem of Poland. Difficulties in
 food production and distribution have given rise to
 chronic shortages of certain items, especially meat.
 Poland's comprehensive national health system provides
 free medical and hospital care to all citizens, although
 the quality of care in government clinics is sometimes
 deficient, especially in rural areas. Medicines are
 sold at nominal cost.
 The state provides free education to all citizens through
 high school. The quality of education in some rural areas
 
 
 642
 is still well bik6~ wthat iilable-In cities, although
 the government has recently undertaken new programs to
 upgrade rural schools. There are no private elementary
 or secondary schools, although the Catholic Church has
 several seminaries and a university at Lublin. Entrance
 into one of the state-run universities or polytechnic in-
 stitutes is governed largely by competitive examinations.
 Party or other high-level connections are frequently the
 determining factor where the number of vacancies is
 limited. Tuition is free at state institutions, and Most
 university students also receive a modest stipend.
 There is no evidence that vital human needs are neglected
 because of corruption. However, considerable small-scale
 economic corruption exists despite official efforts.
 3.   Respect for Civil and Political Liberties,
 Including:
 a.   Freedom of Speech, Press, Religion and Assembly
 These freedoms are guaranteed by the Polish Constitution,
 but in a number of respects are significantly restricted
 in practice.
 Persons who propound opposition views in public risk re-
 prisal in some form. For example, some of the "flying
 university" lectures on subjects not included in the
 official higher education curricula have been broken up
 by the police or by gangs of hecklers. On a number of
 .occasions, lecturers have been prevented from meeting
 "flying university" classes by arrest, detention, or in-
 terference. On the other hand, several peaceful public
 demonstrations during 1979 were allowed to proceed unin-
 terrupted.
 The media are curtailed by secret Party and government
 directives and are fully censored. Radio and television
 broadcasting are government monopolies, and most newsp
 papers, magazines, and books are published by the state
 or the Party. Catholic Church publications, although
 they are also censored, enjoy somewhat greater leeway in
 the treatment of controversial subjects.
 A government censorship office provides detailed instruc-
 tions to editors and broadcasters on subjects which are
 to be avoided and how to treat those not banned. The
 subjects on which a particular line or perspective is
 required are many, and the lists are updated daily. Ex-
 pression of opposition views on both domestic and foreign
 subjects is effectively blocked in the official media.
 With rare exceptions, the censorship apparatus intimidates
 Polish journalists by its very existence; many practice
 self-censorship. Some Western non-comm-a' st newspapers
 and magazines are available in limited quantities in pub-
 lic reading rooms, major hotels, and some of the larger
 newsstands.
 Many underground publications have appeared in Poland in
 recent years. Government response has been restrained,
 limited primarily to occasional short-term detention of
 underground press editors and writers and the confis-
 cation of reproduction equipment.
 
 
 63
 While there are no restrictions on the activities of
 foreign journalists, Polish journalists employed by
 Western wire services frequently are told to pay less
 attention to certain stories -- often relating to dis-
 sidence -- and more to "positive developments." There
 is an implicit threat in such representations, though
 to date no concrete actions have been taken against
 these journalists.
 Although freedom of religion is guaranteed, organized
 religion in.Poland is subject to state control through
 the Government Office of Religious Affairs (and, ulti-
 mately, the Polish United Workers (Communist) Party).
 The Roman Catholic Church, by virtue of its stature and
 influence among the people (upwards of 90 percent of whom
 are Catholics) is able to maintain a substantial degree
 of freedom from such control despite various restrictive
 government policies, e.g., denial of access to the broad-
 cast media, limitations on the number and volume of
 church publications, denials or delays in issuing per-
 mits for new church construction, and refusal to grant
 the Church legal status as a recognized social organi-
 zation. Since 1956, clubs of Catholic intelligentsia
 have operated in major cities as forums for discussion
 of religious, social and economic topics. The Government
 cooperated in the arrangement for Pope John Paul Ills
 visit to Poland in June, 1979. The Pope's visit vividly
 demonstrated the depth and extent of spiritual allegi-
 ance to the Church and of the Church's influence on the
 people. The Catholic Bishops Conference meets frequently,
 often issuing statement sharply critical of Communist
 ideology and certain government policies. These state-
 ments are read from the pulpit in all churches in Poland,
 and priests deal freely with other controversial subjects
 as well in their sermons. Catholic citizens are free to
 practice their faith publicly as well as privately, al-
 though practicing Catholics who work for the government
 or for a state institution generally find their career
 advancement limited.
 There is no evidence that the government pursues a dis-
 criminatory policy among the various religious denomi-
 nations in Poland. The miniscule and increasingly
 elderly Jewish community maintains itself with outside
 support subject to the same restrictions with which other
 religious and social groups must deal. There are no
 seminaries and only a few open synagogues. The sole rabbi
 arrived in Warsaw in 1979. Most of the remaining postwar
 Jewish community was encouraged by the government to leave
 in 1968.
 b.   Freedom of Movement Within the Country,
 Foreign Travel and Emigration
 Freedom of movement within Poland is guaranteed by law.
 Except as it may be limited by the administrative require-
 ment for authorization to reside in certain cities, this
 legal guarantee is honored.
 The right to travel abroad is not guaranteed by law. Dur-
 ing the 1970's the number of Poles traveling outside the
 country grew steadily, and most persons seeking passports
 for tourist travel can now obtain them without great dif-
 ficulty. About 30,000 Polish citizens visited the US in
 1979. Government regulations limiting the availability
 of hard currency inhibit travel for those who do not al-
 ready possess a sufficient amount or have family or friends
 
 
 644
 abroad-iho-will support them~dflig their sEay abroad.
 Some tourist passport applications are also refused on
 political grounds. For example, the Government has denied
 passports to a number of non-comformist academicians and
 other intellectuals invited to visit other countries.
 Visas have been denied to dozens of former Poles seeking
 to return to the country as visitors, often for the pur-
 pose of seeing aged relatives. In late 1979, however, the
 rate of issuance of visas to such persons increased signifi-
 cantly.
 Passport issuance for emigration is very closely scrutini- �
 zed, and denials and long delays for political reasons are
 frequent. In 1979, for example, the authorities rejected
 the applications of nearly 3,000 persons seeking to emi-
 grate for tamily reunification, ostensiIyyon--h  as9s
 that their skills are needed within Poland.
 c.   Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 Poland's political system is authoritarian. Most power is
 exercised by the Polish United Workers (Communist) Party
 (PUWP). There are two other officially sanctioned parties,
 the United Peasant Party and the Democratic Party; each
 ostensibly represents the interests of a distinct sector
 of Polish society but is under the effective control of the
 PUWP. There are several small Catholic groups (not recog-
 nized as parties) in the Polish Parliament. The Parliament
 has little real power, and in practice virtually all decision-
 making and administrative power resides with the PUWP at all
 levels of government; Opposition parties have not been per-
 mited to operate. In 1979, some dissident groups proclaimed
 the formation of an avowedly oppositionist party at a pub-
 lic meeting; the police have not interferred.
 Women enjoy equal legal status with men. Largely because
 of cultural traditions men dominate the political, econo-
 mic, and social life of the country. Although women make
 up a high proportion of the Polish work force, most major
 government posts, as well as managerial level positions in
 industry and other sectors are occupied by men. Low wage
 scales prevail in occupations traditionally filled by wo-
 men. In some professions, e.g., law, teaching, and medicine,
 women fare relativeIy well.
 The official trade union organization is government
 controlled. Attempts by individuals to initiate free
 trade unions have been met with harassment by security
 organs, and in some cases physical violence, jail sen-
 tences, and fines. The right to strike, demanded in
 September 1979 by some dissidents, does not exist, nor
 does the right to bargain collectively.
 4.   Government Attitude and Record Regarding
 International and Non-governmental Investi-
 gation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights:
 The Polish Government generally considers any examination
 of its human rights practices by international govern-
 mental or non-governmental organizations as interference
 in its internal affairs. In international forums, Poland
 has emphasized the importance of economic and social
 rights and minimized the significance of civil and politi-
 cal liberties.
 The authorities have impeded the activities of a small
 domestic chapter of Amnesty International.
 
 
 645
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (USoFISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: POLAND
 1977     1978     1979
 ---------------------------------------------------
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL...          0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS,.0... 00                      0.0      00
 GRANTS*.........o..         0.0      0.0      0.0
 A.AID o... ............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS   ..*..              0.0      000      0.0
 GRANTS..o ........          0.0      0.0      00
 (SEC.SUPPeASSISTo)oeo          0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.FOOD FOR PEACE.......          0.0      0.0       00
 LOANS..,.,. ......          0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ....o.....*.          0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE I-TOTAL,.*.,....,          0.0      0.0      0.0
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS.....          0.0      0.0      0.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR.....          000      0.0      0.0
 TITLE II-TOTAL........           0.0      0.0       0.0
 E.RELIEF.EC.DEV & WFP.          0.0      0.0      0.0
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY.....          0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST9.          0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS**..,**o ... .          0.0      O.0      0.0
 GRANTS..o.O...o.          0.0     00       0.0
 CONTRe TO IFI.,          0.0      0.0      0.0
 PEACE CORPS......          0.0      0.0      0.0
 OTHER ......o..ot          0.0      0.0      00
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL...          00      0.0      0.0
 LOANS.,....   ,.o.o        0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS..*   *......         0.0      0.0      00
 A.MAP GRANTS........o.          0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.CREDIT SALES-FMS....          0.0      0.0      0.0
 CINTL MIL.EO.TRNG...o          0.0      0.0      0.0
 D*TRAN-EXCESS STOCK...          0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTSo. .....          00      0.0      00
 III*TOTAL ECON. & MIL..,          0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS ........... e0.                 0.0 0.0
 GRANTS..........*          0.0      0.0      000
 ---------------------------------------------------
 OTHER US LOANS..........        176.4    522.0     398.9
 EX-IM BANK LOANS.......          2.5     17.3     13.4
 ALL OTHER............        173.0    504.7    385,5
 ---------------------------------------------------
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES-COMMITMENTS
 1977     1978     1979      1946-79
 ---------------------------------------------------
 TOTAL........       0.3      2.2      1.7     20.7
 IBRO                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 IFC                0.0       0.0      0.0      0.0
 IDA                 0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 IO                 0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 ADB                 0.0     "0.0      0.0      0.0
 AFDB                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 UNDP                o.3      2.2      1.7     18.3
 OTHER-UN            0.0      0.0      0.0      2.4
 EEC                 0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 
 
