POLAND
The Report on Poland is an excellent and thorough assessment of the grim human rights situation in that country. We are pleased to note that information provided by independent human rights sources in Poland, particularly by the underground Polish Helsinki Committee, have been included in the Report. Nevertheless, a few points should be clarified.
In the section describing torture and cruel treatment, the Report states that prisoners on hunger strike are being force-fed by prison authorities who are sometimes so "inept" as to cause injury. It should be noted that the force-feeding of prisoners on hunger strike is often administered in a purposefully painful manner and is used as a form of torture. Several former political prisoners who had been on hunger strikes in prison have described such treatment in their testimonies.
The section on arbitrary arrest, detention, or exile, notes that persons placed under "investigatory" or "temporary" arrest can be kept in jail for indefinite periods with no guarantee of access to a lawyer. It should be added that during this period the detainee is denied any visits; though such a measure is not mandatory, it is applied almost as a rule toward detainees accused of political activities.
In the same section, the Report notes that Polish law does not contain any provision for forced exile. It does not mention, however, that for the first time in the history of Communist Poland, the regime denied entry to the country by a citizen holding a valid passport. In February 1985, Seweryn Blumsztajn, a KOR and Solidarity activist, was turned back at the Warsaw airport and sent to Paris, where he had been living since just before the imposition of martial law.
In the section dealing with arbitrary interference with privacy, the Report says that it is "generally assumed" that phone calls are
87
selectively monitored. Actually it is known for a fact at least since February 1985 that calls have been monitored, when Polish TV broadcast a tape of a phone conversation between Seweryn Blumsztajn, who had just been denied entry to the country, and Jacek Kuron, one of the leading opposition members in Poland.
In the section discussing freedom of movement, the Report says that there are no restrictions on travel within Poland or on changing one's residence. The Report does not mention, however, that all Polish citizens travelling in Poland are required to register with the police in the places of their temporary stay, and that all foreign visitors who stay in Polish homes must be registered with the police.
88
