 POLAND
 Poland is a communist country in which there are an
 estimated 30,000 Soviet troops stationed. Like 1956,
 1970 and 1976; 1980 has been a year of upheaval in
 Poland. There has been a change in the leadership
 of the Polish Communist Party, officially known as
 the Polish United Worker's Party (PUWP) in response
 to strikes by workers throughout Poland. For the
 first time the worker unrest was nationwide in
 character, although as in 1978, it was concentrated
 largely in the Baltic Coast area, particularly in
 Gdansk and Szczecin. On August 31 the Polish
 government signed an agreement with the striking
 workers in Gdansk which provides for major reforms.
 Just how far those changes will go and how lasting
 they will be still remains to be seen.
 The strikes and workers' demands were brought on
 by economic pressures but they had their roots in
 a wider malaise affecting every aspect of life in
 Poland. If the reforms now under discussion in
 Poland are implemented in the months to come, the
 human rights climate in Poland would be further
 improved.
 The most significant result of the strikes of the
 summer of 1980 has been the exergenc  of a spontaneous
 movement aimed at the creation of unions which
 authentically represent the interests of their
 members. At the center of the movement is the
 independent, self-governing trade union known as
 Solidarnosc (Solidarity). Solidarity, which has
 obtained legal status, has said that it intends to
 maintain pressure on the government to implement
 fully the various provisions of the agreement,
 including the guarantee of the right to form trade
 unions, independent of state and party control,
 which have the right to strike.
 The union's program also encompasses such things
 as increased access to the media for the Catholic
 Church; reduction of censorship; freedom for
 political prisoners, more consumer goods and
 housing for the population; improved health care;
 and wage increases which will take account of the
 rising cost of living and lessen the disparity
 between the highest paid and the lowest paid
 workers.
 This report focuses on the human rights situation
 which has existed for many years in Poland. However,
 it should be read with the understanding that the
 situation is changing rapidly as a result of recent
 events and that many of the abuses cited have only
 come to light because Poland's relatively open
 society permits the existence of elements which
 report on these aspects of Polish life.
 
 
 852
 1.   Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a.   Torture
 Torture is prohibited by Articles 155-157 of the Polish
 penal code. There was one report in 1980 of torture at a local
 police (citizen's militia) station. The information
 purports to be first-hand, but cannot be confirmed.
 There have been reports that persons arrested on other
 than political charges have been beaten to obtain con-
 fessions. The extent of police beatings of people
 arrested for disorderly conduct, drunkenness and other
 petty offenses cannot be verified. Some knowledgeable
 observers claim, however, that the use of beatings is
 widespread and that no policeman is punished for the
 use of excessive force when arresting a suspect or when
 a suspect is being questioned.
 b.   Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment
 There are approximately 200,000 prisoners in Polish
 prisons as of October 1980. Almost all of these
 prisoners have been jailed on criminal rather than
 political charges. The average prisoner spends 24
 months in jail. We have received a report that in one
 prison in Warsaw for persons convicted of minor offenses,
 15 prisoners are commonly placed in a cell of 20 square
 meters. This constitutes overcrowding. The prisoners
 all work, but some work as much as seven days a week
 without rest.
 Capital punishment is not outlawed in Poland, but is used
 infrequently. One execution was reported in the Polish
 press in October 1980. As in most societies, the great
 majority of persons convicted of crimes come from the
 poorest and most poorly educated stratum of society. We
 have no evidence that prisoners' treatment is differentiated
 because of the sort of crime they were convicted of, their
 social class, race, sex or religion.
 c.   Disappearances
 There is no evidence that persons are abducted, secretly
 arrested or held in clandestine detention in Poland.
 People have been arrested and held by the police for
 questioning without being allowed to notify their
 families or to obtain legal counsel. These periods
 of detention are usually no longer than 48 hours.
 d.   Arbitrary Arrest and Imprisonment
 In Poland it is legal for the police to detain and hold
 a person for 48 hours without Dresenting any formal
 charges. This practice is widely used aqainst Political
 dissidents and members of unofficial human riqhts groups.
 One observer estimates that 900 People were nicked uo and
 held in this way during the last six months. This svstem
 is particularly common durinq periods of Political tension
 or at the time of imoortant political events such as the
 February 1980 Congress of the Polish United Workers Party
 
 
 853
 in Warsaw. Sometimes persons are detained, held 48 hours,
 released and then Picked up for another period of 48 hours.
 Habeas corpus exists in Poland and is guaranteed by the
 constitution (article 87, Paragraph 1). but the legal
 writ of the police is wide and the courts of first instance
 are generally compliant with police requests for holding a
 person.
 e.   Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Alongside the regular court system in Poland, which is
 under the jurisdiction of the Ministry of Justice, there
 is an informal court system under the Ministry of the
 Interior known as the Colleqium for Misdemeanor Affairs,
 which, in 1978 (the last year for which statistics are
 available), tried 724,000 people of whom 680,000 were
 found guilty of offenses such as vagrancy or drunkenness.
 Anyone who is not working for a state enterprise or a
 cooperative can be arrested and brought before this body
 which has the right to sentence persons for up to three
 months, usually to labor camps. The convicted person has
 three days in which to file an appeal, but in practice
 appeals are always denied.
 The right to legal counsel is guaranteed by the constitution
 (article 63, paragraph 2) and in practice is not abridged.
 One observer indicated that legal counsel was usually not
 present during the interrogation period following arrest,
 but a second observer said that he had his lawyer with him
 during questioning after his numerous arrests. The Polish
 authorities have seemed to make a distinction between persons
 arrested for political infractions (passing out leaflets,
 attending unauthorized meetings, etc.) and those arrested
 for common criminal or misdemeanor offenses. The former
 are usually more sophisticated and demand the presence of
 their lawyer, while the latter tend to receive much more
 arbitrary treatment at the hands of the police.
 The judiciary is nominally independent of executive
 control, but courts rarely intervene in cases where
 official misconduct is alleged, and decisions which
 have political importance are in effect decided by the
 government even if the formal decision is handed down
 by a court of law. Decisions may be appealed to higher
 courts, including the supreme court.
 Military courts try persons accused of security offenses.
 The military courts operate under a separate code of
 procedure from the civilian courts and the right of
 appeal is only to a military review panel, not to a
 civilian court. Military trials are held in camera
 and defendants are denied adequate legal safeguards.
 f.   invasion of the Home
 Police searches of homes are not uncommon in Poland.
 A warrant is required but is easily obtained if requested
 by the police and can be written in such broad language
 that even apparently harmless private property can be
 removed. There are no recent reports of forced entry
 to private homes, but confiscated property is not gen-
 erally returned to its owner. The monitoring of tele-
 phones is believed to be widely practiced in Poland,
 especially in the case of dissidents.
 
 
 854
 2.   Government Policies Relating to the Fulfillment of
 Such Vital Needs as Food, Shelter, Health Care and Education
 Health carb, employment and education are guaranteed
 to Polish citizens by the Polish constitution. During
 1980 the Polish economy has performed poorly. Food
 supplies are above the subsistence level although there
 are often widespread shortages of meat, butter, sugar
 and other staple commodities.
 A shortage of housing is one of Poland's main social
 problems. It is estimated that the average wait for
 an apartment is between five and ten years. This
 situation is further aggravated by the fact that housing
 is sometimes available only to a relatively small per-
 centage of the population which can pay in hard currency.
 Many consumer products in short supply are similarly
 restricted to holders of hard currency. Health care
 in Poland is free, but medicine must be purchased at
 state-run pharmacies which frequently do not have a
 supply of some of the more sophisticated drugs, many
 of which have to be imported from the West. Hospital
 facilities are inadequate and overcrowded, but the
 medical profession is staffed by well-trained physicians.
 Infant mortality, according to official statistics,
 has been declining steadily for the last ten years
 (16.1 per 1,.000 deaths before age of one year in 1970
 to 14.5 per 1,000 in 1979. Live births in 1970,
 546,000; in 1979, 688,300).
 Poland experienced a two percent negative economic
 growth rate in 1979 and is expected to have another
 year of negative growth in 1980. This is the first
 time since the end of World War II that this has
 happened. Within the context of this declining rate
 of economic growth, the Polish government has been
 faced with difficult decisions on how much of its
 available funds to invest in long-term projects and
 how much to spend on meeting urgent consumer needs.
 Following the strikes of the summer of 1980 the
 government made a commitment to redirect available
 investment capital into programs designed to meet
 the basic needs of the population for housing,
 medical care, and food. It is too early to tell
 just how successful this new policy will be, but
 the fact that it was only brought about by wide-
 spread social unrest indicates that the popular
 perception is that the state had not been meeting
 vital needs adequately.
 Private property ownership is widespread in Poland,
 especially in the agricultural sector where in 1979
 75 percent of the land was in private hands, according
 to official statistics.
 Dissatisfaction with working conditions, particularly
 in the mines and industrial plants was in large part
 responsible for the outburst of strikes in July-
 September of this year which occurred throughout
 Poland and in all branches of Polish industry. As
 a result of agreements signed between the government
 and the striking workers, Polish workers now have the
 right to form trade unions independent of government
 or party control and bargain on the conditions of
 their employment. At present, it is not clear what
 the long-term impact of this new development will be.
 The demands made by the workers included a reduction
 
 
 855
 in the work week, improved salaries and working
 conditions for health services employees, greater
 government investment in the housing construction
 industry, more equitable distribution of wage increases
 throughout Polish industry, and an end to the four-
 shift system in Polish mining which required miners
 to work seven days without a break followed-by a two-
 day rest and then another seven days of work. Another
 demand was for an end to night work for women in the
 textile industry. Women are generally paid less than
 men, but there are wide variations depending on the
 type of work involved. Low salaries and poor working
 conditions in the health services, for instance, have
 a particularly heavy impact on women, who fill a
 disproportionate share of the jobs in this sector.
 Education in Poland is universal and free, but of widely
 varying quality in various parts of the country. University
 education is more widely available than ever before.
 Admission to higher education institutions is-on the
 basis of competitive examinations, although instances of
 political favoritism are common.
 There is no evidence that discrimination based on race or
 sex is a serious problem in Poland. Political discrimina-
 tion, however, is a ubiquitous fact of life. Advancement
 to managerial positions is almost always conditioned on
 membership in the Polish United Workers Party. The Catholic
 Church has long claimed that such advancement is denied to
 its own members. Thus, in effect, the most satisfying jobs
 and those which are most remunerative go to party members,
 often to the exclusion of more highly qualified persons who
 do not belong to the party. The striking workers in Gdansk
 demanded an end to this system of reserving managerial
 jobs for party members and the government agreed to pro-
 motions based on merit. Again, it is too soon to make
 any definite statement on how this agreement will be
 implemented.
 3.   Respect for Civil and Political Liberties, Including:
 a.   Freedom of Speech, Press, Religion and Assembly
 All of the above freedoms are guaranteed in the Polish
 constitution. In practice, however, these freedoms are
 limited by administrative regulations. The press, tele-
 vision and radio in Poland, as well as imported publica-
 tions, are subject to censorship. The chief office for
 the control of press, publishing and public performances,
 through its central office in Warsaw and a network of
 local offices throughout Poland,must examine every printed
 item of general circulation, as well as radio and television
 programs and public performances of plays and motion
 pictures to ensure that they do not contain political
 content at variance with the government's official line.
 A 1977 censorship handbook gives an exhaustive listing of
 subjects that cannot be mentioned in the mass media. This
 list is updated constantly, but the practice is much the
 same today as it was three years ago. Since the strikes
 of this summer, censorship has been relaxed somewhat,
 especially in the printed media, but television is still
 largely the product of decisions by the censorship office
 rather than an expression of views held by persons who
 actually produce the programs or of journalists who gather
 the news.
 
 
 856
 Imported publications of all sorts must be passed and
 approved by the censor in order to circulate in Poland.
 Any foreign publication (in practice any western publi-
 cation) which does not have this approval can be con-
 fiscated. The same procedure applies to publications
 of an unofficial nature produced in Poland. Even so,
 more foreign publications are circulating in Poland
 than ever before, and the unofficial publishing sector
 in Poland is producing a wider range of titles than ever
 before, particularly the publishing organization, NOWA.
 In the agreement signed with strikers at the end of
 August, the government undertook to revise the censorship
 system, which is still based on a 1946 decree. A law
 on censorship is now in preparation. Whether it will
 restrict the censor activities to matters strictly
 pertaining to national security and public morality
 remains to be seen.
 Academic inquiry has been subject to political control
 since the inception of the Polish People's Republic.
 This is one area, however, in which a much healthier
 and more open atmosphere has been noted in the past
 few months. Perhaps this new attitude is best illus-
 trated by the permission given to the Towarzystwo
 Kursow Naukowych or Flying Universities to hold its
 first lecture of the current school year in a hall at
 the Warsaw University. Last year such an event would
 not have been possible. Earlier participants in these
 lecture and discussion groups were sometimes set upon
 by organized bullies and beaten, and owners of apartments
 where the courses met were taken into court for violations
 of public order. If the Flying Universities are allowed
 to operate without official harassment this will be a
 significant step toward greater intellectual freedom.
 It is also noteworthy that students and faculty are
 establishing independent organizations to represent
 their interests and the academic governing bodies have
 been promised the possibility of electing university .
 rectors free of political dictation throughout Poland.
 Freedom of assembly in Poland is conditioned on approval
 by the local authorities, who must be notified three to
 six days before a meeting or demonstration is scheduled
 to take place. In practice many requests for permission
 have been refused. Demonstrations that take place without
 prior authorization have usually not been broken up, but
 the organizers were often arrested after the demonstration
 and sentenced to fines or from one to three months imprison-
 ment for disturbing the public order. There was a sharp
 increase in the number of demonstrations in 1980.
 The right to form trade unions and the right to strike
 have been granted by the government. Prior to August
 1980 workers who tried to organize trade unions or strike
 were fired, usually under Article 52 of the labor code
 which permits firings for unauthorized absence from work.
 Collective contracts were not negotiated betwen the old,
 official unions and the management of enterprises and
 factories. In practice, wages and working conditions
 were established in negotiations between the enterprise
 management and the state ministry responsible for the
 enterprise. The workers and their representatives had
 little or nothing to say about these matters.
 Since August 31, 1980 these arrangements have been
 superseded. Subsidiary agreements following on the
 
 
 857
 government's agreement to the workers' demands for
 independent trade unions are still being worked out
 in negotiations between plant management, government
 ministries and the workers' representatives. The
 creation of the nationwide union group known as
 Solidarnosc (Solidarity) which claims a membership of
 about eight million, has completely changed the balance
 of forces between workers and management.
 Greater religious freedom has been achieved in Poland
 during the past few months, also as a result of this
 summer's strikes. Traditionally, the state has tried
 to minimize the roles of the Catholic Church in Poland's
 public life. The state was reluctant to authorize the
 construction of enough new churches. It would not allow
 the Church to have access to the mass media or to have
 any influence in the public education system, even though
 eighty or more percent of the Polish people are practicing
 Catholics. One concession won by the striking workers
 was an agreement by the government to allow the live
 broadcast of the mass on state radio every Sunday morning.
 The agreement has been implemented. The government also
 agreed to reestablish the mixed Church-State Commission
 on Religious Affairs. This Committee met in September
 and again in November. Poland's small Protestant sects
 are allowed to operate without any major governmeht
 obstruction. The small Jewish minority, bolstered by
 the presence       of a rabbi, manages to maintain its
 traditions. The government has permitted emigration to
 Israel, the Warsaw Synagogue has been renovated and
 action has been promised to restore Jewish cemeteries
 in Poland.
 b.   Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration and Repatriation
 Poland does not prevent the return of Polish citizens who
 are temporarily abroad. In fact it encourages its citizens
 to retain Polish citizenship even after they have been
 abroad for several years. The government allows Polish
 citizens to travel abroad only with authorization of the
 Polish authorities. Also, it frequently has refused
 passports to dissidents who wish to travel abroad.
 Polish citizens are free to move within Poland without.
 prior authorization.
 A considerable number of Polish citizens who come to
 the U.S. as visitors--perhaps'several thousand--apply
 to remain in the U.S. under refugee status every year.
 Usually the families of persons who are granted refugee
 status in the U.S. are not allowed to leave Poland.
 Poland recently has granted exit permission to some 600
 individuals who are members of divided families. This is
 a significant number and is a considerable advance over
 previous Polish government efforts in solving the divided-
 families problem. Poland has allowed several hundred
 thousand ethnic Germans to leave Poland over the last
 ten years to join their families in West Germany.
 Poland is quite liberal in the issuance of passports
 for tourist travel. Over 30,000 Poles traveled  to the
 United States during the last twelve months and several
 hundred thousand visited Western European countries.
 
 
 858
 There is no evidence to indicate that women are treated
 any differently from men in the matter of granting per-
 mission to travel outside the country.
 c.   Freedom to Participate in Political Process
 The constitution of the Polish People's Republic allows
 for only one true political party, the Communist Party
 which is officially known as the Polish United Workers
 Party. The PUWP governs with the assistance of the
 Democratic Party and the United Peasant's Party in what
 is known as the Front for National Unity. The officially-
 sponsored Catholic group PAX and the Church-sponsored ZNAK
 group enjoy representation in the Polish Sejm (Parliament),
 but both groups operate within limits set by the PUWP
 although since August 1980 there has been a considerably
 greater diversity of views expressed in the Sejm, even by
 Party members.
 Unofficial opposition political and human rights groups
 such as the Committee for Social Self-Defense (KSS/KOR),
 Movement for the Defense of Human Rights and the Citizen
 (ROPCIOI and the Confederation of Independent Poland (KPN),
 are active in Poland and are the target of a concerted
 campaign by the government against "anti-socialist" forces.
 The KPN leader (Moczulski) was arrested in late September
 and remains in jail. The first of these groups, KSS/KOR,
 is by far the most active and important. Its publications
 such as Robotnik and Biuletyn Informacyjny are circulated
 in large n-ubers. Roo-iTns the largest opposition
 publication and is purported to have a month's circulation
 of 40-50,000 copies. These publications are frequently
 confiscated and persons in possession of them can be fined
 or imprisoned for violation of the censorship regulations.
 4.   Government Attitude and Record Regarding International
 and Non-governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 Poland is a signatory of the Final Act of the Helsinki
 Accords of August 1975; thus it is represented at all
 review meetings of the Conference on Security and Coop-
 eration in Europe (CSCE). It is also a member of the
 UN Human Rights Commission and ratified the UN Covenant
 on Civil and Political Rights in 1977. Poland does not
 recognize officially the right of non-governmental human
 rights groups to report on the situation in Poland, but
 it has permitted representatives from Amnesty Interna-
 tional to visit Poland on an unofficial basis within the
 last year.
 All of the opposition groups listed in Section 3 above
 monitor the human rights situation in Poland. Amnesty
 International is represented in Poland by a member of
 the ROPCIO Group. KSS/KOR and ROPCIO recently have
 prepared extensive reports on the human rights situation
 in Poland intended to be conveyed to the governments of
 those countries which signed the Helsinki Final Act for
 consideration at the Madrid CSCE review meeting. Persons
 who prepare such reports are under constant police sur-
 veillance and their homes are subject to frequent police
 searches. They can expect to be questioned by the police
 at regular intervals about their activities, and detained
 periodically.
 
 
 859
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRYI POLAND
 1978     1979      1980
 -----       ------------------------------------------------
 I.ECON. ASSIST-TOTAL...          0.0       0.0      0.0
 LOANS...........0. 0.0               0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .........             0.0       0.0      0.0
 A.AID .      ..   ....          0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANSo....     o sO......00           0.0      0.0
 GRANTS     T.. o..,.o     0.0       0.0      0.0
 (SEC*SUPPASSISTs)..          0.0      0.0       0.0
 B.FOOD FOR'PEACEEo....          0.0       0.0      0.0
 LOANS...............         0.0       0.0      0.0
 GRANTS............          0.0       0.0      0.0
 TITLE I-TOTAL....                0.0       0.0      0.0
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS.....          0.0       0.0      0.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR.....          0.0       0.0      0.0
 TITLE IITOTALT.......           0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.RELIEF.EC.DEV & wFP.          0.0       0.0      0.0
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY.....          0.0       0.0      0.0
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST...          0.0       0.0      0.0
 LOANS............ o0.0                0.0      0.0
 GRANTS..o.S......           0.0       0.0      0.0
 CONTR. TO IFI...*          00       0.0      0.0
 PEACE CORPS   .           0.0       0.0      0.0
 OTHER............       0.00        0.0      0.0
 II.MIL. AgSIST.-TOTAL...          0.0       0.0      0.0
 LOANS...........          0.0       0.0      0.0
 GRANTS...........s.          0.0       0.0      0.0
 A.MAP GRANTS*........          0.0       0.0      0.0
 8.CREDIT SALES-FMS....          0.0       0.0      0.0
 C.INTL MIL.ED.TRNO....          0.0       0.0      0.0
 D.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK...          0.0       0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS........ .0                0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. & IL**,          0.0      OO       0.0
 LOANS...........             0.0       0.0      0.0
 GRANTS.............          0.0       0.0      0.0
 OTHER US LOANS....o.....        522.0     391.7    212.0
 EX-IM BANK LOANS.S....          17.3       6.2     31.6
 ALL OTHER..R.......          504.7     385.5    180.4
 -----       ------------------------------------------------
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1978     1979      1980     1946-S0
 ----------------------------------------------------
 TOTAL....o...       2.2      1.7       0.0     20.7
 IBRD                0.0      0.0      0.0       0.0
 IFC                 0.0      00       0.0      0.0
 IDA                 0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 10B                 0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 ADB                 0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 AFDB                0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 UNDP                2.2      1.7       0.0     10.3
 OTHER-UN            0.0      0.0       0.0      2.4
 EEC                 0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 
 
 860
