 POLAND
 Poland has moved from a Communist state to a multiparty democracy with a live.
 ly, independent Parliament and a vigorous free press, and it continues to consolidate
 dmocratic institutions and processes. The minority coalition government of Jan
 Olszewski that was formed after the free and democratic elections of October 1991
 resigned after a vote of no confidence in the Sejm (lower house) in June. Five weeks
 later, a new minority Government under Prime Minister Hanna Suchocka was voted
 into office.
 In November President Lech Walesa signed into law the so-called Little Constitu-
 tion intended as a transition document while work continues on a "large" (perma-
 nent) constitution to replace the much-amended Communist-era Constitution of
 1952. The Little Constitution clarifies, among other things, the division of powers
 among the President, the Prime Minister, and Parliament. The President also sent
 to Par iament a propsed bill of rights, outlining fundamental civil rights and free-
 doms and intended for incorporation into the future large constitution. The Sejm
 (lower house) continued debate on a new electoral law embodying proportional rep-
 resentation with a qualifying threshold of 5 percent.
 Efforts to restructure the Office of State Security (responsible for intelligence and
 counterintelligence) within the Ministry of Internal Affairs were complicated when
 the Olszewski government sent to Parliament a list of alleged secret police collabo-
 rators. The resulting storm of protest led to a vote of no confidence in the govern-
 ment and the replacement of both the Minister of Internal Affairs and the Minister
 of Defense. Regular police forces, meanwhile, improved their operations and reduced
 the incidence of brutality towards persons in custody. Total military expenditures
 for 1989, the last year for which the U.S. Arms Control and Disarmament Agency
 conducted a detailed analysis, were nearly $15.5 billion. Future expenditures can be
 expected to decrease as the Government continues to reduce its military force levels.
 Continuing the transformation from a centrally planned to a market economy, Po-
 land in 1992 kept its economic reform program on course. Although the Government
 made little headway in privatizing large state-owned enterprises, the share of the
 rivate sector in the national economy continued to grow. A larger than planned
 budget deficit, unemployment at about 14 percent, and rising prices associated in
 the public mind with reform efforts lessened public support for reform and contrib-
 utedto a series of industrial strikes during the summer and fall, to which the Gov-
 ernment responded firmly without major concessions.
 In the area of human rights legislation, Parliament passed a broadcast law on De-
 cember 29 and continued to work on a new labor law and penal code to strengthen
 the legal framework for human rights and to reconcile laws passed during the Com-
 munist period with democratic practices. The typical human rights violations that
 characterized the former Communist rule were an exception in 1992. However, al-
 most all broadcast media were still under government control, and for the first time
 since the overthrow of communism, a citizen was convicted of insulting the Presi-
 dent. Polish society continued to grapple with issues of social, gender, and ethnic
 intolerance.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no reports of killings for
 political motives by the Government or by domestic political groups.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of abductions, secret arrests, or clandes-
 tine detention by police or other official security forces.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel,nlnhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 There were no reported allegations of torture.
 By all accounts, incidents of police brutality declined from 1991. Human rights
 monitors, however, continued to report a number of beatings of persons in police
 custody not yet charged with a crime. The Commissioner for Civil Rights Protection
 (Ombudsman) continued to receive such allegations regularly. Most of these allega-
 tions charged the police with excessive use of force at the time of arrest.
 According to the Ombudsman, local prosecutors, to whom the allegations are for-
 warded, often conduct incomplete investigations, are biased in favor of the police,
 and rarely find the police responsible for excessive use of force. Apart from the pros-
 ecutor's office, no other institution is responsible for investigating complaints of po-
 lice brutality. The Senate Office of Intervention, which started an informal inves-
 tigation in September 1991, found few cases of alleged police brutality and did not
 think the problem warranted a full investigative report.
 
 
 864
 According to civil rights monitors, overall prison conditions improved in 1992.
 Most observers attribute this improvement to a decision by the Ministry of Justice
 allowing greater access to prisons by human rights monitoring institutions-such as
 the Ombudsman and the Helsinki Committee. There are still some deficiencies,
 .however, and a few prisons lack minimally acceptable standards.
 While overall conditions in adult prisons improved, several independent investiga-
 tions, including those conducted by the Helsinki Committee and the Senate Office
 of Intervention, confirmed widespread accounts that conditions in juvenile reform-
 atories were worse than those in adult prisons. In some reformatories, authorities
 often overused solitary confinement as a means of punishment, and guards beat ju-
 venile inmates regularly. Many detention centers were unsanitary, and no program
 to correct these deficiencies has been set up.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-There were very few reported instances
 of arbitrary arrest or detention. Reform of the judicial system, begun in 1990, has
 done much to eliminate serious violations of due process. The Sejm Justice and Leg-
 islative Committees continued to work on a new criminal code at year's end.
 Polish law allows for a 48-hour detention period before authorities are required
 to bring formal charges. Detainees are usually denied access to a lawyer during this
 period. Once a prosecutor presents the legal basis for a formal investigation, the law
 guarantees the detainee access to a lawyer. A detainee may be held under "tem-
 porary" arrest for up to 3 months and may challenge the legality of his arrest
 through appeal to the district court. A court of law may extend this pretrial confine-
 ment every 3 months until the trial date. Human rights groups state that in 1992
 detainees waited on average between 6 and 12 months before trial. In rare cases,
 the confinement period lasted over 2 years. As a rule, judges do not allow bail be-
 cause they suspect that the accused may cause further harm to society, thwart col-
 lection of evidence, or otherwise hinder full investigation of the case.
 There is no exile.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-Poland has a three-tiered court system, consisting
 of regional and provincial courts, and a Supreme Court that is divided into five divi-
 sions-military, civil, criminal, labor, and family. Judges are nominated by the Na-
 tional Judicial Council and appointed by the President for life.
 All defendants are presumed innocent until proven guilty. Once formal charges
 are filed, the defendant is allowed to study the charges and consult with an attor-
 ney, who is provided at public expense if necessary, before a trial date is set. De-
 fendants must be present during trial and may present evidence and confront wit-
 nesses in their own defense. Most cases are tried in open court. The court, however,
 retains the rarely used option of closing a trial to the public in some circumstances,
 such as divorce cases, trials in which state secrets may be disclosed, or to protect
 public morality.
 At the end of a trial, the court renders its decision orally. The court then has 7
 days to prepare a written decision. A defendant has the right to appeal within 14
 days of the written decision. Appeals may be made, among other grounds, on the
 basis of new evidence or procedural irregularities. In regional and provincial courts,
 a panel consisting of a professional judge and two lay assessors tries criminal cases.
 The seriousness of the offense determines which court will try the case.
 In May the Scjm passed a resolution requiring the Interior Minister to make
 available a list of high-ranking Polish officials who, between 1945 and 1990, served
 as agents of the Communist security forces, but it provided no means of redress for
 those who believed they were wrongly accused. On June 4, on the basis of this reso-
 lution, the Ministry of the Interior sent to parliamentary clubs (groups of deputies
 from the same party or from like-minded parties) lists of alleged secret police col-
 laborators. Protests over the lists precipitated a vote of no confidence in the govern-
 ment. Following the Olszewski government's dismissal, Parliament took no further
 action on the release of the lists. In late 1992, a Sejm committee continued work
 on reconciling several bills dealing with the fate of former Communists and secret
 police collaborators in public life.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-Polish
 law forbids arbitrary forced entry into homes. Search warrants issued by a prosecu-
 tor are required in order to enter private residences. In emergency cases when a
 prosecutor is not immediately available, police may enter a residence with the ap-
 proval of the local police commander. In the most urgent cases in which there is
 not time to consult with the police commander, police may enter a private residence
 after showing their official identification. Polish police rarely abused search warrant
 procedures in 1992. The Government does not arbitrarily monitor private mail or
 telephones.
 
 
 865
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-These freedoms are provided for in the Con-
 stitution and exist in practice.
 Polish citizens express their opinions freely both in public and privately. Under
 the current Penal Code, however, persons who insult a state body may be sentenced
 to up to 2 years in prison. In August a district court handed a 3-year suspended
 sentence to a person for insulting President Walesa. The insults involved common
 vulgarities. Similarly, in October another district court gave a 2-year suspended sen-
 tence to former newspaper editor for publishing an offensive remark about the Soli-
 darity Trade Union. Critics of these decisions pointed out that they set a dangerous
 precedent, reflected unequal application of the law, and were subtle forms of censor-
 i nt media in Poland are independent, uncensored, and politically diverse. The
 Government owns a controlling interest (51 percent) in one major newspaper. No
 barriers exist to the establishment of private newspapers other than readership de-
 mand and capital.
 Broadcast media are not yet fully developed and are still mainly under the control
 of the Government, which owns and operates the two national television channels,
 eight local television stations, and two television studios. The eight regional stations
 broadcast as little as half an hour daily (as in Poznan) or as much as 7 hours daily
 (as in Katowice). The Government also operates 5 national radio channels and 16
 regional stations.
 There was debate about the Government's role in broadcast media and the appro-
 priate level of offical control, including in the appointment of key personnel. In
 March the Olszewski government, frustrated with what it perceived to be biased re-
 porting, replaced the head of the Polish Television Information Agency (TAI), which
 produces all six Polish daily news broadcasts. The new head of TAI, in turn, made
 personnel changes aimed at combating the alleged antigovernment bias of television
 news and removing "former Communists." The conflict between the Government and
 the press diminished after the TAI head himself was fired by the head of Polish
 Radio and Television and after Olszewski's government fell in early June. While
 also expressing dissatisfaction with news coverage, the Suchocka Government avoid-
 ed conflict with the news media.
 In December the Sejm passed a broadcast law and sent it to the President for sig-
 nature. The law provides a mechanism for the issuance of broadcast licenses and
 would end the State's official monopoly on broadcasting. In June 1991, Parliament
 removed the power to grant broadcasting licenses from the Ministry of Tele-
 communications but did not transfer it anywhere else. In the resulting egal vacu-
 um, several new private television stations began broadcasting in major cities. In
 addition, over 30 private radio stations were on the air in late 1992. Many of these
 took to the airwaves without official sanction. Unlicensed broadcasters have been or-
 dered to shut down until they obtain licenses. However, it is unclear how the Gov-
 ernment can execute these orders.
 The growing number of radio and television stations, those officially sanctioned
 and those not, expose the public to diverse political and social commentary. Radio
 Free Europe also broadcasts directly from Warsaw on medium wave. Some political
 figures believe the lack of government control will lead to chaos, while others want
 public television to be a tool to address societal problems. The broadcast law re-
 quires public radio and television to "respect the religous feelings of the audience
 and in particular honor the Christian system of values.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-Poles enjoy the freedom to join
 together formally and informally to promote nonviolent causes and protest govern-
 ment policies. Permits are not .reuired for public meetings, but organizers must ob-
 tain permits from local authorities, which issue them routinely. For large dem-
 onstrations, organizers are also required to inform the local police of their planned
 activities. The  authorities  do  not interfere  with  otherwise  peace  u  and
 nondisruptive demonstrations even if permits have not been sought. With govern-
 ment approval, private assdciations are permitted to organize. Such approval is al-
 most always granted and is not withheld for political or other arbitrary reasons.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for freedom of conscience and
 belief, and citizens enjoy the freedom to practice any religion. Poland is overwhelm-
 ingly Roman Catholic. Religious groups may organize, select, and train personnel,
 solicit and receive contributions, publish periodicals, and engage in consultations
 with coreligionists without government interference. There are no government re-
 strictions on establishing and maintaining places of worship.
 The Government does not interfere with the practice of minority religions. East-
 ern Orthodox, Ukrainian Catholic, and much smaller Protestant, Jewish, and Mus-
 lim congregations meet freely. Minority religions occasionally report that workers of
 
 
 their faith are more likely than Catholics to be dismissed from failing enterprises.
 Ukrainian Catholics also consider as religious discrimination refusal by local gov-
 ernment officials to return churches and other property that used to belong to the
 Ukrainian Catholics prior to expropriation by Communist authorities.
 A Ministry of Education directive in April required students or their parents to
 choose between a course in religion or one in ethics or neither, and instructed that
 a grade for the course be indicated in student transcripts. Previously, a combined
 religion and ethics course was compulsory. The Ministry of Education ruling also
 permits the payment of religion teachers from public funds, the placement of reli-
 gious symbols in classrooms, and the saying of prayers before and after classes. The
 Commissioner for Human Rights Protection in August requested the Constitutional
 Tribunal to review this decision on the grounds that it violates the freedom and ano-
 nymity of religious beliefs.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-Polish citizens and legal permanent residents are no longer required to
 register with the police each time they change their place of residence. Polish citi-
 zens are able to obtain passports for worldwide travel.
 Poland's approach to migration issues is framed by its desire to strengthen ties
 to the European Community (EC) and adopt migration policies consistent with those
 of the EC. Poland has placed more emphasis on stopping illegal transit into neigh-
 boring countries, particularly Germany, and has signed readmission agreements
 with the Schengen Group of European countries, whereby Poland agrees to accept
 the return of Polish citizens who do not possess proper travel documents or who are
 residing abroad illegally. Similarly, in September 1991, Poland signed the 1951 Ge-
 neva Convention on refugees, taking on the legal responsibility to process refugees.
 In 1992 Poland often served as a way station to Western Europe and Scandinavia
 for a number of economic migrants and illegal immigrants from the east and south.
 Beginning in May, refugees from the former Yugoslavia began to arrive in Poland
 in significant numbers. Border guards permitted entry to persons with valid pass-
 ports and enough money for transit.
 Most would-be refugees want to settle farther west; they fear that if they make
 formal application in Poland, their cases will not be considered by other refugee of-
 fices. In 1992 fewer than 50 people applied for asylum status in Poland, compared
 with 2,236 applications in 1991.
 Poland has abandoned visa requirements for almost all countries in Europe, in-
 cluding its East European neighbors and the countries of the former Soviet Union.
 Visitors from the former Soviet Union are required to obtain an invitation from a
 permanent resident of Poland to be presented at the border. Because of the lare
 number of Romanians identified at Poland's borders as seeking to enter illegally, the
 Government requires Romanians to show enough money for a minimum 5-day visit,
 i.e., $100. All visitors and temporary workers have the rijght to stay for up to 90
 days and may apply for extensions to the Ministry of Interior. Polish law empowers
 the Ministry of Interior to intern and deport foreigners for violation of immigration
 status.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Poland is a multiparty democracy in which all citizens 18 years of age and older
 have the right to vote. In October 1991, the Polish people freely elected 460 mem-
 bers to the Sejm (lower house of Parliament) and 100 Senators. The new Parliament
 included representatives of 29 political parties and formations.The government
 headed by Prime Minister Olszewski after those elections was dismissed-the follow-
 ing June by a vote of no confidence in the Sejm. In July the Sejm voted in a new
 coalition sovernment led by Prime Minister Hanna Suchocka, the first female Prime
 Minister in Polish history.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 The Ombudsman was established by law in 1987 as an independent body with
 broad authority to investigate alleged infringement of civic rights or liberties. In
 1992 the Ombudsman aggressively investigated public grievances and brought sev-
 eral executive or legislative actions and decrees that allegedly violated human rights
 before the Constitutional Tribunal, which determines the constitutionality of laws
 and administrative regulations. In some cases the intercession of the Ombudsman
 alone was enough to effect resolution. According to the Ombudsman, the Govern-
 ment has cooperated with the Commissioner's Ofice.
 Two other major institutions, the Helsinki Committee and the Senate Office of
 Intervention. created in 1989. investigate a wide range of grievances and are con-
 
 
 867
 mitted to political objectivity. Both groups conducted human rights investigations
 without government interference. Leading members of these organizations report
 that the Government harbors a positive and helpful attitude towards human rights
 investigations.
 There are no restrictions on visits by international organizations for human rights
 purposes.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Language, or Social Status
 Discrimination against ethnic and religious minorities and against women is pro-
 hibited by law; however, a degree of social prejudice against members of national
 minorities exists.
 In 1992 the Government made efforts to improve conditions for ethnic minorities
 living in Poland. Bilateral treaties with Germany and Belarus included sections
 F aranteeing the right of national minorities to cultivate their national identities.
 Currently there are no restrictions on Polish citizens from non-Polish ethnic groups
 holding office. At present the German minority is represented by seven Members
 of Pariament who have formed a German caucus.
 The German minority, especially in southern Poland, achieved several cultural
 goals in 1992. About 30 percent of primary and secondary schools in Opole province
 offer some instruction in the German language. The number of churches conducting
 Mass in German has risen from 8 in 1990 to over 100 in 1992. German minorities
 are well represented in local politics; they publish local newspapers and broadcast
 on radio.
 Prejudice against Germans resulted in several instances of violence. Four Polish-
 Americans were attacked by a group of Poles in a mountain resort, apparently be-
 cause the Polish-Americans had a rental car with German license plates; the
 attackers accompanied their assaults with shouts of "German swine." Two police-
 men who witnessed the incident reportedly failed to intervene actively. In October
 "skinheads" in Krakow attacked three German truckdrivers with clubs, baseball
 bats, and knives, killing one of them. Police reaction was swift and vigorous; by the
 next morning, they had apprehended all the attackers. Skinheads a lso committed
 several attacks on Arab students.
 Several Ukrainian schools and Ukrainian newspapers opened in 1992. Some
 Ukrainian communities complained, however, that local authorities did not provide
 sufficient levels of support. Other ethnic minorities-Lithuanians and Belarusians--
 experienced some local discrimination.
 Romanians (predominantly Gypsies) continued to cross Poland's borders in large
 numbers. While physical attacks against Gypsies were isolated, Gypsies continued
 to be discriminated against. In September and October, the Polish National Front,
 a small radical "skinhead" organization, hung placards in several Polish cities call-
 ing on Poles to expel Gypsies from Poland. AIso in October, a group of Polish youths
 threw stones at Gypsy homes and set fire to nearby bushes. These incidents pre-
 ceded the court's verdict on the 1991 anti-Gypsy riots in Mlawa. In late October,
 a Warsaw court handed prison terms of between 6 months and 2Y2 years to 17 of
 the several hundred participants in the Mlawa riots in which many Gypsy homes
 and cars were plundered or demolished. Ten of the sentences were suspended.
 Some observers noted a rising trend of intolerance toward some social groups,
 such as the victims of the acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS). Attempts
 in July to establish a U.S. Government-supported center in the Warsaw suburb of
 Laski for children infected with the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) had to be
 abandoned because of the local community's violent protests, including the stoning
 and setting on fire of the houses at the site. Local police began an investigation,
 but no findings were reported and no arrests made by year's end.
 Polish law guarantees equal rights for women. The Constitution provides for equal
 rights, regardless of sex, and gives women equal rights with men in all fields of pub-
 lic, political, economic, social, and cultural life, including equal remuneration for
 equal work. Despite these legal guarantees, women continue to be discriminated
 against in the workplace. Aecording to the Ombudsman, the laws do not adequately
 address equality in hiring practices. Although women work in a broad variety of
 professions and occupations, advertisements often continue to designate jobs by gen-
 der as well as by age. Firms sometimes hire men even when a woman is more quali-
 fied.
 Some of the hardships caused by the transition to a market economy fall dis-
 proportionately on women who are more likely than men to be laid off. In some
 cases, laws ostensibly designed to "protect" women are sometimes used to discrimi-
 nate against them, as in the case of occupations barred to women for safety or
 health reasons or when women are required to retire earlier than men. Although
 the Constitutional Tribunal eliminated the latter provision in the case of women
 
 
 868
 university professors in September 1990, women are sometimes forced into earlier
 retirement in many other professions.
 Scattered anti-Semitic incidents continued in 1992. The neo-Fascist Polish Na-
 tional Community, a small but vocal group with approximately 4,000 members, was
 responsible for many of them. In February and in April, the Polish National Com-
 munity held demonstrations during which they chanted anti-Semitic slogans and
 burned the Israeli flag. The group's leader, Boleslaw Tejkowski, was brought to trial
 in March for defaming the Government, the Catholic Church, and Jews. The court
 ordered that Tejkowski be detained in July after he refused to undergo psychiatric
 tests to determine fitness to stand trial. Tejkowski, who went into hiding in April,
 is currently being sought by the police.
 Polish officials and political leaders strongly condemned anti-Semitic incidents. In
 one concrete step, the newly established, government-sponsored "Remembrance
 Foundation" is acting as a partner to the U.S. Commission for the Preservation of
 America's Heritage Abroad, which is negotiating an agreement with the Govern-
 ment on preserving Jewish cultural monuments in Poland.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-All workers, including the police and frontier guards,
 have the right to establish and to join trade unions of their own choosing. In turn,
 unions have the right to join labor federations and confederations, which have the
 right to affiliate with international labor organizations. Within the context of the
 November 1992 negotiations on the so-called Pact on State Enterprises (which
 would directly involve workers in the process of restructuring state firms), the Gov-
 ernment, employers, and trade unions will recommend changes to the 1991 laws
 concerning trade union rights and collective bargaining.
 According to the law that was in effect throughout 1992, as few as 10 persons may
 form a trade union, and a founding committee of 3 persons must register the union
 in the appropriate provincial court. A court decision to refuse registration is subject
 to appeal to an appeals court. Interbranch national unions and national interbranch
 federations must register with the provincial court in Warsaw. As of September
 1992, 4 national interbranch federations were registered along with some 11 other
 major independent industrial branch unions and 3 agricultural unions. Three new
 unions were registered in 1992: the Alliance of Mining Supervisors "Kadra," the
 farmers' trade union "Samoobrona," and the Confederation or Independent Poland
 (KPN) trade union "Kontra."
 The Independent Self-Governing Trade Union (NSZZ) Solidarity is a national fed-
 eration affiliated with the International Confederation of Free Trade Unions and the
 World Confederation of Labor. Solidarity has a membership of 2.2 million, with
 roughly 81 percent paying dues. The National Alliance of Trade Unions (OPZZ), the
 Communist-origin trade union federation registered in 1983 as the sole legal alter-
 native to the then repressed NSZZ Solidarity, is affiliated with the Communist-
 dominated World Federation of Trade Unions (WFTU). It claims a membership of
 4.7 million, but that figure is widely regarded as exaggerated. The OPZZ does not
 collect dues, and the Government ii 1992 had yet to institute a process by which
 a union's claim to representation can be verified. The other federations are the
 Christian Trade Union Solidarity, a small spin-off from mainstream Solidarity reg-
 istered in January 1992, with some 24,000 members, and Solidarity '80, the militant
 rival of mainstream Solidarity, with about 200,000 members. There are several
 other independent industrial branch unions.
 All these union organizations operate independently of state control, and most do
 not have organic links to political parties. The OPZZ, in alliance with the post-Com-
 munist Social Democrats of the Republic of Poland (SDRP), ran candidates in the
 1991 elections under the banner of the Democratic Left Alliance (SLD). Several
 OPZZ leaders, including its chairperson Ewa Spychalska, are members of the SLD
 parliamentary club. Organized labor, despite its divisions, is recognized as a major
 actor on the national economic and political scene.
 The Trade Union Act of 1991, although less restrictive than its predecessor, pre-
 scribes a lengthy process before a strike may be legally launched. During this pe-
 riod, the law, when strictly adhered to, provides several opportunities for employers
 to challenge a pending strike--including the threat of legal action. An employer-
 the Act makes no distinction between state-owned and private firms-must start ne-
 gotiations the moment a dispute begins. Negotiations end with either an agreement
 or a protocol describing the differences between the parties. If negotiations fail, a
 mandatory mediation process ensues; the mediator is appointed jointly by the dis-
 puting parties or, lacking agreement between them, by the Minister of Labor and
 SocialPolicv. If mediation fails, the trade union may launch a warning strike for
 
 
 869
 a period of up to 2 hours or seek arbitration of the dispute. Both employers and
 employees have frequently questioned the impartiality of the mediators.
 A full-fledged strike may not be launched until 14 days after the Ministry of
 Labor and Social Policy has been informed that a dispute exists. Strikes are prohib-
 ited entirely in certain public services, namely the Ofice of State Protection, units
 of the police, firefighters, military forces, prison services, and frontier guards. A
 strike may be called by the trade union a    pproval by the majority of voting
 workers and should be announced at least 5 days beforehand. If the strike is orga-
 nized in accordance with the Act, the workers retain a right to social insurance ben-
 efits but not to wages. If a strike is "organized contrary to the prvisions of the law,"
 the workers may lose social insurance benefits; organizers are liable for damages
 and civil penalties.
 The Government anticipated that the Trade Union Act would discourage labor
 disputes, but the emphasis on discouraging disputes rather than establishing a proc-
 ess aimed at resolving them contribute to a worsening of tensions on the shop floor
 in 1992. Labor disputes were common throughout 1992; a wave of strikes in several
 of Poland's largest industrial enterprises constituted a major challenge to the young
 government of Prme Ministel Hanna Suchcka.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Coectively-The May 1991 law on trade
 unions and collective bargaining provides legal sanctions for antiunion discrimina-
 tion and generally creates a more favorable environment for trade union activity by
 providing union officials with time off with pay, as well as facilities and technical
 equipment in the enterprise. A notable weakness in the law, given Poland's ongoing
 economic transition, is the lack of specific prvisions to ensure that the union has
 continued rights of representation when a state firm changes ownershi through
 privatization, bankruptcy, or sale. Slidarity is particularly concerned thaat many
 joint ventures are ignoring Polish labor law. The P act on State Enterprises, initialed
 by several of the major trade unions in late 1992, is designed to addrss this weak-
 ness bt codifying labor's involvement in the process of enterprise restructuring and
 privatdat  resion.
 The unions, management and workers' councils set wages in ad hoc negotiations
 at the enterprise level. Collective baraining as such does not exist. Since 1988,
 agreements no longer are legally required to be registered with the Government,
 and formal sectorwide collective agreements were reached only in the hard coal, sft
 coal, and transportation sectors. In the two coal mining sectors, those agreements
 were ignored and superseded by agreements reached after enterprise-level strikes
 that rippled through those industries in July and August.
 Throughout 1992, the Government continued to try indirectly to hold down wages
 in state enterprises through a penalty tax (popiwek) in an effort to link wages to
 increases in productivity and reduce inflationary pressures in the state industrial
 sector. The tax is levied on any state co pany that increases its average wage in
 excess of a government-set "inflation coefficient. The enforcement of the popiwek
 tax on excessive wage growth effeictively discouraged enterpriscor sectoral-level col-
 lective bargaining on wages. A law passed in September exempted firms that export
 at least 30 percent of their production.
 Special duty-free zones exist in or have been contemplated for some 15 locations
 throughout Poland but, with the exception of one zone in Poznan, have not so far
 attracted much attention. Collective bargaining does not exist in these zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-Forced and compulsory labor are
 prohibited by law and do not exist.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The Labor Code forbids the em-
 ployment of persons under the age of 15. The employment of persons aged 15 to 18
 is permitted only if that person h as completed basic schooling and if the proposed
 employment is a form of apprenticeship or vocational training. The age floor is
 raised to 18 if a particular job might entail health hazards. The Government en-
 forces the legal protection of minors but is unable to monitor the growing private
 sector effectively.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-Minimum wagesi levels, which the Ministry of
 Labor and Social Policy negotiates every 3 months with the trade unions, do not
 provide a worker and his family a decent standard of living. The standard legal
 workweek is 48 hours, but in practice most Poles work 40 hours a week most of
 the year.
 The Labor Code defines minimum conditions for the protection of workers' health
 and safety; a new draft of that Code, approved by Parliament, took effect in 1992.
 Enforcement is a growing problem because an ever-increasing share of Polish eco-
 nomic activity is in private hands and outside the purview of the State Labor
 Inspectorate, whose staff of 800 instors are only responsible for monitoring state
 firms. In addition, it is not clear which government or legislative body has the re-
 
 
 870
 sponsibility for enforcing the law in the private sector. Meanwhile, work conditions
 in Poland are poor, standards for exposure to chemicals, dust, and noise are rou-
 tinely exceeded. There were about 116,000 serious work-related accidents in 1991,
 involving 781 deaths and 4 925 cases of dismemberment, or, in other words, more
 accidents but fewer deaths tian in 1990.
