 POLAND
 Five years after the fall of Communism, Poland is a parliamentar democracy
 based on a multiparty political system and free and fair elections. Te popularly
 elected President (Lech Walesa) shares power with the Prime Minister, the Council
 of Ministers, and the bicameral Parliament.
 The Government, cmposed of a coalition of the Democratic Left Aiance (SLD),
 a successor to the former Communist party, and the Polish Peasant Party, a succes-
 sor to the United Peasants Party fellow travelers of the Communist era, enjoyed a
 comfortable majority in both houses of Parliament. Prime Minister Waldemar
 Pawlak of the Peasant Party heads the Government.
 The Polish armed forces and the internal security apparatus are subject to gov-
 ernmental authoritya a are under civilian ontrol The precise division of authority
 over the military between the President and Prime Minister continued to be the
 subject of debate in 1994 and will probably be addressed as part of the new constitu-
 tion being drafted by Parliament.
 In 1994 Poland's fledgling market economy registered moderate growth (4.5 per-
 cent), and its level of exports increased significantly. While unempioyment has de-
 clined compared to previous years, it still stands at 16 percent, caused in part by
 the restructuring or closing of largo state enterprises. Unemployment has dispropor-
 tionately affected women and younger and semiskilled workers and brought dis-
 content among Poles who believe that the rapid transition to a market economy has
 lefot themswrs, o thebicameral Paan before.
 The National Assembly (the Sejm and the Senate jointly) formed a constitution-
 drafting committee, which began its work during 1994. In May the Parliament ap-
 proved and the President signed a bill permitting citizens to submit drafts for a con-
 stitution for consideration. The Solidarity Union submitted such a draft in Septem-
 ber, successfully meeting the law's requirement for 500,000 petition signatures. The
 National Assembly formally began consideration of that draft and others submitted
 by the President, the Senate, and five political parties in September. There is no
 legal deadline for completion of work on the new constitution, but the chairman of
 the drafting committee proposed completing work in early 1995 and submitting a
 draft to a national referenduim in the spring of 1995.
 In April the Sejm ratified two human rights pomtecols acompanyingthe European
 Convention for the Protection of Huma Rights and Fundamental Fredoms. One
 of the protocols calls for respect for property rights, including movable goods, real
 estate, intellectual property, and securities. The other states that parents have the
 right to bring up their children in compliance with their own religious and philo-
 sophical beliefs.
 Some infringements on the rights of free speech and assembly continued in 1994.
 Eoth the parliamentary opposition and media organizations vigorously opposed a
 drafct law in Parlament that ththey saw as tending to revive censorship and incor-
 porating too broad an interpretation of those official secrets requiring protection.
 The lack of opportunity for women in the labor market remains a fact of life, despite
 some signs of improvement in recent years.
 
 
 912
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extnajudicial Killing.-There were no reports of politically
 motivated killings. The trial of the two Communist-era high-ranking secret police
 officers Wladislaw Ciaston and Zenon Platek, charged with orde     the 1984 mur-
 der of Father Jerzy Popieluszko, ended in acquittal for lack of evidence. Grzegorz
 Piotrowski, a former Polish securty police captain jailed for the murder of
 Popieluszko, was released on parole in October. An investigation into the alleged
 beating to death of two home es persons by the police, launched in 1993 by the
 Warsaw prosecutor, was still not complete.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of abductions, secret arrests, or clandes-
 tine detention by police or official security forces.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 There were no reported incidents of torture, but police allegedly used excessive force
 while arresting foreigners in incidents at the Warsaw train station in October.
 Parliament passed a law in August limiting the possibility that a person may be
 committed to a mental institution against his or her will and outlining specific pro-
 cedures to be followed in instances of involuntary commitment.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-There were no reports of arbitrary arrest
 or detention. Polish law allows a 48-hour detention period before authorities are re-
 quired to bring formal charges, during which detainees are normally denied access
 to a lawyer. Once a prosecutor presents the legal basis for a formal investigation,
 the law provides the detainee access to a lawyer. A detainee may be held under
 "temporary" arrest for up to 3 months and may challenge the legality of his arrest
 through appeal to the district court. A court may extend this pretrial confinement
 periodevery 3 months until the trial date. Bail is available, and human rights orga-
 nizations reported that most detainees were released on bail pending trial.
 There is no exile.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-Poland has a three-tier court system, consisting
 of re$ional and provincial courts and a Supreme Court which is divided into five
 divisions--military, civil, criminal, labor, and family. Judges are nominated by the
 National Judicial Council and appointed by the President. (Judges are appointed to
 the bench for life and may be reassigned but not dismissed, except by a decision
 of the National Judicial Council. The judicial branch is independent of the executive
 branch. The Constitutional Tribunal may offer opinions on legislation but has no au-
 thority to impose its decisions. It is elected by the Sejm, which may overrule the
 Tribunal's findings.
 All defendants are presumed innocent until proven guilty. At the end of a trial,
 the court renders its decision orally and then has 7 days to prepare a written deci-
 sion. A defendant has the right to appeal a decision within 14 days of the written
 decision. Appeals may be made on, among other grounds, the basis of new evidence
 or procedual irregularities.
 Cminal cases are tried in regional and provincial courts by a panel consisting
 of a professional judge and two lay assessors. The seriousness of the offense deter-
 mines which is the court of first instance. Once formal charges are filed, the defend-
 ant is allowed to study the charges and consult with an attorney, who is provided
 at public expense if necessary. When the defendant is prepared, a trial date is set.
 Defendants are required to be present during trial and may present evidence and
 confront witnesses in their own defense. The right to testify is universal
 Trials in Poland are normally public. The court, however, reserves the right to
 close a trial to the public in some circumstances, such as divorce cases, trials in
 which state secrets may be disclosed, or cases whose content might offend "public
 morality." The court rarely invokes this prero.ative.
 In March the human rights Ombudsman criticized the Interior Ministry for failing
 to allow the prosecutors' offices and courts access to evidence classified as a state
 secret. The Ombudsman descriled this behavior as obstructing the citizens' right to
 a fair trial. The trial of former secret police officer Adam Humer was still in
 progress at year's end.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Government does not arbitrarily monitor private mail or telephones. There is no
 Polish legislation that guarantees the righnt to privacy, although Poland has signed
 the European Convention on Human Rights which provides for that right. Poles do
 have the-legal right to privacy of correspondence, and there was no evidence of vio-
 lations.
 The Government introduced draft legislation in Parliament in September which
 would give the police the power-with the personal approval of the chief prosecutor
 and the Interior Minister-to monitor private mail and telephone conversations in
 
 
 913
 cases involving serious crimes, drugs, money laundering, or illegal arms sales. The
 parliamentary opposition sought assurances that these expanded police powers
 would be subject to appropriate human rights safeguards but generally supported
 the need to expand the police force's ability to combat crime.
 Polish law forbids arbitrary forced entry into homes. Search warrants issued by
 a prosecutor are required in order to enter private residences. In emergency cases
 whlen a prosecutor is not immediately available, police may enter a residence with
 the approval of the local police commander. In the most urgent cases, in which there
 is not time to consult with the police commander, police may enter a private resi-
 dence after showing their official identification. There were no reports that Polish
 police abused search warrant procedures in 1994.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-Although these freedoms are generally provided
 for in the Constitution, they are subect to some restriction in law and practice. Pol-
 ish citizens may generally express their opinions publicly and privately. Article 270
 of the Penal Code, however states that anyone who publicly insults, ridicules, and
 derides the Polish nation, Polish People's Republic, its political system, or its prin-
 cipal organs is punishable by between 6 months and 8 years of imprisonment Arti-
 cle 273 imposes a prison term of up to 10 years on a person who commits any of
 the acts prohibited by Article 270 in print or through the mass media. Speaker of
 the Sejm Jozef Oleksy called in 1994 for revisions of these sections of the Constitu-
 tion in order to ensure it complied with the European Convention on Human Rights
 in relation to freedom of speech. Polish neo-Fascist activist Boleslaw Tejkowski was
 convicted in October of insulting Polish authorities, the Jewish minority, the Pope,
 and Polish bishops and received a 1-year suspended sentence.
 The Penal Code stipulates that offending religious sentiment through public
 speech is punishable by a fine or a 2-year prison term. An August cover of the popu-
 lar weekly newsmagazine, Wprost, which showed an image of the Black Madonna
 and Child in gas masks to protect themselves from environmental pollution, raised
 a strong reaction among Poland's Catholic community, resulting in several legal
 complaints and demands from Catholic extremists that the magazine cease publica-
 tion, prompting the editor to issue an apology.
 The print media in Poland are uncensored and independent, although they may
 be subject to prosecution under the Penal Code provisions descried a ove. A pro-
 posal by some parliamentarians in June to create a national press council awakened
 concerns about the possible return of censorship in some form, and the idea was
 quhiety dropped.
 he Government owns a controlling interest in one major newspaper, which
 serves as the semiofficial newspaper of record. It does not restrict the establishment
 of private newspapers. Journals also appear regularly on newsstands. Books ex-
 pressing a wide range of political and social viewpoints are widely available, as are
 foreign periodicals. Poles have access to foreign publications and foreign radio
 broadcasts.
 The parliamentary opposition expressed strong concern over provisions in a draft
 law on the protection of state and official secrets presented to the Parliament in
 September which would make journalists and private citizens liable to prison terms
 for up to 10 years for disclosure of state secrets, broadly defined to include both
 military and government economic activity. The opposition contends the law would
 unduly restrict the publis freedom of information. After a major outcry from the
 press, consideration of the law was deferred pending approval of a new constitution.
 Organized crime in Poland's larger cities poses a threat to reporters: a journalist
 who covered organized crime was attacked in Gdansk during the summer, and in
 August the cafeteria of the Poznan offices of Gazeta Wyborcza, an influential daily,
 was bombed after the paper published a series of exposes about organized crime.
 The National Broadcasting Council (NBC) supervises pro         on public tele-
 vision, allocates broadcasting frequencies and licenses, and apportions subscription
 revenues. The Council may interpret these very broad prerogatives at its discretion.
 In order to encourage the NBC(s apolitical character, the nine NBC members are
 obliged under the law to suspend any membership in political parties or public asso-
 ciations. However, they were chosen for their political allegiances and nominated by
 the Sejm, the Senate, and the President following political bargaining, raising seri-
 ous questions about the independence of broadcasting from government influence.
 Private broadcasters were concerned that the awarding of licenses for the limited
 number of broadcast frequencies available could be politically motivated. After the
 awarding of the first nationwide television license, President Walesa withdrew his
 support from his three nominees and removed his nominee from the chair. The
 President's right to intervene was taken to the Constitutional Tribunal, and after
 
 
 914
 court decision the three remained on the board, and Walesa named one of them
 The NBC granted a nationwide concession for a private television network to the
 Polsat corporation in February;, competitors alleged that the decision was legally
 flawed, and some charged it was taken under undue political influence. In August
 the Government closed down 6 of 12 stations which the Polonia 1 network operated
 without authorization (in the absence of a law on broadcasting) since 1992 charging
 that the stations were operating on frequencies assigned to the militry. Te foreign
 owner of Polonia 1, who competed unsuccessfully for the national television conces-
 sion, claimed the action was politically motivated. Polonia continued to operate six
 other local television stations, for which it had outstanding concession applications,
 and to broadcast to Poland via satellite from abroad.
 The broadcasting law stipulates that programs should not promote activities that
 are illegal or against Polish state policy, morality, or the common good. The law also
 requires that all broadcasts respet the religious feelings of the audiences and in
 paicular respect the Chrstian system ofvalues." The law does not fuly define the
 term "Christian values." Since the NBC has the ultimate responsibility for super-
 vising the content of prograns, these restrictions could be used as a means of cen-
 sorship. The penalty  or violating this prvision of the law is up to 50 percent of
 a broadcaster's annual fee for the transmission frequency, plus the prospect of hav-
 ing the license withdrawn or experiencing difficulty in renewing the license when
 it expires.
 In arch the Constitutional Tribunal declared that there was no contradiction be-
 tween broadcasting law regulations, which prescribe respect for the Christian sys-
 tem of values in particular, and regulations concerning the pluralism of the public
 media and freedom of speech. In its verdict the Tribunal stated that respect for
 Christian values was not tantamount to their propagation. Observers concluded that
 the ruling made self-censorship more likely and left publishers and broadcasters
 with the threat of legal action if any individual feels -his or her Christian values
 have been violated. In June, acting on the request for an opinion by 89 deputies
 from the SLD, the Constitutional Tribunal confirmed that the requirement that
 broadcast programs "respect the Christian system of values" was constitutional.
 The dafly news editor of the main state television's evening news program was
 punished in May with a 1-month suspension from his duties for neglecting to broad-
 cast anything about President Walesa's visit to Estonia. The action was taken after
 the President's spokesman strongly protested the news program's failure to cover
 Academic freedom is respected in Poland.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Asembly and Association-Poles may gather together for-
 mally and informally to promote nonviolent causes and to protest government poli-
 cies. Permits are not necessary for public meetings but are required for public dem-
 onstrations- demonstration organizers must obtain these permits from local authori-
 ties if the demonstration might block a public road. For large demonstrations, orga-
 nizers are also required to inform the local police of the time and place of their ac-
 tivities and their planned route. Every gathering must have a chairperson who is
 required to open the demonstration, preside over it, and close it. Major demonstra-
 tions of 20,000 to 40,000 protesters, organized by the Solidarity trade union in War-
 saw in February and May, took place without incident.
 In August a group led by Rabbi Avraham Weiss protested without incident the
 placement of religious symbols and the existence of a Roman Catholic chapel on the
 grounds of the former concentration camp Auschwitz-Birkenau.
 Private associations need governmental approval to organize and must register
 with their district court. The procedure essentially requires the organization to sign
 a declaration that it will abide by the laws of Poland. In practice, however, the pro-
 cedure itself is complicated and may be subject to the discretion of the judge in
 charge. In 1994 the courts denied an application for recognition from the Playboy
 Foundation, organized to support minorities on the basis of sexual preference, na-
 tionality, and ethnicity, on the grounds that the Foundation did not promote Polish
 national interests. The application, pending at the end of 1993, of the Wehrmacht
 veterans in Bydgoszcz to form a legal association was approved in 1994.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution, as amended, provides for freedom of
 conscience and belief, and citizens enjoy the freedom to practice any religion they
 choose. Religious grups may organize, select and train personnel, solicit and receive
 contributions, publish, an engage in consultations without government inter-
 ference. There are no government restrictions on establishing and maintaining
 places of worship.
 More than 95 percent of Poles are Roman Catholic but Eastern Orthodox,
 Ukrainian Catholic, and much smaller Protestant, Jewish, and Muslim congrega-
 
 
 915
 tions meet freely. Although the Constitution provides for the separation of church
 and state, state-run radio broadcasts Catholic mass on Sundays. The Catholic
 Church is authorized to relicense radio and television stations to operate on fre-
 auencies assigned to the Church. It is the only body outside the NBC allowed to
 Religious education classes continue to be taught in the public schools at public
 expense. In June the Sejm passed a resolution postponing debate on ratification of
 the Concordat with the Vatican, signed in 1993, until the completion of work on a
 new constitution. Critics of the Concordat have called on the Church to guarantee
 that all church marriages will be registered with civil authorities and to agree not
 to deny burial to non-Catholics in cemeteries it controls.
 Although Catholic Church representatives teach the vast majority of religious
 classes in the schools, parents may request religious instruction in any of the reli-
 gions legally registered in Poland, including Protestant, Orthodox, and Jewish. Such
 non-Cat olic religious instruction exists in practice, and instructors are paid by the
 Ministry of Education.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the County, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Government does not restrict internal or foreign travel. Citizens
 who have left Poland have no trouble returning. There are no restrictions on emi-
 gration.
 The Government generally cooperates with the United Nations High Commis-
 sioner for Refugees and other huianitarian organizations in assisting refugees.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Poles have the constitutional right and the ability to change their government. Po-
 land is a multiparty democracy in which all citizens 18 years of age and older have
 the right to vote and to cast secret ballots.
 Governmental power is divided between the President and Parliament, which is
 composed of an upper house (the Senate) and a lower house (the Sejm). The Con-
 stitution provides for parliamentary elections at least every 4 years. The President,
 elected for 5 years, has the right to dissolve Parliament following a vote of no con-
 fidence or when Parliament fails to pass a budget, and Parliament may impeach the
 President.
 Women comprise some 15 percent of parliamentarians. Of a total of 17 ministries,
 only 1 is headed by a woman. One of three Vice Marshals of the Sejm is a woman.
 The electoral law exempts ethnic minority parties from the requirement to win 5
 percent of the vote nationwide in order to qualify for seats in individual districts.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 The Helsinki Committee, a major nongovernmental organization, conducted
 human rights investigations without government interference in 1994. Members of
 the Committee reported that the Government displays a generally positive and help-
 ful attitude towards human rights investigations.
 Two governmental organizations monitor human rights in Poland. The Office of
 the Commissioner for Civil Rights Protection (the Ombudsman), established in 1987,
 is an independent body with broad authority to investigate alleged violations of civil
 rights and liberties. The Ombudsman has no legislative authority and is sworn to
 act apolitically. He registers each case that is reported to his office and files griev-
 ances, where appropriate, with the relevant government office.
 The second governmental institution, the Senate Office for Intervention, inves-
 tigates a wide range of grievanes. In addition to responding to grievances, it may
 also investigate judicial proceedings. Created in 1989, the O1fice conducts investiga-
 tions and refers legitimate cases to senators whom the investigator feels will be
 sympathetic to the grievance, regardless of their district or political affiliation. If a
 senator does not wish to become involved in the case, the Office presents it to an-
 other senator or senators until it finds one willing to pursue the matter. The Office
 does not release public reports.
 There are no restrictions on visits by international organizations.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 Discrimination is generally prohibited by the Constitution, with specific clauses
 providing equal rights to women and religious minorities.
 Womeh.-The Constitution provides for equal rights regardless of sex and accords
 women equal rights with men in all fields of public, political, economic, social, and
 cultural life, including equal pay for equal work. In practice, however, women are
 paid less for equivalent work, on average hold lower level positions, are discharged
 
 
 916
 
 more quickly, and are less likely to be promoted than men. There are no laws pro-
 viding egal redress for women subject to such discrimination or to sexual harass-
 ment at the workplace.
 Although women are employed in a broad variety of professions and occupations,
 and a few women occupy high positions in government and in the private sector,
 legal barriers, such as clauses in social insurance law limiting child sick care bene-
 fits to women only and early retirement for women, encourage discrimination in hir-
 intolish law does not address equality in hiring practices (there are no legal pen-
 alties for discriminatory hiring practices), and advertisements for jobs frequently in-
 dicate a preference according to sex. Women remain banned from working in 90 oc-
 cupations in 18 fields of industry, health care, forestry, agriculture, andtranspor-
 tation, but unions support the efforts of women to gain entry into these occupations.
 The rise in unemployment and other social changes accompanying economic reforms
 and restructuring have hit women harder than men. Recent statistics suggest, how-
 ever, that the unemployment gap between the sexes may be narrowing as general
 economic conditions improve.
 Violence against women continued to be a problem in Poland, with occasional re-
 ports in the press of wife beating and spousal rape. Centrum Kobiet, a women's
 group, commissioned a study which indicated that nearly 20 percent of married Pol-
 ish women had been struck by their husbands on at least one occasion. Police do
 intervene in cases of domestic violence, and husbands may be convicted for beating
 their wives. A first offender is put on probation, while the penalty for a second of-
 fense is from 8 to 12 months in prison.
 Children.-No special laws exist to ensure the protection of children. Child abuse
 is rarely reported, and convictions for child abuse are even rarer.
 There are no procedures in schools to protect children from abuse by teachers; in
 fact, the teachers' work code guarantees a teacher legal immunity from prosecution
 for the use of corporal punishment in classrooms.
 National /Racil/Ethnic Minorities.-According to the leaders of the Roma com-
 munity, the Roma faced disproportionately high unemployment and were more neg-
 atively affected by the current economic changes and reforms than were ethnic
 Poles. Although the Catholic Church-sponsored school for Rma children in Suwalki
 has enjoyed limited success, the opening of a local school for Rma in Debica was
 delayed following an attack by hooligans on a Rma boy in November.
 As a result of ethnic tensions between Poles and the minority Germans, there was
 a flurry of skinhead attacks against German motorists in 1992. Six skinheads ar-
 rested in Krakow for assaulting German motorists and for the murder of a German
 truckdriver that year were sentenced at the end of January to prison terms ranging
 from 3to 5 years.
 Religious Minorities.-Legislation adopted in 1994 placed the Protestant churches
 in Poland on the same legal footing as Catholic and Orthodox churches. The Protes-
 tants now have the same opportunity to claim restitution of property lost during the
 Communist era and benefit from the same tax reduction as that granted to the Or-
 thodox and Catholic churches. This law covers only church property seized by the
 People's Republic of Poland and consequently does not address either the issue of
 private property or Jewish religious property seized during World War II.
 No violent anti-Semitic incidents were reported in 1994. There are no significant
 anti-Semitic parties, although there is occasional anti-Semitic hetoric at political
 rallies and demonstrations. Both local and international Catholic-Jewish relations
 remained somewhat strained by the continued presence of a large cross and a chapel
 at Auschwitz-Birkenau.
 There were isolated racially motivated incidents, including the painting of a swas-
 tika on a church building in Szczeczin.
 People With Disabilities.-In 1991 the Government passed a number of laws pro-
 tecting the rights of people with disabilities. Implementation, however, falls short
 of the rights set forth in the legislation. Public buildings and transportation are gen-
 erally not accessible to people with handicaps.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-All workers, including the police and frontier guards,
 have the legal right to establish and join trade unions of their own choosing, the
 right to join labor federations and confederations and the right to affiliate with
 international labor organizations. Independent labor leaders reported that these
 rights were largely observed in practice. As few as 10 persons may form a trade
 union, and 30 may establish a national union. Unions, including interbranch na-
 tional unions and national interbranch federations, must be registered with the
 
 
 917
 courts. A court decision refusing registration may be appealed to an appeals court.
 As of September, 223 national unions were registered.
 The Independent Self-governing Trade Union (NSZZ) Solidarity is affiliated with
 the International Confederation of Free Trade Unions and the World Confederation
 of Labor. Solidarity membership has fallen below 2 million (with roughly 80 percent
 paying dues). Spinoffs from mainstream Solidarity include the Christian Trade
 Union Solidarity, Solidarity '80, and a militant rival which broke away to form "Au-
 gust '80." Solidarity '80 split into two rival factions in June. There are no reliable
 estimates of the memberinip of these unions.
 Other unions include the All-Poland Trade Union Alliance (OPZZ), the Com-
 munist-inspired trade union registered in 1984 as the sole legal alternative to the
 then-repressed NSZZ Solidarity, the ex-official miners' union, and the teachers'
 unions (ZNP). The OPZZ claims a membership of 4.5 million, a figure independent
 observers reject as higy inflated. The Seim's passage in August of an overhauled
 collective bargaining law did not require that a trade union be "representative,"
 with its membrship figures verified and its finances based on dues-paig mem-
 bers, in order to be considered a legal negotiating partner. As a result, Solidarty
 continued to boycott some negotiations with the tPZZ on he grounds that the
 latter's membership figures exaggerated its strength at the bargaining table.
 There was no resolution in 1994 of the longstanding dispute over Solidarity assets
 seized during the martial law period and still administered by the OPZZ. In June
 Solidarity formally protested the lack of pro to the International Labor Organi-
 zation (ILO). In April the European Trade Union Confederation declined to cooper-
 ate with the OPZZ, largely because of the outstanding assets dispute.
 Polish trade union organizations operate independently of state control and are
 active in politics. In alliance with the Social Democrats of the Republic of Poland,
 the OPZZ, the ZNP, and several others maintain a strong, 60-seat presence in the
 Sejm under the banner of the SLD. The Solidarity trade union has a 11-member
 caucus in the Senate, while the trade union wing of the Confederation of Independ-
 ent Poland, Kontra, has 1 deputy in the Seim.
 The 1991 Trade Union Act prescribes a lengthy process before a union may call
 a strike. In August the Government announced it would seek to shorten this proc-
 ess. The law, when strictly adhered to, provides several opportunities for employers
 to challenge a pending strike, including  tbreat of legal action. An employer must
 start negotiations the moment a dispute begins.
 Negotiations end with either an agreement between the parties or a protocol de-
 sciigtheir differences. If negotiations fail, a mandatory mediation 1process en-
 e       mediation fails, the tra d e union ma launch a warning strike or a period
 of up to 2 hours or seek arbitration of the  epute. Both employers and employees
 have frequently questioned the impartiality of the mediators.
 A full-fedged strike may not be launched until 14 days after the dispute is an-
 nounced (strikes are prohibited entirely in the Office of State Protection, and in
 units of the police, firefighters, military forces, prison services, and frontier guards).
 The union may call a strike after approval by a majority of voting workers, an-
 nouncing it at least 5 days in advance. If the strike is organized in accordance with
 the law, workers retain their right to social insurance benefits but not pay. If a
 strike is "organized contrary to the prvisions of the law," workers may lose social
 benefits, and organizers are liable for damages and may face civil charges and fines.
 Laws prohibiting retribution against strikers are not consistently enforced; the fines
 imposed as punishment are so minimal that they are not effective sanctions against
 illegal employer activit.
 The Government's strategy for Poland," announced in June, includes a cm-
 prehensive attempt to adapt the many existing, outdated laws governing labor activ-
 iyto the emerging market economy. InAugust the Government sent a revised labor
 cde to the Sejm, in effect abandoning the landmark February 1993 "Pact on State
 Enterpriss which had set forth a detailed framework for dealing with labor-related
 issues and to which the unions, employers, and Government had agreed. In Septem-
 ber the Government announced it would send legislation to the Sejm proposing im-
 portant changes in existing laws governing trade unions employers, and the resolu-
 tion of labor disputes. Its aim is to establish the legal framework governing all as-
 pets of work in a market economy and to bring Polish laws into line with ILO con-
 ventions and Euroean Union practices. In the interim, legal ambiguities continued,
 leading to some labor tensions, including a 9-week prtest campaign in the spring
 led by Solidarity and a 48-day strike at the Huta Lucchini steel mill in Warsaw.
 b.The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectiely-The 1991 law on trade unions
 and the resolution of collective disputes generally created a favorable environment
 to conduct trade union activity. In August the Government announced its intention
 
 
 918
 to reduce some employer-provided, union-related costs in enterprises with a large
 number of unions (some as many as 50).
 Weaknesses in the 1991 law included inadequate sanctions for antiunion discrimi-
 nation and no explicit prohibition of lockouts. The law also lacked specific provisions
 to ensure that a union has continued rights of representation when a state firm un-
 dergoes privatization, commercialization, bankruptcy, or sale. Labor leaders claimed
 that this ambiguity led to underrepresentation of unions in the large and growing
 private sector. There were also a number of confirmed cases in which Solidarity ac-
 tivists were dismissed for labor activity permitted under Polish law, including orga-
 nizing strikes.
 Unions, management, and workers' councils currently set wages in ad hoc negotia-
 tions at the enterprise level. When collective agreements have been reached at the
 national or branch level, they have routinely been ignored or overtaken by enter-
 prise-level disputes. Nevertheless, collective bargaining as a system of industrial re-
 lations is expected to encompass an ever larger percentage of the work force. By
 year's end, both unions and employers were preparing themselves for such a rela-
 tionship. The Government repeatedly stated its intention not to be drawn into labor
 disputes.
 The Government continued its effort to link wages to increased productivity and
 reduce inflationary pressures in the state sector, the so-called neo-popiwek tax pen-
 alty was imposed on any firm which increased its average wage in excess of a gov-
 ernment-set "coefficient." Both Solidarity and the OPZZ challenged the tax in the
 Constitutional Court. The law providing for the excess wage tax was due to expire
 at the end of 1994.
 Current government policy aims to liberalize investment procedures for both do-
 mestic and foreign firms rather than promote special incentive programs. Special
 duty-free zones exist in or have been contemplated for some 15 to 20 locations
 throughout Poland but, with the exception of a zone in Poznan and another in
 Mielec (in southeastern Poland), have not attracted much attention. Thus, tradi-
 tional export processing zones that relax legal guarantees do not, at this time, com-
 prise a threat to workers' rights to organize. However, collective bargaining either
 does not exist there or is in its early stages of development.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.---Compulsory labor does not exist,
 although it is not prohibited by law.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The Labor Code forbids the em-
 ployment of persons under the age of 14. Persons aged 15 to 18 may be employed
 only if they have completed basic schooling and if the proposed employment con-
 stitutes vocational training and is not harmful. The age floor rises to 18 if a particu-
 lar job might pose a health danger. The Government enforces legal protection of mi-
 nors, but its inability to monitor the growing private sector, which now accounts for
 some 60 percent of all employment, leaves officials less certain that the problem
 does not exist.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-A national minimum wage is negotiated every
 3 months by the Ministry of Labor and Social Policy and the trade unions. Minimum
 monthly wages for employees of state-owned enterprises were roughly $105 (Zi
 2,400,000) at the October 1 exchange rate, which was insufficient to provide a work-
 er and family a decent standard of living. The minimum monthly wage has the force
 of law, but a significant number of foreign guest workers received less than the min-
 imum, especially in the construction and agricultural sectors. The average gross
 monthly wage rose to roughly $220 (Zl 5,080,000). Despite several recent annual in-
 creases in gross domestic product, real wages declined.
 There is a standard legal workweek of 42 hours which allows 6- or 7-hour days,
 including at least one 24-hour rest period.
 The Legal Code defines minimum conditions for the protection of workers' health
 and safety. Enforcement is a growing problem because the State Labor Inspectorate
 is unable to monitor the ever-increasing portion of economic activity that is in pri-
 vate hands and where a growing percentage of accidents take place. In addition,
 there is a lack of clarity concerning which government or legislative body has the
 responsibility for enforcing the law. Of the 103,073 cases of work-related accidents
 that were reported in 1993, 655 involved deaths. This represents 9 accidents per
 1,000 workers, a slight upward trend since 1992. The Government itself has noted
 that work conditions are poor and sanctions minimal. Standards for exposure to
 chemicals, dust, and noise are routinely exceeded.
 
 
 919
