POLAND
For Poland, like most other East European countries, 1989 was the most important year in post-war history. According to a constitutional amendment of December 29, 1989, Poland is "a democratic state, governed by the law and principle of social justice." In its introduction, the State Department report correctly notes that "Poland made dramatic progress in human rights in 1989." However, despite this declaration, the report does not cover all events related to human rights during the year.
During 1989 there was a complete overhaul of state machinery in Poland. One looking in the report for information regarding these important developments for human rights will be dissatisfied. It seems that the observer left the "play" before the final act took place, but reviewed the whole performance. In fact in 1989, especially in its last quarter, far more happened than the State Department presents. For example, important legal changes affecting human rights which were made during this period were the constitutional amendment referred to above and new laws regarding employment, the judicial system, the Supreme Court, the Constitutional Tribunal, and the subordination of the procuracy to the Minister of Justice. All of these changes are intended to create the legal framework for an independent judicial system.
Despite these shortcomings, the report presents a generally accurate picture of the state of human rights in Poland which in fact "made dramatic progress" during a period of political, economic and legal transition. While the general picture is accurately described, some problems concerning the details of changes in Poland's legal system should be mentioned.
The section on arbitrary arrest, detention, or exile is the weakest part of the report. The most serious inaccuracy concerns temporary arrest. The report refers to the prosecutor as the person in full control of temporary arrest. A November 1989 amendment to the Polish Code of Criminal Procedure provides for judicial review of the prosecutor's decisions imposing temporary arrest. Consequently, the prosecutor no longer has unfettered power in this area. While it is true that the major revision of the Code of Criminal Law and Procedure is to be completed in 1990, the above-mentioned changes occurred in November 1989 and were not "deferred until a later date."
183
Poland
The riots which took place in Polish prisons in the fall of 1989 are not correctly reported. There were in fact two waves of strikes. The first occurred during the time when the broad amnesty law shortening prison terms and providing for the release of many prisoners was being drafted. Inmates at that time expressed their interest in the new law and their hope for a broad amnesty. The second mischaracterization was of the dissatisfaction of the inmates with the amnesty law. It has to be emphasized that this law was unsatisfactory in the view not only of the inmates, but also of the Senate. Comment on the role of Solidarity legislators in connection with the debate oversimplifies the topic. The Senate supported a more liberal law accepting some inmates' demands while the Sejm and the Minister of Justice took a more restrictive position. The report does not make this clear. The report does not mention that after the riot had been suppressed, the inmates were transferred to distant facilities and their personal property was confiscated. Cases of beatings by the prison staff were reported.
The government does not "plan to review the law" regarding "habitual parasites" as stated in the report since it was already abolished by virtue of a new employment law. Moreover, the Minister of Science, Higher Education and Technology does not have to approve all candidates for university high offices before their names can be submitted to university senates for election.
The report alludes to the term "legal code" while Poland, like every civil law country, has many codes and a specification to a particular code, i.e., criminal, civil, commercial or administrative should be given to allow the reader to identify which code is at issue.
The report also underestimates the changes regarding human rights institutions. The report announces that there are no government-controlled or non-governmental organizations devoted exclusively to human rights issues. In fact, the government-sponsored Social Commission on Human Rights was legally although not actively functioning in 1989. In addition, in the fall of 1989, the Commission on the Rule of Law and Human Rights was created by the Polish Senate. The Commission, led by Senator Zbigniew Romaszewski plays a crucial role in initiating legislative work and intervening where human rights are in danger. The Senate's role in organizing this commission emphasizes the importance of human rights in the agenda of the Senate.
184
