 POLAND
 Four years after the fall of communism, Poland is a parliamentary democracy
 oased on a multiparty system and free and fair elections. A popularly elected Presi-
 dent shares power with a Prime Minister and bicameral Parliament.
 The coalition government led by Prime Minister Hanna Sucho;. and the Demo-
 cratic Union party fell in May on a vote of no confidence which passed by one vote,
 and President Lech Walesa dissolved Parliament. In parliamentary elections held in
 September, the Democratic Left Alliance, a successor to the former Communist
 party, won a plurality of the votes and formed a coalition Government with the Pol-
 ish Peasant Party. The Government headed by Prime Minister Waldemar Pawlak
 3f the Peasant Party, has a comfortable majority both in the Sejm (the lower house)
 and the Senate (the upper house).
 
 
 994
 The Polish armed forces and the internal security apparatus are subject to gov-
 ernmental authority and under civilian control. There is some ambiguity over how
 the President and the Prime Minister share power over the military. This issue is
 to be addressed with new legislation which President Walesa and the Pawlak Gov-
 ernment are considering and ultimately with a new constitution. Relar police
 were accused of using excessive force to disperse demonstrations in Warsaw on
 three occasions and ofbrutality in dealing with homeless people and foreigners.
 Poland's fledgling market economy provided opportunity to associate with others,
 pursue private interests, and own private property. However, the struggle to con-
 tinue the rapid pace of transition from a centrally planned economy to a market-
 oriented system caused a steady rise in unemployment with women and younger
 workers suffering disproportionately. Discontent among Poles who believed that the
 reform process left them worse off than before contributed to an increase in voter
 support for leftist parties which promised to cushion the pain of economic reform
 while preserving democratic institutions.
 Some infringements of the rights of free speech and assembly occurred in 1993.
 Polish courts handed down convictions based on a section of law that imposes fines
 and prison sentences on persons who criticize a state body. A new broadcast law
 went into effect in March, and some of its provisions were criticized for potentially
 impinging on the freedom of the electronic media. On occasion police used excessive
 force to disperse demonstrators who, they claimed, violated the rules governing pub-
 lic demonstrations. Women continued to be hampered in their struggle for equality
 in the workplace by the lack of legal redress. Regulations on religious education in
 schools, supported by the rightist Christian National Union (ZChN), a member of
 Prime Minister Suchocka's coalition, fueled much controversy, and the Ombudsman
 raised the question of their legality to the Constitutional Tribunal which ruled, in
 part, in his favor. An attempt in the Sejm to recall the Ombudsman was frustrated
 y the dissolution of Parliament.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no reports of politically
 motivated killings, but in July police allegedly beat to death two homeless people
 living in Warsaw's central train station. The Warsaw district prosecutor opened a
 special investigation into the incident.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of abductions, secret arrests, or clandes-
 tine detention by police or official security forces.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 No allegations of torture were reported. Some incidents of police brutality received
 wide publicity in the Polish press in 1993. Members of a Carmelite monastery that
 provides medical aid to the homeless living around the train station reported that
 the people in their care often claim to have been beaten by police. The district police
 commandant acknowledged to the press that it is standard police procedure to use
 force with homeless people under certain circumstances, including when trying to
 compel them to vacate public areas.
 Police also used force to disperse public demonstrations. In June police broke up
 a demonstration of center-right parties in Warsaw's Castle Square by beating dem-
 onstrators with nightsticks. The Commissioner for Civil Rights Protection (or Om-
 budsman) asked the prosecutor's office to begin an investigation into the incident.
 In September police dispersed a demonstration organized  y a   acifist group pro-
 testing obligatory military service by beating protesters with nigItsticks and shov-
 ing them into police and unmarked vehicles. There were no arrests.
 On the night of the September parliamentary elections, members of a center-right
 party held an impromptu demonstration in the streets of Warsaw; police also used
 force to disperse them. According to the official account of the incident, demonstra-
 tors resisted police when they were asked to move to the sidewalk; however, a jour-
 nalist reported that demonstrators in fact obeyed the police and moved to the side-
 walk; nevertheless, police dragged them into squad cars, beating them with night-
 sticks. No charges were brought by the victims.
 The Ombudsman's office reported that it examined over 40 complaints of police
 brutality against foreigners in 1993.
 Overall, prison conditions continued to improve in 1993. The Ombudsman pre-
 sented proposals for more lenient sentencing to the Ministry of Justice and the
 Central Board of Penal Institutions to reduce overcrowding in prisons. The Ministry
 of Justice had not taken action by year's end. However, conditions in juvenile deten-
 tion centers remained poor. The Helsinki Committee reported that financial difficul-
 ties resulted in a lack of food for detainees in some institutions, and personnel were
 
 
 995
 generally more abusive toward detainees than prison guards were toward prison in-
 mates. Human rights organizations reported that they have permanent passes to
 visit prisons and juvenile detention centers and that they can monitor their oper-
 ations freely.
 No laws currently exist regarding the rights of psychiatric patients admitted to
 mental hospitals. A press report in September stated that, of some 142,000 Poles
 admitted yearly to mental health facilities, over 20,000 were placed there against
 their will. Under current procedures, a doctor's order alone suffices to have a patient
 confined to a mental institution.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-No arbitrary arrests were reported in
 1993. Polish law allows a 48-hour detention period before authorities are required
 to bring formal charges, during which detainees are normally denied access to a
 lawyer. Once a prosecutor presents the legal basis for a formal investigation the
 law provides the detainee access to a lawyer. A detainee may be held under ;kem-
 porary" arrest for up to 3 .nths and may challenge the legality of his arrest
 through appeal to the district court. A court may extend this pretrial confinement
 period every 3 months until the trial date. Human rights organizations reported
 that most detainees were released on bail pending trial although in a few instances
 detainees were held in jail for over a year awaitin trial.
 The Ombudsman worked to improve detention facilities in 1993. His office submit-
 ted proposals to allow detainees access to telephones, which are still relatively dif-
 ficult to obtain for average Poles. A change in procedure required that an investiga-
 tor be present at the time a detainee is charged with a crime.
 In September the Ombudsman demanded publicly that policemen, public prosecu-
 tors, and judges provide prisoners of foreign nationalities with information on their
 legal rights in languages unde-9tandable to them. He asked that prison authorities
 ensure that prisoners are not served meals banned by their respective religions; he
 said that they should also be guaranteed access to their native press and literature.
 The Government took no action by year's end.
 There is no exile.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-Poland has a three-tier court system, consisting
 of regional and provincial courts and a Supreme Court which is divided into five
 divisions-military, civil, criminal, labor, and family. A Constitutional Tribunal may
 offer opinions on legislation but has no real authority. It is elected by the Se'm
 which can overrule the Tribunal's findings. Judges are nominated by the National
 Judicial Council and appointed by the President. They serve until the age of 65 and
 may apply for an extension until age 70, after which they are retired.
 All defendants are presumed innocent until proven guilty. At the end of a trial,
 the court renders its decision orally and then has 7 days to prepare a written deci-
 sion. A derendant has the right to appeal a decision within 14 days of the written
 decision. Appeals may be ma e on, among other grounds, the basis of new evidence
 or procedural irregularities.
 Criminal cases are tried in regional and provincial courts by a panel consisting
 of a professional judge and two lay assessors. The seriousness of the offense deter-
 mines which of these is the court of first instance. Once formal charges are filed,
 the defendant is allowed to study the charges and consult with an attorney, who
 is provided at public expense if necessary. Once the defendant is prepared, a trial
 date is set. Defendants are required to be present during trial and may present evi-
 dence and confront witnesses in their own defense. The right to testify is uni' 3al.
 Trials in Poland are normally public. The court, however, reserves the right to
 close a trial to the public in some circumstances, such as divorce cases, trials in
 which state secrets may be disclosed, or cases whose content might offend "public
 morality. " The court rarely invokes this prerogative.
 The Senate Office of Intervention reported that it received some complaints in
 1993 that Polish judges released or convicted defendants at their whim. According
 to the Office of Intervention, the majority of Polish judges are holdovers from the
 Communist era when their verdicts were influenced by the Communist party, and
 therefore they do not have the proper training to implement the law.
 An amendment to the law on the court system, which went into effect in Septem-
 ber, made it possible for the Ministry of Justice to recall a judge if a disciplinary
 commission demonstrates that the judge violated the principle of "court in epend-
 ence." In effect this amendment gives the executive branch the power of recall over
 the judiciary. From the day the appeal is fled, the judge in question is suspended
 from duty. The motion is ihen considered by five judges from the disciplinary com-
 mission, who are selected by the Polish General Assembly of Judges. The president
 of the Warsaw district court resigned in protest over the amendment, and both the
 Association of Polish Lawyers and the Ombudsman protested its implementation. In
 August the Ombudsman challenged the amendments before the Constitutional Tri-
 
 
 bunal, which had already opened proceedings on the constituionality of the amend-
 ments.
 On July 1 a law went into effect introducing appellate courts into the Polish judi-
 cial system for the first time since before WorldWar II. These courts deal with ap-
 peals based on procedural issues only, not on the substance of a particular case.
 The controversy about former Communists and secret collaborators continued
 after the fall of the Olszewski government in 1992. A special committee was formed
 in the Sejm to consider the various draft bills that would have instituted systems
 of political screening for public officials. It did not complete its work prior to the
 dissolution of the Sejm. A screening provision, however, was written into the elec-
 toral law of 1993, requiring that all parliamentary candidates sign a statement that
 they had never collaborated with the secret police. Some individuals have been tried
 or are being investigated for state crimes under communism. Adam Humer, a
 former employee of the state security bureau, was tried for torturing and killing
 prisoners; the trial was unfinished at year's end. Thirteen more former state secu-
 rity agents are currently awaiting trial on similar charges.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Government does not arbitrarily monitor private mail or telephones. There is no
 Polish legislation that guarantees the right to privacy, although Poland has signed
 the European Convention on Human Rights, in which Article 8 guarantees that
 right. Poles do have the legal right to privacy of correspondence, and police are not
 legally able to enter a private residence without a search warrant, but nothing pro-
 hibits the Government from creating a bank of information on its citizens. Because
 of the lack of an overall revision of the Penal Code, some laws concerning inter-
 ference with correspondence remain in effect which do not conform to international
 human rights standards; however, they are no longer enforced. Under Articles 30
 and 31 of the Polish Penal Code, a prison inmate must seek the permission of a
 prison warden to contact a human rights organization. The Ombudsman lodged a
 protest in 1993 with the Minister of Justice to have these articles rescinded.
 Polish law forbids arbitrary forced entry into homes. Search warrants issued by
 a prosecutor are required in order to enter private residences. In emergency cases
 when a prosecutor is not immediately available, police may enter a residence with
 the approval of the local police commander. In the most urgent cases, in which there
 is not time to consult with the police commander, police may enter a private resi-
 dence after showing their official identification. No allegations that Polish police
 abused search warrant procedures in 1993 were reported.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-Although these freedoms are generally provided
 for in the Constitution, they are subject to some rstriction in law and in practice.
 Polish citizens may generally express their opinions publicly and privately. Article
 270 of the Penal Code, however, states that anyone who "publicly insults, ridicules,
 and derides the Polish Nation, Polish People's Republic, its political system, or its
 principal organs is punishable by between 6 months and 8years of imprisonment."
 vernment continues to use this law against its critics. Article 273 imposes
 a prison term of up to 10 years for a person who commits any of the acts prohibited
 by Article 270 in print or through the mass media. In March two students in the
 town of Brzeg who admitted to shouting "Down with Walesa--Communist agent" at
 a demonstration were fined the equivalent of an average Polish monthly salary for
 "abusing and discrediting" the President. This decision was overturned on appeal in
 July. In June, 12 people were arrested for putting up posters announcing a dem-
 onstration; the posters claimed that members of the Government had collaborated
 with the secret police under communism. Helsinki Watch and the Free WVorld Fund,
 both New York-based human rights monitoring groups, have called on the Polish
 Government to rescind Article 270 but have received no response from the Govern-
 ment.
 The Penal Code stipulates that offending religious sentiment is punishable by a
 ine or a 2-year prison term. Under this provision of the law, in late 1992 the Chris-
 tian National Union (ZChN), a political party, brought charges against the rock
 group Piersi for a song called "The ZChNis Coming.' The song, which is sung to
 the tune of a religious hymn, describes a priest who gets drunk and crashes his car,
 and his parishioners lament that they will have to finance the cost of a new one.
 Five persons complained to the Warsaw district prosecutor that the song had of-
 fended their religious feelings. The prosecutor's office announced in Apl that it
 would notpress charges, andthe ZChN is appealing the decision. A radio producer
 was fried orplaying the song on Polish Radio 3, a government-owned station, but
 was reinstatedafr memers of the Democratic Union Party intervened.
 
 
 997
 In March a ZChN deputy unsuccessfully sued the Poznan weekly Poznaniak over
 the publication of a satirical picture of the Madonna and Child with the deputy's
 face superimposed on the face of the baby Jesus. In May ZChN deputies reportedly
 sought to sue a Poznan movie theater for showing the film "The Last Temptation
 of Christ"; the deputies admitted they had never seen the film, and none of the
 film's 600 Poznan viewers signed the deputies' complaint. The Poznan district pros-
 ecutor declined to pursue the case.
 The print media in Poland are uncensored and independent, although they may
 be subject to prosecution under the Penal Code provisions described above. The ma-
 jority of today's periodicals have a left-of-center slant; the spectrum of political opin-
 ion was reduced in 1993 because of the closure of several right-of-center publications
 for financial reasons. The Government owns a controlling interest (51 percent) in
 one major newspaper, Rzeczpospolita, which serves as the semiofficial newspaper of
 record. No barriers exist to the establishment of private newspapers other than
 readership demand and capital. Journals also appear regularly on newsstands.
 Books expressing a broad range of political and social viewpoints are widely avail-
 able, as are foreign periodicals.
 Citizens have access to foreign publications and foreign radio broadcasts.
 Television is still mainly under the control of the Government. However, regional
 television centers are more autonomous and active; some are cooperatively owned
 and control their own budgets and in some cases even their own frequencies. An
 ever-increasing segment of radio media is independently owned and self-financing
 and exposes its listeners to a broad array of points of view.
 In March a new broadcast law took effect to regulate the licensing of the numer-
 ous private radio and television stations which began broadcasting after the fall of
 communism without sanction, in the absence of any legal means to obtain a license.
 The law stipulates the formation of a National Broadcasting Council (NBC) to im-
 plement the law. The NBC has very broad prerogatives: it is to supervise program-
 ming, allocate broadcasting frequencies and licenses, and apportion subscription rev-
 enues. It may interpret these prerogatives at its discretion. As of year's end, the
 NBC had granted two licenses. Unlicensed stations are not being shut down.
 The NBCis nominally an apolitical body. Although the nine people nominated to
 the NBC were obliged under the law to suspend any membership in political parties
 or public associations, they were in fact chosen for their political allegiances, nomi-
 nated by the Sejm, the Senate, and the President following political bargaining. This
 raised serious questions about the independence of broadcasting from government
 influence. Private broadcasters were concerned that the awarding of licenses for the
 limited number of broadcast frequencies available could be politically motivated.
 Private broadcasters whose applications for licenses are rejected may appeal to
 the Administrative Court, which is empowered to rule solely on whether the proce-
 dural process by which the NBC reached its decision was i1 keeping with the law,
 not to examine the reason for the application's rejection.
 The law stipulates that programs should not promote activities that are illegal or
 against Polish state policy, morality, or the common good. The law also requires
 that all broadcasts "respect the religious feelings of the audiences and in particular
 respect the Christian system of values." This particular provision was the source of
 much controversy before the Sejm finally a pproved it. Human rights organizations
 charged that the law does not fully define the term "Christian values," thus requir-
 ing media owners themselves to reconcile different interpretations of religion in
 order to determine what such values constitute. Since the NBC has ultimate respon-
 sibility for supervising the content of programs, these restrictions could be used as
 a means of censorship. The penalty for violating this provision of the law is up to
 50 percent of a broadcaster's annual fee for the transmission frequency, plus the
 prospect of having the license withdrawn or experiencing difficulty in renewing the
 icense when it expires.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-Poles enjoy the freedom to join
 together formally and informally to promote nonviolent causes and protest govern-
 ment policies. Permits are not required for public meetings but are required for ub-
 lic demonstrations; demonstration organizers must obtain these permits from local
 governing authorities if the demonstration might block a public road. For large dem-
 onstrations, organizers are also required to inform the local police of the time and
 place of their activities and their planned route. Ever) gathering must have a chair-
 person who is required to open the demonstration, preside over it, and close it.
 In June police used force in Warsaw's Castle Square to disperse a demonstration
 of center-right parties who were questioning the Government's ties to the former
 Communist security apparatus. The organizers had obtained permission for a dem-
 onstration and parade originating from a different location. The Ombudsman asked
 
 
 the prosecutor's office to investigate whether the demonstrators' rights were vio-
 lated.
 Just after the September parliamentary elections, members of the center-right
 Center Alliance party held an impromptu demonstration on one of Warsaw's main
 thoroughfares; police arrested 10 people in connection with the incident, including
 a journalist alegedly for disturbing the peace. The Ombudsman asked the Con-
 stitutional Tribunal to adjudicate the rules for demonstrations, complaining that the
 rules do not specify if district authorities may set a different route and different des-
 tination for demonstrators. He also claimed the rules do not specify whether, in a
 situation in which the demonstration is not dissolved, police may intervene to dis-
 erse demonstrators who refuse to change the site of their protest (see also Section
 .c.). There has been no government response.
 Private associations need governmental approval to organize and must register
 with their district court. The procedure basically requires the organization to sign
 a declaration that it will abide by the laws of Poland. In practice,however, the pro-
 cedure itself is complicated and may be subject to the whim of the judge in charge.
 The Helsinki Foundation noted three instances in 1993 in which organizations expe-
 rienced problems in obtaining court approval. The first was in Opole, where a Ger-
 man organization was denied the righttochange its charter to include citizens of
 countries other than Poland. The German organization filed a lawsuit to have the
 charter changed and won its suit in a higher court, but the Opole judge, who ini-
 tially denied the change, filed for extraordinary powers to regulaT tae group, fear-
 ing a rise in the influence of the German minority in the region. The second oc-
 curred in Kielce, where a society of Gypsies (Roma) ran into difficulty in gaining
 court approval because of a local judge's refusal to grant such approval to Roma;
 eventually, the group did gain approval. The third instance involved a group of vet-
 erans of the German Wehrmacht army, forcibly conscripted Poles as well as Ger-
 mans, who wanted to form a society and were denied permission; the case had not
 been resolved by year's end.
 A German minority organization in Opole experienced difficulty when it applied
 to drop the word "minority" formally from its name. The Government refused to
 allow the designation to be dropped, even though equivalent Belarusian and Lithua-
 nian groups do not have the word "minority" in their names. The Government also
 ruled that only Polish citizens could join German minority groups; this is not a ;e-
 quirement for other minority groups, which may induct members regardless of their
 citizenship status.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for freedom of conscience and
 belief, and citizens enjoy the freedom to practice any religion. Religious groups may
 organize, select, and train personnel, solicit and receive contributions, publish, and
 engage in consultations without government interference. There are no government
 restrictions on establishing and maintaining places of worship.
 The vast majority of Poles are Roman Catholic, but Eastern Orthodox, Ukrainian
 Catholic, and much smaller Protestant, Jewish, and Muslim congregations meet
 freely. The Catholic Church maintains over 16,000 churches, schools, and other in-
 stitutions and continues to build new ones. It also publishes significant numbers of
 books and periodicals, as does the independent Catholic press. The Constitution pro-
 videc for the separation of church and state. State-run radio broadcasts Catholic
 mass on Sundays.
 As a result of the 1989 roundtable negotiations, the Catholic Church is authorized
 to issue licenses to radio and television stations which are equivalent to licenses is-
 sued by the National Broadcasting Council; it is the only body outside the NBC al-
 lowed to do so. The broadcast law incorporated this roundtable decision.
 A controversial ordinance regulating religious education in schools, which was
 signed by the Minister of Education and went into effect in April 1992, was also
 strongly supported by the Catholic Church. In August 1992, the Ombudsman filed
 a list of eight objections to the directive with the Constitutional Tribunal on the
 Ounds that the directive violated the principle of separation of church and state.
 n April 1993, the Tribunal ruled that it was against the law to demand declara-
 tions from parents or older schoolchildren that the children were not going to take
 part in religion classes at school or that they attended religion classes elsewhere.
 Italso decreed that it was illegal to give a grade in religion or ethics on the official
 school certificate if the subject was taught outside the school. The Tribunal further
 supported the Ombudsman's objection that if a bishop withdrew his recommenda-
 tion for a religion teacher, this could mean that ;he teacher would lose his or her
 job. On the other hand, the Tribunal ruled that hanging religious symbols in class-
 rooms is legal, as is a prayer at the beginning of classes. Debate in Parliament over
 the future of the directive was suspended after President Walesa dissolved the Sejm
 in May, leaving the rest of the directive in effect.
 
 
 999
 In July the Government signed a Concordat with the Vatican which, while spei-
 fying that the Roman Catholic Church and the State are "autonomous and inde-
 pendent," nevertheless confirmed the Church's right to "maintain religious instruc-
 tion in schools," permitted church marriages to be legally binding without a civil
 ceremony, and obliated the State to subsidize the Pontifical Theological Academy
 of Krakow and the Catholic University in Lublin, as well as to contribute to the
 maintenance of properties belonging to the Church. The Concordat had not been
 ratified by year's end.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration and Re-
 patriation.-Within the country Poles move freely and easily and may freely change
 their place of residence. Foreign travel is unrestricted, and Poles may obtain pass-
 ports easily. Citizens who have left Poland have no trouble returning. There are no
 restrictions on emigration.
 During the first part of 1993, Poland continued to serve as a country of transit
 for illegal migrants headed to the West, particularly citizens of the former Soviet
 Union, Romania, and Bulgaria seeking to apply for asylum in Germany. The flow
 of asylum seekers across the border in 1993 reached a high in April, when border
 guards caught 2,186 people attempting to cross the Polish-German border illegally.
 In May Poland signed a migration agreement with Germany, as an amendment to
 the 1991 Schengen accord, to readmit immigrants who crossed the Polish border il-
 legally into Germany. The agreement specified a 6-month time period from the day
 or crossing into Germany during which the German authorities are allowed to re-
 turn an immigrant. The agreement went into effect on July 1 in conjunction with
 a new German law that severely tightens asylum procedures.
 Poland's position on East-West migration thus changed from a point of transit to
 a potential country of first asylum. Since implementation of the new German asy-
 lum policy began, the number of people illegally crossing the German border from
 Poland has declined greatly, and the leading Polish official for refugee affairs re-
 ported that there had not been a corresponding rise in the number of refugee appli-
 cants in Poland. According to the Warsaw representative of the United Nations
 High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), however, the Polish Government ac-
 tively discouraged some refugees from applying for asylum, especially citizens of the
 former U.S.S.R., Bulgaria, and Romania. Although Poland signed the 1951 Geneva
 Convention on refugees in 1991, since March the Government has stopped issuing
 permanent residence documents to registered refugees (one of the provisions of the
 Convention), thus limiting a refugee's ability to seek gainful employment. The Gov-
 ernment has further refused to allow undocumented refugees to apply for asylum,
 contrary to another provision of the Convention.
 There was one known report indicating mistreatment of asylees. The UNHCR re-
 ported that the Government deprived two Bosnian Gypsy families of refugee status
 and privileges after they had already been accepted for asylum and were living in
 a government refugee facility. According to the UNHCR, the decision to deprive the
 families of status stemmed from the refugees' social behavior and therefore was not
 reached in accordance with standard procedure: the daughter of one family had at-
 tempted to commit suicide, while another Bosnian Gypsy refugee, who was not part
 of either family but shared the same nationality, was supposedly involved in a
 brawl, an allegation that was disputed by witnesses.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Poles have the right and ability to change their government. This right is guaran-
 teed in the Constitution and exists in practice. Poland is a multiparty democracy
 in which all citizens 18 years of age and older have the right to vote and to cast
 secret ballots.
 Governmental power is divided between the President and Parliament, which is
 composed of an upper house (the Senate) and a lower house (the Sejm). The Con-
 stitution provides for parliamentary elections at least every 4 years. The President,
 elected for 5 years, has the right to dissolve Parliament when Parliament loses con-
 fidence in the Government or when Parliament fails to pass a budget, and Par-
 liament may impeach the President.
 In November 1992, President Walesa signed into law the so-called Little Constitu-
 tion, which is a transition document to be replaced when a "large," or permanent,
 constitution is eventually ratified by Parliament. The Little Constitution specifies
 the division of powers among the President, Prime Minister, and Parliament and
 delineates ways in which a government may be formed or dissolved. The constitu-
 tional balance of power among the presidency, government, and legislature remains
 amorphous, pending the adoption of a formal constitution.
 
 
 1000
 
 In May President Walesa dissolved the Sejm following a motion of no confidence
 in the Suchocka government which passed by one vote. The Suchocka government
 was the fourth to fall since Poland's lirst freely elected Seim took office in 1991. In
 the resulting elections, held in September, the Democratic Left Alliance, a successor
 to the former Communist party, won 171 seats out of 460 in the Sejm (20.4 percent
 of the vote) and formed a coalition with the Polish Peasant Party (132 seats, or 15.4
 percent of the vote), with Waldemar Pawlak of the Peasant Party as Prime Minister.
 The Democratic Union of former Prime Minister Suchocka, which obtained 74 seats,
 based on 10.6 percent of the vote, is the major opposition party. Only three other
 parties exceeded the threshold of 5 percent for representation in Parliament, a re-
 quirement of the 1992 electoral law aimed at avoiding the fragmentation of political
 representation in Parliament. This requirement eliminated most center and right-
 of-center parties that had failed to form electoral alliances.
 The electoral law strictly limited the amount of broadcast time the parties could
 buy and provided that all parties registered on the ballot nationwide were entitled
 to the same amount of free television time. State television provided 90 minutes
 daily of free time over a 14-day period prior to the election. President Walesa used
 his office to campaign on the broadcast media's reglar programming for the Non-
 partisan Bloc in Support of Reform (BBWR), which he created in the wake of the
 dissolution of the Suchocka government as an alternative to the existing parties.
 The other parties complained about this discrepancy, and the electoral commission
 allotted them the equivalent amount of time at a later date. According to the elec-
 tion law, no opinion polls were to be released publicly beginning 12 days before elec-
 tion day. However, one major newspaper illegally ran a poll the day before the elec-
 tions and was consequently fined.
 Women comprised some 10 percent of the candidates for Parliament and approxi-
 mately 15 percent of the candidates elected. A special provision in the electoral law
 exempted national minority parties from the 5-percent threshold; four members of
 the German minority were elected under this provision.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 The Helsinki Committee, a major nongovernmental organization, conducted
 human rights investigations without government interference in 1993. Leading
 members of the Committee reported that the Government displays a generally posi-
 tive and helpful attitude towards human rights investigations.
 Two governmental organizations monitor human rights in Poland. The Office of
 the Commissioner for Civil Rights Protection (the Ombudsman), established in 1987,
 is an independent internal body with broad authority to investigate alleged viola-
 tions of civil rights and liberties. The Ombudsman has no legislative authority and
 is sworn to act apolitically. He registers each case that is reported to his office and
 files grievances, when appropriate, with the relevant government office.
 According to the Ombudsman's office, the Interior Ministry and the armed forces
 have the quickest rates of response to grievances. There were 1,325 cases still pend-
 ing in September, however, some dating back to 1988; most of these dealt with the
 issue of compensation for land that was taken over by the Communist government.
 The Ombudsman conducted aggressive investigations of human rights infringe-
 ments in 1993 in spite of an increasingly negative governmental attitude towards
 his role under the Suchocka government. Under the faw, the Sejm can vote to recall
 the Ombudsman if he proves himself "unfaithful to his oath" to keep faith with the
 Constitution of the Republic of Poland, safeguard the rights and liberties of citizens,
 and carry out his duties impartially. As a result of the Ombudsman's eight com-
 plaints concerning the Minister of Education's 1992 ordinance regulating religious
 education in schools (see Section 2.c.), the ZChN led the more conservative parties
 in the Sejm in accusing the Ombudsman of being "unfaithful to his oath." Nearly
 80 deputies from right-of-center parties filed a motion for a vote of no confidence
 in him in April. The Ombudsman fought back, saying his oath compelled him to pro-
 mote the separation of church and state. The motion died when President Walesa
 dissolved the Sejm in May.
 The second governmental institution, the Senate Office for Intervention, inves-
 tigates a wide range of grievances. In addition to responding to grievances, it may
 also investigate judicial proceedings. Created in 1989, the Office conducts investiga-
 tions and refers legitimate cases to senators whom the investigator feels will be
 sympathetic to the grievance, regardless of their district or political affiliation. If a
 senator does not wish to become involved in the case, the Office presents it to an-
 other senator or senators until it finds someone willing to pursue the matter. The
 Office does not release public reports.
 There are no restrictions on visits by international organizations.
 
 
 1001
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 Women.-The Constitution provides for equal rights regardless of sex and grants
 women equal rights with men in all fields of public, political, economic, social, and
 cultural hife, ic uding equal pay for equal work. In practice, however, women are
 sometimes paid less, ol lesser positions, are discharged more quickly, and are less
 likely to be promoted than men. There are no laws providing explicit legal redress
 for women subjected to such discrimination.
 Women are employed in a broad variety of professions and occupations, and a
 handful of women occupy high positions in many branches of government and in the
 private sector. However, certain Polish laws discriminate against women.
 Under retirement laws, women may retire earlier than men and human rights
 organizations reported that, as a result, employers were generally more hesitant to
 hire women. Polish law does not adequately address equality in hiring practices.
 Women are banned by law from working in 90 occupations in 18 fields of industry,
 health care, forestry, agriculture, and transportation, but unions support the desire
 of women to gain entry into these occupations.
 Unemployment disproportionately affects Polish women, who are more likely to
 lose their jobs than their male colleagues if an employer is forced to scale down
 an ever-increasing phenomenon in the transition economy. The Senate Office of
 Intervention reported that women often do not take advantage of sick leave from
 work so that they will appear healthier to their employers than their male counter-
 parts.
 Although women with infants are eligible to receive a maintenance allowance
 from the State, the amount of the allowance has not kept pace with inflation. The
 Helsinki Committee reported that some progress had been made in improving work-
 ing conditions for women in 1993, and the Government had taken some steps to im-
 prove labor laws for women. A law providing that only women could take a leave
 of absence from work to care for a sick child was amended to include men as well.
 The Helsinki Committee pointed out that men must be 21 years of age to marry,
 while women need only be 18. According to the Helsinki Committee, it is impossible
 to estimate the likely extent of violence against women and spouse abuse, although
 it is certainly a problem in Poland, and the cases that are reported are probably
 but a fraction of the real number. Police do intervene in cases of domestic violence,
 and husbands can be convicted for beating their wives. A first offender is put on
 probation; the penalty for a second offense is from 8 to 12 months in prison.
 Children.-No special laws exist to ensure the protection of children. Child abuse
 is very rarely reported, and convictions for child abuse rarer still. Under the law
 there is no special distinction between children and adults. Until the age of 18, par-
 ents have the right to make all decisions concerning their children's medical treat-
 ment; the Helsinki Committee reports cases of children being forced to have cos-
 metic surgery by their parents or of parents deciding whether or not their child will
 have an abortion. However, education is compulsory until the age of 16. In divorce
 cases, children have no say over which parent will be granted legal guardianship.
 There are no procedures in schools to protect children from abuse by teachers; in
 fact, the teachers' work code guarantees a teacher legal immunity from prosecution
 for the use of corporal punishment in classrooms. Infant mortality is higher in Po-
 land than in developed countries. According to Polish government sources, this is
 because of the inadequate availability of acute postnatal care and the conditions in
 maternity  hospitals. A   center  in  Laski for  children  with  the  human
 immunodeficiency virus (HIV) was closed following the burning down of one its
 buildings. The children have been dispersed throughout Poland.
 National /Racial /Ethnic Minorities.-Poland's population is 97-percent ethnically
 homogeneous, although small Ukrainian, Belarusian, Slovakian, and Lithuanian mi-
 norities reside along the borders, and a German minority is concentrated near the
 southwest city of Opole. There are no restrictions on Polish citizens from non-Polish
 ethnic groups holding office. The new electoral law exempted ethnic minority parties
 from the requirement to win 5 percent of the vote nationwide in order to qualify
 for seats in individual districts. Four members of the German minority party were
 elected to Parliament in September.
 Ethnic tensions exist in the province of Opole, which is approximately 30-percent
 German. Many of the minority Germans charge Polish citizens and the Government
 with discriminating against them. Disputes centered over efforts to restore monu-
 ments built to honor World War II German soldiers and to put up bilingual street
 names, which the regional governor claimed were prohibited by law. Controversy
 also centered on the number of qualified German-language teachers provided by the
 Government and the weekly number of hours of Germanianguage training provided
 in schools.
 
 
 1002
 According to the Krakow prosecutor's office, seven "skinheads" were arrested in
 Krakow in connection with the murder of a German truckdriver in 1992. They have
 been held in detention ever since. No charges have been formally brought against
 them because the Krakow prosecutor's office and the court medical doctors are at
 odds as to the actual cause of the truckdriver's death.
 All minority groups were concerned about education in public schools of their na-
 tive language and customs. Approximately 30,000 ethnic Slovaks live in Poland,
 mostly in the southeast. Their main concern is that not enough Polish schools in
 the region teach the Slovak language. Only about 500 Slovak students are enrolled
 in Polish schools. The Government operates two elementary schools and one high
 school in which classes are taught exclusively in Slovak. The Slovak minority a so
 wants the Government to allow trained Slovakian priests to come to Poland so there
 can be more masses said in Slovak.
 Several persons were tried for desecrating the Soviet soldiers' cemetery in Elblag
 during 1992. In September 1993, two men were convicted of vandalizing it, and both
 were sentenced to  year in prison, suspended for 4 years, the performance of public
 works, and a fine of about $50 to the city. Investigations into vandalism of Soviet
 soldiers' graves at two other cemeteries continued.
 Roma reported that they were often victims of random acts of violence in 1993.
 Many of these were minor acts, such as rocks being thrown through house windows.
 One example of serious crime, though, was a raid on a Gypsy camp outside Warsaw
 in September, in which one of the participants was dressed in a police uniform. Ac-
 cording to the Helsinki Committee, the police investigation is being conducted seri-
 ously and properly. No outcome had been noted in the press by year's end, and it
 was unclear whet er the person involved was actually a police officer. In a public
 forum of national minority organizations, which was held with the Ombudsman in
 July at the behest of the Helsinki Committee, Roma leaders claimed that they con-
 tinued to experience difficulty seeking compensation for damage suffered by Roma
 during the 1991 anti-Roma riots in Mlawa.
 The Ombudsman received 122 complaints from foreigners, of which 35 percent
 dealt with police brutality. Foreigners also complained that they were detained
 without being informed of the charges against them and for excessive periods of
 time and that court interpreters were poor.
 Religious Minorities.-Under communism many church properties were absorbed
 by the State. It is generally more difficult for the Orthodox Church in eastern Po-
 land than for the Catholic Church to obtain compensation for, or the return of, its
 properties, the Helsinki Committee reported. (See Section 2.c. for discussion of gov-
 ernment involvement in religious affairs.)
 Jewish groups have compiained about a playgund installed on Kalisz' former
 Jewish cemetery grounds. There has been no resolution of this issue.
 Violent anti-Semitic incidents are rare in Poland, and none was reported in 1993.
 Despite occasional anti-Semitic rhetoric at _political rallies and demonstrations,
 there are no significant anti-Semitic political parties. The neo-Fascist Polish Na-
 tional Community is weak and has no seats in Parliament. Anti-Semitic graffiti
 sometimes appear in Polish cities, including on Holocaust monuments, and Jews are
 sometimes subjected to anti-Semitic remarks on the street. The press reported in
 December that some Poles had complained about an anti-Semitic requirement in Po-
 land's passport application procedure. The requirement specified that people who
 emigrated from Poland in 1968 on a one-way passport had to sign a special declara-
 tion that they had not gone to Israel or that they had not accepted Israeli citizen-
 ship. A subsequent investigation by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs revealed that
 this requirement had actually been overturned in 1984, but the change was never
 implemented. In December the Ministry of Foreign Affairs announced that the re-
 quirement had been overturned permanentley. A major tension in Catholic-Jewish
 relations was defused when the Pope intervened to instruct Carmelite nuns to leave
 their convent at Oswiecim (Auschwitz), which was located in the "Old Theater" im-
 mediately outside the former concentration camp.
 People with Disabilities.-Poland has no laws guaranteeing rights for the dis-
 abled. Neither buildings nor public transportation are generaly accessible to the
 handicapped.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-All workers, including the police and frontier guards,
 have the legal right to establish and to join trade unions of their own choosing, the
 right to join labor federations and confederations, and the right to affiliate with
 international labor organizations. Following negotiations with trade unions and em-
 ployers in 1992-93, the Suchocka government sent new legislation to Parliament
 concerning trade union rights and collective bargaining under the terms of the so-
 
 
 1003
 called Pact on State Enterprises. Parliament was dissolved on May 31 before the
 legislation could be approved.
 As few as 10 persons may form a trade union, and a founding committee of 3 per-
 sons must register the union in the court of the province where that union's head-
 quarters is located. A decision of the court refusing registration may be appealed
 to an appeals court. Interbranch national unions and national interbranch edera-
 tions must register with the provincial court in Warsaw. As of September, 4 na-
 tional interbranch industrial unions were registered, along with some 17 other
 major independent industrial branch unions and 3 agricultural unions.
 The Independent Self-Governing Trade Union (NSZZ) Solidarity is affiliated with
 the International Confederation of Free Trade Unions and the World Confederation
 of Labor. Solidarity has a membership of 2.2 million (with roughly 81 percent pay-
 ing dues). Spin-offs from mainstream Solidarity include the Christian Trade Union
 Solidarity (16,200 members) and Solidarity '80 (156,000 members), a militant rival
 from which a group broke away to form "August 80."
 The National Alliance of Trade Unions (OPZZ) the Communist-inspired trade
 union, was registered in 1983 as the sole legal aternative to the then repressed
 NSZZ Solidarity. According to trade union legislation of 1991, OPZZ was obligated
 by law to relinquish "inherited" properties and return assets it acquired (or an ap-
 proxination of their value at the time they were seized) following the imposition of
 martial law. The OPZZ did not have sufficient funds to pay Solidarity's claim out-
 right; consequently, negotiations throughout 1993 centered on property claims, some
 of which had already been improprly transferred either to private hands or to
 branch unions no longer affiliated with the OPZZ. As a general rule, Solidarity has
 rejected the OPZZ's suggestion that Solidarity's claims be paid out of the state budg-
 et. In a complaint to the International Labor Organization (ILO), the OPZZ alleged
 that the amount of zlotys (Polish currency) it had been assessed to pay back had
 been unduly indexed, but the ILO Governing Body found that indexation by the
 Government was not inconsistent with the requirements of freedom of association
 in principle.
 The OPZZ claims a membership of 4.7 million, a figure that independent observ-
 ers reject as inflated. Solidarity's continued support for the new collective bargain-
 ing legislation is contingent on prvisions to verify union membership claims. Until
 then, Solidarity refuses to join negotiations with the OPZZ on the grounds that its
 inflated membership figures exagerate its strength at the bargaining table. Among
 several other independent industrial branch unions, the largest and most influential
 is the Free Miners Trade Union, which claims more than 300,00 members.
 All these trade union organizations operate independently of state control. In alli-
 ance with the Social D~mocrats of the-Republic of Poland, the OPZZ, the National
 Teachers' Union, and several others won 63 seats in the September parliamentary
 elections under the banner of the Democratic Left Alliance. The So idarity trade
 union ran a full slate of candidates independent of any political parties but failed
 to meet the necessary threshold of 5 percent of the national vote. It will only have
 nine representatives in the Senate, the upper house of the new Parliament.
 The Trade Union Act of 1991 is less restrictive than the 1982 version passed soon
 after the imposition of martial law, but it still prescribes a lengthy process before
 a strike may be launched. During this period, the law, when strictly adered to, pro-
 vides several opportunities for employers to challenge a pending strike-including
 the threat of legal action. An employer-the Act makes no distinction bet. ecn state-
 owned and private firms- must start negotiations the moment a dispute begins.
 Negotiations end with either an agreement or a protocol describing the differences
 between the parties. If negotiations fail, a mandatory mediation process ensues; the
 mediator is appointed jointly by the disputing parties or, lacking agreement between
 them, by the Minister of Labor and Social Policy. If mediation fails, the trade union
 may launch a warning strike for a period of up to 2 hours or seek arbitration of
 the dispute. Both employers and employees have frequently questioned the impar-
 tiality of the mediators.
 Aul-fledged strike may not be launched until 14 days after the dispute is an-
 nounced (strikes are prohibited entirely in the Office of State Protection, in units
 of the police firemen, military forces, prison services, and frontier guards). A strike
 may be proclaimed by the trade union after approval by the majority of voting work-
 ers and should be announced at least 5 days in advance. If the strike is organized
 in accordance with the law, the worker retains his right to social insurance benefits
 but not pay. If a strike is "organized contrary to the provisions of the law," the
 workers may lose social insurance benefits; organizers are liable for damages and
 may face civil charges and fines. Laws prohibiting retribution against strikers are
 not consistently enforced; the fines imposed as punishment are so minimal that em-
 ployers can easily afford to pay them.
 
 
 1004
 The Government anticipated that the Trade Union Act would discourage labor
 disputes, but in fact the absence of a stable process for resolving them contributed
 to a worsening of tensions on the shop floor in 1993. The Suchocka government
 hoped that the collective bargaining aspects of the Pact on State Enterprises would
 heIp remedy that situation, but shop floor tensions turned into full-fledged strikes
 before the fegislation could be passed. The Government faced a major strike in the
 Silesian coalhasin in January and only narrowly avoided a simultaneous stoppage
 by public service workers. Tensions in the latter sector led to another strIke in
 April, culminating in a successful no confidence motion in the Government launched
 by Solidarity parliamentarians in May.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The May 1991 law on trade
 unions and collective disputes generally creates a favorable environment to conduct
 trade union activity through provisions for time off with pay, as well as facilities
 and technical equipment in the enterprise. Notable weaknesses in the law include
 minor penalties for antiunion discrimination and, given Poland's ongoing economic
 transition, the lack of specific provisions to ensure that a union has continued rights
 of representation when a state firm undergoes privatization, bankruptcy, or sale.
 Unions, management, and workers' councils set wages in ad hoc negotiations at
 the enterprise level; collective bargaining as such does not exist. When formal agree-
 ments have been reached, they are routinely ignored and overtaken by enterprise-
 level disputes. In response to complaints from the Federation of Mining Unions and
 the Occupational Union of Employees in the Copper Industry regarding the refusal
 of the Government to negotiate with the strike committee of miners and copper
 works group unless Solidarity also participated, the ILO Governing Body urged the
 Government to begin negotiations with the complainants with a view to concluding
 agreements on the procedure for settling collective disputes and in order to dispel
 an possibility of discrimination against them.
 I common complaint voiced by organized labor is that the Polish laws concerning
 trade unions and collective disputes presume a fully developed market economy with
 private employers as negotiating partners. Because the State still is the dominant
 employer in Polish industry, government ministers gt drawn into ro-tine labor dis-
 l utes, thereby unduly politicizing the process of labor-management relations. The
 act on State Enterprises, initialed by several of the major trade unions in 1992,
 is designed to address these weaknesses by codifying labor's involvement in the
 process of enterprise restructuring and privatization. As it stands, however, the law
 does not take into account the special circumstances created by Poland's trans-
 formation from a Socialist centrally planned economy to a market-oriented system
 in which many grievances arise from Poland's massive, structural economic adjust-
 ment. Women, for example, are generally the first fired in a mass layoff because
 it is assumed that men are the principal wage earners in a family.
 Throughout 1993, the Government continued to impose a ceiling on wages in state
 enterprises through a penalty tax, the so-called popiwek, in an effort to link wages
 to increases in productivity and reduce inflationary pressures in the state industrial
 sector. The penalty tax is charged on any state company (which does not produce
 for export) that increases its average wage in excess of a government-set "inflation
 coefficient." The enforcement of the popiwek tax on excessive wage growth effec-
 tively discouraged enterprise or sectoral-level collective bargaining on wages.
 Current government policy aims to liberalize investment procedures for both do-
 mestic and foreign firms rather than to promote special incentive programs. Special
 duty-free zones exist in or have been contemplated for some 15 to 20 locations
 throughout Poland but, with the exception of one zone in Poznan and one in Mielec
 (near Krakow), have not thus far attracted much attention. Thus, traditional export
 processing zones that relax legal guarantees do not, at this time, constitute a threat
 to workers' rights to organize. As in all other areas, however, collective bargaining
 does not exist.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-Compulsory labor does not exist
 in Poland, although it is not prohibited by law. The Polish Government has signed
 the ILO Convention, which prohibits compulsory labor.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The Labor Code forbids the em-
 ployment of persons under the age of 15. The employment of persons aged 15 to 18
 is permitted only if that person as completed basic schooling and if the proposed
 employment constitutes vocational training. The age floor is raised to 18 if a par-
 ticular job might pose a health danger. The Government enforces legal protection
 of minors, but its inability to monitor the growing private sector leaves officials less
 certain that the problem does not exist.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-A national minimum wage is negotiated every
 3 months by the Ministry of Labor and Social Policy and trade unions. Minimum
 wages for state-owned enterprises are roughly $85 (ZI 1,650,000) per month at the
 
 
 1005
 October 1 exchange rate which is insufficient to provide a worker and family a de-
 cent standard of living. The minimum wage has the force of law, but a significant
 number of foreign guest workers receive less than the minimum wage, especially in
 the construction industry. The average monthly wage is roughly $197 (Zl 3,845,000).
 There is a standard legal workweek of 42 hours which allows 6- or 7-hour days,
 including at least one 24-hour rest period.
 The Legal Code defines minimum conditions for the protection of workers' health
 and safety; a new draft of that code was approved by Parliament. Enforcement is
 a growing problem because an ever-increasing portion of Polish economic activity is
 in private hands and outside the purview of the State Labor Inspectorate, which is
 unable to monitor both the state and private sectors of the economy. In addition,
 there is a lack of clarity concerning which government or legislative body has the
 responsibility for enforcing the law. About 102,944 serious work-related accidents
 were reported in 1992, involving 644 deaths and 3,380 cases of dismemberment.
 This represents a downward trend in work-related accidents, but as the Government
 itself has noted, work conditions in Poland are poor. Standards for exposure to
 chemicals, dust, and noise are routinely exceeded.
