POLAND
The report on Poland provides a generally accurate assessment of the
human rights situation during 1987, and is significantly more thorough than in
previous years. The State Department reports that:
[t]he exercise of human rights remains considerably restricted, particularly in such areas as the right of assembly and free association, workers rights, freedom from arbitrary detention, the right to a fair trial, and, ultimately, the right of citizens to choose their own government.
But it also correctly notes that Poles do have "some freedom of speech, access to a wide range of independent (including church) publications, and the right to worship freely and to travel abroad." Despite this balanced and generally fair portrayal, the report understates the extent of continuing human rights violations in several respects.
When discussing freedom of expression, the report states that "Poland's extensive network of underground publications continues to flourish with official acquiescence." This statement implies that the government willingly tolerates the existence of these publications. In fact, while the government is certainly aware of their existence, the entire editorial and printing process has to be pursued with great secrecy because throughout 1987 the government continued to confiscate any printing equipment it found and to impose heavy fines on those involved in printing and distribution.
In the section regarding arbitrary interference with privacy, the report states that Poles are not "forced to participate in any political organization although it is understood that membership in the PZPR [the Polish United Workers' (Communist) Party] is advisable for advancement in certain professions." This assertion understates the pressure that is often exerted on individuals to join the Communist Party or the government-controlled trade unions. For example, numerous benefits are frequently reserved for members of government-controlled unions, such as access to vacation centers,
125
Critique
opportunities to purchase goods that are unavailable on the regular market, and financially attractive foreign assignments. With regard to the freedom of assembly and association, the report does not mention the newly created Polish Socialist Party and the severe harassment to which its members have been sub-j ected. Most of the group's meetings have been interrupted either by police raids or by the detention of its leaders beforehand.
In coimting the number of political prisoners in Poland, the report states that by the end of 1987there were 19. Our information indicates that there were actually 21 prisoners held on politically related charges.
In the section regarding foreign travel, emigration and repatriation, the report mentions the recent liberalization of the passport policies, including "the guarantee that persons abroad 'illegally^ would not face reprisals upon returning to Poland unless guilty of anti-Polish or criminal activities." It would have been worth mentioning that the government does not specify what it considers to be "anti-Polish" activity, and that in the past it has viewed the mere involvement with many emigre or human rights organizations to be anti-Polish.
In contrast, to the report on Czechoslovakia the report on Poland does not address substandard prison conditions in Poland. The conditions in police lock-ups and prisons stand in flagrant Niolation of international standards, and a discussion of this problem should have been included.
Finally, the report refers to an "anonymous chapter" of the Helsinki Committee in Poland. In fact, the entire Polish Helsinki Committee has been anonymous since the imposition of martial law in December 1981 because of the dai^er of reprisals if the identities of its members become known.
126
