 POLAND
 Poland is ruled by the leadership of the Polish United Workers
 (Communist) Party (PUWP) headed by General Jaruzelski. He is
 also the Supreme Commander of the Armed Forces in his capacity
 as Chairman of the National Defense Committee. In November
 1985 General Jaruzelski became Chairman of the Council of
 State and was replaced as Chairman of the Council of Ministers
 by Zbigniew Messner, an economist. Two other parties, the
 United Peasants Party and the Democratic Party, are
 represented in the Government and the Sejm (Parliament), but
 their representatives collaborate closely with and are
 dominated by the Communist leadership.
 Poland has a powerful security apparatus administered by the
 Minister of Internal Affairs. The Ministry's power was
 trimmed briefly by the trial and conviction of four of its
 secret police officers for the October 1984 kidnapping and
 murder of Father Jerzy Popieluszko, a Catholic priest and
 human rights activist with close ties to the Solidarity trade
 union movement. They received sentences of up to 25 years in
 prison. Since the termination of martial law in 1983, the
 army has returned to its barracks but a military leader,
 General Kisczak, remains Minister of the Interior.
 Poland's economic recovery continues slowly under the burden
 of substantial economic difficulties, including large debts to
 foreign creditors. Reforms aimed at greater decentralization
 of decisionmaking have modified only marginally the economic
 system's basic dependence on central control over resource
 management, production, and distribution. The major exception
 to that system remains Poland's predominantly private
 agricultural sector, in which the right to own land is
 provided. Small private businesses, mostly in the crafts and
 service areas, are also permitted.
 During 1985, the principal issue of public life in Poland
 remained the tension between the Government and the great
 numbers of Poles who distrust or oppose the regime of General
 Jaruzelski. The Polish Constitution and legal code provide
 for a wide spectrum of civil and political rights. Other
 legislation, however, makes it clear that these rights are
 subordinate to the interests of the State. In an important
 negative development in the human rights area, legislation
 enacted in 1985 modified the Penal Code to provide, among
 other things, for the greatly enlarged use of summary courts.
 These courts are empowered to bring an accused to trial within
 48 hours of arrest and to impose prison terms of up to 3 years
 for certain criminal and noncriminal offenses. According to
 an official source, some 20 percent of all penal cases were
 being heard under accelerated procedures, and more than 8,000
 persons, including many of at least 400 political prisoners,
 had been sentenced between July and December under these
 accelerated proceedings.
 Other negative developments included: the conviction and
 sentencing of 3 noted opposition activists to prison terms of
 2-1/2 to 3-1/2 years for participating in a meeting which
 allegedly discussed plans to call a 15-minute strike
 protesting food price rises; amendments to the Trade Union Act
 of 1985 which indefinitely postponed the possibility of union
 pluralism; legislation c6ncerning higher education which
 severely reduced the relative independence of Polish
 universities; and the increase in the number of political
 prisoners detained in jail or serving sentences from about 50
 
 
 1054
 POLAND
 at the beginning of 1985 to a high of about 360 in
 mid-October. A limited release of political prisoners was
 announced late in November. By year's end there were still at
 least 200 people being held on political charges.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 On February 7, 4 officers of the security service of the
 Ministry of Internal Affairs received prison sentences ranging
 from 14 to 25 years for their roles in the kidnapping and
 murder of the Catholic human rights activist and Solidarity
 supporter, Father Jerzy Popieluszko. Their conviction marked
 the end of a public trial, unprecedented in postwar Eastern
 Europe, in which members of the secret police were made "
 accountable for their illegal activities against a citizen.
 Despite the outcome of the trial, many Poles remain convinced
 some senior official inspired the killing and will never be
 brought to trial.
 The Polish Helsinki Committee believes that since December 13,
 1981, the deaths of at least 118 persons, including many
 active in Solidarity, may be directly attributed to the
 violent imposition of martial law and the continuing
 suppression of popular movements in the name of public order.
 The committee alleges that six individuals died in 1985 as a
 result of physical abuse by police after arrest, and that
 three Solidarity activists died under suspicious
 circumstances. The committee reports no instances of deaths
 brought about during 1985 by police operations or actions
 against strikers or demonstrators.
 b. Disappearance
 Instances of prolonged or permanent disappearance have not
 been reported.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 There is no evidence that the authorities systematically use
 torture to extract information. However, there have been
 frequent cumplaints by human rights groups of the militia or
 secret police having beaten or mistreated persons in their
 custody.
 In December a Polish human rights activist released a report
 accusing prison authorities in the southwestern Polish town of
 Leczyca of torturing (beating) several political prisoners.
 In March a French citizen, Frederic Castaing, was detained by
 police in Krakow for 48 hours, accused of acting as a courier
 for Solidarity, and then given 48 hours to leave the country.
 Just after his release he was reportedly seized by three
 unidentified men, taken to an isolated location, tortured for
 several hours by burning with cigarettes, and then left near a
 hospital. In April in the same city, a Catholic priest with
 ties to the Solidarity movement, Father Tadeusz Zaleski,
 reported that he was attacked and gassed at home by a masked
 man and received second degree burns on his face, chest, and
 hands. The Government dismissed Father Zaleski's claim and
 
 
 1055
 POLAND
 implied that his wounds were self-inflicted; the Church has
 supported Father Zaleski's version. In December, Father
 Zaleski was again reportedly attacked, this time by two men
 and one woman, and had to be hospitalized with head injuries.
 Incidents of this nature are not likely to occur without
 secret police involvement.
 Both the militia and the riot police have employed unwarranted
 force, such as beatings and the use of water cannon, against
 peaceful antigovernment demonstrators. As there have been
 fewer demonstrations in 1985, there have also been fewer
 reports of the use of excessive police force.
 There were continuing reports of poor prison conditions for
 political prisoners and of some prisoners suffering from food
 poisoning or hepatitis as a result of eating the prison fare.
 Medical services reportedly were also poor at many prisons.
 Some prisoners have been furloughed in order to obtain
 necessary medical care.
 Prisoners who engaged in hunger strikes, either to protest
 prison conditions or to gain governmental recognition as
 political prisoners, have been subjected to force-feeding by
 prison authorities, sometimes administered so ineptly as to
 cause injury.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Polish law allows for a 48-hour detention period before the
 authorities have to bring formal charges. Certain categories
 of offenses may actually be tried within 48 hours of arrest
 under special, accelerated procedures, whose use was greatly
 enlarged under legislation passed in May 1985. Other
 suspects, after the presentation of the legal basis for formal
 investigation, may be held in indefinite "investigatory" or
 "temporary" arrest. During this period there is no guarantee
 of access to a lawyer. Once a formal indictment is filed, the
 defendant is allowed ample time to study the charges in
 consultation with an attorney of his or her choice. A trial
 date is set only after the defendant expresses readiness.
 Legal provisions for bail are rarely used, but suspects, as
 well as those already convicted, are sometimes furloughed for
 humanitarian reasons.
 Polish law does not contain any provision for forced exile.
 Under 1983 legislation, individuals who are registered as
 unemployed and who refuse to seek employment without adequate
 justification can be listed as "habitual parasites" and
 compelled to accept specific employment, usually street
 cleaning, park maintenance or garbage collection, under threat
 of penal sanction. To date application of the law does not
 suggest it is intended as a means of political coercion or
 education, as an additional sanction against the free
 expression of political or ideological opinions, or as a means
 of racial or social discrimination. Penal sanctions under
 this law are rare. In August wide publicity was given to the
 case of a man in Szczecin fined roughly $2,000, or more than 1
 year's average income, for refusing persistently to accept a
 job as garbage collector.
 
 
 1056
 POLAND
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Amendments to the Penal Code enacted by the Sejm (Parliament)
 in May 1985 and put into effect on July 1, ostensibly to
 assure the speedy hearing of certain accusations, have greatly
 enlarged the application of special accelerated trial
 procedures that severely limit the rights of defendants. In
 such summary trials, charges are made by the police rather
 than the prosecution, and the defendants are not given an
 opportunity to choose an attorney. The assigned public
 defender has little time to discuss the case with his client
 and no time to search for witnesses or for evidence of
 innocence since the defendant may be tried within 48 hours of
 arrest. These special courts, which earlier dealt with a
 narrow range of misdemeanor-type offenses, can now pronounce
 prison sentences of up to 3 years and a fine of about $3,000
 for some offenses. On October 16 a deputy minister of justice
 announced that some 20 percent of all penal charges were being
 heard under this "accelerated procedure."
 During the trial of four officers of the security service for
 the murder of Father Popieluszko (see Section l.a.), testimony
 about the possible involvement of senior government figures
 was censored from media coverage. Furthermore, the
 prosecutor's closing statement sharply attacked Father
 Popieluszko and the Catholic Church.
 The trial of opposition activists Bogdan Lis, Adam Michnik,
 and Wladyslaw Frasyniuk during May and June in Gdansk was
 widely criticized for the "political" nature of the charges,
 for the conduct of the trial, and for the verdict. All three
 were arrested in a private meeting in Gdansk on February 13 at
 which the Government alleged that a token 15-minute strike in
 protest against price rises was being discussed. The charges
 against them were fomenting public unrest and participating in
 the activities of an illegal association (Solidarity's
 underground Temporary Coordinating Commission). The trial was
 closed to journalists, outside observers, and the general
 public. The court reportedly often prevented the defendants
 from addressing the charges against them and, on occasion,
 ordered them removed from the court for protesting violations
 of their rights or improper judicial procedure. The verdict,
 sentencing the defendants to terms of 2-1/2, 3, and 3-1/2
 years was widely deplored.
 During the course of 1985 the number of political prisoners
 rose continually according to official figures, from about 50
 as the year began to a peak of over 360 in October.
 Throughout 1985 the spokesman of the Government reported
 frequently on the number of persons imprisoned or arrested for
 "noncriminal reasons." On October 22 he said that the figures
 included "282 persons held in investigative custody, 70
 convicts, and 11 not embraced by the 1984 Amnesty Act--a total
 of 363 persons." By year's end the Government said about 200
 prisoners had been released, leaving at least 160 still in
 custody. Human rights groups estimated that with continuing
 arrests, at least 200 people were still being held. They
 consider that the Government's figures do not include various
 political activists arrested or convicted on criminal
 charges. Many also decry the fact that the official figure
 includes the four secret police officers convicted for the
 murder of Father Popieluszko.
 
 
 1057
 POLAND
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Although government activities in Poland appear less intrusive
 than in other Warsaw Pact countries, it is generally assumed
 that mail and phone calls are selectively monitored. Overt
 censorship of the mail and announced monitoring of telephone
 calls ceased with the suspension of martial law. Packages to
 be mailed abroad must be assembled at the post office in the
 presence of a customs official or postal worker. The
 Government does not interfere with the right to marry or to
 have children as one chooses, nor does it prevent the teaching
 of religion to children at home or in churches. However, the
 Government often views as suspect the contacts of its citizens
 with foreigners and.with domestic political opponents.
 Searches without warrant of homes and offices and confiscation
 of personal documents and property continue in Poland.
 Warrants are sometimes required under Polish law, although the
 circumstances under which the warrant requirement applies are
 ambiguous.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Although the Constitution provides for freedom of speech, this
 right has been systematically abridged. The freedom to
 express one's opinion in a coffeehouse conversation is
 generally tolerated, while the freedom to distribute
 opposition pamphlets or deliver a controversial speech in a
 public place is not.
 One example of freedom of expression is the monthly "Mass for
 the Fatherland" held in the church of St. Stanislaw Kostka
 where Father Popieluszko used to preach (see Section l.a.).
 Attendance at the Mass is regarded as a way of expressing
 support for the Catholic Church, Father Popieluszko's work,
 and the ideals of the Solidarity trade union movement.
 Official censorship of all media exists as part of the
 authorities' control mechanism. Censorship in Poland
 generally assumes one of three basic forms. First, there is
 self-censorship. Many articles are consciously or
 unconsciously self-censored by their authors before being
 submitted, more often to increase the chances for publication
 than to avoid specific reprisals. Second, editors of
 state-run media may kill an article or program entirely, if
 they feel its content is too controversial. Controversial
 articles or programs which do appear are often the result of
 prolonged bargaining with editors and censors. Finally, there
 is the government censorship apparatus. It is frequently
 impossible to detect the impact of the formal censorship
 process in state-controlled media, but such publications as
 the Catholic weekly, Tygodnik Powszechny, and the monthly of
 the Catholic intelligentsia clubs, Wiez, indicate to their
 readers, in brackets, where the censors have deleted material
 and which particular provision of the censorship laws has been
 invoked.
 The vast majority of newspapers and journals are state-owned
 and operated, as are publishing houses, television channels,
 and radio stations. While the state-owned press follows the
 approved government line on all essential issues, it does
 provide a forum for debate on certain domestic issues and even
 
 
 1058.
 POLAND
 on some foreign policy questions. This is usually a debate of
 nuance rather than of fundamental principles, goals, or
 policies. The major national dailies are closely identified
 with elements of the ruling elite (e.g., the Communist Party,
 the government apparatus, and the armed forces), and the
 distinct interests of each can often be detected in its
 paper's columns. In addition, long articles, essays, and
 columns in various weeklies present contending views on such
 matters as economic and administrative reform, public policy
 and cadre matters, the nature and extent of "national
 reconciliation", and the role of the Church and labor unions.
 Despite censorship, Poland may still have the least controlled
 official press (as distinct from the more tightly run
 electronic media) of all Warsaw Pact countries. In addition,
 some nongovernmental publications like Tygodnik Powszechny
 offer a true alternative voice to the government-run media,
 although their circulation and impact are limited by
 government restrictions on newsprint and by censorship. There
 is also an active underground press, chiefly reflecting the
 views of the banned Solidarity trade union and its
 supporters. It publishes weekly newspapers, periodicals, and
 books despite government efforts to stamp it out.
 Amendments adopted in July 1985 to the 1982 higher education
 law empower local and national authorities to increase
 substantially their control over universities and other
 college-level institutions which could significantly increase
 the curbs on freedom of inquiry. The changes in the law
 provide for the vetting of all candidates for rectorships by
 the Minister of Higher Education for a greater degree of
 direct government involvement in university operations, and
 for strict limitations on the role of university senates and
 student self-government. The 1985 amendments legislate the
 composition of university senates, reserving seats for party
 and other official representatives and senior faculty, while
 limiting representation for younger faculty, "nonscientific"
 university employees, and students. In late 1985 over 70
 rectors, deans, and department chairmen were dismissed from
 their administrative positions in order to ensure tighter
 government control.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Freedom of peaceful assembly and association remain restricted
 in Poland. Public meetings and rallies require official
 sponsorship or permission, and permission is not granted for
 meetings of opposition groups such as Solidarity.
 Unauthorized protest meetings and demonstrations continued to
 occur in 1985, but with less participation than in the martial
 law period. Small gatherings, usually of students or workers,
 take place in private homes for the purpose of participating
 in "free university" courses and seminars on Polish history,
 sociology, economics, and other subjects. The authorities
 have generally not interfered with these meetings.
 A "law on foundations," enacted in spring 1984, established a
 judicial basis for the formation of private, nonprofit
 institutions to conduct certain charitable, social, and
 health-related activities. The Roman Catholic Church and
 Government representatives continued to discuss details of the
 proposed church-sponsored foundation to assist Polish private
 farmers. Discussions are also under way with the Rockefeller
 
 
 1059
 POLAND
 Brothers Foundation on a program to assist Polish agriculture
 and to promote export earnings.
 Associations or clubs need either official permission or
 sponsorship. Since the end of martial law, some
 organizations, notably Catholic intelligentsia clubs, have
 been permitted to resume activities. About 40 such clubs
 exist throughout the country.
 Professional associations, such as the writers' union, were
 disbanded under martial law and replaced by organizations more
 subservient to the Government. These associations must be
 registered with the courts, which in some cases have refused
 to grant legal recognition to an association or union, because
 its charter did not conform to legal requirements.
 A 1982 Trade Union law outlawed Solidarity and other labor
 unions and provided for the formation of new
 government-controlled unions. A few unions were organized
 under the new law at the enterprise level (factory or shop) in
 1983, and industry-wide occupational federations (e.g., of
 steelworkers' unions) were formed in 1984. Following a
 national congress in late November 1984, organizers proclaimed
 the formation of the national alliance of trade unions or
 OPZZ. Formal legal registration of the new union
 confederation followed quickly. The OPZZ has joined the
 Communist-dominated World Federation of Trade Unions.
 Additional national meetings and organizational activities of
 the OPZZ took place throughout 1985. The OPZZ played a
 well-publicized role in government-sponsored public
 consultations, first on the national economic plan and later
 on the related issues of food price increases and rationing.
 In both cases the alliance took public positions critical of
 elements of government policy and declared its intention to be
 a "troublesome partner" of the Government in vigorously
 defending workers' interests, especially on bread and butter
 issues.
 During the spring, the OPZZ participated in a government-
 established commission to amend the 1982 law. The resulting
 amendments, approved by the Sejm (Parliament) during the
 summer, gave the OPZZ greater power to distribute such fringe
 benefits as allocation of spaces in factory-owned vacation
 resorts, priority in purchasing apartments, and permits to buy
 cars, household furnishings, appliances, and other items in
 relatively short supply on the market. Significantly, the
 amendments also postponed indefinitely any reintroduction of
 union pluralism.
 In a separate action, the Government formally transferred to
 the OPZZ the offices, equipment, and financial assets of
 Solidarity and other pre-1982 unions. The authorities have
 recently brought a court action against the former Solidarity
 leader in Wroclaw, Jozef Pinior, who had retained the fund of
 union dues that had belonged to his Solidarity region before
 martial law and refused to acknowledge the legitimacy of the
 new unions.
 According to official statements, the OPZZ has a membership of
 some 5.5 million. The official Polish press agency reported
 on August 27 that 60 percent of the members, or about 3.3
 million, are active workers (the Solidarity trade union in the
 premartial law period had nearly 10 million members). The
 
 
 1060
 POLAND
 non-rural work force is estimated to total about 15 million.
 Although Solidarity has not had legal status since the 1982
 Trade Union Act, some factory-level Solidarity organizations
 continue to carry out informational, educational, and
 self-help.activities among workers and their families on a
 local level.
 Previous involvement in Solidarity activities deters
 management from hiring an applicant, thus curtailing both
 worker mobility and possibilities for union activity. Workers
 continue to be dismissed from their jobs because of previous
 or continued support of Solidarity. This has affected, in
 particular, ex-internees or political prisoners who have been
 released.
 The right to strike exists by law, but it is severely
 limited. Those who, in the opinion of the authorities, abuse
 the right are subject to criminal punishment. Unofficial
 observers believe that local unauthorized strikes occurred
 frequently in 1985. Most of these actions concerned local
 issues and were settled quickly through conciliatory actions
 by management. There are reports, however, that the
 organizers of unauthorized strikes sometimes suffer subsequent
 discrimination. Political activity by trade unions is
 specifically forbidden by law, and the Government can broadly
 interpret what is considered "political."  The right to
 collective bargaining for wages and improved working
 conditions has been considerably restricted since the
 suspension and subsequent prohibition of Solidarity. The
 Government acknowledged in October 1985 that factory
 managements have "failed to create conditions for trade unions
 to fulfill the role of co-manager."
 c. Freedom of Religion
 The Constitution guarantees "freedom of conscience and
 belief," and Polish citizens, both in law and fact, enjoy
 considerable freedom to practice their religion. However,
 party authorities discourage the open practice of religion.
 The Church has criticized a new campaign for propagating
 atheism in the schools.
 Poland is overwhelmingly Roman Catholic; the Catholic Church
 maintains over 3,300 churches, schools, and other
 institutions. Seminaries train large numbers of priests, and
 many religious orders are represented. The Catholic Church
 publishes significant numbers of books and periodicals, as
 does the independent Catholic press. Sunday Mass is broadcast
 over Polish radio under a provision of the 1980 Gdansk Accords
 that is still observed. The Catholic University of Lublin
 remains the only university in Eastern Europe under private
 control.
 Relations between the Government and the Roman Catholic Church
 have been strained, particularly so following the 1984 murder
 of human rights activist Father Jerzy Popieluszko. The
 Bishops' Conference protested the conduct and official press
 coverage of the trial of his accused assailants, as well as
 press attacks on Pope John Paul II. An April incident in
 which a priest claimed he had been attacked and tortured added
 further tension. Efforts to establish a church-administered
 foundation to aid private agriculture continued to meet
 official obstacles. A June meeting between General Jaruzelski
 and Cardinal Glemp, the Polish Primate, appeared to do little
 
 
 1061
 POLAND
 to resolve church-state issues. But discussions take place
 frequently at various levels. The Primate and the Episcopate
 as a whole, as well as individual clergy and Catholic lay
 leaders, continue to campaign vigorously for greater
 individual freedom and respect for human rights.
 There is no official discrimination against minority
 religions. The Orthodox, Muslim, and Jewish faiths and the
 various Protestant denominations sometimes find it difficult
 to maintain their places of worship and train their clergy.
 Their representatives cite limited financial resources, some
 traditional prejudices, and widely dispersed congregations as
 the chief reasons for their difficulties. Protestant services
 are also broadcast on Sundays over Polish radio.
 d. Freedom of Movement within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration and Repatriation
 There are no restrictions on travel within Poland. There are
 no legal restrictions on changing one's residence, but the
 housing shortage makes this nearly impossible in practice.
 Cases of persons working in one location and legally
 "residing" hundreds of kilometers away are not uncommon.
 The 1983 law on the liberalized issuance of passports for
 travel abroad continues to be applied flexibly. Actual
 denials of passport applications are not numerous but do
 occur. Denials are most often received by persons working in
 areas of scientific research or industry considered
 "sensitive" by the Government. Several prominent dissidents
 have been denied passports for visits abroad; many others have
 declined to apply for passports, fearing that, once out of
 Poland, they would be denied the right to return.
 In order to receive an emigration passport, Poles must divest
 themselves of all real property and obtain customs permission
 for any personal items they wish to take. Although most
 applicants for emigration passports eventually obtain them,
 certain cases appear to require an unduly lengthy waiting
 period. While a few Solidarity members, formerly interned or
 jailed because of their activity, have been denied passports
 when seeking to relocate to another country, many others have
 been encouraged to leave, as the Government tries to rid the
 country of persons it views as "troublesome." Once residing
 abroad, a Polish citizen must exchange an emigration passport
 for a consular passport (one issued by a Polish Consulate
 abroad) for return trips to Poland. Otherwise there are no
 formal restrictions on an emigrant's return to Poland.
 Only Polish citizens who have been issued emigration passports
 are legally permitted to take up residence in another
 country. Polish citizens who leave Poland on tourist
 passports and take up residence abroad without the permission
 of the Polish Government may, should they return to Poland for
 a temporary stay, experience difficulties departing again.
 Polish citizens who emigrate legally from Poland, and who
 desire to return for brief visits on consular passports,
 generally experience few difficulties with the authorities.
 Under Polish citizenship law, only the Council of State may
 revoke citizenship. According to the law, involuntary
 revocation must be based on one of the following activities:
 actions violating the duty of allegiance to the Polish State;
 actions detrimental to the substantial interests of Poland;
 
 
 1062
 POLAND
 departure from Poland after May 9, 1945, and failure to return
 when so requested by the Polish Government; evasion of
 military service; or conviction abroad of a crime also
 recognized as a felony under Polish criminal law. The
 Government recently used this prerogative in revoking the
 citizenship of two former ambassadors who defected to the
 United States, as well as the citizenship of a Polish
 journalist now working for Radio Free Europe.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Poland is ruled by the PUWP, or Communist Party, through
 General Jaruzelski who, with a small group of advisers,
 determines national policy goals. They implement policy
 through the government ministries and through a parallel party
 bureaucracy which complements and interacts with the
 ministries. Unlike elsewhere in Eastern Europe, the party is
 not always clearly the dominating force. Various economic
 ministries, as well as the military and security services
 often play key roles, not only in exercising power but also
 sometimes in setting policies. The two other coalition
 partners, the United Peasants Party and the Democratic Party,
 continue to be responsive to PUWP guidance as is the Patriotic
 Movement for National Rebirth, an umbrella group of political,
 economic, and social organizations that cooperates with the
 authorities.
 The Constitution specifies that the Seim (Parliament) is the
 chief legislative body of Poland. The Seim can be counted on
 to pass, nearly unanimously, any legislation that the Prime
 Minister and the relevant bureaucracies believe is necessary.
 Nevertheless, when the authorities seemed undecided or divided
 during 1985, deputies in the Seim were on occasion able to
 modify proposed legislation, especially in behind-the-scenes
 committee sessions.
 National parliamentary elections were held in October 1985.
 After wide-ranging debate on possible democratic reforms,
 including an open nomination procedure and mandatory use of
 the voting booth, the PUWP decided, nevertheless, to keep all
 crucial controls in its hands. In addition to 50 uncontested
 seats, which included Jaruzelski, most of his closest
 advisers, and other leaders, 2 candidates, each of the same
 party or grouping, were nominated to vie for each of the other
 410 seats in the Sejm. The PUWP maintained its nominal
 majority in the Sejm. Although the number of nonparty
 deputies rose from 49 to 74, many were identified with the
 Jaruzelski regime. Several critical voices from the previous
 Sejm were not renominated.
 According to the Government, more than 78 percent of eligible
 voters went to the polls, up from the 75 percent turnout it
 claimed in the 1984 local elections. The opposition, claimed
 that the turnout was only about 66 percent. The Government is
 bringing charges against Solidarity leader Lech Walesa on the
 grounds of having slandered the State in presenting
 Solidarity's figures for the election.
 
 
 1063
 POLAND
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernthental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 Although the Government signed the Final Act of the Conference
 on Security and Cooperation in Europe, it generally maintains
 that international inquiries into the human rights situation
 in Poland constitute interference in Poland's internal
 affairs. This attitude was evident throughout the
 International Labor Organization's (ILO) investigation of
 violations of international labor standards in Poland. The
 report of the ILO's commission of inquiry, published in June
 1984, noted that the Polish Government "systematically
 abstained from participating in the procedure and from
 replying to the various communications addressed to it
 concerning the complaint." The ILO found that "the basic
 objection advanced by the Government of Poland to justify its
 attitude of non-cooperation was.. .that the procedure of the
 complaint constituted interference in Poland's internal
 affairs." The ILO found the Government's objection "devoid of
 any legal validity." After the ILO governing body voted in
 November 1984 to note the commission's report, thereby turning
 the case over to the ILO's normal executive machinery, Poland
 announced its intention to withdraw from the ILO...
 The Government has also not cooperated in the implementation
 of a 1983 resolution of the United Nations Human Rights
 Commission requesting the Secretary General or his designee to
 update and complete a comprehensive study of the human rights
 situation in Poland. The Government refused to allow the
 Secretary General's special representative to visit Poland in
 preparation of his report.
 Domestic human rights organizations are not officially allowed
 in Poland. The Polish Helsinki Committee, which operates
 anonymously, issues reports from time to time on the human
 rights situation in Poland. Following the murder of Father
 Popieluszko, groups of prominent intellectuals and social
 activists undertook to form several open committees on human
 rights, generally known by the Polish acronym "KOPP." The
 Government declared such organizations illegal and warned
 foreign news correspondents that they risked prosecution if
 they attended news conferences called by such committees.
 Many KOPP members have been questioned by the police regarding
 their activities; several have been fined or given short jail
 sentences. In June human rights activist Jan Kostecki was
 sentonced to 2 years in prison for his activities as deputy
 chairman of the regional KOPP in Szczecin. Underground
 Solidarity publications also call attention to reports of
 human rights violations. Several score individuals were
 arrested during 1985 for alleged participation in illegal
 publication, distribution, or broadcasting activities. In
 October, two persons received sentences under summary
 procedures of 3 years' and 2-1/2 years' imprisonment for
 unauthorized possession of broadcasting equipment.
 The Catholic Church has actively employed its influence and
 moral authority to protect the persecuted and increase respect
 for human rights. The Primate's Aid Committee for Political
 Prisoners is one example of this activity.
 In its 1985 Report (covering the year 1984), Amnesty
 International expressed concern about the arrest and detentioa
 of hundreds of prisoners of conscience, allegations of
 
 
 1064
 POLAND
 ill-treatment and torture of political prisoners, and
 unexplained deaths of political activists. Freedom House
 rated Poland "partly free."
 ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND CULTURAL SITUATION
 Poland's population in 1985, according to World Bank figures,
 was 37,233,000, and the growth rate was 0.8 percent. The
 modest Polish economic recovery of 1983 and 1984 has slowed in
 1985. Per capita income remains about on the level of 1973,
 and there are few prospects for rapid recovery.
 In 1985, market supplies continued their gradual improvement,
 reflecting increased production as well as price rises for
 farmers. While rationing has been lifted on such basic food
 items as flour, butter, sugar, and animal fats, it continues
 on meat and a few nonstaples, as well as on gasoline. At the
 same time, the limited availability of unrationed consumer
 items, including consumer durables, still forces consumers
 either to spend hours in queues or to rely on the black
 market. For persons with access to hard currency, however,
 the market situation is entirely different; the Government
 maintains a chain of special stores, where a wide range of
 foreign-produced consumer items can be purchased by anyone
 with hard currency. For those without direct access to hard
 currency, it can be obtained illegally for four to five times
 the official rate.
 The Government remains formally committed to an economic
 reform program, aimed at decentralizing the economy and giving
 Poland's alienated work force a greater voice in economic
 decisionmaking. Given the obstacles posed by a reluctant
 bureaucracy and by the need to manage a struggling economy,
 the Government in 1985 made very limited progress in
 implementing the reforms and in increasing the role of market
 forces.
 Poland's primary education system reaches virtually the entire
 population, with 99 percent of the school age population
 enrolled. Literacy is almost universal. Poland has a
 wide-scale system of primary rural health care, although
 access to safe drinking water for the rural population (and in
 many urban centers as well) remains a problem. Life
 expectancy at birth is 72.4 years, and the infant mortality
 rate is 18.1 per 1,000 live births. Although private
 construction of homes in the countryside is active, state and
 cooperative housing continues in short supply, especially in
 urban areas where the average waiting time for such housing is
 about 15 years.
 Culturally, Poland maintains a greater degree of openness in
 art, the theater, music, and dance than is common in eastern
 Europe. Political messages are frequently not very far
 beneath the surface of Polish theater and film productions.
 Cultural life in homes and churches in Poland is very
 active.
 The Polish labor code generally forbids the employment of a
 person who has not reached the age of 15. The employment of a
 1young person," defined as aged 15 through 18, is permitted,
 provided the individual has completed basic schooling.
 Special exceptions are sometimes required if a particular work
 might pose a health danger. The labor code specifies that a
 "young person" without professional qualification may be
 
 
 1065
 POLAND
 employed only for the purpose of vocational preparation,
 although again there is provision for special exceptions.
 The length and distribution of hours of work is regulated by
 the Polish labor code in accordance with internationally
 accepted standards. Paid annual holidays are provided for.
 In practice, most families find that both husband and wife
 must be employed in order to sustain an acceptable standard of
 living. Minimum conditions for the protection of worker
 health and safety spelled out in the Polish labor code seem,
 in most respects, to meet the international norm. Poland,
 however, suffers serious environmental pollution problems,
 some of which particularly affect worker health. There are:
 frequent allegations that some plants fail to maintain
 government-regulated worker health and safety standards, and
 the official media occasionally publicize such cases.
 Women's rights have not become a public issue in Poland.
 Historical circumstances, including World War II losses,
 helped open access for women into many previously closed
 professions. Women work in all blue-collar trades, except for
 heavy mining and steel, and in all professional fields.
 Compared to their presence in the work force, however, only a
 small proportion of women are found in the higher levels of
 local and national government.
 Poland has a liberal maternity and child care leave policy
 dating from the Solidarity-inspired Gdansk Accords. Women are
 entitled to 4 months of paid maternity leave and may then opt
 for up to 3 years of unpaid child care leave, after which they
 are guaranteed a job at the same level of pay. Such a policy
 has obvious social benefits in terms of child-rearing and
 strengthening of the family; it also takes pressure off
 Poland's day-care system for young children.
 
 
 1066
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.PISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: POLAND
 1983     1984     1985
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL..         24.8     20.9     13.8
 LOANS .................    0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............   ... 24.8     20.9     13.8
 A.AID .....................    0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS ...............       0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................     0.0      0.0      0.0
 (SECSUPP.ASSST.) .,         0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.FOOO FOR PEACE .......       24.8     20.9     13.8
 LOANS .................    0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............   ... 24.8     20.9     13.8
 TITLE  I-TOTAL ..........       0.0      0.0      0.0
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS .....        0.0      0.0      0.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR .....        0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE II-TOTAL .........       24.8     20.9     13.8
 E.RELIEF.EC.OEV & WFP.         0.0      0.0      0.0
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY .....       24.8     20.9     13.8
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST...*        0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS ..............    .. .0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................     0.0      0.0      0.0
 PEACE CORPS ......        0.0      0.0      0.0
 NARCOTICS ........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 OTHER ..............     0.0      0.0      0.0
 II.MiL. ASSIST.-TOTAL ...        0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS ..............    ... 0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................    0.0      0.0      0.0
 A.MAP  GRANTS ..........       0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.CREDIT FINANCING ....        0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.INTL MIL.ED.TRNG ....        0.0      0.0      0.0
 D.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK...        0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS ........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. I MIL ..        24.8     20.9     13.8
 LOANS ................ 0.0          0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............   ... 24.8     20.9     13.8
 OTHER  US  LOANS ..........      0.0     .0.0      0.0
 EX-IM BANK LOANS .......        0.0      0.0      0.0
 ALL OTHER ................ 0.0          0.0      0.0
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1983     1984     1985     1946-85
 TOTAL ........     1.2      0.9      0.0     24.2
 I8RO               0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 IFC                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 IDA                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 1D                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 ADS                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 AFOB               0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 UNOP               1.2      0.9      0.0     21.8
 OTHER-UN           0.0      0.0      0.0      2.4
 EEC                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 
 
 1067
