 POLAND
 Poland is ruled by the leadership of the Polish United
 Workers' (Communist) Party (PZPR), headed by General Wojciech
 Jaruzelski. Jaruzelski is also the Supreme Commander of the
 Armed Forces in his capacity as Chairman of the National
 Defense Committee, as well as the Chairman of the Council of
 State. Zbigniew Messner, an economist, is the Chairman of the
 Council of Ministers. Two other parties, the United Peasants'
 Party and the Democratic Party, are represented in the
 Government and the Sejm (Parliament), but their representatives
 collaborate closely with and are dominated by the Communist
 leadership.
 The Ministry of Internal Affairs supervises the uniformed
 polide, the powerful security apparatus, and the militarized
 riot police.
 Poland's large foreign debt service burden continues to
 inhibit imports and slow economic growth. The Government has
 made internal economic reform a priority and in October put
 forward a reform package which, during the next several years,
 is designed to restrict the role of the governmental
 bureaucracy, ease direct control over enterprises, and attempt
 to increase market supplies, thereby reducing demand-driven
 inflationary pressures. In November, however, the Polish
 people turned down the Government's proposed program as
 formulated in a referendum. The Government subsequently
 stated that it planned to pursue the same goals at a slower
 tempo. Individual initiative and the role of private
 enterprise are currently represented by the private farming
 sector and a growing small business sector.
 The exercise of human rights remains considerably restricted,
 particularly in such areas as the right of assembly and free
 association, worker -rights, freedom from arbitrary detention,
 the right to a fair trial, and, ultimately, the right of
 citizens to choose their own government. Nevertheless, Poles
 have some freedom of speech, access to a wide range of
 independent (including church) publications, and the right to
 worship freely and to travel abroad.
 The 1986 amnesty for political prisoners accused or convicted
 of crimes against the State or public order has continued to
 hold more than 1 year later. The Government claims that there
 currently are no political prisoners in Poland. However,
 independent human rights monitoring groups contend that there
 are approximately 20 persons sentenced or being held on
 criminal charges for politically motivated activities. This
 includes persons held for refusing military service and
 refusing to take the military oath of allegiance.
 The security service and the judiciary retain immense powers
 to deal with political opposition. Legislation adopted in
 1986, which allows for certaili political offenses to be
 treated as misdemeanors rather than felonies, was extensively
 used in 1987 to discourage opposition activity. By the end of
 1987, about 800 persons charged with political offenses such
 as displaying Solidarity emblems or possessing illegal
 publications have had to pay fines of up to 50,000 zlotys
 (about $200 or twice the average monthly salary). In 15
 cases, automobiles were confiscated if they were deemed to
 have been instrumental in the criminal act. In addition, many
 professionals and workers, not all connected with the
 independent Solidarity trade union movement, which is now
 illegal, lost their employment as a result of political
 
 
 989
 POLAND
 activity and remained unemployed or were unable to continue
 working in their professions.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 There were no instances of political killing reported.
 However, the Helsinki Committee in Poland listed at least four
 deaths since December 1986 which it attributed to injuries
 sustained during detention by the police.
 b. Disappearance
 Instances of prolonged or permanent disappearance have not
 been reported.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 Although there were no reported instances in which the
 authorities systematically used torture to extract information,
 complaints are common that the militia and secret police have
 mistreated, beaten, or tortured persons in their custody.
 Many persons active in the opposition or taking part in
 demonstrations reported that, while detained by the police,
 usually for periods of several hours up to 2 days, they were
 subjected to mistreatment ranging from verbal abuse to blows
 with truncheons. In several instances, broken bones and
 concussions resulted. For example, a young man detained twice
 in a 4-month period by police in Plock had to be hospitalized
 after fainting; medical examinations revealed both
 hemorrhaging in the brain and damage to one eye. Other
 detainees have lodged complaints that policemen repeatedly
 banged their heads against concrete floors or metal arm rails
 or kicked them in the face and genitals.'
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, Exile, or Forced Labor
 Polish law allows for a 48-hour detention period before the
 authorities are required to bring formal charges. Certain
 categories of offenses may actually be tried within 48 hours
 of arrest under special, accelerated procedures whose use was
 greatly enlarged under legislation passed in May 1985. This
 legislation is due to expire in May 1988, and discussions are
 now under way concerning possible renewal. In Polish practice,
 after presentation of the legal basis of formal investigation,
 arrestees may be held in indefinite "investigatory" or
 "temporary" arrest until the investigation is completed and an
 indictment filed. During this period there is no guarantee of
 access to a lawyer, and visits are generally denied.
 Once a formal indictment is filed in a case not handled under
 accelerated procedures, the defendant is allowed ample time to
 study the charges in consultation with an attorney of his or
 her choice. A trial date is set only after the defendant
 expresses readiness. Legal provisions for bail are rarely
 used, but suspects, as well as those already convicted, are
 sometimes furloughed for humanitarian reasons.
 After the 1986 amnesty, fewer persons were detained for long
 periods on vague or unspecified grounds. However, human
 
 
 990
 POLAND
 rights groups and members of the opposition reported that the
 number of brief detentions of up to 48 hours has burgeoned.
 The Freedom and Peace Movement, a group concerned with
 military draft, human rights, and environmental issues, which
 sponsored an International Peace Seminar in Warsaw in May,
 claimed that 27 activists scheduled to attend were detained
 and thus prevented from participating. Opposition sources
 charged that about 100 were detained in order to prevent them
 from taking part in events connected with Pope John Paul II's
 visit in June. Many persons were held by police for up to 2
 days for taking part in opposition demonstrations and
 processions throughout the year. For example, about 150
 demonstrators were detained for several hours in Krakow on May.
 3, the anniversary of Poland's 1791 constitution.
 Polish authorities also make use of "warning talks," in which
 they summon known opposition members on the eve of major
 anniversaries or other events that are likely to be rallying
 points for antigovernment displays and reportedly threaten
 them with reprisals if they participate in any form of
 demonstration. Sometimes persons called in for warning talks
 were held in police custody long enough to prevent them from
 taking part in public activities.
 Polish law contains no provision for forced exile. Some
 former political prisoners reported police statements in 1987
 that harassment of them or their families would end only if
 they emigrated. -Some labor and political activists
 occasionally expressed fears that they would be refused
 reentry if they were to travel abroad, especially to the West.
 Under 1983 legislation, persons who are registered as
 unemployed, and who refuse to seek employment without adequate,
 justification, may be listed as "habitual parasites" and
 compelled to accept assigned employment, usually in street
 cleaning, park maintenance, or garbage collection, under
 threat of penal sanction. Implementation of sanctions under
 this law are rare, however, and to date the law has not been
 specifically applied as a means of political coercion,
 curtailment of the free expression of political or ideological
 opinions, or racial or social discrimination. Some members of
 the opposition, however, have reported that they have been
 called in for interviews with the authorities under the
 provisions of this law.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Amendments to the penal code, enacted in May 1985 ostensibly
 to ensure the speedy hearing of certain cases, greatly
 enlarged-the scope for application of specially accelerated
 trial procedures that severely limit the rights of
 defendants. In such summary trials, charges are made by the
 police directly rather than by the prosecution, and the
 defendants are not given an opportunity to choose an
 attorney. The assigned public defender has little time to
 discuss the case with his or her client and no time to search
 for witnesses or for evidence of innocence, since the
 defendant may be tried and sentenced within 48 hours of
 arrest. Persons accused of inciting public unrest, possessing
 underground publications, or participating in illegal
 organizations have been convicted in the past under these
 summary procedures. Provisions of these amendments were
 rarely used in 1987. The legislation is scheduled to expire
 in May 1988.
 
 
 991
 POLAND
 In October 1986 the Sejm passed legislation that allows
 certain crimes against public order (political offenses) to be
 treated as misdemeanors subject to a maximum penalty of 50,000
 zlotys (around $200 at the exchange rates of 1987 or twice the
 average monthly salary). The new legislation gives the
 authorities the option of handling certain crimes either as
 felonies or misdemeanors, depending on the perceived
 seriousness of the offense. In the latter case, the accused
 often does not have the benefit of a defense counsel. Of some
 800 persons who reportedly have been arrested and tried in
 misdemeanor courts since the enactment of the new law, the
 majority has had to pay the maximum or close to the maximum
 fine allowable. Property, such as typewriters and electronic
 equipment, was sometimes confiscated, as were 15 automobiles
 alleged to have been used in the commission of crimes. In at
 least two cases involving the possession of illegal
 literature, the publications in question were not found in the
 confiscated vehicles.
 According to the Government, Poland has no political
 prisoners. Since the 1986 amnesty, no prominent member of the
 opposition has been sentenced to a jail term of any kind.
 According to opposition sources, the number of political
 prisoners in Poland stood at 19 by year's end, of whom 15 were
 arrested after the 1986 amnesty. Approximately 10 of these
 persons are in prison for charges stemming from their refusal
 to serve in the army or take the military oath of allegiance.
 The remainder were convicted of criminal or civil charges,
 although their offenses are considered by independent human
 rights monitoring groups to have been politically motivated.
 During the visit of Pope John Paul II in June, five
 demonstrators in Krakow were sentenced to the maximum
 allowable 3 months' imprisonment on misdemeanor charges, the
 only known cases since October 1986 of persons being held for
 longer than 48 hours for political offenses. All were
 released from jail after serving 3 weeks. Kornel Morawiecki,
 a leader of the small, clandestine group "Fighting Solidarity"
 (not part of the independent Solidarity trade union movement)
 was arrested with an associate in November. At year's end, he
 was being held on suspicion of smuggling and using false
 identity papers but had not formally been charged.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Mail and phone calls are selectively monitored. Overt
 censorship of the mail and announced monitoring of telephone
 calls ceased with the suspension of martial law in 1983.
 Packages to be mailed abroad must be assembled at the post
 office in the presence of a customs official or postal
 worker. It is generally assumed that the secret police uses
 an extensive/network of informers.
 Polish citizens are not forced to participate in any political
 organization, although it is understood that membership in the
 PZPR. is advisable for advancement in certain professions. The
 Government does not interfere with the right to marry or to
 have children as one chooses, nor does it prevent the teaching
 of religion to children at home or in churches. In certain
 cases, the Government may view as suspect the contact of its
 citizens with members of the opposition or with foreigners.
 In April the government spokesman publicly warned Poles to be
 particularly wary of meetings with diplomats. Searches
 without warrants do occur, although warrants are required
 under Polish law under some circumstances. Foreign radio
 
 
 992
 POLAND
 broadcasts from the West are sometimes jammed, and access to
 foreign periodicals is limited.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and the Press
 The Polish Constitution of 1952 provides for freedom of
 speech. The freedom to express one's opinion in a private
 conversation, whether or not in a public place, is generally
 tolerated, while the freedom to distribute opposition
 pamphlets or deliver an antigovernment speech in a public
 place is not. Polish citizens can be arrested and fined for
 writing, printing, distributing, or possessing publications
 not approved by the authorities. Between November 1986 and
 April 1987, 156 such arrests were reported by human rights
 groups. In addition, there were numerous cases tried before
 misdemeanor courts of persons who publicly wore or displayed
 opposition symbols. Some Catholic churches sponsor or permit
 alternative cultural and other activities on their premises
 which are free from government interference. Such events also
 take place in private homes. Several Catholic congregations
 in Warsaw, Gdansk, Krakow, and elsewhere openly sponsor
 programs sympathetic to the opposition with little direct
 reprisal.
 The Main Office for the Control of Press, Publishing, and
 Public Performances oversees censorship of all media and
 deletes material which it considers inimical to state
 interests. In 1987 the censors permitted a very wide range of
 opinion to be printed and broadcast on previously forbidden
 topics. Practically all domestic matters, both political and
 economic, currently seem to be open to public discussion.
 Censorship is most actively applied to direct or implied
 criticisms of the Soviet Union or other Warsaw Pact states.
 Even in this sensitive area, however, public officials for the
 first time referred to the circumstances surrounding the
 Soviet invasion of Poland in 1939, the subsequent deportation
 of Poles, and the Katyn Forest massacre of Polish army
 officers by the Red Army. A number of controversial films on
 political topics previously withheld from public release
 appeared in the theaters. Members of Solidarity were featured
 on state-owned television in debates and discussions with
 government representatives. Recently, Polish State Radio
 began a weekly program of broadcasts, without comment, of
 critical political commentaries from Western radio stations,
 including Radio Free Europe and the Voice of America.
 Within the framework of official censorship, Poland has a
 diversified press. In the major national dailies, which are
 closely identified with various elements of the ruling elite
 (e.g., the Communist party, the armed forces, or the
 government apparatus), the distinct interests of each group
 often may be detected. In recent years, there has been a
 noticeable loosening up of the focus and scope of public
 debate, especially in such areas as the economy, ecological
 problems, and certain topics in Polish history. State-owned
 newspapers offer a limited range of contending opinions and
 may even serve as a forum for discussion of such controversial
 domestic issues as national reconciliation and the role of the
 church and labor unions. Nongovernmental publications such as
 those issued by the Catholic Church as well as independent
 Catholic lay publications, such as Tygodnik Powszechny and
 Wiez, continue to offer a credible voice wholly distinct from
 the government-run media. In subtly addressing a wide range
 
 
 993
 POLAND
 of issues, these publications customarily indicate within
 printed texts where censors have deleted material and which
 provision of the censorship law has been invoked. A similar
 technique was employed by Res Publica, an independent
 intellectual journal which, after a lapse in time, reappeared
 in 1987. The legal appearance of Res Publica may signal the
 Government's desire to demonstrate greater tolerance for some
 nonofficial points of view.
 Despite pressure, Poland's extensive network of underground
 publications continues to flourish with official acquiescence,
 and scores of national and local newspapers and periodicals
 appear regularly. These publications are generally associated
 with the banned Solidarity trade union, as are myriad
 pamphlets, brochures, and books which enjoy wide circulation
 despite illicit publishing. In two major cases in 1987, the
 authorities, with much fanfare, confiscated printing equipment
 and reproduction machines allegedly being smuggled into Poland
 for use by the underground. Despite chronic shortages of
 materials and equipment, many opposition publications appear
 in a regular and timely fashion. Also thriving is an
 underground video market which is even less vulnerable than
 the printed media to government control. There are still
 brief, unscheduled opposition radio broadcasts.
 Poland is the home of the only independent university in
 Eastern Europe, the Catholic University of Lublin (KUL).
 KUL's very existence, as well as its extensive ties to
 institutions and persons in the West (it counts Pope John Paul
 II among former faculty members), is visible evidence of the
 national and religious traditions which still help to shape
 Polish higher education. There are also a number of diocesan
 seminaries, independently administered by the Bishop Ordinary
 in Poland's dioceses.
 However, amendments adopted in 1985 to the 1982 Higher
 Education Law increased governmental control over universities
 and other college-level institutions. One of the most
 substantial measures empowered the Minister of Science, Higher
 Education, and Technology to approve all candidates for
 university rector and other high offices before the names of
 the candidates could be submitted to university senates for
 elections. According to the Polish press, before elections
 held in 1987, three candidates were eliminated through this
 process, although it was not reported at which institutions.
 While the actual number of such vettings thus appears to have
 been small, it is impossible to determine how many potential
 candidacies were effectively ruled out by this procedure.
 The other major governmental intrusion on academic freedom was
 the "verification process," a program announced in 1985
 ostensibly to weed out less productive academics in midlevel
 positions. Despite the fear that the program would be used to
 strip selected faculty of their tenure and teaching
 responsibilities, and although in 1986 certain universities
 removed some faculty members, there was no wide-scale purge.
 Even some opposition activists passed through the verification
 process successfully.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Freedom of peaceful assembly and association is at government
 sufferance and subject to tight restrictions. Permits are
 required to hold public meetings -or rallies. Requests for
 permits for protest meetings are routinely denied, but
 
 
 994
 POLAND
 unofficial discussion groups and alternative cultural events
 continue to take place in churches and private homes with the
 toleration of the authorities.
 The frequency and intensity of large-scale public
 demonstrations continued to decrease in 1987 compared to 4 or
 5 years ago, with the result that there were fewer violent
 confrontations with police. The most serious clashes occurred
 nationwide during May Day observances, unofficial celebrations
 of Polish Constitution Day on May 3, and commemorations of the
 signing of the Gdansk Accords on August 31. Western news
 media reported that on May 3 tear gas was sprayed at
 worshipers as they left St. John's Cathedral in Warsaw (these
 reports were later denied by the Government). In major cities
 throughout Poland, the authorities wet antigovernment displays
 on these anniversaries, as well as the large crowds gathering
 to greet Pope John Paul II during the Polish Pontiff's visit
 in June, with a heavy mobilization of militia. The police
 presence and use of force tended to be less overt in those
 cities customarily covered by Western news agencies (Warsaw,
 Krakow, Gdansk), while demonstrators in other cities removed
 from media observation (such as Wroclaw, Lublin, and Torun)
 tended to suffer more serious reprisals.
 Under Polish law, associations and clubs need official
 permission or sponsorship to function legally. Among the most
 significant of Poland's many clubs is the Catholic
 Intellectuals' Club (KIK). KIK sponsors lecture series and
 other independent activities that are open to the public with
 little or no interference from the authorities.
 Some officially sponsored professional associations were
 formed after the Government's dissolution in 1983 of the
 writers' and journalists' unions and other organizations which
 had attained considerable independence during the 1980-81
 period. These successor groups have failed to earn the
 support of a significant proportion of Poland's intellectuals,
 despite material incentives to join. In September 1987, the
 dissolved Journalists' Association attempted to register with
 the authorities, but its bid for recognition was again denied.
 The law permitting the formation of nonprofit, independent
 foundations for certain charitable, social, and health
 purposes remains in effect. The Church Agriculture Committee
 (a scaled-down version of the defunct Polish Agricultural
 Foundation)- was granted certain legal rights in 1987 and was
 established formally. In addition, in 1986 an association was
 formally established in Krakow which essentially operates as a
 chamber of commercial unions. All unions must receive court
 permission to exist. The Polish chapter of PEN, an
 international writers' organization, is still suspended.
 The Sejm in 1987 adopted amendments which indefinitely
 postponed the possibility of trade union pluralism contained
 in the 1982 Trade Union Act. Government leaders on several
 occasions in 1987 underscored the official position that union
 pluralism is out of the question because it would be divisive
 in the workplace and reduce worker efficiency. Hence, only
 government-controlled unions are permitted; consequently,
 workers are not free to associate in labor unions of their own
 choosing.
 Leaders of the official unions, the vast majority of which are
 grouped under the umbrella of the National Alliance of Trade
 Unions (OPZZ), formally established in November 1984, have
 
 
 POLAND
 vehemently opposed trade union pluralism. The leadership of
 the OPZZ has made clear that the official unions should be a
 partner to the authorities. The OPZZ acknowledges the right
 of unions not formally affiliated with it to exist, as long as
 they are registered with the courts, a qualification that
 excludes Solidarity unions from consideration.
 At the International Labor Organization (ILO) Conference in
 1987, the two democratic trade union internationals (the
 International Confederation of Free Trade Unions and the World
 Council of Labor) challenged the credentials of the OPZZ
 delegation on the grounds that the Solidarity trade union was
 excluded from the delegation and the process of forming it.
 The credentials committee ruled that while the OPZZ did
 represent a substantial proportion of Polish workers,
 Solidarity had not lost its representative character.
 The Government continues to consider Solidarity-affiliated
 unions illegal organizations. In August four factory-level
 Solidarity groups in Torun and Szczecin failed in their
 attempt to register legally as trade unions. The legal
 pretext for the refusal of registration was the preexistence
 of officially sanctioned trade unions in the workplaces.
 Nevertheless, Solidarity members play an active role in
 workers' self-management committees in some factories.
 In October Solidarity announced its decision to dissolve its
 two governing branches, the underground Temporary Coordinating
 Committee and the Provisional Council created after the 1986
 amnesty. A new national Executive Commission was formed in
 their place, and its membership was publicly announced. The
 Government has declared the commission illegal, though it took
 no steps actively to suppress it. The day-to-day activities
 of Solidarity's top leadership are not normally repressed, and
 known activists commonly meet both each other and Western
 journalists and diplomats without overt official interference.
 Many Solidarity members, including its leaders, are subject to
 various forms of harassment, however, and they may be detained
 sometimes, as noted in Section l.d. More visible leaders of
 the opposition seem to have greater leeway in their movements
 and contacts than do low-level organizers, who seem subject to
 more severe official-harassment.
 The 1982 Trade Union Act severely circumscribes the right to
 strike, making legal work stoppage virtually impossible.
 Occasional wildcat strikes have been settled at the factory
 level, although their existence is not publicly acknowledged.
 Leaders of such strikes, if identified, may face discrimination
 in the workplace or even lose their jobs. Many opposition
 activists, both profesionals and workers (opposition estimates
 run as high as several thousand), continue to be unemployed or
 employed in jobs not in keeping with their qualifications as a
 result of their political activities.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 The Constitution ensures "freedom of conscience and belief,"
 and Polish citizens (other than party members, who are
 discouraged from overt religious practice) enjoy considerable
 freedom to profess their religious beliefs.
 Poland is predominantly Roman Catholic. The Church maintains
 over 3,300 churches, schools, and other institutions, and a
 vigorous program of building new-churches is going on with
 state permission. TheCatholic Church publishes significant
 
 
 996
 POLAND
 numbers of books and periodicals, as does the independent
 Catholic press, though there are some practical restrictions,
 such as limited access to printing equipment and government-
 allocated paper. Sunday Catholic mass and services of other
 religions are broadcast. Preparations by the Church and
 Government for the, visit of Pope John Paul II in June 1987
 were notably smoother than for his two previous visits.
 Discussions in 1987 were actively pursued concerning the
 establishment of diplomatic relations with the Vatican, with
 both sides expressing optimizm about the prospects. Despite
 improved church-state relations, however, the worldviews of
 the Communist authorities and the-Church remain antithetical,
 and individual clergy and Catholic lay leaders carried on
 their at times vigorous campaigns for greater individual
 freedom and respect for human rights.
 There is no government-sponsored discrimination against
 minority religion . Eastern Orthodox, Protestant, Jewish, and
 Muslim congregations meet without interference but find it
 difficult to maintain their places of worship and train their
 clergy, mainly because of their small size, wide dispersion,
 and limited financial resources. Several Jehovah's Witnesses
 are in jail for refusing to perform Poland's obligatory
 military service.
 The largest minority religion is the Orthodox faith, with
 between 800,000 and 1.5 million faithful concentrated in
 Poland's eastern provinces. The Orthodox Church maintains 350
 places of worship and has begun an ambitious program of church
 building and monastery renovation. It sponsors the
 publication of a number of books and several periodicals and
 broadcasts its masses on Polish radio four times a year. As a
 result of recent administrative action, it has obtained the
 return of some religious buildings previously under government
 control. Apart from financial difficulties, there have been
 complaints of Polish ethnic prejudice (most of the Orthodox
 faithful in Poland are of Byelorussian, Ukrainian, or Russian
 origin). Orthodox believers face a major problem in
 maintaining contact with their religious brethren in the
 Soviet Union because of restrictions on their movements across
 the border by both the Polish and Soviets Governments.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 There are no formal restrictions on travel within Poland.
 There are also no legal restrictions on changing one's
 residence, but in practice the housing shortage makes this
 difficult to do. Cases of persons working in one location and
 legally residing hundreds of miles away are known. In most
 cases, Polish citizens are free to travel abroad provided they
 possess sufficient hard currency to finance their trip, or are
 invited by a person residing abroad. The authorities state
 that 96 percent of all passport applications are approved.
 CriminalS, persons with access to military and other secrets,
 and some opposition activists were among the categories in
 1987 most likely to be denied permission to travel abroad. In
 July the Government liberalized passport and travel
 regulations, making it easier in principle for Poles who have
 lived abroad illegally (from the point of view of the Polish
 authorities) to.return to Poland without harassment or
 reprisal.
 
 
 997
 POLAND
 Most applicants for emigrant passports eventually obtain
 them. The recent liberalization of passport issuance policy
 has made it easier for certain groups of persons, such as
 family members of Polish citizens who have "illegally"
 remained abroad, to obtain permission to emigrate. In order
 to receive an emigration passport, Poles must divest
 themselves of real estate owned in Poland and they must obtain
 customs permission for any personal items they wish to take
 with them. After establishing legal residence abroad, a
 Polish citizen can obtain a consular passport and can also
 revalidate a tourist passport for visits to Poland. During
 bilateral consular talks held in October between U.S. and
 Polish government representatives, the Polish Government
 stated it would reduce significantly the number of divided
 families on the American list.
 Poles living permanently abroad have often refused to return
 to Poland to visit families for fear of reprisals by the
 Government (such as confiscation of their passports which
 would enable them later to exit the country). In July,
 however, the Government announced liberalized passport
 policies, amohg which was mentioned the guarantee that persons
 abroad "illegally," including those who obtained asylum,
 refugee status, or citizenship in a foreign country, would not
 face reprisals upon returning to Poland unless guilty of
 anti-Polish or criminal activities.
 Under Polish law, only the Council of State may revoke
 citizenship. Involuntary revocation must be based on one of
 the following activities: actions violating the duty of
 allegiance to the Polish State; actions detrimental to the
 substantial interests of Poland; departure from Poland after
 May.9, 1954 and failure to return when so requested by the
 Polish Government; evasion of military service; or conviction
 abroad of a crime also recognized as a felony under Polish
 criminal law. The Government rarely revokes citizenship.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Poles do not have the right to change the system of
 government. Poland is ruled by the PZPR or Communist party,
 which, through its head, General Jaruzelski, and a small group
 of his advisers, determines national policy goals. Policy is
 normally implemented through the government ministries and
 through a parallel party bureaucracy that complements and
 interacts with the ministries. The party is not always
 clearly the dominant force. The military and security
 services, as well as various economic ministries, often play
 key roles not only in the exercise of power but also in policy
 formulation. The two coalition partners, the United Peasants'
 Party and the Democratic Party, are responsive to PZPR
 guidance. The Patriotic Movement for National Rebirth, an
 umbrella group of political, economic, and social
 organizations, is directed by the authorities.
 The Constitution specifies that the Sejm is the chief
 legislative body of Poland. The Sejm can be counted on to
 pass, nearly unanimously, any legislation that the Chairman of
 the Council of Ministers and relevant bureaucracies propose,
 and does not, as a rule, generate legislation itself.
 Nevertheless, when the authorities seemed undecided or divided
 during 1987, deputies in the Sejm were, on occasion, able to
 modify proposed legislation, especially in behind-the-scenes
 committee sessions.
 
 
 998
 POLAND
 In November police broke up a meeting of opposition figures
 attempting to form a new Polish Socialist Party independent of
 government control. Several participants were detained
 briefly.
 In December 1986, the Government formed a 56-member
 Consultative Council to serve as an advisory body to the
 Chairman of the Council of State. The Council is composed of
 proregime figures and a handful of independents of some
 stature, but has no members currently associated with
 Solidarity. Other independent and opposition figures have
 denounced the Council as nonrepresentative of society. As of
 November 1987, the Council had held five lengthy meetings. At.
 each one, General Jaruzelski was present throughout to debate
 controversial contemporary problems which otherwise might not
 be granted a public hearing. Uncensored transcripts of a
 portion of the Council's proceedings have been published and
 provide a wider commentary on government policies and current
 domestic issues than has been available in official'sources in
 the past. Legislation creating the Office of the ombudsman or
 Spokesman for Citizens' Rights was passed by the Sejm in July
 and will come into effect in January 1988. The incumbent, who
 will be appointed by the Government, will have the right to
 review and reverse administrative and legal decisions appealed
 to him by individual Polish citizens.
 A framework for national referendums was legislated in May.
 The first referendum under this law, concerning the
 Government's economic reform program and political
 democratization measures, was turned down when only 46 percent
 of all registered voters voted in favor- Although a majority
 of those voting voted in favor, a favorable vote of more than
 50 percent of all registered voters was required for passage.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 There are no government-controlled or sponsored organizations
 in Poland devoted exclusively to human rights issues, and
 independent human rights groups have no official permission to
 exist. However, there is an anonymous chapter of the.Helsinki
 Committee in Poland, which compiles occasional reports
 evaluating-the human rights situation in Poland. In June it
 published its second Comprehensive Report for the Conference
 on Security and Cooperation in Europe (CSCE), entitled "The
 Violation of Basic Freedoms in the Polish People's Republic
 from November 1, 1986 to April 30; 1987." Underground
 publications persisently raise questions about human rights
 practices in Poland, focusing primarily on labor and
 police-related-issues.
 The Government is party to many international covenants with
 human rights components, including the Final Act of the CSCE
 signed in 1975. Government authorities typically contend,
 however, that international and nongovernmental inquiries into
 the state of human rights in Poland based on these agreements
 constitute interference in Poland's internal affairs. The
 Government did not cooperate in the implementation of the 1983
 resolution of the U.N. Human Rights Commission asking the U.N.
 Secretary General, or his designee, to prepare a comprehensive
 report on the human rights situation in Poland.
 Poland's decision to withdraw from the ILO, announced in 1984
 and scheduled to take effect in November 1986, was made in
 
 
 999
 POLAND
 response to the decision of the ILO's executive board to take
 formal notice of the report of the ILO's Commission of Inquiry
 into violations of international labor standards. However,
 after postponing the effective date of withdrawal until
 November 1987, the Polish Government notified the ILO on
 November 16 that it was withdrawing its withdrawal notice to
 the ILO.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 Women's rights have not become a major public issue in
 Poland. Historical circumstances, including World War II
 losses of manpower, helped open many professions to women.
 Women work in nearly all blue-collar trades, other than heavy
 mining and steel, and in all professional fields. However,
 despite their major presence in the work force and government
 figures which show they are generally better educated than
 men, women usually earn less than their male colleagues. Only
 a small proportion of positions at the higher levels of local
 and national government is filled by women.
 Poland has a liberal maternity and child care leave policy
 dating from the Solidarity-inspired Gdansk Accords. Women are
 entitled to 4 months' paid maternity leave and up to 3 years'
 unpaid leave with guarantees of returning to the same or a
 comparable position. Depending on the family income, support
 is sometimes provided for the entire duration of the leave
 period. The Government and some places of employment offer
 child-care services; however, these facilities do not come
 close to meeting the work force's child-care needs.
 CONDITIONS OF LABOR
 The Polish Labor Code generally forbids the employment of a
 person who has not reached the age of 15. The employment of a
 "young person," defined as someone aged 15 to 18, is permitted,
 provided the individual has completed basic schooling.
 Special exceptions are sometimes required if a particular job
 might pose a health danger. The Labor Code specifies that a
 "young person" without professional qualifications may be
 employed only for the purpose of vocational preparation,
 although again there is provision for special exceptions.
 The length and distribution of hours of work are regulated by
 the Polish tabor Code and meet generally accepted international
 standards. Paid annual holidays are provided. In practice,
 most families find that both the husband and wife must be
 employed in order to sustain an acceptable standard of
 living. The Polish legal code spells out minimum conditions
 for the protection of workers' health and safety, which seem
 in most respects to meet the international norm. Poland,
 however, suffers serious environmental pollution problems,
 some of which particularly affect workers' health. There are
 frequent allegations that some factories fail to maintain
 government-regulated work, health, and safety standards, and
 the official media occasionally publicize such cases.
 
 
 1000
