Preventing the Further Spread of HIV/AIDS:
The Essential Role of Human Rights
By Joseph Amon
AIDS is no longer [just] a disease. It is a human rights issue.
Nelson Mandela
After twenty-five years, the global AIDS pandemic is still expanding. More
than forty million people are living with HIV/AIDS. In 2005, five million
people were newly infected, and three million died of AIDS. Between 2003
and 2005, the number of people living with HIV in East Asia rose by more
than 25 percent, and the number of people living with HIV in Eastern
Europe and Central Asia rose by more than one-third. However, sub-Saharan
Africa remains by far the worst-affected region.1 Countries such as Lesotho
and Swaziland, with nearly one in three adults infected, are openly presented
as possibly being the first countries to “die” of AIDS.
Why has the epidemic spread so inexorably across the globe? Why have
countries failed to act—or acted so ineffectually—to stop the epidemic from
progressing? It has been acknowledged for almost as long as HIV has been
recognized that HIV/AIDS is fundamentally tied to human rights abuses.2
But such acknowledgment has had surprisingly little impact on the global
response to the epidemic, and this failure explains, to a large extent, why we
have made so little progress.
Worldwide, vulnerability to HIV/AIDS is linked to populations marginalized
by society because of their gender, race/ethnicity, sexual orientation, or social
or economic class. Human rights are central both to our understanding of
the dynamics of the disease and to how we must combat it.
HIV/AIDS is commonly thought to be related to “economic, social, and cultural
rights” (such as the right to health care), as opposed to “civil and political
rights,” such as freedom of expression and association and due process of
law. However, many of the human rights abuses that most increase HIV
risk—violence and discrimination against women and marginalized populations as well as people living with HIV/AIDS, harassment and imprisonment
without due process of outreach workers and at-risk populations seeking
HIV/AIDS information or services, and censorship of health information—
are abuses of civil and political rights. The fact that these abuses have a concrete
impact on the health of individuals underscores what has been called
the “indivisibility” of human rights norms—the notion that civil and political
rights and economic, social, and cultural rights are mutually reinforcing and
derive from a single principle: the fundamental dignity of each human being.
While there is widespread, though by no means universal, recognition that
social stigma can fuel the epidemic, and that the characteristics of HIV infection
do not warrant intrusive restrictions on liberty, all too often these basic
understandings are not reflected in law or in concrete policy terms. Equally
important, there is uneven (at best) appreciation of the broader human rights
issues that contribute to the continuing spread of the disease. Most perversely,
some of the critical lessons about stopping HIV/AIDS, learned painfully
and acted on with positive results in the 1980s and 1990s, are now being disregarded.
Even while treatment options are expanding, responses to
HIV/AIDS in many places are getting further from the kind of sciencebased,
human-rights informed response that has been proven to stop the
spread of the disease. Left unaddressed, human rights abuses will undermine
both HIV/AIDS prevention and treatment.
Mobilizing Communities, Increasing Awareness (1981-1999)
Although the first AIDS case was diagnosed in 1981, little global recognition
of the disease or response to the epidemic was seen before 1986 when, at the
World Health Assembly, Uganda’s health minister declared that his country
had an enormous problem with AIDS and needed help. The Minister and the
Assembly called on the World Health Organization (WHO) to act. In
September 1986, a WHO program for prevention and control of AIDS was
formed, which, in February of 1987, became the Global Programme on
AIDS (GPA).
By January 1990, the GPA was working in 123 countries to develop national
AIDS prevention plans. The national programs that emerged from these tions as well as people living with HIV/AIDS, harassment and imprisonment
without due process of outreach workers and at-risk populations seeking
HIV/AIDS information or services, and censorship of health information—
are abuses of civil and political rights. The fact that these abuses have a concrete
impact on the health of individuals underscores what has been called
the “indivisibility” of human rights norms—the notion that civil and political
rights and economic, social, and cultural rights are mutually reinforcing and
derive from a single principle: the fundamental dignity of each human being.
While there is widespread, though by no means universal, recognition that
social stigma can fuel the epidemic, and that the characteristics of HIV infection
do not warrant intrusive restrictions on liberty, all too often these basic
understandings are not reflected in law or in concrete policy terms. Equally
important, there is uneven (at best) appreciation of the broader human rights
issues that contribute to the continuing spread of the disease. Most perversely,
some of the critical lessons about stopping HIV/AIDS, learned painfully
and acted on with positive results in the 1980s and 1990s, are now being disregarded.
Even while treatment options are expanding, responses to
HIV/AIDS in many places are getting further from the kind of sciencebased,
human-rights informed response that has been proven to stop the
spread of the disease. Left unaddressed, human rights abuses will undermine
both HIV/AIDS prevention and treatment.
Mobilizing Communities, Increasing Awareness (1981-1999)
Although the first AIDS case was diagnosed in 1981, little global recognition
of the disease or response to the epidemic was seen before 1986 when, at the
World Health Assembly, Uganda’s health minister declared that his country
had an enormous problem with AIDS and needed help. The Minister and the
Assembly called on the World Health Organization (WHO) to act. In
September 1986, a WHO program for prevention and control of AIDS was
formed, which, in February of 1987, became the Global Programme on
AIDS (GPA).
By January 1990, the GPA was working in 123 countries to develop national
AIDS prevention plans. The national programs that emerged from these MSM with HIV information and instructions on how to use condoms and
negotiate condom use with partners. Broader messages to the general population
were conveyed through the mass media to “humanize” the disease and
fight stigma and discrimination.
Although taking different approaches, these programs were all initiated by
individuals from the most affected communities, supported by local or
national governments (often through financing as well as new legislation),
and based on the dignity and autonomy of each individual. The programs
quickly saw results. In New York, HIV prevalence among white MSM at
STD clinics decreased from 47 percent to 17 percent between 1988 and
1993. In Uganda, adults reported increased condom use and decreased numbers
of sexual partners, while youth reported delayed onset of sexual behaviors.
Uganda saw the start of a downward trend in HIV prevalence, peaking
in the early 1990s at over 15 percent and decreasing to 6-7 percent by 2003.
In Thailand, decreases were seen in the number of men reporting commercial
sex, while increases were reported in condom use. HIV prevalence
declined to 1.5 percent in 2003. In Brazil, the percentage of young people
who reported using condoms the first time they had sex increased from less
than 10 percent in 1986 to more than 60 percent in 2003, and national HIV
prevalence among pregnant women remained below 1 percent.
Despite these visible successes, in communities where outreach efforts were
less focused—for example among drug users in Thailand, Hispanic MSM in
New York City, or poor slum dwellers in Brazil—considerably less success
was noted.
Nonetheless, these comprehensive programs, remarkable for their mobilization
of resources, political will, engagement with the community, and respect
for human rights, were seen as models for expanding the HIV/AIDS
response worldwide.
Through the mid-1990s emphasis was also put on understanding the epidemic
as a multi-dimensional problem, requiring a multi-sectoral response. This
strategy emerged in part because HIV/AIDS was expanding unchecked with
massive social and economic consequences and in part because of difficulties generating the resources required to fight the epidemic properly. Concerned
officials and donors sought to leverage resources simultaneously from multiple
sources including ministries of education, agriculture and industry.
Then, from the mid to the late-1990s, international efforts to fight
HIV/AIDS foundered and splintered. The earlier focus and success in places
like Thailand and Uganda were not replicated elsewhere, and the global leadership
at WHO waned. Fast-growing epidemics were recognized virtually
everywhere. Bilateral programs expanded, as did the prominence (and budget)
of the World Bank, but these developments were unable to keep pace with
the increasing demands of the pandemic. Increased attention was placed on
the biomedical aspects of HIV/AIDS, including vaccine development and the
use of anti-retroviral drugs to treat people living with HIV/AIDS and reduce
the risk of mother-to-child HIV transmission.3
Expanding Resources, Narrowing Approaches: Moralizing the
Epidemic (2000-2005)
In June 2001, a historic U.N. General Assembly Special Session (UNGASS)
on HIV/AIDS for the first time generated global acknowledgement of the
pandemic as not only a public health crisis but also a threat to societies and
international security. The special session put virtually all of the world’s leaders
on record as endorsing a set of specific global targets in combating
HIV/AIDS, while its formal declaration explicitly underscored the links
between poverty, underdevelopment, and illiteracy to the spread and impact
of HIV/AIDS. It also recognized that stigma, silence, discrimination, and
lack of confidentiality undermined prevention and care efforts, and that gender
equality and the empowerment of women and girls were fundamental to
reducing vulnerability. The Declaration affirmed that access to medication in
the context of pandemics such as HIV/AIDS was fundamental to the realization
of the right to health.
Specifically, governments pledged: “by 2003, to enact, strengthen or enforce
as appropriate, legislation, regulations and other measures to eliminate all
forms of discrimination against, and to ensure the full enjoyment of all
human rights and fundamental freedoms by people living with HIV/AIDS and members of vulnerable groups, in particular to ensure their access to,
inter alia, education, inheritance, employment, health care, social and health
services, prevention, support and treatment, information and legal protection,
while respecting their privacy and confidentiality; and develop strategies
to combat stigma and social exclusion connected with the epidemic.”4
While this effort arguably increased the political will to address HIV/AIDS,
the most important change in this era was perhaps the increased allocation of
resources committed to fighting the epidemic. In 2001, the Global Fund to
fight HIV/AIDS, TB and Malaria was created. Three years later, the United
States Leadership against AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria Act of 2003 (the
U.S. Global AIDS Act) and the U.S. President’s Emergency Plan for AIDS
Relief (commonly known as PEPFAR) were enacted. The same year, a revitalized
WHO announced an ambitious plan to get three million people on
anti-retroviral treatment by the end of 2005.
But these declarations and commitments of new resources, while seeming to
recognize the central importance of combating the human rights violations
underlying the epidemic, have addressed them in only limited ways. The
integration of prevention and treatment programs has splintered. Sciencebased
prevention programs increasingly are being replaced by conservative,
moralistic sexual abstinence campaigns that stigmatize those living with
AIDS and deny people information about condoms. Treatment programs
have made some headway but still do not reach many affected populations
and still do not recognize critical obstacles that rights-based approaches
would help overcome. In 2003, one-half of all governments in sub-Saharan
Africa had yet to adopt legislation specifically outlawing discrimination
against people living with HIV/AIDS and only one-third of countries worldwide
had adopted legal measures specifically outlawing discrimination against
populations especially vulnerable to HIV/AIDS.
Throughout the 1990s the dominant approach to HIV prevention among
young people was comprehensive sex education, which teaches abstinence as
a healthy choice for young people but also provides information about condoms
and safer sex. As a part of the PEPFAR program, comprehensive sex
education programs are being replaced by programs that emphasize “abstinence only” until marriage, which censor or distort information about condoms
and safer sex. The U.S. Global AIDS Act requires that 33 percent of
HIV prevention spending go to “abstinence-until-marriage” programs.5
Abstinence-only proponents commonly rely on fear-based messages, making
unsubstantiated claims about the psychological effects of pre-marital sex and
exaggerating the failure rate of condoms. These programs often suggest that
condoms are appropriate only for those who “fail” at abstinence or marital
fidelity and “choose to engage in high-risk sex”—contributing to an environment
of shame and stigma which discourages the use of condoms even for
sexually active youth and among adults with multiple, concurrent partners.6
Another example of HIV/AIDS policies turning their back on proven, evidence-
based approaches that respect human rights is the restriction in the
U.S. Global AIDS Act requiring that organizations receiving U.S. anti-AIDS
funding have a policy “explicitly opposing prostitution” and barring the use
of funds to “promote or advocate the legalization or practice of
prostitution.”7 This approach recalls the efforts by Senator Jesse Helms in
1987 to block federal HIV/AIDS education funding to groups that “promote”
homosexuality.
The U.S. requirements not only coerce organizations into adopting a particular
ideology as a condition of receiving HIV/AIDS funding, but also negate
the ability of outreach organizations to approach sex workers with the nonjudgmental
and non-moralistic attitude that has been shown to be effective
with these communities. Empowering women marginalized in prostitution to
participate in public life and to challenge the rights abuses that impede their
struggle against HIV/AIDS has been a documented success in the efforts
against AIDS. Far from addressing the harms associated with sex work, the
U.S. requirements are likely to alienate sex workers and to fuel public opprobrium
against them, further driving sex workers underground and away from
life-saving services. In addition, the lack of guidance from the U.S. government
regarding just what it means to “oppose prostitution” casts a shadow of
uncertainty over HIV prevention programs and places a chilling effect on
organizations wishing to conduct outreach and HIV prevention with sex
workers in a respectful, non-judgmental manner.8
U.S. restrictions on needle exchange and other “harm reduction” programs
and U.S. law enforcement interference with grassroots HIV prevention work
are additional examples of the disastrous effect of replacing science-based
approaches with narrowly defined moralistic ones.9 The sharing of hypodermic
syringes accounts for the majority of new HIV infections in much of
Eastern Europe, Central and Southeast Asia, and Latin America: needle
exchange programs are a matter of life and death. Needle exchange programs,
moreover, are perhaps the best studied HIV prevention intervention
in the world. Rigorous evaluations consistently show that providing sterile
syringes and information about sterile drug injection to people who use drugs
reduces HIV risk without increasing rates of drug use.10 Although the effectiveness
of sterile syringe programs has been endorsed by the World Health
Organization, the Joint United Nations Program on HIV/AIDS, the U.S.
National Institutes of Health, the U.S. Institute of Medicine, and other leading
public health bodies,11 the United States remains the only country in the
world to ban the use of federal funds for needle exchange. Recently, it has
begun to aggressively export this standard internationally.
The U.S. has blocked resolutions at the United Nations that would recognize
the human rights of injection drug users;12 sought to obstruct the work of
UNAIDS and the U.N. Office on Drugs and Crime in promoting harm
reduction and needle exchange in countries hard-hit by HIV/AIDS;13 and
encouraged national governments to adopt criminal law approaches to drug
use rather than recognizing that epidemics of drug addiction and HIV/AIDS
are public health threats requiring humane, rights-based responses.14
With the expanded resources now available for HIV/AIDS, it is finally possible
to imagine HIV treatment programs joining HIV prevention efforts in an
integrated, rights-respecting continuum of services. Unfortunately, moralistic
approaches to HIV prevention which place new obstacles in the way of
reaching populations that most need information and services hinder such a
comprehensive approach. Restrictive and moralistic U.S. policies also endanger
one of the most ardently promoted and potentially life-saving approaches
to HIV prevention and treatment: expanded HIV testing.
Expanding access to HIV testing is a critically important step in improving
responses to the epidemic. When accompanied by effective counseling and
accessible post-test services—including comprehensive prevention (information
and condoms) and treatment and care—expanded HIV testing can
encourage more people to protect themselves and their partners, and to seek
care which can prolong their lives.
Expanded HIV testing can take many forms, however. It is all too common
for HIV testing to be mandatory for certain populations—prisoners and military
recruits, for example. In many countries, moreover, even HIV testing
outside such institutional settings is sometimes conducted without consent
and test results sometimes are not given to the person who was tested.
In medical settings, two different approaches have recently been promoted:
“routine offer” HIV testing—with an “opt-in” emphasis—proposes that every
individual in the health care setting be offered an HIV test. By contrast,
“opt-out” HIV testing attempts to increase the number of individuals consenting
to an HIV test by requiring that individuals be tested unless they
specifically decline the test. In some settings, protocols require individuals to
decline the test three times before their refusal is accepted, and before they
are entitled to receive medical care.
The newest approach to expanded HIV testing, however, goes beyond these
approaches by seeking to bring HIV tests out of the medical setting and into
communities. On December 1, 2005, the Ministry of Health of Lesotho and
the WHO announced an unprecedented effort in the fight against
HIV/AIDS: a village-to-village campaign to test every Mosotho (resident of
Lesotho) aged twelve and older for HIV by the end of 2007.15 This program
was launched in Lesotho because it has one of the highest HIV prevalence
rates in the world, with approximately one in three adults infected. With
Lesotho facing a projected massive population loss from migration as well as
mortality and a decrease in life expectancy from fifty-two to thirty-four years
between 2000 and 2005, observers fear that Lesotho will collapse and fail—
the first country to “die” of AIDS.
Village-to-village HIV testing recalls the great public health campaigns of
thirty years ago, such as the worldwide eradication of smallpox through case
detection, isolation, and mass vaccination. Because of the inextricable link
between HIV/AIDS and human rights abuse, however, this method of HIV
testing also carries the potential for spreading stigma and, with it, discrimination
and other human rights violations. HIV/AIDS, a disease with a long and
silent incubation period, with transmission caused by intensely personal
behaviors (sex, childbirth, drug use), and with disproportionate prevalence
among the most marginalized populations in society, is strikingly different
from smallpox, and must be treated as such.
Historically, the largest concerns around HIV testing were ensuring that testing
was voluntary, that it was confidential, and that adequate counseling was
provided. These concerns were of primary importance in a context where few
resources existed for people who tested positive, and where people believed
to be living with HIV/AIDS faced serious and often life-threatening violence
and abuse (women facing domestic violence as well as MSM and marginalized
populations generally). It was hoped that if individuals learned their
HIV serostatus, they would adopt behaviors that would either reduce their
risk of infection if they were HIV-negative, or reduce the risk that they
would transmit the virus to others if they were HIV-positive. In some cases,
where counseling was adequate, and decisions were truly voluntary, these
programs were shown to work.16
In the past few years, as significant resources have been committed to
expanding access to anti-retroviral drugs throughout the world, treatment
that can alleviate suffering and postpone death has become a real possibility
for hundreds of thousands of people living with AIDS. In this context, HIV
testing has become increasingly critical to expanding access to treatment,
and, in turn, is helping to transform HIV/AIDS from a death sentence to a
manageable chronic disease. These changes have led to a justified re-evaluation
of HIV testing principles, and have led many people in the public health
community to push for a different approach.17 Specifically, they emphasize
the “right” to know one’s HIV serostatus and have called for dramatic
increases in the numbers of people tested.
But much of the call for this type of expanded approach rests upon two
assumptions: 1) that mass HIV testing will lead to positive changes as people
change their behaviors and seek treatment; and 2) that few human rights
abuses will result from this approach. There is little evidence to support
these assumptions.
Studies in sub-Saharan Africa have found between 3.5 percent and 14.6 percent
of women report abuse following the disclosure of their HIV test result.
The highest rates of negative outcomes have been reported by women tested
in antenatal clinics, and the lowest rates by women tested at voluntary counseling
and testing sites. Women who are tested at antenatal clinic sites do not
have a chance to think about testing or prepare themselves or their partners
for testing. Therefore they are both less likely to disclose results to their
partners and also are more likely to be victims of violence when they do.
The Lesotho operational plan for universal access to HIV testing states that
“every household will be offered an HIV test” and that “communities will
choose how HIV testing and counseling will be carried out for [their] members.”
Independent oversight “to guarantee the rights of community members”
will be provided by a three-person committee in each health center
catchment area, with each center providing “at least a biannual written
report.” The government is also creating a national telephone hotline.18
Public health officials argue that it is unfair to criticize the lack of evidence in
support of village-to-village testing in light of the public health crisis facing
Lesotho. That argument would be justified if this were the only approach
available. But it is not. The other available alternative—concerted, large-scale
promotion of voluntary HIV counseling and testing—has not been tried.
The Lesotho plan will only be as successful as the government’s ability to get
people to participate, as well as its ability to provide comprehensive HIV prevention
information and necessary medicines. However, without better protections
for human rights and without concerted efforts to reduce the stigma
of HIV/AIDS within Lesotho, there is little hope for widespread, truly voluntary
participation. Even if large numbers of people are tested, the Lesotho plan allocates only 3,000 Maloti (U.S.$465) out of a total of 75,593,250
Maloti (U.S.$11.7 million) to support post-test referrals and services.19
The Lesotho plan, like many calls for expanded HIV testing, focuses almost
exclusively on individual behavior change and does not adequately take into
account the structural barriers—violence, abuse, and interference with lifesaving
information and services—that prevent individuals most vulnerable to
infection from taking measures to reduce their HIV risk.
Efforts to expand HIV testing should not put public health experts on one
side and human rights proponents on the other. Both recognize that people
have a right of access to HIV testing as part of the broader right to health
care enshrined in the International Covenant on Economic, Social, and
Cultural Rights. Informed consent and confidentiality requirements, protections
against violence and discrimination, and measures to combat stigma
need not be barriers to expanded HIV testing.
The 1984 Siracusa Principles on the Limitation and Derogation of Principles
in the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, moreover, illustrate
that, where there is a perceived conflict between critical public health
needs and human rights imperatives, governments should proceed rationally
and deliberately. Public health policies can infringe rights if they are sanctioned
by law, serve a legitimate public health goal, are necessary to achieve
that goal, are no more intrusive or restrictive than necessary, and are non-discriminatory
in application. The International Guidelines on HIV/AIDS and
Human Rights, issued as non-binding policy guidance to governments by the
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) and the
Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) in 1996, affirm
that HIV testing of individuals “should only be performed with the specific
informed consent of that individual” except where specific judicial authorization
is granted to perform a mandatory test.
Too often, expanded HIV testing programs forget their goal is not simply to
get a large number of people tested once. “Knowing your HIV status” is a
dynamic issue with repeat testing required, as adolescents become adults, as
an individual’s behavior (and risk) changes, or (as is especially true for women and girls in many parts of the world) as their own behavior stays the same but
their partner’s behavior changes. Mass HIV testing programs may be able to
test large numbers of people once, but only programs that protect individual
rights will encourage people to seek follow-up treatment services and help
people reduce their risk behaviors and their vulnerability to HIV infection
over time.
A Different Approach: Protecting Human Rights
Over the course of the HIV/AIDS epidemic, too little has been done to
change laws and practices that violate human rights, putting individuals at
risk of infection and disease and impeding access to HIV information and
services for those who need it most. Changing these laws is not only a moral
imperative, but is also key to the sustained success of prevention, testing, and
treatment programs.
In sub-Saharan Africa, for example, nearly 60 percent of individuals living
with HIV infection are women. This disproportionate burden is due less to a
specific biologic susceptibility to infection, and more to their lack of basic
human rights. Women and girls are put at risk by economic vulnerability
resulting from discrimination and lack of legal protections; sexual violence,
including in institutions such as schools, prisons, and workplaces; domestic
violence, including marital rape; violations of property and inheritance rights;
and, in some countries, harmful traditional practices such as exorbitant bride
price, widow inheritance, and even ritual sexual “cleansing.” Governments,
which have an obligation to stop such violations and abusive practices, too
often tolerate them.
Responding to the HIV/AIDS epidemic requires addressing such vulnerabilities
directly, not indirectly through general education campaigns or HIV testing.
In Zimbabwe, an estimated 700,000 people lost their homes, livelihood,
or both when, in May 2005, the government unleashed Operation
Murambatsvina (Cleanse the Filth), a campaign of forcible evictions and
demolitions in urban areas throughout the country. Six months into the crisis,
hundreds of thousands of people remained displaced throughout the
country. Among other things, the massive displacement disrupted access to life-saving therapies for individuals with HIV and TB, encouraging the
emergence of multi-drug resistant strains, and it created the conditions—displacement,
destitution, lack of legal protections—which are known to spur
the epidemic. This was recognized by UNAIDS representatives when, in
November 2005, they cautioned that recent declines in HIV prevalence in
Zimbabwe “could start rising again if underlying vulnerabilities, which contribute
to unsafe sexual behaviour and fuel the epidemic, are not sufficiently
addressed. Such vulnerabilities include gender inequality, poverty and population
mobility.”20
Stigmatizing attitudes and discrimination by health care providers continue
to hinder access to HIV testing and treatment in many places. In other
places, violence, or the fear of violence, prevents many people from obtaining
HIV/AIDS testing and treatment. In Uganda, despite long-standing and well
run programs, service providers have reported that women come to them
secretly, fearing that their husbands will beat them if they seek HIV testing
or medical attention. Jane Nabulya, a Ugandan woman, said that she secretly
tested for HIV in 1999 when she found out her husband had AIDS. She
explained: “I was scared to tell him that I had tested HIV-positive. He used
to say [of] the woman who gives him AIDS, ‘I will chop off her feet.’ I have
never told him.”21
Conclusion
The response to the HIV/AIDS epidemic by governments and multilateral
agencies must recognize and respect human rights. In parts of the world
today, the lack of an adequate response to the epidemic—whether due to
denial of the existence or extent of the epidemic, misappropriation of
resources, or hostility to those individuals infected or those populations most
at-risk of infection—represents a basic violation of the right to health. In
other countries, HIV education, prevention, and treatment programs are
inaccurate or inequitable.
All individuals, including those most marginalized, must enjoy access to accurate
information about HIV/AIDS and have equal access to HIV/AIDS programs.
HIV testing in particular—as the entry point for access to anti-retroviral drugs and important services—must be accessible to all. But efforts to
expand HIV testing, and to put in place “routine” testing, must not become
coercive, must recognize the rights of the individuals being tested, and must
provide linkages to both prevention and care.
Across the globe, people who test positive for HIV have been denied
employment, fired from their jobs, kicked out of hospitals, denied both HIV
specific and general medical treatment, harassed and assaulted by community
members who find out their status, and sometimes even killed. Because
human rights abuses fuel the HIV epidemic, HIV/AIDS programs must
explicitly address, and find ways to mitigate, these abuses.
Combating the rights abuses that put vulnerable populations at risk of HIV is
essential to turning around the AIDS crisis. Concrete policy measures are
urgently needed and can have immediate and long-term impact. New laws
can be put in place, or enforced if they already exist, to protect women’s
equal rights in the areas of inheritance, sexual violence, domestic violence
and spousal rape, marriage, division of property upon divorce, land use and
ownership, and access to housing and social services.
Programmatic reforms, designed to address human rights violations, should
ensure that national HIV/AIDS programs include measures to combat discrimination
and violence against people living with HIV/AIDS, with particular
attention to marginalized populations. Efforts should also be made to provide
human rights training for judges, police, and other officials; improve
data collection relating to police abuse and domestic violence, women’s property
rights, and sexual abuse of girls; ensure that anti-retroviral drug distribution
systems recognize the challenges marginalized populations face in
accessing treatment; and ensure that HIV test results and other patient information
is kept confidential. Public education campaigns on the human rights
of people living with HIV/AIDS in local languages and using appropriate
media should be intensified.
It is sometimes suggested that paying attention to human rights is somehow
so costly and time consuming that it should really be considered optional
during a public health crisis. However, there is no reason that public health and human rights be considered in opposition to one another. In responding
to the global HIV/AIDS epidemic, only programs that start with a basic
respect for individuals, and their rights, will be successful. Those programs
which adopt strategies in the name of efficiency or ideology and which fail to
respect human rights will ultimately fail.
Joseph Amon directs the HIV/AIDS Program at Human Rights Watch.
1 U.N. Joint Progamme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS), AIDS Epidemic Update: December
2005 (Geneva: United Nations, 2005),
http://www.unaids.org/epi2005/doc/EPIupdate2005_html_en/epi05_00_en.htm#TopOf
Page (retrieved November 21, 2005).
2 Jonathan Mann, who headed the first Global Programme on HIV/AIDS at the World
Health Organization (WHO), recognized early in the epidemic the importance of linking
HIV/AIDS and human rights, especially to ensure that those at risk would not be
stigmatized in using services. See Jonathan M. Mann, “Human rights and AIDS: The
future of the pandemic,” in Jonathan M. Mann, Sofia Gruskin, Michael A. Grodin, and
George J. Annas, eds., Health and Human Rights: A Reader (New York and London:
Routledge, 1999).
3 HIV can be transmitted from an HIV-infected mother to her child during pregnancy,
labor, and delivery, or through breastfeeding. The administration of antiretroviral drugs
to HIV-infected pregnant women and to her infant shortly after birth greatly reduces
the risk of mother-to-child HIV transmission.
4 United Nations General Assembly, “Declaration of Commitment on HIV/AIDS,”
June 27, 2001.
5 U.S Global AIDS Act, 22 U.S.C. §§ 7672(b)(3), 7673(a); see also Office of the United
States Global AIDS Coordinator, “The President’s Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief.
U.S. Five Year Global HIV/AIDS Strategy,” February 2004.
6 For further information about U.S.-funded abstinence-only-until-marriage programs,
see Human Rights Watch, “The Less they Know, the Better: Abstinence-only
HIV/AIDS Programs in Uganda,” vol. 17, no. 4(A), March 2005; Human Rights
Watch, “Ignorance Only: HIV/AIDS, Human Rights and Federally Funded Abstinence-
Only Programs in the United States: Texas: A Case Study,” vol. 14, no. 5(G), September
2002.
7 U.S. Global AIDS Act, 22 U.S.C. § 7631(e, f) (2003); see also Letter from Human
Rights Watch, et al., to President Bush opposing mandatory “anti-prostitution pledge,”
May 18, 2005, http://hrw.org/campaigns/hivaids/hiv-aids-letter/; Rebecca Schleifer,
“United States: Funding Restrictions Threaten Sex Workers’ Rights,” HIV/AIDS Policy
and Law Review, vol. 10, no. 2, August 2005.
8 Two separate lawsuits have been filed in U.S. courts challenging the “anti-prostitution
pledge” requirements as violating fundamental rights to health and to free expression.
See Rebecca Schleifer, “Challenges filed to U.S. Anti-AIDS Law Anti-prostitution
Pledge Requirement,” HIV/AIDS Policy and Law Review (forthcoming) (describing
cases); “Prostitution Loyalty Oath,” http://www.genderhealth.org/loyaltyoathsuit.php
(website links to court pleadings filed in cases).
9 See Human Rights Watch, “Injecting Reason: Human Rights And HIV Prevention
For Injection Drug Users; California: A Case Study,” vol. 15, no. 2(G), September
2003.
10 See studies cited in “Injecting Reason,” pp. 10-17.
11 See, e.g., World Health Organization, Joint United Nations Program on HIV/AIDS,
and United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, “Policy Brief: Provision of Sterile
Injecting Equipment to Reduce HIV Transmission” (2004); Joint United Nations
Program on HIV/AIDS, “Intensifying HIV prevention: UNAIDS policy position
paper,” August 2005, p. 23; U.S. National Institutes of Health, Interventions to Prevent
HIV Risk Behaviors: Consensus Development Statement, February 11-13, 1997; Institute
of Medicine of National Academy of Sciences, No Time to Lose: Getting More from HIV
Prevention (2001).
12 Transnational Institute, “The United Nations and Harm Reduction – Revisited: An
unauthorized report on the outcomes of the 48th CND session,” Drug Policy Briefing
No. 13, April 2005.
13 Ibid.; see also, Letter from Antonio Maria Costa, Executive Director, United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, to Robert B. Charles, Assistant Secretary,
International Narcotics and Law Enforcement Affairs, U.S. Department of State,
November 11, 2004.
14 See, e.g., Jole Baglole, “Vancouver Drug Facilities Draw Ire of U.S. Officials,” Wall
Street Journal, April 1, 2003.
15 “Lesotho launches groundbreaking HIV campaign on World AIDS Day,” WHO
website: http://www.who.int/mediacentre/news/releases/2005/pr64/en/index.html
(retrieved December 1, 2005).
16 See: The Voluntary HIV-1 Counseling and Testing Efficacy Study Group, “Efficacy
of VCT in individuals and couples in Kenya, Tanzania, and Trinidad: A Randomised
Trial,” The Lancet, vol. 356, July 8, 2000, pp 103-112; M.H. Merson, J.M. Dayton, K.
O’Reilly, “Effectiveness of HIV prevention interventions in developing countries,”
AIDS, September 2000, vol. 14, supp. 2, pp. S68-84; and C.A. Liechty, “The evolving
role of HIV counseling and testing in resource-limited settings: HIV prevention and
linkage to expanding HIV care access,” Current HIV/AIDS Report, December 2004,
vol. 1(4), pp. 181-5.
17 See, e.g., Kevin De Cock et al., “A serostatus-based approach to HIV/AIDS prevention
and care in Africa,” The Lancet, vol., 367 (2003), pp. 1847–49; Kevin De Cock, et
al., “Shadow on the continent: public health and HIV/AIDS in Africa in the 21st century,”
The Lancet, vol. 360 (2002), pp. 67-72.
18 Lesotho Ministry of Health and Social Welfare (STI, HIV & AIDS Directorate and
Partners), “‘Know Your Status’ Campaign Operational Plan 2006-7; Gateway to comprehensive
HIV prevention, treatment, care and support; Universal Access to HIV
Testing and Counseling,” December 1, 2005.
19 This figure refers to the total budget for Strategic objective 7: “Strengthen post-test
services for both HIV positive and HIV negative people” as specified in Lesotho
Ministry of Health and Social Welfare (STI, HIV & AIDS Directorate and Partners),
“‘Know Your Status’ Campaign Operational Plan 2006-7; Gateway to comprehensive
HIV prevention, treatment, care and support; Universal Access to HIV Testing and
Counseling,” December 1, 2005.
20 UNAIDS, “HIV rates decline in Zimbabwe,” November 21, 2005,
http://www.unaids.org.zw/default.htm (retrieved November 21, 2005).
21 Human Rights Watch, “Just Die Quietly: Domestic Violence And Women’s
Vulnerability to HIV In Uganda,” August 2003, vol. 15, no.15(A), p. 29