Principled Leadership: A Human Rights Agenda
for UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
By Peggy Hicks
The post of United Nations (UN) secretary-general has been called “the most
impossible job on earth” by both the first secretary-general, Trygve Lie, and the
most recent, Kofi Annan. During his tenure, Annan made the position even more
arduous than it had been before by treating human rights as an integral part of
his job. There is no turning back: there is an urgent need today for the new
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon to speak out forcefully in defense of human rights
and give substance to the United Nations’ now extensive human rights commitments.
Ban comes to the job with a stated predisposition to support human rights, but a
limited track record that can be used to assess the strength of that commitment.
As South Korea’s foreign minister, he was willing to subordinate human rights
concerns to other objectives in his country’s dialogue with North Korea. In his
new position, he will need to take on those who want to overlook human rights
for the sake of political expediency and confront those responsible for human
rights abuses.
The UN secretary-general’s role is barely defined by the United Nations Charter,
the scope of potential work is vast, and his or her power is ambiguous. The secretary-
general is the world’s chief diplomat, manager of some 30,000 staff, and
public face of the United Nations. As an international civil servant, the UN leader
is responsible to the 192 members of the United Nations collectively and must
count on members’ support individually to implement his or her agenda. While
diplomatic skills are a must, successful officeholders also are remembered for
their vision and leadership.
Annan’s most important contribution as secretary-general was the recognition
that human rights must be respected as the “third pillar” of the UN’s work alongside
development, and peace and security, and that the UN’s efforts in these
areas will not be successful so long as human rights are neglected and marginalized.
Within the UN system, the reality remains far removed from Annan’s vision.
As the scope of human rights protections has grown, so has the gap between the
UN’s human rights aspirations and its ability to act on them.
Ban’s success as secretary-general will depend in part on his ability to address
that void. Doing so successfully will take vision, drive, and a clear agenda for
strengthening the UN’s human rights performance. His agenda should include the
following:
• Exercising leadership for human rights protection;
• Strengthening UN institutions and integrating human rights;
• Building a “new UN for women”; and
• Addressing the human rights aspects of peace and security.
While putting an ambitious agenda in place will not be easy, Ban should keep in
mind the perils of putting human rights on the back burner. As Annan emphasized
in his 2005 report “In Larger Freedom: Towards Development, Security and
Human Rights for All” (General Assembly document A/59/2005), “we will not
enjoy development without security, we will not enjoy security without development,
and we will not enjoy either without respect for human rights. Unless all
these causes are advanced, none will succeed.” But the risks of ignoring human
rights are even greater than that, as Annan’s own record demonstrates. Ban, like
his predecessor, will be judged at least in part by the UN’s response to the most
horrendous crimes it faces during his tenure. Annan has been haunted by the
UN’s failures in Rwanda, and has played a vocal—but as yet unsuccessful—role in
trying to see that they were not repeated in Darfur. Ban will need to do better.
Annan’s Legacy
Annan’s human rights legacy provides both a solid foundation and an enormous
challenge for the new secretary-general. The most significant achievements under
Annan’s leadership include:
Acting as a moral voice: Annan’s willingness to speak out on human rights issues
and to be the conscience of the world has been critical and has given greater
courage to human rights defenders worldwide. His advocacy on Darfur since 2004 has been crucial to the limited successes the United Nations has achieved in that
crisis to date.
Strengthening the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR):
Annan successfully pushed for expansion both of the high commissioner’s staff
and of her influence within the UN system with important results. The OHCHR’s
monitoring mission in Nepal is a telling example of what timely human rights
work can achieve.
Human security: During Annan’s tenure, the Security Council has made real if
inconsistent progress in integrating the impact of conflict on civilians in its work,
including through adoption of resolutions on protection of civilians, women and
armed conflict, and children and armed conflict.
Responsibility to Protect: Annan put response to grave human rights violations at
the center of his agenda. His work culminated in the recognition by leaders at the
2005 World Summit and later the General Assembly and the Security Council of a
“responsibility to protect” populations from mass atrocities.
Human Rights Council: Annan initiated the idea of replacing the Commission on
Human Rights with the Human Rights Council, a permanent, standing body that
would raise the profile of inter-governmental human rights activity. Although the
Human Rights Council is off to a rocky start, the resolution establishing the council
provides the foundation for the stronger, more effective institution that Annan
envisioned.
Mainstreaming: From the outset of his first term, Annan emphasized that human
rights was a cross-cutting issue that is the “common thread” running through all
the UN’s other activities. He worked to make that understanding operational
through the “mainstreaming” of human rights, incorporating a rights-based
approach within all aspects of the UN’s work.
Engaging with civil society: Recognizing that expanded civil society involvement
would both strengthen the UN’s work and enhance its credibility, Annan opened
up new opportunities for civil society organizations to contribute to the UN’s
work.
Key Human Rights Challenges
Ban assumes the post of secretary-general at a pivotal moment for human rights
within the UN system. The key pieces of Annan’s human rights legacy—the
Human Rights Council and the “responsibility to protect” doctrine—are not just
incomplete, but endangered. The Human Rights Council has failed to take action
to address the world’s human rights crises, and has adopted a one-sided
approach to abuses in Israel and Lebanon. States with poor human rights records
have dominated the council’s deliberations, and supporters of human rights have
failed to exercise leadership to put this new body on course. The situation in
Darfur is deteriorating, exposing the absence of a mechanism to put the principle
of responsibility to protect into practice. Annan’s efforts to mainstream human
rights are also incomplete: human rights frequently remain a secondary—and
often unwelcome—consideration in the UN’s work.
At the same time, given the failure of governmental leadership detailed in the
Introduction to this volume, the UN’s role in human rights protection has never
been more important. Of course, there is reason to question whether the United
Nations—which is composed of those same governments—will be willing to do
more than its members individually. While these constraints should temper
expectations, the United Nations has shown the ability to do more for human
rights than the sum of its parts, particularly when it has had a committed secretary-
general at the helm. For example, the Security Council was able to refer the
situation in Darfur to the International Criminal Court, although the United States
(US), Russia, and China were all potentially opposed to that action.
The period since the adoption of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights has
witnessed an impressive growth in human rights standards. The development of
norms, however, has not been matched by effective means for their implementation.
Today, the accumulated body of human rights law faces another great challenge—
adapting and responding to the dual threats of terrorism and the abuse of
human rights in counterterrorism efforts.
Addressing terrorism as a human rights abuse is at once both simple and inordinately
complex. Simple, as terrorist attacks breach the most basic human rights—
the rights to life and security of the person. Complex, as the organizations responsible for human rights violations are not states or traditional “non-state
actors” like rebel groups, and treating their actions as human rights abuses raises
important questions concerning the nature of these groups and our response
to them. The erosion of human rights in the “war on terror” is the flip side of this
coin. In the post-September 11 world, some of those threatened by terrorism have
suggested that human rights are neither universal nor absolute, and that the
rights of some can somehow be effectively traded for more security for all. The
suggestion that terrorism creates a perpetual state of emergency in which derogation
from basic rights is permitted has already undermined human rights protection
worldwide, and the threat to human rights continues to grow. While Ban’s
primary challenge will be implementing norms already developed, this new context
requires continuing diligence to defend fundamental human rights standards.
Leadership
Faced with these challenges, the most important single element in Secretary-
General Ban’s human rights agenda should be public advocacy for human rights.
While some of the secretary-general’s work will involve private diplomacy, he
must also be the United Nations’ most prominent human rights defender. Ban
should follow Annan’s example in using the “bully pulpit” of the secretary-general’s
office to take on those responsible for human rights abuses and to push the
UN system to be stronger in the defense of human rights. To demonstrate the universal
basis of human rights, he should be willing to speak out even when the
offender is a powerful government.
Ban should move quickly upon assuming his office to make public statements on
human rights issues. Ban’s early attention to human rights is essential to send a
signal to abusive governments that the UN secretary-general will continue to be a
vocal advocate for victims of human rights violations worldwide. Such statements
would also make clear to those resisting change within the United Nations that
human rights mainstreaming will accelerate. He should also recognize the critical
role of civil society in the UN’s work, and step in as needed to protect human
rights defenders. Ban should pay careful attention as well to selecting senior staff
who are seriously committed to human rights, particularly in key Secretariat posts such as the under-secretary-general for political affairs and in peacekeeping missions.
Further, the secretary-general must be a forceful advocate for the importance of
human rights in the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals. In particular,
Ban should emphasize that failures to respect freedom of speech and
association undermine the participation and accountability essential to drive
development processes and attack corruption.
Like his predecessor, Ban should also speak out on the importance of justice and
accountability in the protection of human rights. In addition, the new secretarygeneral
should address head on other challenges to the universality of human
rights, including claims that human rights standards are imposed values from
developed, Western states. In particular, Ban should engage in ongoing discussions
about religion and human rights in ways that reinforce fundamental human
rights principles.
Strengthening UN Institutions and Integrating Human Rights
The Human Rights Council
Annan’s effort to replace the UN Commission on Human Rights with a stronger
and more credible body—the Human Rights Council—is off to a rocky start. The
council, which began work in June 2006, has quickly fallen prey to some of the
same problems that doomed its predecessor. It has failed to take concrete action
regarding human rights abuses in places like Darfur, Burma, Uzbekistan, and
Colombia. During the same period, the council has adopted three resolutions
condemning Israeli human rights violations, none of which even mentions abuses
by Palestinian armed groups or Hezbollah.
States with poor human rights records are working to render the new institution
impotent, including through seeking to do away with its ability to criticize governments
for their human rights abuses. States ordinarily supportive of human rights
have been ineffective in responding, and have displayed a conspicuous lack of
leadership.
This reform cannot be allowed to fail. Despite its shortcomings, the Commission
on Human Rights, particularly its system of independent experts, played an
important role in spotlighting abuses and pushing governments to address
human rights violations. The Human Rights Council must build on the commission’s
successes, not repeat its mistakes. The UN needs a strong, effective intergovernmental
body to carry forward its human rights agenda. The council’s work
is also seen as an indicator of the seriousness of UN reform more generally. The
council’s missteps have given succor to UN detractors, and the credibility of the
UN as a whole has been damaged. Ban will need to make getting this fledgling
institution on track a priority, both for its own sake and for the sake of the UN as
a whole.
While the majority of the action on the Human Rights Council will take place in
Geneva, the council also needs strong support from the United Nations in New
York and from foreign ministries in capitals. Ban should exert his leadership to
rally support for a broad cross-regional coalition of “friends of human rights”
within the council that would take action on pressing issues and act as a counterweight
to those states that are seeking to weaken the new body. He should plan
on attending the March 2007 session of the Human Rights Council, and should
engage actively with council members and other interested governments to
strengthen this fledgling institution.
The UN High Commissioner for Human Rights
The United Nations’ ability to move from rhetorical support for human rights to
real strengthening of human rights protection on the ground is dependent upon
the Office of the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights. Under General
Assembly resolution 48/141, OHCHR has “principal responsibility” for the UN’s
human rights activities, yet OHCHR received only 1.8 percent of the UN budget in
2005, and lacks operational capacity, particularly in the field. The World Summit
recognized this gap, and called for doubling OHCHR’s budget in five years. The
high commissioner is now implementing a plan to strengthen her office. Ban
should make full implementation of this plan a priority.
Two crucial elements of the OHCHR plan are a substantial strengthening of its
field presence and an expansion of its New York office. Both will be critical to the UN’s ability to meet the challenges it faces in the coming decade. A broader field
presence will allow OHCHR to serve the United Nations and its members more
effectively in many ways through more effective mainstreaming, improved monitoring
of abuses, and strengthened technical assistance and capacity building.
For example, by more closely monitoring human rights situations, field-based
staff are more likely to be able to identify impending political and security crises.
Monitoring missions are also a proven means of improving human rights protection,
as OHCHR’s recent deployment in Nepal has again shown. An enhanced
field presence will also enable OHCHR to play a stronger role within UN country
teams.
In addition, the role of the high commissioner’s office in New York must be
enhanced. Given the interdependent relationship between peace and security,
development, and human rights, OHCHR must be able to engage frequently and
at the right level with the UN’s institutions and agencies that are based in New
York. This requires not only a much larger office, but also a more powerful one.
The office should be headed by an assistant secretary-general, and the head of
office should be able to represent the high commissioner in meetings of the new
secretary-general’s cabinet (the UN’s Senior Management Group).
Secretary-General Ban should also make clear that he will stand behind the high
commissioner and defend the independence of her office at all costs. The high
commissioner must be able to speak frankly about any government, even the
most powerful, without repercussions. An important case study for Ban can be
found in Annan’s response to a broadside launched by US Ambassador John
Bolton against the high commissioner in 2005. Bolton called High Commissioner
Louise Arbour’s comments on secret detention and rendition of suspects to governments
that routinely practice torture “inappropriate and illegitimate for an
international civil servant.” Annan quickly responded by publicly reaffirming his
“absolute full confidence” in Arbour and noting that he intended to take up the
issue with Bolton “at an early date.” Ban should similarly be vigilant in his
defense of the independent operations of OHCHR, and of the high commissioner’s
ability to speak freely about human rights abuses wherever and whenever
they occur.
Mainstreaming Human Rights
As secretary-general, Kofi Annan emphasized mainstreaming of human rights as a
centerpiece of his UN reform agenda. While some progress has been made, the
high commissioner for human rights recently noted that conceptual and methodological
advances in mainstreaming are “well ahead of actual results on the
ground.” Human rights may be at the table, but it does not yet have an equal
voice in the discussion. In many circumstances, human rights protection is an
afterthought or, worse, is seen as an unnecessary obstacle in the path of other
objectives such as stability or reconciliation. For example, when the United
Nations engaged in Afghanistan, those who expressed concern for human rights
and cautioned against relying on warlords were overruled for the sake of political
expediency. Sidelining human rights was justified as the pragmatic view, but
Afghanistan is paying the price today. As is often the case, what its practitioners
describe as “pragmatism” proved to be shortsightedness.
More effective integration of human rights at an operational level in UN country
work is the chief outstanding element of the mainstreaming effort. This will
require a much greater role for OHCHR in the selection, support, and evaluation
of the heads of UN country teams, including the addition of dedicated capacity on
human rights. It also means that senior UN officials, including heads of country
teams, must be held accountable for their performance on human rights.
Effective mainstreaming of human rights also requires leadership, not just from
the secretary-general himself, but from other senior UN staff. As noted, Ban’s senior
staff should be truly committed to human rights, and they should be held
accountable when they fail to uphold the human rights standards of the United
Nations in their interactions with national actors.
Building a “New UN for Women”
In no area has the UN’s promise on human rights fallen as far short as it has on
women’s rights. The first target within the Millennium Development Goals to go
unmet was the objective of eliminating gender disparity in primary and secondary
education by 2005. As Stephen Lewis, the UN special envoy for HIV/AIDS in
Africa, recently noted, “A destructive pattern has taken hold of landmark agreements on women’s rights: gender equality advocates work tirelessly to gain international
consensus, only to see their hard-won declarations and resolutions
reach dead ends for lack of expertise and operational capacity at the country
level.”
The limitations of gender mainstreaming efforts have been widely recognized. In
its November 2006 report, the secretary-general’s High-Level Panel on UN
System-Wide Coherence in the Areas of Development, Humanitarian Assistance
and the Environment acknowledged “a strong sense” that the UN’s contribution
to achieving gender equality “has been incoherent, under-resourced and fragmented.”
The panel concluded that the United Nations needs to pursue gender
equality “far more vigorously” and that it requires “a much stronger voice on
women’s issues to ensure that gender equality and women’s empowerment are
taken seriously throughout the UN system and to ensure that the UN works more
effectively with governments and civil society in this mission.”
To address these needs, the panel recommended the creation of “a dynamic gender
entity responsible for gender equality and women’s empowerment.” The new
entity would consolidate the Office of the Special Advisor on Gender Issues, the
Division for the Advancement of Women, and the Development Fund for Women,
and would have policy, advocacy, and operational functions. The panel also
found that the new entity should be headed by an under-secretary-general and
have stable funding that is substantially greater than that accorded to its three
constituent components.
While there may be debate about the details of this prescription, the panel’s
diagnosis is widely accepted: the United Nations is substantially underperforming
on women’s human rights, and tinkering with current approaches will not remedy
the problem. As with human rights generally, the major challenge faced today
in women’s human rights is not in standard-setting but rather, implementation.
The United Nations is ill-equipped to meet that challenge, as the coherence panel
concluded. Despite Annan’s strong commitment to women’s human rights, the
panel’s report has laid bare the deficiencies of the existing system and placed
this issue squarely on the new secretary-general’s plate. Creating an improved
framework for the UN’s women’s human rights work—a “new UN for women”—
should be a signature effort for Ban.
Human Rights and Peace and Security
Secretary-General Annan made a compelling case for the interrelationship of
human rights and the UN’s work on peace and security. In his “In Larger
Freedom” report (2005), Annan stated:
It would be a mistake to treat human rights as though there
were a trade-off to be made between human rights and such
goals as security or development. We only weaken our hand in
fighting the horrors of extreme poverty or terrorism if, in our
efforts to do so, we deny the very human rights that these
scourges take away from citizens. Strategies based on the protection
of human rights are vital for both our moral standing and
the practical effectiveness of our actions.
The Responsibility to Protect
One of the UN’s greatest challenges and its best known failures involve its
response to mass atrocities. Annan’s legacy here is substantial. Growing out of
his own experiences as head of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations during
the Rwandan genocide, Annan made a priority of improving the UN’s response
to future genocides. In a 1999 speech to the UN General Assembly, Annan argued
that “the core challenge to the Security Council and to the United Nations as a
whole in the next century” would be “to forge unity behind the principle that massive
and systematic violations of human rights—wherever they may take place—
should not be allowed to stand.”
Six years later at the 2005 World Summit, leaders from some 150 nations agreed
to recognize a “responsibility to protect populations from genocide, war crimes,
ethnic cleansing, and crimes against humanity.” The primary burden to protect
falls upon individual states, which must prevent such crimes “through appropriate
and necessary means.” When states are unable or unwilling to protect their
population, however, the responsibility to protect holds that other states, through
the United Nations, should use “appropriate diplomatic, humanitarian, and other
peaceful means” to help protect those in danger and should take collective
action, including the use of force, “should peaceful means be inadequate and national authorities manifestly fail to protect their populations from genocide,
war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity.”
Recognition of this multifacted Responsibility to Protect (or “R2P” as it has come
to be known in UN circles) was in some sense the culmination of Annan’s tenure
as secretary-general. He has left the new secretary-general, however, the thorny
task of making the agreed principle a reality. Ban must pick up this gauntlet, and
work within the UN system to create a framework for implementation of R2P. Of
course, it will be up to states themselves whether they act in the face of mass
atrocities. But the secretary-general can play a crucial role as an educator, organizer,
and catalyst.
As an educator, Ban should work to build understanding of R2P among member
states. While R2P is mistakenly often seen as synonymous only with intervention
by force, in fact R2P encompasses a continuum of actions where forcible intervention
is at one end of the spectrum. Short of such intervention, R2P requires that
states take other measures such as technical assistance, diplomatic initiatives
and sanctions to protect endangered populations. The new secretary-general and
his staff should work with member states to explain this continuum, and to identify
opportunities where strategies short of military intervention are required
because of the responsibility to protect.
Secretary-General Ban should also work to put in place a framework to make the
concept of R2P operate in practice. This effort will have many parts, some of
which are still to be agreed. At a minimum though, the secretary-general should
be the focal point for efforts to see that the UN’s institutions bring R2P into their
work systematically and with effect. He should also make recommendations as to
the role of other UN actors regarding implementation of R2P. In particular, the
Security Council, the Peacebuilding Commission, and the Human Rights Council
must all play a part in implementing R2P, and Ban should work with those institutions
to build a consistent approach to addressing R2P within the United Nations.
One part of that effort should be the development of guidelines for when situations
rise to the level demanding Security Council attention and, in particular, for
when intervention by force is required. In addition, Ban should work with his special
advisor for the prevention of genocide to prepare indicators that can be monitored to give early warning in situations where the responsibility to protect is
implicated. Further, the new secretary-general should actively support Annan’s
request to create a permanent core of UN staff who would be available for deployment
on urgent peacekeeping or special political missions. Ban should also push
for serious dialogue concerning broader proposals to create a standing emergency
peace service within the United Nations that could include a military component
able to respond quickly when mass atrocities are threatening.
Finally, Secretary-General Ban needs to be willing to push both UN institutions
and member states to live up to their commitments regarding the responsibility to
protect. His office and the special advisor should act as watchdogs for situations
in which R2P is implicated, and they should be willing to speak loudly and often
when the responsibility to protect is not being met.
Darfur
The credibility both of the responsibility to protect doctrine and of Ban’s leadership
will depend at least in part upon how the United Nations responds to the
Darfur crisis in which the Sudanese government and allied militias have forcibly
displaced over two million people; over 200,000 have been killed and tens of
thousands of women have been subject to sexual violence. The UN’s apparent
impotence in the face of the government of Sudan’s barbarity and stubborn
refusal to allow a UN peacekeeping force in Darfur raises justified concerns that
the R2P is merely rhetoric.
In such a situation, the secretary-general must act as the conscience of the
United Nations and its members. Ban should use the platform provided by his
office to shine a sustained spotlight on the plight of the people of Darfur. He
should also use his diplomatic role to conduct a persistent dialogue with UN
member states that have shown a willingness to sacrifice the R2P for their own
economic or energy interests, such as China. Ban also needs to encourage African
and Arab states to set aside concerns of regional solidarity and put the principle
of R2P into practice by being willing to condemn the Sudanese government, and
call for stronger sanctions to stop its murderous policies.
The Security Council
Significant headway on human rights has been made in recent years within the
UN Security Council, which has now taken up human rights matters in a range of
guises (e.g.: the protection of civilians; women and peace and security; children
and armed conflict; as well as country-specific discussions on places such as
Darfur). The high commissioner for human rights has been invited to brief the
Security Council, reflecting recognition of the interrelationship between human
rights and peace and security, but this is still a rare occurrence. In his “In Larger
Freedom” report, Annan called for this trend to be intensified, arguing that the
high commissioner should play a more active role in the deliberations of the
Security Council and of the Peacebuilding Commission.
Despite this progress, the Security Council’s practices relating to human rights are
still sporadic and inconsistent. Its ability to address human rights violations
relates not as much to the level of abuses or their relationship to security, but
rather to the weight and persistence of those countries who seek to place (or
block) issues on the Security Council’s agenda. The United Kingdom succeeded in
2005 in holding a private meeting of the Security Council for a briefing concerning
housing evictions in Zimbabwe. During the same period, however, Russia was
able to block the high commissioner from briefing the Security Council on the situation
in Uzbekistan in the wake of the massacre of hundreds of civilians in
Andijan.
Ban should push for integration of human rights in the Security Council’s work in
a more systematic manner, and should take up Annan’s call for a greater role for
the high commissioner in Security Council discussions. At the same time, the secretary-
general should practice what he preaches by ensuring that a human rights
analysis is an integral part of the reports that he presents to the Security Council.
The responsibility to protect also has a direct bearing on the Security Council’s
work, and on its consideration of human rights crises. As the 2005 World Summit
outcome document makes clear, collective action should be taken through the
Security Council when peaceful means have proven inadequate and national
authorities are manifestly failing to protect their populations. To be able to exercise
that power appropriately, the Security Council should be prepared to discuss
situations implicating the responsibility to protect, regardless of where they fall on the R2P continuum discussed above. As part of his efforts to make R2P operational,
Ban should encourage integration of R2P issues into the Security Council’s
agenda in a consistent and timely manner.
Annan’s High-Level Panel on Threats, Challenges, and Change also called on the
permanent members of the Security Council to “refrain from the use of the veto in
cases of genocide and large scale human rights abuses.” Ban should encourage
Security Council members to commit themselves to that practice, as it is essential
if the council is to live up to its commitment to the responsibility to protect.
Conclusion
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, like his predecessor, will have his hands full with
UN reform and managing a large and complex organization. And human rights
can be a messy business—placing the secretary-general into conflict with UN
member states to whom he reports. But, despite the difficulties he may face in
doing so, Ban needs to put human rights at the center of his agenda.
Progress on human rights is inextricably linked to the other core functions of the
United Nations: development, and peace and security. By focusing needed attention
on human rights, Ban will reap dividends in those areas as well. Ensuring
that UN human rights institutions function effectively, and strengthening the work
of the United Nations on women’s rights, will significantly aid the UN’s development
efforts. Keeping a close eye on global human rights crises will aid the UN’s
peace and security efforts.
The reverse is also true: Ban should be very aware that failure to address human
rights issues could place the rest of his agenda at risk. The legacy of Rwanda
should not only haunt Annan, but his successor. Despite the limitations on any
secretary-general’s ability to take on a crisis like Darfur single-handedly, Ban’s
leadership and vision in responding to the most dire human rights situations will
be critical to how his tenure as secretary-general is remembered.
Peggy Hicks is global advocacy director at Human Rights Watch