PRISONS
Prisoner numbers continued to rise in countries all over the world, resulting
in severe overcrowding of prisons and other detention facilities. Even
where legislation permitted alternatives to incarceration as a criminal sanction,
authorities in most countries neglected them in preference to confinement.
While conditions of detention varied greatly from country to country and facility
to facility, standards in most countries were shockingly low, and in some case
horrific. Prisons and jails in even the richest and most developed countries were
plagued by massive overcrowding, decaying physical infrastructure, inadequate
sanitation, lack of medical care, guard abuse and corruption, and prisoner-on-prisoner
violence. In many countries abysmal prison conditions were life threatening,
leading to inmate deaths from disease, malnutrition, and physical abuse.With few
exceptions, neither the public nor political leaders were willing to commit the
financial resources needed to improve prison conditions. By barring human rights
groups, journalists, and other outside observers access to their penal facilities,
prison officials in many countries sought to shield substandard conditions from
scrutiny.
ABUSIVE TREATMENT OF PRISONERS
Violence was rife in many prisons. In some countries, including Brazil, Kenya,
Venezuela, and Panama, prison homicides were so frequent as to seem routine.
Inmates were usually killed by other inmates rather than by guards, but
inmate-on-inmate violence was often the predictable result of official negligence.
By neglecting to supervise and control the inmates within their facilities, by failing
to respond adequately or at all to incidents of violence, by corruptly allowing the
entry of weapons and drugs into the prisons, and by generally abetting the tyranny
of the strongest prisoners over the weakest, prison authorities were directly complicit
in the violence against their charges. In some countries, for example Mexico,
inmates were able to control fellow inmates with little interference from prison authorities, and to engage in violence, sexual abuse, drugs and arms trafficking,
coercion, and influence peddling.
Incidents of collective violence, particularly in South America, also led to inmate
deaths and injuries. In May, clashes between rival inmate gangs at two prisons in
Venezuela, El Rodeo and Tocuyito, left twelve inmates dead and at least thirty-three
wounded.During 2000, 276 Venezuelan prisoners were killed during gang fights or
riots. In a February uprising coordinated by a prison gang, 20,000 prisoners took
some 7,000 hostages, including at least twenty-seven guards, in over two dozen
prisons in Sao Paulo state in Brazil.During the seventeen-hour revolt, sixteen prisoners
were killed and seventy-seven wounded; four police agents were also
wounded. It was unclear how many of the prisoners were killed by the police, but
they apparently shot at least three prisoners in the back. Three other prisoners suffocated
to death after guards left them locked in a sweltering van. The Sao Paulo
prison system is notorious for under-staffing, extreme overcrowding,deaths in custody,
use of torture, and lack of medical and sanitation facilities. More uprisings
followed in other Brazilian states in March. In a juvenile detention center in
Alagoas, four inmates died after other prisoners set them on fire. In Colombia, ten
prisoners died and twenty-three were wounded in a July gun battle among inmates
in Bogota’s Modelo prison. After quelling the violence, authorities found small
arms, grenades, machine guns, and ammunition inside the prison. The Procuracy
opened an investigation against various prison officials for failing to maintain security
and prevent the violence.
Physical abuse of prisoners by guards remained another chronic problem. The
U.N. special rapporteur against torture reported in April that torture and ill-treatment
were widespread in Brazil’s prisons and detention centers. There and elsewhere,
unwarranted beatings were so common as to be an integral part of prison
life in many prison systems, including Angola, Armenia, Brazil, the Democratic
Republic of Congo,Egypt, Iran, Iraq,Malaysia,Mexico, South Africa,Thailand, and
Vietnam, among other countries. In Indonesia, officers punished inmates with
electric shock batons and by stapling their ears, nose and lips. In the United States,
electronic stun devices were used to control inmates. Some countries continued to
permit corporal punishment and the routine use of leg irons, fetters, shackles, and
chains. The heavy bar fetters used in Pakistani prisons, for example, turned simple
movements such as walking into painful ordeals. Some prisoners contracted gangrene
and required amputations. In Iraq, some prisoners in two prisons were
reportedly locked in metal boxes the size of coffins that were opened for only thirty
minutes each day.
Women prisoners were vulnerable to custodial sexual abuse. The problem was
widespread in the United States, where male guards outnumbered women guards
in many women’s prisons. In some countries, Haiti being a conspicuous example,
female prisoners were even held together with male inmates, a situation that
exposed them to rampant sexual abuse and violence.
In contravention of international standards, juvenile inmates were often held
together with adults.Many of Pakistan’s jails and police lockups mixed juvenile and
adult prisoners, as did certain detention facilities in Nicaragua, Kenya, South
Africa, Sudan, Turkey, the United States, and Zambia, among other countries.
Male inmate on inmate rape was common in many prison systems. In the United States, rape was a widespread problem facilitated by staff indifference and even, in
some instances, complicity, as well as by a lack of effective prevention and punishment
systems. In South Africa, the Office of the Inspecting Judge reported that fellow
prisoners sodomized an estimated 70 to 80 percent of arrested suspects.
Corruption and extortion accompanied the low salaries generally paid to guards
and their inadequate training and supervision. In exchange for contraband or
special treatment, inmates in many countries supplemented guards’ salaries with
bribes. Powerful inmates in Colombian, Indian, and Mexican prisons, among
others, enjoyed cellular phones, rich diets, and comfortable lodgings, while other
inmates were held in squalor. Prisoners in many countries complained that they
must buy their food,medicine and other necessities from guards or bribe guards to
allow goods to be brought into the facility.
Increasing levels of overcrowding—prevalent in most countries for which information
was available—compounded substandard conditions. Inadequate living
space, poor or nonexistent ventilation, limited sanitation facilities, low levels of
cleanliness and hygiene, and inadequate food and medical supplies made prisons
life-threatening in many countries, including Armenia, Burma, Kenya, Mozambique,
Nigeria, Peru, Russia, Sudan, Tanzania, Zambia. In the central prison in
Karachi, Pakistan, there were four times as many prisoners as the prison was
designed to hold, and only two toilets available per hundred prisoners. In Uzbekistan,
ten to fifteen inmates were reportedly confined in cells designed for four. In
Peru’s Lurigancho men’s prison, 6,000 inmates were held in a facility built to
accommodate 1,500. The La Loma prison in Mexico, built to hold two hundred
prisoners, housed nearly 1,200. In Bolivia, cells were “sold” to incoming prisoners
by previous occupants or other prisoners; in the poorest areas, cells measured three
by four by six feet and lacked ventilation, lighting, or beds. The crowding in some
prisons is so bad that prisoners must sleep sitting up. In Angola,whose prison population
is five times larger than the prison system’s capacity, many prisons lacked
financial support from the government.
In many countries, prison authorities failed to provide basic necessities to prisoners,
who were obligated to depend on families, friends or international relief
organizations for food, blankets, mattresses, toiletries, and even toilet paper. Insufficient
food or poor diet leading to many cases of malnutrition, semi-starvation
and even death, was a serious problem in countries such as Angola,Armenia,Azerbaijan,
Burundi, Cambodia, Colombia, Cuba, Ethiopia, Haiti, Mexico, Mozambique,
Pakistan, Peru, Russia, Tajikistan, Tanzania, Turkmenistan, Uganda, and
Uzbekistan.
Another common problem was governments’ continued reliance on antiquated
and physically decaying prison facilities.Nineteenth-century prisons needing constant
upkeep remained in use in Italy,Mexico,Russia, the United Kingdom, and the
United States, among other counties, and more modern facilities were often in
severe disrepair due to lack of maintenance.Many prisons lacked adequate sanitation
facilities, a problem compounded by overcrowding. Some cells lacked toilets
or latrines, requiring prisoners to “slop out,” that is, defecate in buckets that they
periodically emptied. In the United Kingdom, for example, there were still five prisons
in Scotland where inmates still had to slop out although the Committee for the
Prevention of Torture condemned the practice as “inhuman” more than a decade ago. Inmates at Makala prison in the Democratic Republic of Congo had no toilets
and had to urinate and defecate on the floor.
Detained migrants awaiting deportation were also frequently confined in
appalling conditions. In Greece, for example, migrants held at the Alexandras
Avenue police station in Athens were confined for long periods in grossly overcrowded
conditions. The detainees had little access to medical care, exercise, and
fresh air. They lacked adequate food and sleeping conditions, and were kept in a
dirty and roach infested environment.
A different set of concerns was raised by the spread of ultra-modern
“super-maximum” security prisons. Originally prevalent in the United States,
where politicians and state corrections authorities promoted them as part of a
politically popular quest for more “austere”prison conditions, the supermax model
was increasingly followed in other countries. Prisoners confined in such facilities
spent an average of twenty-three hours a day in their cells, enduring extreme social
isolation, enforced idleness, and extraordinarily limited recreational and educational
opportunities. While prison authorities defended the use of super-maximum
security facilities by asserting that they held only the most dangerous,
disruptive, or escape-prone inmates, few safeguards existed to prevent other prisoners
from being arbitrarily or discriminatorily transferred to such facilities. In
Australia, the inspector of custodial services found that some prisoners were being
held indefinitely in special high security units without knowing why or when their
isolation would end.
Beginning in December 2000, the Turkish government opened six “F-type”prisons
for prisoners held for offenses tried in the state security courts. Concerned
about conditions in the new prisons,where they were to be held in cells rather than
communal wards, hundreds of prisoners began a hunger strike in October 2000.By
November, thirty-eight prisoners or former prisoners and four prisoners’ relatives
had died in the hunger strike, and at least 399 prisoners had been released because
of poor health. Twenty-eight prisoners were killed on December 19, 2000 when the
government sent soldiers into twenty prisons to break the protest and transfer
inmates to the new facilities. Some prisoners deliberately burned themselves to
death. Inmates in the F-type prisons were initially held in small group isolation,
locked in shared cells and deprived of opportunities for exercise, work, education
or other social activities.However, new legislation was passed in May to enable outof-
cell activities, in which some prisoners were permitted to engage. Prisoners
reported being subjected to “disciplinary” beatings.
Fiscal constraints and competing budget priorities were to blame for prison
deficiencies in some countries, but as the supermax example suggests, harsh prison
conditions were sometimes purposefully imposed. In Peru, notably, a punitive
motive was evident in the decision to hold top-security prisoners in the high-altitude
Challapalca and Yanamayo prisons, whose remote locations and miserable
conditions led the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights to declare in
2000 that they were “unfit” to serve as places of detention. The European Court of
Human Rights ruled in April that conditions in the segregation unit of Koridallos
prison in Greece constituted treatment in violation of article 3 of the European
Convention on Human Rights. The inmate who brought the case for several
months had been practically confined continuously to his bed in a small cell shared with another inmate; the cell had no ventilation, no windows and no privacy for the
in-cell toilet.
With few means to draw public attention to violations of their rights or to secure
improved conditions, prisoners around the world resorted to riots, hunger strikes,
self-mutilation, and other forms of protest. In Guatemala, over 1,000 prisoners
temporarily took control of the country’s main detention facility in Guatemala
City, to demand improved conditions. In Venezuela, inmates at El Rodeo prison in
June held 250 visitors and guards hostage for three days until officials agreed to
study prison conditions and ways to address agonizingly slow pace of legal cases.
In Bolivia, nearly 3,000 prisoners went on strike to demand inclusion in a new
amnesty law. Three women prisoners had themselves tied to slabs of wood with
cord and sheets and raised to the highest point at the prison so that they could be
seen, as if crucified, by the public. Four other women had their lips sewn together
in an effort to obtain amnesty. About 950 male inmates of an Argentine prison in
Buenos Aires began a mass hunger strike in January, demanding the shortening of
their sentences. Protests and violent mutinies, in which guards and visitors are
often taken hostage, have become commonplace in Argentina’s crowded, filthy and
violent prisons. In Nepal, jail inmates demanding better conditions started attacking
the guards, who opened fire, killing one and injuring about a dozen more.
UNSENTENCED PRISONERS
Although comprehensive figures were impossible to obtain, the available statistics
showed that a large proportion of the world’s prisoners had not been convicted
of any crime, but were instead being detained pending trial. In countries as varied
as Bangladesh, Burundi, Chad, the Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador,
Guatemala, Haiti, India, Mali, Nigeria, Pakistan, Peru, Rwanda, Uganda, and
Venezuela, unsentenced prisoners made up the majority of the prison population.
In South Africa, 64,000 people—more than one third of the country’s prisoners—
were incarcerated awaiting trial. Fifty-nine percent of the inmates in Central American
prisons were unsentenced, with Honduras having the highest percentage: 87
percent.Worse, such detainees were in many instances held for years before eventually
being acquitted of the crime with which they were charged. Prisoners also
continued to be held after the expiration of their sentences in some countries. In
many countries, prisoners awaiting trial were confined together with sentenced
prisoners.
HEALTH
Health care in most prisons was poor to non-existent. Even in developed countries,
medical services for prisoners were often seriously inadequate. In April, the
British Medical Association warned that limited medical resources, medical staff
shortages and poor prison management were contributing to a prison health care
crisis in England and Wales.
The spread of communicable diseases in numerous prison systems was the predictable
result of overcrowding, malnutrition, poor ventilation, lack of potable
water, inadequate sanitation, and lack of medical care. Tuberculosis (TB) continued
to ravage prison populations around the world, including those of Armenia,
Azerbaijan, Belarus, Brazil, Cuba, India, Peru, Russia, Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan,
and Venezuela. Twelve percent of the prison population in Kazakhstan had tuberculosis.
Penal facilities around the world reported grossly disproportionate rates of HIV
infection and of confirmed AIDS cases. A November 2000 government study estimated
that the HIV infection rate among prisoners in Canada was at least fifteen
times higher than in the general population. The corresponding figure in the
United States was about six times higher, and similar disparities were evident elsewhere.
While overcrowding and a lack of appropriate services facilitated the spread
of many infectious diseases in prison, HIV/AIDS resulted particularly from the failure
of prison authorities both to protect inmates from sexual violence and to offer
even simple and cheap services such as access to condoms. Segregation of HIV-positive
prisoners, in some cases causing their marginalization from basic services,
remained common in several countries and was practiced in three U.S. states
(Alabama,Mississippi and South Carolina). Regular access to services such as needle
sterilization or needle exchange in prisons was a distant dream in most countries
outside ofWestern Europe.
Access to antiretroviral drugs contributed to lower death rates from AIDS
among prisoners in Western Europe, North America and some Latin American
countries, but they were unavailable elsewhere, including in Eastern Europe,which
has the fastest growing AIDS epidemic in the world. The Centers for Disease Control
of the U.S. government reported late in 2000, however, that U.S. prisoners have
a higher rate of drug-resistant strains of HIV than the general population due to
irregular supplies of drugs and because inmates have medicines taken away from
them when they are processed in and out of the prison system.
In 2001, there was increasing awareness that hepatitis C had joined HIV/AIDS
and tuberculosis as a major scourge of prisoners. The hepatitis C virus (HCV), like
HIV, can cause liver failure and death and is transmitted through needle sharing,
tattooing with used needles, and sharing of shaving equipment. Canada estimated
that HCV was fifty times more prevalent among its prisoners than in the general
population. In 2001, inmates brought legal actions against several U.S. states for
failure to provide adequate HCV treatment.
DEFENDING PRISONERS’ HUMAN RIGHTS
Struggling against governmental tendencies toward secrecy and silence on
prison abuses, numerous local human rights groups around the world sought to
obtain access to prisons, monitor prison conditions, and publicize the abuses they
found.. In some countries, government human rights ombudspersons, parliamentary
commissions, and other official monitors also helped call attention to abuses.
In the United Kingdom, notably, the chief inspector of prisons continued his vigorous investigation and forthright criticism of conditions in the country’s penal
facilities. In many countries, however, authorities permitted no outside scrutiny of
penal conditions.
At the regional level, prison monitoring mechanisms were active.The European
Committee for the Prevention of Torture (CPT) continued its important work,
inspecting penal institutions in Georgia,Greece,Malta,Moldova, the Russian Federation
(Chechen Republic), Slovenia, Spain, Switzerland, Turkey, and the United
Kingdom and publishing reports on penal conditions in Austria, Croatia, France,
Greece,Hungary, Lithuania, the former Yugoslav Republic ofMacedonia,Northern
Ireland, Portugal, and Turkey.
In Africa, the special rapporteur on prisons and conditions of detention, an
adjunct to the African Commission on Human and Peoples’Rights, visited prisons
in Malawi,Namibia and Mozambique. The General Assembly of the Organization
of American States adopted a resolution endorsing efforts to draft an Inter-American
Declaration on Persons Deprived of Liberty.
UNITED NATIONS MONITORING EFFORTS
The vast scale and chronic nature of human rights violations in the world’s prisons
have long been of concern to the United Nations, as demonstrated by the 1955
promulgation of the U.N. Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners.
Indeed, the international community’s failure to adopt these standards in practice,
even while it has embraced them in theory, has inspired the United Nations’
most recent prisons effort.
For nearly a decade, a U.N. working group has been hammering out a draft
treaty that would establish a U.N. subcommittee authorized to make regular and ad
hoc visits to places of detention in states party to the treaty, including prisons, jails,
and police lockups.As described in the draft treaty—conceived as an optional protocol
to the Convention against Torture—the primary goal of the subcommittee
would be to prevent torture and other ill-treatment. Based on the information
obtained during its periodic and ad hoc visits, the subcommittee would make
detailed recommendations to state authorities regarding necessary improvements
to their detention facilities.
The working group’s most recent session, in October 2000, ended without any
progress being made toward the completion of a draft treaty. The session revealed
the wide gap that remains between countries on such fundamental issues as which
places should be subject to visits,whether prior consent must be obtained,whether
reservations to the optional protocol should be allowed, and the impact of national
legislation on the nature and scope of visits.
Other U.N. bodies pressed countries to improve their prison conditions. The
U.N. Special Rapporteur on torture,whose mandate was renewed for another three
years by the U.N. Commission on Human Rights, reported findings of widespread
torture in Brazil and Azerbaijan, based on his visits to those countries in 2000.
Relevant Human Rights Watch Reports:
No Escape: Male Rape in U.S. Prisons, 4/01
Beyond Reason: The Death Penalty and Offenders with Mental Retardation, 3/01