 DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF KOREA*
 The Democratic People's Republic of Korea, which was
 formed in 1948 during the Soviet administration of the
 northern half of the Korean peninsula, is a rigid commu-
 nist dictatorship. Although some internationally res-
 pected human rights are acknowledged by the Constitution
 and laws, individual rights are fully subordinated in
 practice to the ruling Communist Party, with its over-
 riding aim of imposing a social revolution and enforcing
 unanimous popular support for the country's governing
 system and its leaders.
 The Government is controlled by the Korean Workers' (com-
 munist) Party which, in turn, is under the domination of
 one man, Kim Il-sung, and his family. The latest Consti-
 tution, promulgated in 1972, purports to guarantee a wide
 range of rights, including: freedom of the press, reli-
 gion, work, and association, and freedom from sex discrim-
 ination. Other provisions of that Constitution, as well
 as the fact of communist party control, render meaningless
 most of these guarantees. While there were pro forma
 elections to the Supreme People's Assembly in February
 1982, free elections do not exist in North Korea since
 citizens have no choice among candidates.
 Kim Il-sung has made unification of the divided peninsula,
 by whatever means necessary, the touchstone of his ideo-
 logical system. North Korean leaders justify regimenta-
 tion and militarization of society in the name of reunifi-
 cation.
 The North Korean people are subject to rigid control
 measures. Persons who fail to cooperate with the regime
 face imprisonment, confiscation of property, or enforced
 removal to remote villages. Observation by informers is
 prevalent. Movement outside one's own village requires
 documented permission. Punishment for "political crimes,"
 (crimes against the state), a recognized category of
 offenses, can be severe.
 The state's intervention in the individual's activities in
 North Korea goes well beyond those of assembly and expres-
 sion. The authorities attempt to shape the consciousness
 of the populace. Pre-school children are drilled in
 homage to Kim II-sung and his family, while youths and
 adults are required to participate in daily ideological
 training conducted by youth organizations or at places of
 employment. The propaganda requires rote recitation of
 party maxims and positions, and strives for ideological
 purity. The result is that North Korea's society is one
 of the most highly regimented and controlled in the world
 *The United States does not have diplomatic relations with
 the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, and thus does
 not have direct access to information on the situation in
 North Korea. Because of the closed nature of the society,
 there was little new information in 1982 on human rights
 practices in North Korea. Much of this report therefore,
 is a repeat of previous human rights reports, and is nec-
 essarily based on information obtained over a period of
 time, extending well before 1982. While limited in scope
 and detail, the information is generally indicative of the
 human rights situation in North Korea today.
 
 
 736
 today. It is a classic communist dictatorship. At least
 two North Korean security organizations enforce these
 controls.
 Virtually no outside information other than that approved
 and disseminated by the North Korean authorities is
 allowed to reach the North Korean public. Foreigners who
 have traveled to Pyongyang have been surprised to learn
 how little the North Korean populace knows of the outside
 world.
 Despite North Korean claims of being a "socialist soci-
 ety,* it is not "classless." Security ratings for each
 person are based on such considerations as class origin,
 ideological fervor and reliability, and whether any of the
 individual's relatives or associates collaborated with the
 Japanese occupation of 1910 to 1945, or have attempted to
 defect to other countries.
 These ratings determine access to the better jobs,
 schools, medical facilities, and stores, as well as
 admission to the Korean workers' Party, the route to the
 highest levels and privileges of the society. Any
 individual whose relative or close family associate has
 settled in South Korea is treated as suspect, by the North
 Korean authorities.
 The Sixth Congress of the Korean Workers Party was held in
 October 1980. This was the first party congress to be
 held in a decade. Kim II-sung was "re-elected" President
 of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea and Secretary
 General of the Party, and his son, Kim Chong-il,
 effectively was placed in position eventually to succeed
 his father. That Kim Il-sung appears thus far able to
 ensure his succession by his own son is indicative of the
 enormous power concentrated in his hands over 35 years.
 The absence of any evidence of public debate is also
 indicative of the lack of popular participation in the
 political process. While the Supreme People's Assembly
 "unanimously endorsed" all the decisions and reports of
 Kim Il-sung and the Political Bureau of the Central
 Committee without debate or dissent, the party congress
 provided another illustration of the total concentration
 of political power in the hands of Kim Il-sung and a small
 group of relatives and close associates. This situation
 is unlikely to change in the near term, and Kim Il-sung is
 attempting to ensure that the system he has established
 will endure beyond his lifetime.
 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Killing
 No reliable information is available on politically-
 motivated killing in North Korea.
 b. Disappearance
 Available information on disappearance is insufficient for
 useful comment.
 c. Torture
 Information on specific criminal justice procedures and
 practices in North Korea is extremely scarce. North Korea
 
 
 737
 has refused to permit outside observation of its legal
 system and practices. The accounts provided by the crew
 members of the USS Pueblo and by Venezuelan poet Ali
 Lameda, while clearly from an earlier period, comprise
 virtually all the specific information available on the
 operation of the criminal justice system in North Korea.
 The accounts of torture and beatings of crew members of
 the OSS Pueblo in 1968 are well known and documented. The
 only other reliable source on prison conditions and treat-
 ment of prisoners in North Korea is Venezuelan poet Ali
 Lameda, who was detained in North Korea from September
 1967 through 1974, allegedly for attempted sabotage and
 espionage. While physical torture was not used on Mr.
 Lameda, he stated that Korean prisoners were beaten.
 Lameda noted that *beating was also used as a means of
 persuasion during interrogation.' Further details are not
 available.
 d. Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment
 Lameda reported the use of deprivation of food to force
 "confessions,w as well as solitary confinement, continuous
 interrogation, enforced waking periods, poor or non-
 existent medical treatment, and twelve hours of forced
 labor per day. In addition, prisoners were denied family
 visits, parcels, correspondence, writing materials, news-
 papers, and clothing changes. Prisoners appeared to be
 regarded as persons without any rights.
 e. Arbitrary Arrest and Imprisonment
 North Korean law provides that the period prisoners may be
 held for interrogation shall not exceed two months. This
 period may be extended indefinitely, however, if the
 Interrogation Department obtains approval of the Chief
 Prosecutor. Lameda, himself, was detained for twelve
 months without trial or charge. His request for a lawyer
 of his choice and an open trial were ridiculed as
 bdurgeois.w Habeas corpus or its equivalent does not
 exist in practice.
 Newspaper reports, attributed to North Korean defectors in
 South Korea whose reliability cannot be determined, esti-
 mated in April 1982 that at least 105,000 "ideological
 offenders" were being held in eight major camps in the
 North.
 f. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The North Korean Constitution states that courts are
 independent, and judicial proceedings are to be carried
 out in strict accordance with law. All courts, however,
 are "responsible" to the people's assemblies, which effec-
 tively means total governmental control of the judiciary.
 Article 138 states that wcases are heard in public, and
 the accused is guaranteed the right to defense; hearings
 may be closed to the public as stipulated by law." Lameda
 was twice denied public trial. After his first arrest he
 was imprisoned for a year without a hearing; after his
 second arrest, he was put through a closed session without
 benefit of counsel of his choice, or even knowledge of the
 charges. His tribunal was under the direction of the Min-
 istry of Internal Security, with one person serving as
 both judge and prosecutor.
 
 
 738
 Lameda stated that, other than to admit guilt, he was
 refused the right to speak out or defend himself at his
 trial. His *defense counsel" represented him by making a
 lengthy speech praising Kim Il-sung and then requesting a
 20-year sentence, which the tribunal imposed after five
 minutes of dbliberation.
 In a 1979 interview with American journalist John Wallach,
 North Korean Supreme Court Justice Li Chun-uk noted that,
 "his (the defense counsel's) job is to give the suspect
 due punishment.' Open court appears to consist of an
 announcement of the term of imprisonment, which has
 already been determined by the Provincial Safety Bureau.
 g. Invasion of the Home
 The Constitution states that "citizens are guaranteed the
 inviolability of person and residence and the privacy of
 correspondence.' Lameda reported, however, that his resi-
 dence was not respected, and that listening devices were
 used against him. He was arrested and his collected
 papers and poetry destroyed without warrant.
 2. Respect for Civil and Political Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 The Constitution states that "citizens have the freedoms
 of speech, the press, assembly, association, and
 demonstration,' and that *citizens have the religious
 liberty and the freedom of anti-religious propaganda.* In
 fact, North Koreans enjoy none of these rights except in
 support of government objectives. Other articles of the
 Constitution which require citizens to follow the
 *socialist norms of life' and to obey a 'collective
 spirit,* take precedence over individual political or
 civil liberties. Censorship of foreign and domestic media
 is enforced and no deviation from the official government
 line is tolerated. Listening to foreign media broadcasts
 is prohibited and violators reportedly are subject to
 punishment. Artistic works are controlled by the
 Government and visitors report that a primary function of
 plays, movies, operas, and books apparently is to
 contribute to the cult of personality surrounding "the
 great leader," Kim Il-sung and his son, "the beloved
 leader," Kim Chong-il.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 The Government has developed a pervasive system of inform-
 ers throughout the society. No public meetings can be
 held without governmental authorization. Trade unions and
 professional associations appear to exist solely as
 another method of governmental control over workers. They
 have no effective rights to organize, negotiate, or strike.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Although freedom of religion allegedly is guaranteed,
 North Korea, in fact, has severely persecuted Christians
 and Buddhists since the late 1940's, using enforced mem-
 bership in North Korean 'religious organizations" as a
 means of identifying and controlling these groups and
 individuals. The regime uses the remaining organizational
 facades to proclaim the practice of religious freedom, but
 has long since purged the membership out of existence.
 
 
 739
 Religious practice is impossible in North Korea, and
 persons whose family or relatives once had a strong
 religious involvement are discriminated against.
 d. Freedom of Movement within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Internal travel in North Korea is strictly controlled. A
 travel pass is required for any movement outside one's
 home village and is granted only for required official or
 personal travel. This requirement has been strictly
 enforced since April 1982. Foreign travel is limited to.
 officials or trusted artists and performers. Emigration
 is not allowed, and few refugees or defectors succeed in
 fleeing the country. Retaliation reportedly is taken
 against the relatives of those few persons who manage to
 escape. North Korea encourages Korean residents overseas
 to repatriate to "the Fatherland." Some observers esti-
 mate that, since 1959, over 100,000 Korean residents of
 Japan have voluntarily repatriated to North Korea. After
 their arrival in North Korea, repatriates are isolated
 from North Korean society until they can be indoctrinated
 and their ideological reliability gauged because of their
 "corruption" by exposure to foreign influences.
 North Korea has permitted some overseas Korean residents
 to return to visit their relatives.
 e. Freedom to Participate in the Political. Process
 The Constitution states that all citizens above the age of
 17 may vote and be elected. Political processes in North
 Korea are dominated exclusively by the leadership of the
 Korean Workers Party, which is headed by Kim Il-sung, who
 also heads the Government. The legislature, the Supreme
 People's Assembly, has never taken any action other than
 unanimous passage of resolutions presented to it. In an
 effort to create an appearance of democracy, North Korea
 has sanctioned several "minority parties." They exist
 only as rosters of officials who have token representation
 in the National Assembly and completely support the
 Government line.
 Free elections do not exist in North Korea, although
 "elections" to the Supreme People's Assembly were held in
 February 1982. Single candidates were approved by the
 Government party in each electoral district. According to
 the Government-controlled media, 100 percent of the voters
 turned out to elect 100 percent of the approved candi-
 dates. Such "elections" in reality are a mandatory exer-
 cise in which "voters" are required to participate and to
 approve candidates selected in advance by the party.
 The average citizen is completely excluded from any real
 participation in the political process unless he becomes a
 member of the Korean Worker's Party, the selection process
 for entrance to which is long and rigorous. Even the
 lower levels of the party have no voice, serving only to
 carry out the fiats, decrees, and "on the spot guidance"
 promulgated by the party's leadership, dominated by Kim
 Il-sung. Individuals from "bad social backgrounds," i.e.,
 those who have relatives who fled south during the Korean
 war, those whose families had strong religious involvement
 or were once property owners or members of the bour-
 geoisie, and those who have relatives who are political
 
 
 740
 prisoners effectively are denied participation in the
 political process and are discriminated against.
 3. Government Attitude Regarding International and Non-
 governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations of
 Human Rights
 No organizations exist within North Korea to report on or
 observe human rights violations. North Korea does not
 participate in any international or regional human rights
 organizations. On September 14, 1981, North Korea acceded
 to the International Covenant on Civil and Political
 Rights and the International Convenant on Economic, Social
 and Cultural Rights. Amnesty International has requested
 a visit to North Korea; the Government has not responded
 to or acknowledged this request.
 Amnesty International in its 1982 report on North Korea,
 which covers events during calendar year 1981, continues
 to express its concern about punishment for political
 offenses and the imprecise definition of such offenses.
 Freedom House, in its 1982 report, rates North Korea 'Not
 Free," places North Korea in the least free category for
 political and civil liberties, and sees no prospect of
 change.
 4. Economic, Social, and Cultural Situation
 North Korea is a less-developed country with a highly cen-
 tralized, planned economy. Many observers believe that
 after a period of rapid growth in the 1960s and early
 1970s, the economy has experienced difficulties in recent
 years due largely to an overemphasis on self-sufficiency,
 centralized planning, heavy industrialization, and mili-
 tary expenditures. Fifteen to twenty percent of North
 Korea's gross national product consistently is committed
 to military expenditures, the second highest such level in
 the world. This policy has seriously retarded the
 progress of the civilian economy.
 According to World Bank estimates, North Korea's popula-
 tion totalled 18,334,000 in 1981, and was growing at a
 rate of 2.4 percent. The 1980 infant mortality rate was
 34.1 per 1,000 live births, and life expectancy at birth
 was 65.5 years. There were no estimates available for the
 percentage of the population with access to safe water or
 the population below the absolute poverty level. The
 World Bank's 1977 estimate of the ratio of calorie supply
 available for consumption relative to nutritional
 requirements was 121 percent.
 North Korea appears to have invested considerable effort
 and money in developing a comprehensive health care system
 for its citizenry. Both pre- and post-working age
 citizens are cared for by the state, and their basic
 physical necessities reportedly are provided for
 satisfactorily. Basic food supplies are heavily
 subsidized and rationed for equal distribution.
 Per capita income in North Korea was estimated by the
 World Bank to be approximately $1,130 in 1979. The party
 and government elite enjoy significant economic privi-
 leges, such as access to special stores and medical facil-
 ities, better housing and better education, which are not
 available to ordinary citizens.
 
 
 741
 The North Korean Government provides eleven years of com-
 pulsory free education to its citizens and claims to have
 eliminated illiteracy. The World Bank estimated the adult
 literacy rate at 90 percent in 1970.
 The Constitution states that "women hold equal social
 status and rights with men.* Despite this provision, few
 women reach high levels of the party or government. Women
 are represented proportionally in the labor force and
 personnel in small factories are predominately women.
 Reportedly, women are often paid less than men for similar
 work.
 
 
 .742
 REPUBLIC OF KOREA
 The Republic of Korea has a political system in which the
 Presidency, with the support of the country's military
 establishment, is the focus of power. Its elected
 legislature has grown in influence but continues to be
 dominated by the executive. The Government is organized
 under a constitution adopted by referendum in October 1980.
 Because of the threat from an aggressive communist regime in
 North Korea, the Government has emphasized external and
 internal security; its policies in this respect have brought
 a number of charges of suppression of opposition activity.
 The Republic of Korea has a mixed economy, with extensive
 government intervention to stimulate and influence the
 direction of the free market system. Over the past two
 decades the Republic of Korea, with one of the highest real
 growth rates in the world, has achieved middle income,
 'middle power" status.
 Korea is an ethnically homogeneous nation which, until its
 division in 1945, had existed as a distinct national entity
 for many centuries. Surrounded by great powers--China,
 Japan, and the USSR--Korea has for centuries focused its
 foreign policy on avoiding subjugation by its larger neigh-
 bors. Confucianism, with its emphasis on order and filial
 piety, retains great strength in Korean society, co-existing
 uneasily with the Western democratic ideals and industrial
 age values to which Korea has been exposed in this century.
 Since the division of the peninsula in 1945, North Korea has
 insisted on reunifying the nation, on its own terms and
 through any means, including the use of military force as it
 attempted in the invasion of June 1950. North Korean
 military activities against the South continue, including
 frequent infiltration attempts by armed commando teams, and
 the digging of tunnels (three of which have been uncovered)
 under the Demilitarized Zone separating North from South
 Korea. The area on either side of this zone is one of the
 most heavily armed regions in the world. Fear of another
 invasion from the north is a fundamental factor in South
 Korean thinking, and successive governments have concluded
 that for security reasons the Republic cannot afford the
 'luxury' of dissent and discord which would characterize a
 more open political system.
 Koreans of both sexes participate in institutional politics.
 Constitutional safeguards against ex post facto laws and
 double jeopardy continue to be generally observed. The
 Constitution guarantees freedom of speech and the press,
 though in practice both are abridged. Prominent politicians
 and others who have publicly criticized the Government have
 in some instances been interrogated or charged with crimes.
 Newspapers are expected to practice self-censorship, and
 failure to comply with this requirement has led to interro-
 gation of journalists and editors. The law limits the free-
 dom to assemble and demonstrate, and offenders are often
 detained and charged. Freedom of religious belief and
 worship is virtually complete, but religious freedom does not
 extend to churches' involvement in political and social
 action. There is freedom of movement within the country and,
 within limits, freedom to emigrate. In July the Government
 eased controls on foreign travel: except for persons with a
 history of political opposition, who are considered on a
 case-by-case basis, Koreans may now travel abroad without
 restriction.
 
 
 743
 In late December the Government released from prison former
 opposition leader Kim Dae Jung and seven other persons who
 had stood trial with Kim in 1980 (Kim's remaining 16
 co-defendants from that trial had been freed earlier). Kim's
 case had become a rallying point for critics of the Korean
 Government, and his release had broad symbolic importance.
 About 70 other prisoners in politically sensitive cases had
 been freed in two earlier amnesties in 1982, and about
 another 250 defendants in political cases received reductions
 in their sentences or restoration of their civil rights
 during the year. Estimates of those. remaining in prison for
 political reasons range between 300 and 400.
 As in previous years, there have been persistent allegations
 of torture in sensitive political cases. The authorities
 denied these charges, although in four criminal cases the
 courts freed defendants after finding that the police had
 used "illegal duress' to extract confessions. Prison
 conditions remained spartan, and human rights activists cite
 mistreatment of two political prisoners, and poor medical
 treatment of one following a hunger strike, as contributing
 to the two prisoners' deaths. There were no allegations of
 murder against the Government in 1982.
 Although enforcement of the press law, the law on public
 assembly and other key laws which impinge on human rights was
 uneven in 1982, no particular pattern or long-term trend was
 evident.
 1.   Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Killing
 There were no reports in 1982 of deliberate killings by the
 Government, although there were accusations that mistreatment
 had led to the deaths of persons in custody. In March 1982,
 an anti-government group firebombed the US Cultural Center in
 Pusan to protest alleged US support for the Korean Govern-
 ment; an innocent student died in the resulting fire.
 b. Disappearance
 Except for periods of detention prior to the filing of formal
 charges (see subsection *e", below), there were no cases of
 disappearance in 1982.
 c. Torture
 The Constitution prohibits torture. Confessions determined
 to have been induced by duress are inadmissible in the
 courts, and a confession alone is not legally sufficient to
 secure a conviction.
 Despite these legal protections, there continue to be
 frequent claims that persons accused in politically sensitive
 cases are routinely tortured, both psychologically and
 physically, in initial interrogation by police and also
 later, when the investigating agency is building its case.
 Reports on four specific cases in 1982 were sufficiently
 widespread and persistent to warrant citation:
 (1) The most persistent charges of torture in 1982
 involved the defendants in the arson attack at the American
 
 
 744
 Cultural Center in Pusan. These defendants readily admitted
 arson, but claimed they were tortured while being questioned
 about their political motives. While they initially told the
 prosecution in their public trial that they had not been
 tortured, they later changed that testimony, insisting they
 had been subjected to beatings and other forms of duress.
 (2) An unemployed politician, Ki Chong To, claimed
 in a letter dictated from a hospital, shortly before his
 death there, that the police had beaten him for five days to
 extract a confession, and that those beatings and poor
 medical treatment were responsible for his serious condition.
 (3) The police allegedly used severe abuse in
 interrogating a number of students accused of prohibited
 political activity at Pusan National University.
 (4) In a case adjudicated in January 1982, the
 police allegedly tortured a publisher, Lee Tae Bok, and
 several of his associates prior to their trial for seditious
 activity. The Korean National Council of Churches petitioned
 the President to protest the alleged torture. The Home
 Ministry, replying on behalf of the President to the church
 leaders' petition, neither confirmed nor denied the
 allegations of torture.
 Although the Government insists that strict injunctions
 against torture have been issued by the very highest autho-
 rities, and that those injunctions are strictly enforced and
 violations of them sternly punished, reports of torture
 neverthless persist. In four non-political criminal cases in
 1982, the courts acknowledged the occurrence of torture. In
 the first, the court ruled that evidence had been illegally
 obtained under "physical duress" and acquitted that defend-
 ant. In another case, the court rejected evidence it said
 had been obtained under duress. In a third case the prosecu-
 tor, and, subsequently, the Minister of Home Affairs, in an
 interpellation in the National Assembly, admitted that the
 police had tortured a suspect, who was then freed. The
 policemen involved in that case were fired and were later
 booked on criminal charges.
 All of these cases received wide publicity. In a
 less-publicized incident, the Supreme Court in November
 remanded a case to a lower court which, noting the Supreme
 Court's finding that the defendant's confession had been
 obtained by torture, dismissed the charges against him.
 d. Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment
 Prison conditions are spartan and discipline is strict, but,
 aside from penalties for violating prison regulations,
 prisoners normally are not subjected to physical punishment.
 In an atypical case, mistreatment and poor medical care
 allegedly caused the death of a prisoner in Kwangju in
 October 1982. The Government does not allow prisoners to
 receive visits except by their lawyers and immediate family
 members. On some occasions the police have blocked access to
 persons by placing them under house arrest. There does not
 seem to be a difference in the treatment of political and
 non-political prisoners, though the authorities have
 occasionally allowed special provisions for political
 prisoners such as heaters during the winter or examination by
 outside physicians. There is no apparent difference in the
 treatment of prisoners on the basis of social class, race, or
 sex.
 
 
 745
 e. Arbitrary Arrest and Imprisonment
 Korean law requires that, within 40 days after making an
 arrest, the police notify an arrested person's family of his
 detention and whereabouts. The police normally wait at least
 several days, and occasionally more than 40 days, before
 complying with this requirement. The Korean Constitution
 guarantees the right to prompt legal assistance, and the
 right to request court review in case of arrest. For persons
 deemed "socially dangerous,' the law allows for preventive
 detention under provisions of the social protection and
 social stability laws. Detention is for a fixed term, which,
 however, a judicial review panel may extend for periods up to
 10 years.
 The Government declared three prisoner amnesties in 1982. In
 December, Kim Dae Jung was freed and allowed to depart
 Korea. A prominent opposition politician, Kim had been
 imprisoned since May 1980 on sedition charges which many
 believe were never substantiated. Of the 23 persons tried
 and convicted with Kim, seven were freed with him, the others
 having been freed earlier. Originally condemned to death,
 Kim had had his sentence commuted, first to life imprisonment
 and later to 20 years. As long as he remained imprisoned,
 his case had served as a rallying point for critics of the
 Korean Government. In addition to Kim and his associates,
 about 70 other prisoners in political cases were freed in
 1982. About 250 others benefited from amnesties during 1982,
 by having their sentences reduced or their civil rights
 restored. Estimates of those remaining in prison for
 political reasons range between 300 and 400. Amnesty
 International reported that in 1981 it worked on behalf of
 about 300 Korean 'prisoners of conscience.' The Korean
 National Council of Churches' Human Rights Commission stated
 in November 1982 that there were 417 political prisoners in
 Korea (of whom 48, including Kim Dae Jung, were amnestied in
 December) as compared with 272 in late 1981.
 f. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The Constitution guarantees many rights of defendants: the
 right to presumption of innocence; the rights against self-
 incrimination, ex-post facto laws, and *double jeopardy'; the
 right to a speedy trial; and the right to legal counsel.
 These rights are generally observed, although there have been
 cases in which defendants in politically sensitive trials
 have not been able to obtain lawyers--whether because of
 government pressure or reluctance on the part of lawyers to
 accept such cases is not clear. Charges against defendants
 in the courts are clearly stated.
 The President appoints the members of the Supreme Court,
 whose chief justice in turn appoints lower level judges. The
 judiciary is considered independent in ordinary criminal and
 civil cases, but much less so in politically sensitive cases.
 The same courts try political cases and ordinary criminal
 cases. The military courts do not try civilians. Defendants
 have the right of appeal in felony cases, a right which is
 often exercised and frequently results in substantial reduc-
 tions in sentences. Death sentences are automatically
 appealed.
 
 
 746
 g. Invasion of the Home
 The Constitution requires a iarrant, issued by a judge upon
 request of a prosecutor, for search and seizure in a resi-
 dence. However, there have occasionally been credible
 charges that-police have forced their way into private homes
 without such warrants. There have also been charges of
 'bugging' or surveillance of homes. Koreans who meet with
 foreigners, particularly officials of foreign embassies, are
 often questioned by security officers about these meetings.
 2. Respect for Civil and Political Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Freedom of speech and press are guaranteed by the Constitu-
 tion, though the laws are drafted and applied in such a way
 as to severely limit the expression of opposition
 viewpoints. In 1982, a former opposition leader was placed
 under house arrest after granting interviews with foreign
 reporters in which he criticized the Government. Another
 opposition leader, who criticized the Government sharply in a
 speech in the National Assembly, was subsequently jailed on
 adultery charges which observers agreed were a political
 reprisal. Communist or socialist themes are strictly
 forbidden in books and artistic works. Academic freedom is
 subject to some political limitations, and about 80 profess-
 ors who lost their jobs in the political upheavals of 1980
 remain out of work.
 The domestic media are subject to self-censorship, according
 to press guidelines the Government periodically distributes
 to editors. Journalists who ignore these guidelines or who
 in the view of the Government go too far in their criticism
 have been picked up for questioning. The Government has
 generally been reluctant to grant visas and residence permits
 to foreign journalists. A Christian youth activist was
 sentenced to 18 months imprisonment in October 1982 on
 charges of slandering the Government in an interview with
 foreign reporters. This was the first case brought under a
 1975 law against criticizing the Government to foreigners.
 The Government routinely opens some persons' mail. The
 Christian Broadcasting Service is barred from accepting
 commercial advertising, a stricture which places it in a
 precarious financial position.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 The penalties for violating the Law on Assemblies and
 Demonstrations, which forbids holding gatherings *likely to
 undermine public order or cause social unrest," range up to a
 maximum of seven years in prison and heavy fines. There may
 be as many as 250 people in custody (not all formally
 charged) for violating this law. The police may enter areas
 and buildings where illegal gatherings are taking place, and
 also intervene in outdoor gatherings. The police broke up a
 number of campus demonstrations in 1982 and also prevented
 the holding of several meetings concerned with human rights
 or trade unionism.
 Labor unions are confined in scale to the level of individual
 enterprises and may not receive outside aid even from their
 national federations. Union shop provisions in contracts
 have been ended. Other restrictions on union leadership and
 
 
 747
 finances have further reduced unions' independence. Collect-
 ive actions and strikes are technically legal but very diffi-
 cult to organize and carry out. Unions are banned in the
 public sector and certain key industries. The authorities
 have mounted a determined campaign to discredit such labor-
 oriented religious organizations as the Young Christian
 Workers and the Urban Industrial Mission.
 Union membership reportedly is increasing slowly, after an
 estimated 12 percent drop in 1981 in the wake of the imple-
 mentation of new labor legislation. About seven percent of
 all Koreans employed are now union members, including 50
 percent in the mining and 15 percent in the manufacturing
 sectors. The Federation of Korean Trade Unions is affiliated
 with the International Confederation of Free TradeUnions,
 and its member unions are affiliated with recognized
 international trade union federations. In 1982, for the
 first time, a Korean observer delegation was invited to the
 annual International Labor Organization convention.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 There is no state-favored religion in Korea. Church
 activities, other than those the Government considers
 politically oriented, are virtually unfettered. There is
 complete freedom of proselytizing, doctrinal teaching, and
 conversion. Minority sects are not discriminated against,
 and adherence to a faith does not confer advantages in civil,
 military, or official life.
 d. Freedom of Movement within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 There is essentially complete freedom of movement within
 South Korea, and the Government does not discriminate against
 prospective emigrants. Most people can obtain a passport,
 except for criminals or, in some cases, those considered
 politically suspect. Some former political prisoners, and
 persons who are currently banned from political activities,
 were for the first time permitted to travel abroad in 1982.
 Similarly, the authorities in 1982 allowed many expatriates,
 who for years had been barred from Korea because of their
 past political activities, to return to and remain in the
 country.
 Over 600 Vietnamese boat refugees have arrived in South Korea
 since 1977. Refugees awaiting resettlement reside in a camp
 in Pusan. They may not settle in Korea permanently, and are
 cared for through the auspices of the Korean Red Cross. The
 time between arrival of refugees in Korea and their resettle-
 ment abroad has varied between six months and two years.
 e. Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 The President, supported by the military, is the dominant
 factor in the Republic of Korea's political system. Partici-
 pation in the political process is governed by a series of
 electoral laws enacted under Presidential sponsorship just
 prior to the lifting of martial law in January 1981. Under
 these laws, all existing political parties were dissolved and
 new ones formed, of which eight survived the 1981 National
 Assembly elections. With the exception of 567 persons,
 mostly former opposition figures, who in 1980 were banned
 from all political activity for eight years, Koreans are free
 
 
 748
 to belong to and participate in the activities of political
 parties. However, these parties have had difficulty
 attracting mass followings, at least in part because their
 independence is limited: the Government may dissolve any
 party it deems contrary to *basic democratic order," and the
 electoral laws put time and fiscal constraints on campaigning
 which cause all parties, and particularly the opposition,
 significant difficulties in publicizing their candidates and
 presenting their programs.
 The 276-member National Assembly, though politically weak,
 showed significant new assertiveness in 1982, and is import-
 ant as a forum for expression of divergent views of the
 Government's programs. Moreover, the members of the Assembly
 are the only directly elected officials in Korea. The
 electoral laws passed in 1981 established a proportional
 representation system that reserves 92 of the Assembly's 276
 seats for members appointed by their parties, with two-thirds
 of those seats awarded to the party which gains a plurality
 of the popular vote. The elections in March 1981 were
 reported to be largely free of voting irregularities, and 78
 percent of the eligible voters participated. The authorities
 restricted who might run but did not interfere with the
 balloting or vote-counting. Of the 184 elected Assembly
 seats, the Government's party ran candidates for 92, of which
 it won 90. Under the proportional representation system, the
 Government's party was accordingly awarded 61 proportional
 representation seats, giving it a comfortable majority in the
 National Assembly. Opposition parties and independent candid-
 ates divided the remaining seats.
 Criticism of the Government, much of it strong, occurs in the
 Assembly. When the Government and opposition parties cooper-
 ate, the Assembly has succeeded in forcing the Government to
 modify policies. However, strong opposition to the Govern-
 ment can be dangerous, as in the previously-cited case of an
 Assemblyman jailed for adultery in the wake of a critical
 speech.
 Women are free to vote, become government officials, or run
 for the National Assembly; women hold eight Assembly seats
 (all but one appointed by their parties). In practice, the
 power structure remains male dominated.
 3. Government Attitude Regarding International and Non-
 governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations of
 Human Rights
 The Republic of Korea does not belong to any international
 human rights bodies and does not welcome outside involvement
 in the human rights area. It tolerates the existence of
 domestic human rights groups, but closely monitors their
 operations. There were no formal government-sanctioned
 investigations into human rights in 1982. The state of human
 rights in Korea drew criticism in 1982 from such groups as
 Amnesty International and the World Council of Churches. In
 its 1982 report, Amnesty International expressed concern for
 the existence of wprisoners of conscience" and reports of ill
 treatment and torture of political prisoners. Freedom House,
 in its 1982 report, classified the Republic of Korea as
 *Partly Free.' The Korean government has not publicly
 reacted to or attempted to rebut criticisms from any of these
 organizations.
 
 
 749
 The Republic of Korea engaged in no discussions or
 negotiations in 1982 with international human rights groups.
 It did cooperate with the UN Commission on Human Rights,
 which in 1982 decided to discontinue its consideration of the
 human rights situation in the Republic of Korea, a matter
 which had been brought to its attention under the confiden-
 tial 1503 procedures. The Korean Government permitted visits
 by members of international organizations concerned with
 human rights, such as the US National Council of Churches.
 The Government has complained that members of these groups
 sometimes engage in activities in substantial violation of
 their visa status, and on such grounds it revoked the visas
 of two US National Council of Churches staff members who had
 visited Korea in August 1982 to investigate a labor dispute
 involving an American company.
 There are no government groups charged with the protection of
 human rights, although political parties and the National
 Assembly have committees which are concerned with oversight
 of some aspects of the issue. A number of private organi-
 zations are also active in this area, chiefly the Human
 Rights Commission of the Korean National Council of Churches,
 the Catholic Justice and Peace Committee, and a legal aid
 center in Seoul run by a prominent woman lawyer. The Human
 Rights Commission works closely with the World Council of
 Churches overseas. The Commission and other human rights
 organizations submit petitions to the Government and make
 their views known both internally and outside Korea. Most
 observers believe these organizations have been relatively
 effective in furthering their aims, depending on the issue.
 People working with these groups are sometimes questioned by
 the security forces, though apparently none have been
 arrested in the past several years.
 4. Economic, Social, and Cultural Situation
 The Republic of Korea has a mixed economy with extensive
 government intervention to stimulate the free market system.
 Economic and social development during the last two decades
 has been extraordinarily fast-paced: per capita GNP increas-
 ed from $180 in 1960 to $410 in 1970 and $1,523 in 1980.
 As in most traditional Asian societies, males tend to be the
 main breadwinners and property owners; however, there is
 relatively less official discrimination against women today
 than at any other time in Korea's long history.
 A series of major revisions to the legal code in recent years
 have given women rights in inheritance, child custody, family
 headship, and other areas which law and Confucian tradition
 had long denied them. Women enjoy full access to educational
 opportunities at all levels. They are increasingly repre-
 sented in the military, the police, the civil service, and
 the professions, and hold a variety of positions in private
 industry. They are not legally protected against discrimina-
 tion in hiring, pay, or advancement, and these remain problem
 areas. Korea has not developed a politically powerful
 feminist movement.
 There is no racial or religious discrimination in the econom-
 ic sphere. The right to own property, alone as well as in
 association with others, is protected under the Constitution.
 
 
 750
 Korea is one of the most densely populated countries in the
 world. With little arable land, it supports a population of
 nearly 40 million. The population growth rate has dropped
 from 2.7 percent in 1970 to 1.6 percent in 1981, thanks to
 concerted efforts by the Government to popularize family
 planning.
 Improved health care and nutrition were responsible for in-
 creasing Korean life expectancy from 54.2 years in 1960 to
 65.4 years in 1980. By 1981, infant mortality had declined
 from 62 to 37 deaths per 1,000 live births. Access to safe
 drinking water increased from 12 percent of the population in
 1960 to 71 percent in 1979. Caloric intake increased from 94
 percent, in 1960, to 119 percent, in 1977, of minimum nutri-
 tional requirements.
 Education receives high priority in government policy. The
 adult literacy rate has increased from 70.6 percent in 1960
 to 93 percent in 1978. Primary school education is universal
 for both sexes, and government statistics indicate that over
 90 percent of elementary students enter secondary school.
 Entrance to institutions of higher education is very competi-
 tive, and only about 50 percent of those who wish to attend
 are able to enter. There is a substantial measure of social
 mobility based on the merit system in education and employ-
 ment. There is no national unemployment insurance plan.
 
 
 751
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: KOREA, REPUBLIC OF
 1980     1981      1982
 I.ECON. ASS.IST-TTAL,..        30.8     27.6       0.0
 LOANS.....   o   ........  2.5     25.6       0.0
 GRANTS.............          2.3      2.0       0.0
 A.AID     . .. ........         0.0      0.0       0.0
 LOANS.      .......     ......0.0     0.0       0.0
 GRANTS...............0.0             0.0       0.0
 (SEC.SUPPASIST.),..          0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.FOOD FOR PtACE .......        2.5      25.6       0.0
 LOANS ..............    ... .2.5     Z5.6      0.0
 GRANTS. .............       0.0      0.0       0.0
 TITLE I-TOTAL ..........        23.5     25.6       0.0
 R EPAY. IN I-LOANS ........     23.5     5.6       0.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURq ...o.          0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE Il-TOTAL .........0. o.O            0.0       0.0
 t.RELIEF.EC.OEV 6 WFPP          0.0      0.0       0.0"
 VOL.RELIEP AGENCY .....         0.0      0.0       0.0
 C.OTMtR LCON. ASSIST,.,          2.3      2.0       0.0
 LOANS ..............         0.0      0.0       0.0
 GRANTS ............. .  .. 2.3      2.0       0.0
 PEACE CORPS 2....          2.3      2.0      0.0
 NARCOTICS........          0.0      0.0      0.0
 OTHER..... .......         0.0      0.0      0.0
 IX.MIL. ASSST.-TOTAL,..        130.5    162.7     167.4'
 LOANS...............    .. 129.0   161.5     166.0.
 GRANTS .............     .. ..1.5     1.2       1.4
 A.MAP GRANTS.........     ..   0.5      0.1       0.0
 ..CRFDIT SALES-FMS ....       129.0    161.5     166.0
 C.INTL MIL.lOTRG ....         1.0      1.1       1.4
 O.TRAN-tXUESS STOCK...*         0.0      0.0       0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS ........         00       0.0       0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. & 141...        151.3    190.3     167.4
 LOANS ..............       157.5    137.1    166.0
 GRANTS......,.........      3.8      3.2       1.4
 OTHER US LOANS..........      . 322.1   276.9      58.7
 EX-IM BANK LOANS .......       272.7    275.9      58.7
 ALL OTHE ..............         49.4     '0.0       0.0
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 19E0     19i1      1952     1946-82
 TOTAL ........    052.9   533.6    606.5    5460.7
 1BRO              414.0    390.0    470.0   3bOq.o
 IFC                 5.5      9.5      1.7    127.4
 IDA                 0.0      n.0      0.0    115.6
 .105                0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 A06               226.6    133.5    132.2    1306.0
 APO0                0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 U10 P               1.3      0.6      0.0      31.3
 OTHER-UN            0.0      0.0      2.7      15.4
 :EC                 0.0      0.0      0.0       0.0
 
 
 752
