 DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF KOREA*
 The Democratic People's Republic of Korea (DPRK), formed in
 1948 during the Soviet administration of the northern half of
 the Korean peninsula, is a dictatorship under the rule of the
 Korean Workers' (Communist) Party (KWP). The party exercises
 absolute power on behalf of its leader, General Secretary Kim
 Il Sung, who is also President of the DPRK. Kim Il Sung, who
 has been in power for 40 years, has groomed his son, Kim Chong
 Il, as his successor. The younger Kim has become the second
 ranking member of the party and like his father is accorded
 deity-like status.
 The North Korean regime subjects the people to rigid controls.
 For each person the regime establishes security ratings which
 determine access to employment, schools, medical facilities,
 and stores as well as admission to the KWP. The rights of the
 individual are subordinated to the rights of the State and
 party.
 The DPRK Government was responsible for the November 29, 1987,
 bomb explosion aboard Korean Airlines Flight No. 858, which
 killed all 115 persons on board. This act by North Korea
 continued a pattern of terrorism in recent years. North
 Korean agent Kim Hyong-hui, who was indicted for the bombing,
 confessed that North Korea's aim was to discourage foreign
 countries from participating in the 1988 Olympics in Seoul.
 The DPRK has a centralized economy under which the State owns
 the means of production, and the Government directs all
 significant economic activity. The people have a Spartan
 standard of living. Despite modest economic progress, North
 Korea remains a less-developed country with a worsening
 balance of payments.
 North Korea did not improve its poor human rights performance
 in 1988. The Government imprisons persons who fail to conform
 to the dictates of the State and often exiles them together
 with their families to remote villages. No outside
 information reaches the general public except that approved
 and disseminated by the Government. Respect for basic human
 rights and human dignity is scant. The regime permits no
 independent press or associations.
 *The United States has no diplomatic relations with the
 Democratic People's Republic of Korea (DPRK). North Korea
 forbids representatives of governments that do have relations
 with it, as well as journalists and other invited visitors,
 the freedom of movement that would enable them to assess
 effectively human rights conditions there. Most of this
 report, therefore, is a repeat of previous human rights
 reports based on information obtained over a period of time
 extending from well before 1988. While limited in scope and
 detail, the information is indicative of the human rights
 situation in North Korea today.
 
 
 835
 DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF KOREA
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 Little information is available on whether politically
 motivated killing occurs in North Korea. The regime, according
 to several defectors, has summarily executed certain political
 prisoners. Internationally, North Korea has been engaged in a
 20-year pattern of terrorist attacks directed against South
 Korea, including the bombing of Korean Airlines Flight No.
 858, which killed all 115 people on board.
 b. Disappearance
 There is no information available on disappearance.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 According to the Freedom House 1987-88 Report, "torture is
 reportedly common" in North Korea. No recent information is
 available. However, the Venezuelan poet Ali Lameda, whom the
 authorities detained from September 1967 through 1974,
 allegedly for attempted sabotage and espionage, stated that
 Korean prisoners were routinely beaten. Lamed& noted that
 "beating was also used as a means of persuasion during
 interrogation.*
 Lameda reported the use of deprivation of food to force
 "confessions," as well as solitary confinement, continuous
 interrogation, enforced waking periods, poor or nonexistent
 medical treatment, and 12 hours of forced labor per day. In
 addition, the regime denies prisoners family visits, parcels,
 correspondence, writing materials, newspapers, and clothing
 changes. In the Government's view, prisoners have no rights.
 Much of what Lameda reported was corroborated by Shin Sang-Ok
 and his wife, Choi Un-Wui (hereinafter referred to as the
 Shins), the Korean film producer and actress, who reportedly
 were kidnaped by North Korean operatives and who left North
 Korea in 1986. Although Shin witnessed no beatings during his
 incarceration, he heard repeated stories of such treatment.
 Shin personally experienced many other forms of cruel and
 inhuman treatment, sometimes amounting to torture, including
 denial of sleep, starvation rations, and solitary confinement,
 as well as being required to sit motionless for long periods
 of time.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Information on specific criminal justice procedures and
 practices in North Korea is extremely scarce. North Korea has
 refused to permit outside observation of its legal system and
 practices.
 North Korean law provides that prisoners may be held for
 interrogation for a period not to exceed 2 months. This
 period may be extended indefinitely, however, if the
 Interrogation Department obtains approval of the Chief
 Prosecutor. Lameda states that he was detained for 12 months
 without trial or charge. Government authorities ridiculed his
 request for a lawyer of his choice and an open trial as
 
 
 836
 DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF KOREA
 "bourgeois." Shin notes that it is very difficult for family
 members or other concerned persons to obtain information
 regarding charges being leveled against an accused person or
 even where an accused person is being detained. Habeas corpus
 or its equivalent does not exist in law or in practice.
 According to newspaper reports, North Korean defectors in
 South Korea estimate that in 1982 the regime was holding at
 least 105,000 "ideological offenders" in 8 major labor camps.
 The Shins believe this estimate to be understated (some
 estimates range as high as 150,000 detainees) and state that
 the plight of political prisoners has worsened over the last
 few years. As one example, the Shins note that 12 years ago
 the authorities allowed political prisoners family visitors
 and gifts, but now deny both. The Shins further report that
 the Government punishes the families of political detainees
 for the political beliefs of their relatives. It is not
 unusual, according to the Shins, for the State to banish
 entire families to outlying rural regions. Amnesty
 International (AI) has received unconfirmed reports of arrests
 of those opposed to heir apparent Kim Chong If.
 With regard to forced or compulsory labor, see Section 6.c.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The Constitution states that courts are independent and that
 judicial proceedings are to be carried out in strict
 accordance with the law. All courts, however, are responsible
 to the people's assemblies, which effectively provide
 arbitrary government control of the judiciary. Article 138
 states that "cases are heard in public, and the accused is
 guaranteed the right to defense; hearings may be closed to the
 public as'stipulated by law." Lameda claimed that he was
 denied a public trial, as does Shin. Lameda reported that
 after his first arrest, the regime imprisoned him for a year
 without a hearing; after his second arrest, he was put through
 a closed session without benefit of counsel of his choice, or
 even knowledge of the charges. His tribunal was under the
 direction of the Ministry of Internal Security, with one
 person serving as both judge and prosecutor.
 The regime did not allow Lameda the right to speak out (other
 than to admit guilt) or to defend himself. His "defense
 counsel" represented him by making a lengthy speech praising
 Kim Il Sung and then requesting a 20-year sentence, which the
 tribunal imposed after 5 minutes of deliberation. In a 1979
 interview with American journalist John Wallach, North Korean
 Supreme Court Justice Li Chun Uk noted that the defense
 counsel's job is "to give the suspect due punishment." Open
 court appears to consist of an announcement of the term of
 imprisonment, which has already been determined by the
 Provincial Safety Bureau.
 According to AI's 1988 Report, which covers 1987, there were
 developments in the case of two Japanese citizens detained by
 the DPRK in 1983. Isamu Beniko and Yoshio Kuriura, captain
 and chief engineer on a ship which traveled regularly between
 Japan and the DPRK, were detained after an army sergeant hid
 on their ship and reached Japan in October 1983. Despite
 reports that they were tried on February 1987, the Korean
 Central News Agency (North Korea's official news agency)
 announced in March that they had not been tried on espionage
 charges, although an official stated that they would be
 released if the sergeant was returned. It was announced later
 
 
 837
 DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF KOREA
 that they were tried on December 24, 1987 in Nampo City Court
 and sentenced to 15 years' "reformation through labor" for
 espionage and "abduction" of a North Korean citizen.
 The Shins note a distinction between political and common
 criminals, asserting that the State affords trials only to the
 latter. North Korea equates "political criminals" with those
 who criticize the regime. Other reports suggest that
 political offenses range from sabotage to failing .to applaud
 appropriately at political rallies.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The regime subjects the people to a pervasive program of
 indoctrination designed to shape and control individual
 consciousness. Preschool children are. drilled in homage to
 Kim Il Sung and his family, while youths and adults are
 required to participate in daily ideological training
 conducted during school or at places of employment.
 Approximately half the school day is devoted to indoctrination.
 This is also provided by government-organized neighborhood
 units for persons who neither work nor go to school. The
 daily indoctrination requires rote recitation of party maxims
 and policies and strives for ideological purity. Multiple
 North Korean security organizations enforce these controls.
 According to reports in South Korean journals, the Government
 prevents Japanese wives of Koreans repatriated from Japai
 since 1959 from visiting Japan. Because their letters are
 subject to strict censorship, many have lost contact with
 their families. Some reports suggest that the-Government
 discriminates against these Japanese wives in other ways,
 including access to jobs.
 Although the Constitution states that "citizens are guaranteed
 the inviolability of person and residence and the privacy of
 correspondence," practice is otherwise. Lameda reported that
 the privacy of his residence was violated and that listening
 devices were used against him. When the authorities arrested
 him, they seized and destroyed without warrant all his
 collected papers and poetry.
 The Government has developed a pervasive system of informers
 throughout the society. In addition, according to the Shins,
 electronic surveillance of residences is pervasive and it is
 common practice for neighbors to report on one another. In
 school, the authorities encourage children to discuss what
 their parents have said at home. The Government conducts
 monthly "sanitation" inspections to check on household
 activities. Each house is required to have portraits of Kim
 II Sung and Kim Chong II.
 Section 2 RespeCt for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Although the Constitution states that "citizens have the
 freedoms of speech, the press, assembly, association, and
 demonstration," the regime permits such activities only in
 support of government objectives. Other articles of the
 Constitution that require citizens to follow the "Socialist
 norms of life" and to obey a "collective spirit" take
 precedence over individual political or civil liberties. AI's
 1987 Report stated that a range of sources continued to allege
 
 
 838
 DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF KOREA
 that the rights of freedom of expression and association
 guaranteed under the International Covenant on Civil and
 Political Rights, to which North Korea acceded in 1981, were
 strictly curtailed. According to these reports, persons
 criticizing the President or his policies were liable to
 punishment by imprisonment or "corrective labor."
 Foreign media are excluded, domestic media censorship is
 enforced, and no deviation from the official government line
 is tolerated. The regime prohibits listening to foreign media
 broadcasts except by high government officials, and violators
 reportedly are subject to severe punishment. Most urban
 households have a radio and some have television, but reception
 is limited to domestic programming. The Government controls
 artistic and academic works, and visitors report that the
 primary function of plays, movies, operas, and books is to
 contribute to the cult of personality surrounding "the great
 leader," Kim Ii Sung, and "the beloved leader," Kim Chong Ii.
 The Shins, who made a number of movies at the behest of the
 North Korean leadership, state that movie producers have
 political advisers who ensure the ideological purity of the
 final product. Actors must undergo background investigations
 prior to obtaining a role. They also undergo constant
 indoctrination.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 No public meetings can be held without government
 authorization. There appear to be no organizations other than
 those created by the Government. The State even prohibits
 apolitical groups such as neighborhood or alumni
 organizations. Professional associations exist solely as
 another method of government control over the members of these
 organizations.
 For a discussion of freedom of association as it applies to
 labor unions, see Section 6.a.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Although the Constitution provides that "citizens have
 religious liberty and the freedom of antireligious
 propaganda," the regime, in fact, has severely persecuted
 Christians and Buddhists since the late 1940's. The regime
 uses religious organizational facades to proclaim the practice
 of religious freedom, but appears to have long since purged
 the original membership. The regime discriminates against
 persons whose family or relatives once had a strong religious
 involvement. On October 30, Vatican envoys reportedly
 celebrated mass before approximately 60 North Koreans at a
 newly built Catholic Church in Pyongyang.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 The DPRK regime strictly controls internal travel, requiring a
 travel pass for any movement outside one's home village; these
 passes are granted only for required official or certain
 personaltravel. Personal travel is usually limited to
 attending the wedding or funeral of a close relative. Long
 delays in obtaining the necessary permit often result in denial
 of the right to travel even for these limited purposes. State
 control of internal travel is also ensured by a ration system
 that distributes coupons valid only in the region issued.
 
 
 839
 DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF KOREA
 Reports, primarily from defectors, indicate that forced
 resettlement, particularly for those deemed politically
 unreliable, is common. Permission to reside in, or even
 enter, Pyongyang, the capital, is strictly controlled.
 According to Japanese and South Korean press reports, a plan
 was under way in mid-1987 to relocate forcibly 300,000 of
 Pyongyang's 1.5 million population out of the capital city in
 order to boost farm production in the countryside.
 Foreign travel is limited to officials or trusted artists and
 performers. The regime allows no emigration, and few refugees
 or defectors succeed in fleeing the country. The regime
 retaliates against the relatives of those few persons who
 manage to escape. According to Freedom House, "rights to
 travel internally and externally are perhaps the most
 restricted in the world: tourism is unknown--even to
 Communist countries."
 In 1959 North Korea began actively encouraging Korean
 residents overseas to repatriate to "the Fatherland." Some
 observers estimate that during the next several years over
 100,000 overseas Koreans, almost all from Japan, voluntarily
 repatriated to North Korea. Since then, however, reports of
 the harsh treatment given repatriates has reached overseas
 Koreans, reducing the flow to a trickle. Because of their
 "corruption" by exposure to foreign influences, repatriates
 are isolated from North Korean society until they can be
 indoctrinated and their ideological reliability gauged.
 North Korea has permitted entry to some overseas Korean
 residents to visit their relatives, and several have made
 repeat visits.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 There is no mechanism by which the citizenry can effect
 transitions in leadership or changes in government. The
 political system in North Korea is dominated by Kim Il Sung,
 who leads the KWP and also heads the Government. Kim has
 groomed his son Kim Chong I to succeed him. Over the last
 few years Kim Chong I1 has been acquiring increasing power and
 influence. The legislature, the Supreme People's Assembly,
 has never taken any action other than unanimous passage of
 resolutions presented to it by the leadership. In an effort
 to create an appearance of democracy, the DPRK has created
 several "minority parties." They exist only as rosters of
 officials who have token representation in the People's
 Assembly and completely support the government line.
 Free elections do not exist in North Korea. Although
 elections to the Supreme People's Assembly were held in
 November 1986, and to city and county assemblies in March
 1983, in all cases the Government approved only one candidate
 in each electoral district. According to the government-
 controlled media, 100 percent of the voters turned out to
 elect 100 percent of the approved candidates. Such
 "elections" are an exercise in which people are forced to
 participate and to approve the Government's candidates.
 Despite the long and rigorous selection process for membership
 in the KWP, most party members have no voice in decision-
 making, serving only to carry out the decrees and "on the spot
 guidance" promulgated by party leader Kim Il Sung and his top
 subordinates.
 
 
 840
 DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF KOREA
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 No organizations exist within North Korea to report on or
 observe human rights violations. North Korea participates in
 no international or regional human rights organizations.
 The Government has not allowed AI or other international
 organizations to visit North Korea to monitor human rights
 practices. In late 1988, Asia Watch and the Minnesota Lawyers
 International Human Rights Committee released a report which
 concludes that the DPRK has established a comprehensive system
 of restrictions which consistently deprive its citizens of
 basic rights and freedoms. A DPRK representative called a
 preliminary version of the report "full of lies and
 fabrications," and warned that if it were published, the human
 rights organizations "will be held fully responsible for all
 the consequences arising therefrom."
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 The Constitution states that "women hold equal social status
 and rights with men." However, few women have reached high
 levels of the party or the Government. Women are represented
 proportionally in the labor force, and personnel in small
 factories are predominantly women.
 The regime discriminates against the physically handicapped.
 Handicapped persons, other than war veterans, are reportedly
 not allowed within the city limits of Pyongyang. The dwarf
 community has been specifically singled out for harsh
 treatment; all members of it have been banished to a remote,
 rural region.
 North Korea is a homogeneous country and is relatively devoid
 of minority groups.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 Free labor unions do not exist in North Korea. Because the
 party by definition purports to represent the interests of
 labor, trade unions exist in form only. They do not have the
 right to strike.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 Workers have no right to organize or to bargain collectively.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 There is no prohibition on the use of forced or compulsory
 labor. The Government routinely uses military conscripts for
 forced labor. The Shins report that conscripts are not told
 where they will serve or for how long. AI's 1987 Report cites
 reports that some "political prisoners" were reportedly
 sentenced to "corrective labor" which could be served at a
 person's normal workplace (working for part or no wages) or at
 work in agriculture or mining in areas where conditions are
 very harsh.
 
 
 841
 DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF KOREA
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 No data are available on the minimum age for employment of
 children.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 No data are available on minimum wages, or occupational safety
 and health. Wages are set by government ministries. The
 State assigns all jobs; ideological purity, rather than
 professional competence, is the standard used in deciding who
 receives a particular job. Laborers have no input into
 management decisions. Absence from work without a doctor's
 certificate results in a reduction in a worker's rations. The
 Constitution stipulates a workday limited to 8 hours, but
 several sources report that most laborers work from 12- to
 16-hour days. The regime's propaganda euphemistically refers
 to these extra hours as "patriotic labor" done on a
 'voluntary" basis by the workers.
 
 
 842
