 DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF KOREA*
 The Democratic People's Republic of Korea (DPRK) is a dictatorship under the ab-
 solute rule of the Korean Workers' Party (KWP). Kim I1 Sung ruled the DPRK from
 its inception until his death in July 1994. Although he has not assumed his father's
 positions of President of the DPRK and Secretary General of the KWP, Kim Jong
 's leadership appears to be unchallenged. Both Kim Ii Sung and Kim Jong I1 con-
 tinue to be the objects of intense personality cults.
 The Korean People's Armed Forces is the primary organization responsible for ex-
 ternal security. It is assisted by a sizable military reserve force and several quasi-
 military forces, including the Worker-Peasant Red Guards and the People's Security
 Force. These organizations assist the Ministry of Public Security and cadres of the
 Korean Workers Party in maintaining internal security. Members of the security
 forces committed serious human rights abuses.
 The State directs all significant economic activity, and only government-super-
 vised labor unions are permitted. According to some estimates, the economy has con-
 tracted in each of the last 5 years, largely due to the collapse of the Soviet bloc and
 the elimination of Soviet and Chinese concessional trade and aid. Economic develop-
 ment continues to be hindered by distribution bottlenecks, inefficient allocation of
 resources, lack of access to international credit stemming from the DPRK's default
 on much of its foreign debt, and by the diversion of a quarter of the gross national
 product to military expenditures. In 1995 North Korea admitted publicly for the
 first time that it suffered from food shortages, which were exacerbated by wide-
 spread flooding in the summer, it sought international food aid as well as other
 forms of assistance. Food, clothing, and energy are rationed throughout the country.
 The Government continues to deny its citizens human rights. Citizens do not have
 the right peacefully to change their government. There continued to be reports of
 extrajudicial killings and disappearances. Torture and harsh prison conditions are
 common. Citizens are detained arbitrarily and many are held as political prisoners.
 The constitutional provisions for an independent judiciary and fair trials are not im-
 plemented in practice. The North Korean regime subjects its citizens to rigid con-
 trols. The state leadership perceives most international norms of human rights, es-
 pecially individual rights, as illegitimate and alien social artifacts.subversive to the
 goals of the State and party. The Penal Code is draconian, stipulating capital pun-
 ishment and confiscation of all assets for a wide variety of "crimes against the revo-
 lution," including defection, slander of the policies of the party or State, listening
 to foreign broadcasts, and possessing "reactionary" printed matter. The Government
 prohibits freedom of the press and association; all forms of cultural and media ac-
 tivities are under the tight control of the party. Little outside information reaches
 the public except that approved and disseminated by the Government. The Govern-
 ment restricts freedom of religion, citizens' movements, and workers' rights.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-According to defector sources, the re-
 gime continued summary executions of political prisoners, political opponents, repa-
 triated defectors, and others (reportedly including military officers suspected of plot-
 ting against Kim Jong I1). The Criminal Law makes the death penalty mandatory
 for activities "in collusion with imperialists" aimed at "suppressing the national lib-
 eration struggle." Some prisoners are sentenced to death for such ill-defined
 "crimes" as "ideological divergence," "opposing socialism," and other "counter-revolu-
 tionary crimes."
 b. Disappearance.-There is no reliable information on disappearances within
 North Korea. However, there continued to be numerous reports of DPRK involve-
 ment in the kidnaping abroad of South Koreans, Japanese, and other foreign nation-
 als. The Japanese press estimates that as many as 20 Japanese may have been kid-
 naped and remain in detention in North Korea. In addition, several cases of kidnap-
 ing, hostage taking, and other acts of violence allegedly intended to intimidate eth-
 *The United States does not have diplomatic relations with the Democratic People's Republic
 of Korea. North Korea does not allow representatives of foreign overnments, journalists, or
 other invited visitors the freedom of movement that would enable  em to assess human rights
 conditions there. This report is based on information obtained over a period of time extending
 from well before 1995, as updated where possible by information drawn from recent interviews,
 reports, and documentation. While limited in detail, this information is nonetheless indicative
 of the human rights situation in North Korea today.
 
 
 640
 nic Koreans living in China and Russia were reported. The DPRK denies these re-
 ports.
 Amnesty International (Al) reports issued in 1993, 1994, and 1995 detail a num-
 ber of cases, including that of Japanese citizen Shibata Kozo and his wife Shin Sung
 Suk, who left Japan in 1960 and resettled in North Korea. Mr. Shibata was report-
 edly arrested in 1962, allegedly after encouraging a demonstration against the poor
 treatment given to former residents of Japan. In 1993 AI claimed that he was still
 in custody, and in poor health. AI stated that there had been no word about his
 wife and three children since 1965. In June Al was informed by North Korean offi-
 cials that Shibata Kozo, his wife, children, and grandchildren died in a train acci-
 dent in early 1990, a few weeks after his release from nearly 30 years in prison.
 However, AI has received other reports that Shibata Kozo was still in custody at
 the time of the alleged accident.
 In another case cited by AI in 1993, North Korean officials informed AI in April
 that Japanese citizen Cho Ho Pyong, his ethnic Japanese wife Koike Hideko, and
 their three young children were killed in 1972, while attempting to flee the country.
 The North Korean authorities told AI that Cho had escaped from a detention center,
 where he was being held for spying, killing a guard.
 In September Ai reported that three ethnic Korean residents of Beijing, China
 (ages 16, 18, and 20) had been taken to North Korea against their will in apparent
 retaliation for criticism of North Korean human rights violations made by their fa-
 ther, a former prisoner in North Korea, on Japanese television and in the Japanese
 press. The North Korean authorities deny this allegation, claiming that the three
 brothers had been deported to North Korea for breaking Chinese law, and that they
 are now living with relatives. Al has been unable to confirm this account and at
 year's end was still concerned about the welfare of the three brothers.
 Numerous reports indicate that ordinary citizens are not allowed to mix with for-
 eign nationals, and AI reported that a number of North Koreans who maintained
 friendships with foreigners have disappeared. In at least one case, AI reported that
 a citizen who had disappeared was executed for maintaining a friendship with a
 Russian National.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 While there is no information on recent practices, credible reports indicate that pris-
 oners are routinely tortured or ill-treated, and that many prisoners have died from
 torture, disease, starvation, or exposure. There are increasing reports of executions
 reportedly carried out at public meetings and rallies attended by workers, students,
 and school children. Executions have also been carried out before assembled inmates
 at places of detention.
 According to international nongovernmental organization (NGO) and defector
 sources, whole families, including children, are imprisoned together. "Reeducation
 through labor" is cormn punishment, consisting of forced labor (logging, tending
 crops) under harsh conditions. A small number of people who claim to have escaped
 from North Korean detention camps report that starvation and executions are com-
 mon. In one prison, clothing was reportedly issued only once in a 3-year period.
 Former inmates have produced photographs of an inmate wearing specially designed
 leg irons which permit walking but make running impossible. Al reports the exist-
 ence of "punishment cells," too low to permit standing upright and too small for
 lying down flat, where prisoners are kept for up to several weeks for breaking pris-
 on rules. Recent visitors to North Korea report observing prisoners being marched
 in leg irons, metal collars, and shackles. With the exception of one model "rehabili-
 tation center" visited by Amnesty International representatives, the Government
 has not permitted inspection of prisons by human rights monitors.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-There are no practical restrictions on the
 ability of the North Korean Government to detain and imprison residents of North
 Korea at will, and hold them incommunicado.
 Little information is available on North Korea's criminal justice procedures and
 practices, and outside observation of its legal system has been limited to apparent
 show trials on traffic violations and other minor offenses.
 Family members or other concerned persons find it virtually impossible to obtain
 information on charges against detained persons. Judicial review of detentions does
 not exist in law or in practice.
 Defectors claim that North Korea detains about 150,000 political prisoners and
 family members in maximum security camps in remote areas. An October 1992 re-
 port by two former inmates made reference to the severe living conditions in what
 they called "concentration camps." North Korean officials deny the existence of such
 gulags or prisons but admit the existence of "education centers" for people who
 "commit crimes by mistake."
 
 
 One credible report lists 12 such prison camps in the DPRK. It is believed that
 some former high officials are imprisoned in the camps. Any form of communication
 with detainees, including visitors, although once allowed, is now said to be prohib-
 ited.
 In July 1991, a North Korean defector who had been a ranking official in the Min-
 istry of Public Security said that there were two types of detention areas. One con-
 sists of closed camps from which prisoners never emerge and where conditions are
 extremely harsh. In the other type, prisoners can be "rehabilitated."
 e. Denial of Fair Public Tria -The Constitution states that courts are independ-
 ent and that judicial proceedings are to be carried out in strict accordance with the
 law. The Constitution contains elaborate procedural guarantees, and it states that
 "cases are heard in public, and the accused is guaranteed the right to defense; hear-
 ings may be closed to the public as stipulated by law." However, an independent
 juiciary and individual rights do not exist in fact in the DPRK. The Public Security
 Ministry dispenses with trials in political cases and refers defendants to the Min-
 istry of State Security for imposition of punishment.
 When trials are held, lawyers are apparently assigned by the Government. Re-
 ports indicate that defense lawyers are not considered representatives of the ac-
 cused, but rather are expected to help the court by persuading the accused to con-
 fess guilt. Some reports note a distinction between those accused of political crimes
 and common criminals and state that the Government affords trials only to the lat-
 ter. The Government considers critics of the regime to be "political criminals."
 Numerous reports suggest that political offenses have in the past included sitting
 on newspapers bearingKim Il Sung's picture, or (in the case of a professor report-
 edly sentenced to work as a laborer) noting in class that Kim 1l Sung had received
 little formal education. A foreigner hired to work on foreign broadcasts for the re-
 gime in the 1970's was imprisoned for 1 year without trial for criticizing the quality
 of the regime's foreign propaganda, and then imprisoned for an additional 6 more
 years (with trial) shortly atr his release for claiming in a private conversation that
 his original imprisonment was unjust. While AI has listed 58 political prisoners by
 name, the total number of political prisoners being held is unknown. Several defec-
 tors and former inmates reported that the total figure is approximately 150,000.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 constitutional stipulation that "citizens are guaranteed the inviolability of person
 and residence and the privacy of correspondence" does not reflect reality. The Gov-
 ernment relies upon an extensive, multilevel system of informers to identify critics
 and potential troublemakers. Whole communities are sometimes subjected to mas-
 sive security checks. According to Kim Jong II, North Korean society embodies "a
 new way of thinking" which cannot be evaluated on the basis of "old yardsticks" of
 human rights imported from abroad. In this context, the DPRK celebrates the closed
 nature of its society as a virtue. The possession of "reactionary material" and listen-
 ing to foreign broadcasts are both considered crimes which may subject the trans-
 gressor to the death penalty. In some cases, entire families are punished for political
 offenses allegedly committed by one member of the family.
 The Government's ideology is derived from Marxist-Leninist concepts of collective
 consciousness and the "Juche' idea of self-reliance propounded by Kim II Sung. Al-
 though Juche is generally translated as "self-reliance, it more literally means "the
 ability to act independently without regard to outside interference." Originally de-
 scriled as "a creative application of Marxism-Leninism" in the Korean context,
 Juche is a malleable philosophy, reinterpreted from time to time by the regime as
 its ideological needs change and used by the regime as a "spiritual" underpinning
 for its rule.
 As defined by Kim 1 Sung, the Juche idea connotes a quasi-mystical concept in
 which the collective will of the people is distilled into a supreme leader whose every
 act is by definition in accordance with the State and society's needs. An October
 1995 commentary in the North Korean press explained that "the leader is not an
 individual, but the brain of the revolution, the center of unity, and the supreme per-
 son who represents the popular masses." Opposition to such a leader, or to the
 rules, regulations, and goals established by his regime, is thus in itself opposition
 to the national interest. The regime therefore claims a social interest in identifying
 and isolating such people.
 The Government continued to classify citizens into three main classes: "core," "wa-
 vering," and "hostile." These 3 classes are further subdivided into over 50
 subeategories based on perceived loyalty to the party and the leadership. Security
 ratings are assigned to each individual; according to some estimates, as much as
 75 percent of the population is designated as either wavering or hostile. These loy-
 alty ratings determine access to employment, higher education, place of residence,
 medical facilities, and certain stres, and affect the severity of punishment in the
 
 
 642
 case of legal infractions. While there are signs that the Government has eased en-
 forcement of this rigid system in recent years, it remains a basic feature of North
 Korean society.
 The authorities subject citizens in all age groups and occupations to intensive po-
 litical and ideological indoctrination. Even after Kim I Sungs death, his cult of per-
 sonality and glorification of his family and the official Juche ideology continued to
 be omnipresent. The North Korean press regularly reports the occurrence of mir-
 acles on the anniversary of Kim II Sung's birth. The cult approaches the level of
 a state religion.
 The goal of indoctrination remains to ensure loyalty to the Kim II Sung system
 and to his son and heir Kim Jong II, as well as conformity to the State's ideology
 and authority. The necessity for intensification of such indoctrination is repeatedly
 stressed in the writings of Kim Jong Hi, who attributes the collapse of the Soviet
 Union largely to insufficient ideological indoctrination, compounded by the entry of
 foreign influences.
 Indoctrination is carried out systematically not only through the mass media, but
 also in schools and through worker and neighborhood associations. Kim Jong II has
 recently stated that ideological education must take precedence over academic edu-
 cation in the nation's schools, and has also called for the intensification of manda-
 tory ideological study and discussion sessions for adult workers. One objective of
 these extended studies is to deny citizens sufficient leisure time in which to engage
 in undesirable activities or reflection.
 Another aspect of the State's indoctrination system is the use of mass marches,
 rallies, and staged performances, sometimes involving hundreds of thousands of peo-
 ple. The recent celebration of the 50th anniversary of the founding of the Korean
 Workers' Party included several hours of carefully choreographed demonstrations of
 mass adulation of the leadership, reportedly involving virtually the entire popu-
 lation of Pyongyang and outlying communities. Foreign visitors were told that
 nonparticipation bylPongyang residents in this event was unthinkable.
 Citizens with relatives who fled to South Korea at the time of the Korean War
 appear to be classified as part of the hostile class in the DPRK's elaborate loyalty
 sytm This subategory alone encompasses a significant percentage of the North
 Korean population. One defector estimated that the class of those considered poten-
 tilly hostile may comprise 25 to 30 percent of the population; others place the fig-
 ure at closer to 20 percent. Members of this class are subject to discrimination, al-
 though a defector has claimed that their treatment has improved greatly in recent
 years.
 The Government monitors correspondence and telephones. Telephones are re-
 stricted to domestic operation (see Section 2.a.).
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-Articles of the Constitution that require citizens
 to follow the "Socialist norms of life" and to obey a "collective spirit" take precedence
 over individual plitical or civil liberties. Although the Constitution provides for
 freedom of speec, press, assembly, and association, the Government prohibits the
 exercise of these rights in practice. The regime permits only activities which support
 its objectives.
 The Government strictly curtails freedom of expression. The authorities may pun-
 ish persons criticizing the regime or its policies by imprisonment or "corrective
 labor." One defector reported in 1986 that a scientist, whose home was bugged
 through his radio set, was arrested and executed for statements made at home that
 were considered critical of Kim II Sung. In another case, AI reports that a family
 formerly resident in Japan was sent to a reeducation through labor center because
 one member of the family allegedly made remarks disparaging the Government.
 The Government attempts to control all information that enters and leaves the
 DPRK. It carefully manages the visits of Western journalists. Domestic media cen-
 sorship is strictly enforced, and no deviation from the official government line is tol-
 erated.
 The regime prohibits listening to foreign media broadcasts except by the political
 elite, and violators are subject to severe punishment. Radios and television sets are
 built to receive only domestic programming;, radios obtained from abroad must be
 submitted for alteration to operate in a similar manner. North Korea's private tele-
 phone lines operate on an internal system which prevents making or receiving calls
 from outside the country. Some foreign relatives of well-connected individuals are
 reportedly able to contact them through official telephone lines.
 The Government severely restricts academic freedom. The Government controls
 artistic and academic works, and visitors report that the primary function of plays,
 
 
 643
 movies, operas, children's performances, and books is to contribute to the cult of per-
 sonality surrounding Kim II Sung and Kim Jong If.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-Although the Constitution pro-
 vides for freedom of assembly and association, the Government does not respect
 these provisions in practice. The Government prohibits any public meetings without
 authorization. There are no known organizations other than those created by the
 Government. Professional associations exist solely to reinforce government monitor-
 ing and control over the members of these organizations.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The 1992 Constitution provides for the "freedom of reli-
 gious belief" including, "the right to build buildings for religious use." However, the
 same article adds that "no one can use religion as a means to drag in foreign pow-
 ers" or to disrupt the social order. In practice, the regime firmly discourages all or-
 ganized religious activity except that which serves the interests of the State.
 As late as the 1980's, foreign visitors to North Korea were told that there were
 no churches in the country, and only a handful of Buddhist temples. However, in
 recent years, the regime has facilitated the formation of several government-spon-
 sored religious organizations. These serve as interlocutors with foreign church
 groups and international aid organizations. Some foreigners who have met with rep-
 resentatives of these organizations are convinced that they are sincere believers;
 others claim that they appeared to know little about religious dogma, liturgy, or
 teaching.
 There are a few Buddhist temples where religious activity is permitted, and three
 Christian churches-two Protestant and one Catholic-have been opened since 1988
 in Pyonpyang. These appear to be the only active Christian churches in the country.
 Many visitors say that church activity appears staged. Foreign Christians who have
 attempted to attend services at these churches without making prior arrangements
 with the authorities report finding them locked and unattended, even on Easter
 Sunday.
 The DPRK claims there are 10,000 Christians who worship in 500 house church-
 es, and that the Chondogyo Young Friends Party, a  overnment-sponsored group
 based on a native Korean religious movement, is still in existence. The authorities
 have told foreign visitors that one Protestant seminary exists, accepting six to nine
 puils every 3 years.
 . Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The re&   e strictly controls internal travel, requiring a travel pass for
 any movement outside one's home village; these passes are granted only for official
 travel or attendance at a relative's wedding or funeral. Long delays in obtaining the
 necessary permit often result in denial of the right to travel even for these limited
 purposes. As an additional means of control, travelers must produce special "travel-
 ers coupons" in order to buy food on trains or at restaurants or shops. Only mem-
 bers of a very small elite have vehicles for personal use. The regime tightly controls
 access to civilian aircraft, trains, buses, food, and fuel.
 Reports, primarily from defectors, indicate that the Government routinely uses
 forced resettlement, particularly for those deemed politically unreliable. The Gov-
 ernment strictly controls permission to reside in, or even enter, Pyongyang. This is
 a significant lever as food, housing, health, and general living conditions are report-
 edly much better in Pyon ang than in the rest of the country. Diplomatic and press
 reports concur that the DPRK began an intensive effort in 1995 to reduce signifi-
 cantly thepopulation of Pyongyang due to concerns about overcrowding. Hundreds
 of thousands of people were reportedly required to relocate out of the city.
 The regime limits foreign travel to officials and trusted artists, athletes, academ-
 ics, and representatives of religions. It does not allow emigration, although there
 have been a limited number of defections. Recently, the number of defectors has in-
 creased. The regime reportedly retaliates harshly against the relatives of those few
 persons who manage to escape. According to the Penal Code, defection and at-
 tempted defection (including the attempt to gain entry to a foreign embassy for the
 purpose of seeking political asylum) are capital crimes. Defectors and other sources
 report that involuntarily repatriated defectors are routinely executed. As a rule, the
 regime does not allow students to study abroad except in China and a few other
 friendly countries.
 From 1959 to 1982, 93,000 Korean residents of Japan, including 6,637 Japanese
 wives, voluntarily repatriated to North Korea. Despite regime assurances that the
 wives, 1,828 of whom still had Japanese citizenship, would be allowed to go home
 to Japan every 2 or 3 years, none is known to have done so. Most have not been
 hea   of since, and their relatives and friends in Japan have been unsuccessful in
 their efforts to gain information about their condition and whereabouts.
 Although over the past decade the DPRK has permitted an increasing number of
 overseas Korean residents of North America, Japan, China, and other countries to
 
 
 visit their relatives in North Korea, most requests for such visits are still denied.
 Many foreign visitors to the April International Pyongyang Sports Festival reported
 that they were denied permission to visit or otherwise contact their relatives, even
 those who lived only a few miles from   ongang. The DPRK does not participate
 in United Nations or other internationa refgee forums, and it is not in contact
 with the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens have no right or practical means to change their government. The politi-
 cal system is completely dominated by the KWP, with Kim I Sung's heir Kim Jong
 II apparently in control. There is very little hard information available on
 intraregime politics following Kim 11 Sung's death. The legislature, the Supreme
 People's Assembly, which meets only a few days a year, serves only to rubber-stamp
 resolutions presented to it by the party leadership.
 In an effort to create the appearance of democracy, the DPRK has created several
 "minority parties." Lacking grassroots organization, they exist only as rosters of offi-
 cials with token representation in the Supreme People's Assembly. Their primary
 purpose appears to be that of promoting government objectives abroad as touring
 parliamentarians. Free elections do not exist in North Korea, and Kim Jong II has
 derided the concept of free elections and competition among political parties as an
 artifact of capitalist decay.
 Elections to the Supreme People's Assembly and to provincial, city, and county as-
 semblies are held irregularly. In all cases there is only one government-approved
 candidate in each electoral district. According to the media, over 99 percent of the
 voters turn out to elect 100 percent of the candidates approved by the KWP. The
 vast majority of the KWP's estimated 3 million members (m a population of 22 mil-
 lion) woik to implement decrees formulated by the party's small elite.
 Few women have reached high levels of the party or the Government.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 The Government does not permit any independent domestic organizations to mon-
 itor human rights conditions or to comment on violations of such rights. A North
 Korean Human Rights Committee established in 1992 denies the existence of any
 human rights violations in North Korea and is merely a propaganda arm of the re-
 gime. However, by offering international human rights organizations an identifiable
 official interlocutor, the new body facilitates their ability to enter into two-way com-
 munication with the regime.
 AI representatives visited the DPRK in 1991 and 1995 and met officials from the
 Ministries of Foreign Affairs and Public Security, as well as judges, lawyers, and
 legal scholars. The Government has ignored requests for visits to the DPRK by
 other international human rights organizations.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution provides for equal rights for all citizens. However, the Govern-
 ment denies its citizens most fundamental human rights.
 Women.-There is no information available on violence against women.
 The Constitution states that "women hold equal social status and rights with
 men." Women are represented proportionally in the labor force, with the exception
 of small factories in which the work force is predominantly female. Like men, work-
 ing age women do not have the option not to work. They are thus required to leave
 their preschool children in the care of elderly relatives or in state nurseries. How-
 ever, according to the Constitution, women with large families are guaranteed short-
 ened working hours.
 Children.-Social norms reflect traditional, family centered values in which chil-
 dren are cherished. The State provides education for all children. There is no avail-
 able evidence of a pattern of societal abuse of children. However, some children are
 denied educational opportunities and subjected to other punishments and disadvan-
 tages as a result of the loyalty classification system and the principle of "collective
 retribution" for the transgressions of their parents.
 Like others in North Korean society, children are the object of intense political
 indoctrination; even mathematics textbooks propound the party line. In addition,
 foreign visitors to North Korea and academic sources report that children are sub-
 jected to several hours a week of mandatory military training and indoctrination at
 their schools from an early age. School children are sometimes sent to work tempo-
 rarily in factories or in the fields to assist in completing special projects or in meet-
 ing production goals.
 
 
 645
 People With Disabilities.-Traditional social norms condone discrimination against
 the phy ically disabled. Disabled persons are almost never seen within the city lim-
 its of ongang, and several defectors and other former North Korea residents re-
 port that disabled persons are routinely assigned to the rural areas. There are no
 ally mandated prvisions for accessibility to buildings or government services for
 the disabled.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right ofAssociation.-Nongovernmental labor unions do not exist. The Ko-
 rean Workers' Party purports to represent the interests of all labor. There is a sin-
 gle labor organization, called the General Federation of Trade Unions of Korea,
 which is aflfliated with the formerly Soviet-controlled World Federation of Trade
 Unions. Operating under this umbrella, unions function on the classic Stalinist
 model, with responsibility for mobilizing workers behind production goals and for
 providing health, education, cultural, and welfare facilities. They do not have the
 right to strike. North Korea is not a member of, but has observer status with, the
 International Labor Organization.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-Workers have no right to or-
 ganize or to bargain collectively. Wages are set by government ministries. The State
 assigns all jobs. Ideological purity is as important as professional competence in de-
 ciding who receives a particular job and foreign companies that establish joint ven-
 tures in North Korea report that all their employees must be hired from lists sub-
 mitted by the KWP. Factory and farm workers are organized into councils, which
 do have an impact upon management decisions.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-There is no prohibition on the use
 of forced or compulsory labor, and the Government routinely uses military
 conscripts for construction projects. Reformatory labor and reeducation through
 labor are common punishments for political offenses. Al reports that forced labor,
 such as logging and tending crops, is common among prisoners.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-According to the Constitution, the
 State prohibits work by children under the age of 16 years. As education is univer-
 sal and mandatory until age 15, it is believed that this regulation is enforced.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-he Constitution states that all working-age
 citizens must participate in work, and "strictly observe labor discipline and working
 hours." The Penal Code states that anyone who hampers the nation's industry, com-
 merce, or transportation through purposefully failing to carry out a specific assign-
 ment "while pretending to be functioning normally" is subject to the death penalty;
 it also states that anyone who "shoddily carries out" an assigned duty is subject to
 no less than 5 years' imprisonment.
 Even persistent tardiness may be defined as "anti-Socialist wrecking" under these
 articles. A DPRK official praised the North Korean labor force to an audience of for-
 eign business executives by noting that "there are no riots, no strikes, and no dif-
 ferences of opinion" with management.
 The Financial Times reported in September that the minimum wage for workers
 in foreign joint ventures is $80 a month (about 168 North Korean won); no data are
 currently available on the minimum wage in state-owned industries. Wages and ra-
 tions appear to be adequate to support workers and their families at a basic subsist-
 ence level. Wages are not the primary form of compensation since the State provides
 all educational and medical needs free of charge, while most goods are distributed
 according to a rationing system, and only token rent is charged.
 In 1994 new labor regulations for foreign-funded enterprises were reportedly
 adopted by the Administration Council. Referring to labor contracts, they set out
 provisions on the employment and dismissal of workers, technical training, work
 hours, rest periods, remuneration, labor protection, social security, fines for viola-
 tions of regulations, and settlement of disputes.
 The Constitution stipulates an 8-hour workday, but several sources report that
 most laborers work 12 to 16 hours daily. Some of this additional time may represent
 mandatory study of the writings of Kim I1 Sung and Kim Jong Df. The Constitution
 provides all citizens with a "right to rest," including paid leave, holidays, and access
 to sanitariums and rest homes funded at public expense. The actual availability of
 these protections in practice is unknown.
