 DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF KOREA*
 The Democratic People's Republic of Korea (DPRK), formed in
 1948 during the Soviet administration of the northern half of
 the Korean peninsula, is a Coimunist dictatorship under the
 rule of the Korean Workers' Party (KWP). The party exercises
 absolute power on behalf of its leader, General Secretary Kim
 Il Sung, who is also President of the DPRK. Kim Il Sung, who
 has been in power for 42 years, has groomed his son, Kim Jong
 Il, as his successor. The younger Kim ranks second in the
 party and, together with his father, is the subject of a
 personality cult.
 The North Korean regime subjects its people to rigid controls.
 For each person the regime establishes security ratings which
 determine access to employment, schools, medical facilities,
 and stores as well as admission to the KWP. Individual rights
 are subordinated to the rights of the State and the party.
 In the DPRK's centralized economy, the State directs all
 significant economic activity. Soviet-style economic reform
 has been firmly resisted, and as Soviet aid and concessional
 trade declines, overall economic growth and the already
 Spartan standard of living have fallen further. Real gross
 national product growth in 1990 is estimated at 2 percent or
 less, and serious distribution bottlenecks, nonproductive
 allocation of resources, and a worsening foreign debt hinder
 development efforts.
 In 1990 North Korea continued to deny its citizens the most
 fundamental human rights. The Government allowed more foreign
 visitors and permitted a number of overseas Koreans into the
 country for family reunification. However, although the DPRK
 has held three high-level meetings with South Korea, it has
 avoided substantive discussion of the family reunification
 issue.
 The North Korean penal code is draconian, stipulating capital
 punishment and confiscation of all assets for a wide. variety
 of "crimes against the revolution," including defection,
 slander of the party or State, and having reactionary printed
 matter. The regime permits no independent press or
 associations, and little outside information reaches the
 general public except that which.the Government approves and
 disseminates.
 *The United States'does not have diplomatic relations with the
 Democratic People's Republic of Korea. North Korea forbids
 representatives of governments that do have relations with it,
 as well as journalists and other invited visitors, the freedom
 of movement that would enable them to assess human rights
 conditions there. Most of this report, therefore, is based on
 information obtained over a period of time extending from well
 before 1990. While limited in scope and detail, the
 information is indicative of the human rights situation in
 North Korea today.
 
 
 922
 DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF KOREA
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing
 According to several defectors believed to be reliable, the
 regime has summarily executed some political prisoners and
 political opponents of Kim Il Sung and Kim Jong Il. A 1990
 report indicates that a potential defector involuntarily
 repatriated from China and a dissenting student were, in
 separate incidents, executed without trial.
 For over 20 years, North Korea has intermittently directed
 terrorist attacks against South Korea, including the bombing
 of Korean Air Flight 858 off the coast of Burma in November
 1987, which killed all 115 people on board, and the September
 1983 bombing in Rangoon, Burma, which took the lives of 17
 high-ranking South Korean officials..
 b. Disappearance
 There is no information available on disappearance within
 North Korea. There are several reports that over the past 10
 years the DPRK has kidnaped South Koreans, Japanese, and other
 foreign citizens outside of its borders. According to a 1988
 report by Asia Watch and the Minnesota Lawyers International
 Human Rights Committee (MLIHRC), these kidnapings were
 apparently carried out to enhance Pyongyang's technical and
 espionage capabilities.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 As noted in the Asia Watch/MLIHRC-report, "all available
 evidence indicates that, at least through the early 1980's,
 North Korean prisoners were routinely tortured or ill-treated
 during interrogation and at times during later imprisonment."
 The report noted that many prisoners have died from torture,
 disease, starvation, or exposure. Korean film producer Shin
 Sang-Ok and his actress wife, Choi Un-Wui, who claimed to have
 been kidnaped by North Korean operatives overseas and who
 escaped from North Korean officials in Vienna in 1986, also
 attested to hearing repeated stories of beatings during
 incarceration. Shin personally experienced denial of sleep,
 starvation rations, and solitary confinement, as well as being
 required to sit motionless for long periods of time.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Little information is available on specific criminal justice
 procedures and practices in North Korea. North Korea has
 refused to permit outside observation of its legal system and
 practices.
 North Korean law provides that prisoners may be held for
 interrogation for a period not to exceed 2 months. This
 period may be extended indefinitely, however, if the
 Interrogation Department obtains the approval of the Chief
 Prosecutor. There are reports of persons being detained for
 12 months without trial or charge. Shin noted that it is very
 difficult for family members or other concerned persons to
 obtain information regarding charges being leveled against an
 accused person or even where an accused person is being
 
 
 DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF KOREA
 detained. Habeas corpus or its equivalent does not exist in
 law or in practice.
 North Korean defectors to South Korea in 1989 estimated that
 the regime holds at least 105,000 political prisoners and
 their family members in "concentration camps," -where they are
 prohibited from marrying and required to grow their own food.
 Based on defector testimony and other sources, the Republic of
 Korea estimates North Korea detains about 150,000 political
 prisoners and family members in maximum security camps in
 remote, isolated areas. North Korean officials deny the
 existence of such gulags or prisons but admit the existence of
 "education centers" for people who "commit crimes by
 mistake." The Asia Watch/MLIHRC report lists 12 such prison
 camps believed to exist in the DPRK. The camps include four
 thought to have been added in 1982 to accommodate between
 6,000 and 15,000 new prisoners resulting from a campaign by
 Kim Jong Il to purge his critics and rivals. The Institute of
 North Korean Studies report notes that several former high
 officials, including former Prime Ministers, are imprisoned in
 the camps. The Asia Watch/MLIHRC report states that most
 maximum security prisoners allegedly have been confined
 without trial or formal charges. Visitors and any form of
 communication with detainees, although once allowed, are said
 to be prohibited.
 In October 1990, North Korea released two Japanese merchant
 seamen, Isamu Beniko and Yoshio Kuriura, in connection with an
 offer to Japan to begin normalizing bilateral relations. The
 DPRK detained the pair during a port call in North Korea in
 October 1983 in retaliation for the defection of a DPRK army
 sergeant who stowed away on their ship, the Fujisan Maru, on a
 prior trip and sought refuge in Japan. North Korea announced
 that the twd seamen were tried in December 1987 and sentenced
 to 15 years' "reformation through labor" for espionage and
 "abduction" of a North Korean citizen. The DPRK depicted the
 release as a "humanitarian" act, but it was clearly done in
 order to meet a Japanese condition for entering into
 normalization talks.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The Constitution states that courts are independent and that
 judicial proceedings are to be carried out in strict
 accordance with the law, which c6ntains elaborate procedural
 guarantees. According to the Asia Watch/MLIHRC report, these
 safeguards are not followed in practice, and it appears the
 party exercises pervasive control over the criminal justice
 system. Article 138 of the Constitution states that "cases
 are heard in public, and the accused is guaranteed the right
 to a defense; hearings may be closed to the public as
 stipulated by law." There are numerous reports, however, of
 the Public Security Ministry dispensing with trials in
 political cases and instead referring cases to the Ministry of
 State Security for imposition of punishment.
 When trials are held, lawyers are apparently assigned by the
 Government. According to the Asia Watch/MLIHRC report, defense
 lawyers are not considered representatives of the accused, but
 rather independent parties who are "expected to help the court
 by persuading the accused to confess his guilt." The report
 adds, "The counsel must.. .only present facts to mitigate
 punishment."
 
 
 924
 DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF KOREA
 The Shins noted a distinction between political and common
 criminals, asserting that the State affords trials only to the
 latter. North Korea equates "political criminals" with those
 who criticize the regime. Numerous other reports suggest that
 political offenses include such forms of lese majesty as
 sitting on newspapers bearing Kim Il Sung's picture.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The regime subjects the people to a pervasive program of
 indoctrination designed to shape and control individual
 consciousness. Preschool children are drilled in homage to
 Kim Il Sung and his family, while school age children are
 subjected daily to a half day of indoctrination. Youths and
 adults are required to participate in daily ideological
 training conducted during school or at places of employment.
 Government-organized neighborhood units also provide
 indoctrination for persons who neither work nor go to school.
 The daily indoctrination requires rote recitation of Party
 maxims and policies and strives for ideological purity.
 Multiple North Korean security organizations enforce these
 controls.
 Koreans with relatives who fled to the South appear to be
 classified as part of the "hostile class" in the DPRK's
 elaborate class system, which is based in part on loyalty to
 the.regime. Members of this class are subject to
 discriminatory treatment. The Government prevents Japanese
 wives of Koreans repatriated from Japan since 1959 from
 visiting Japan. Because their letters are subject to strict
 censorship, many have lost contact with their families.
 Although the Constitution states that "citizens are guaranteed
 the inviolability of person and residence and the privacy of
 correspondence," the practice is otherwise. The Government
 has developed a pervasive system of informers throughout the
 society and, according to the Shins and several defectors,
 electronic surveillance of residences is also pervasive. In
 school, the authorities encourage children to discuss what
 their parents have said at home. The Government conducts
 monthly "sanitation" inspections to check on household
 activities. Each house is required to display portraits of
 Kim Il Sung and Kim Jong Il. The Asia Watch/MLIHRC report
 concluded that "because of the surveillance and the attendant
 risk of consequences, fear appears to govern all social
 relationships."
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Although the Constitution states that "citizens have the
 freedoms of speech, the press, assembly, association, and
 demonstration," the regime permits such activities only in
 support of government objectives. Other articles of the
 Constitution that require citizens to follow the "Socialist
 norms of life" and to obey a "collective spirit" take
 precedence over individual political or civil liberties.
 Amnesty International (AI) in its 1988 Report stated that the
 Government strictly curtails the.rights of freedom of
 expression and association guaranteed under the International
 Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, to which North Korea
 became a party in 1981. According to these sources, persons
 criticizing the President or his policies were liable to
 
 
 925
 
 DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF KOREA
 punishment by imprisonment or "corrective labor." A defector
 interviewed by Asia Watch/MLIHRC in 1986 reported that a
 scientist, whose home was bugged through his radio set, was
 arrested and executed for statements made at home critical of
 Kim Il Sung. The Institute of North Korean Affairs report on
 the DPRK penal code notes that drafting, keeping, or
 distributing "reactionary" printed matter is punishable by
 death.
 Foreign media are excluded, domestic media censorship is
 enforced, and no deviation from the official government line
 is tolerated. The regime prohibits listening to foreign media
 broadcasts except by high government officials, and violators
 reportedly are subject to severe punishment. Most urban
 households have radio and some have television, but reception
 is limited to domestic programming. The Government controls
 artistic and academic works, and visitors report that the
 primary function of plays, movies, operas, and books is to
 contribute to the cult of personality surrounding the "Great
 Leader," Kim Il Sung, and the "Dear Leader," Kim Jong Il.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 No public meetings can be held without government
 authorization. There appear to be no organizations other than
 those created by the Government. The State even. prohibits
 apolitical groups such as neighborhood or alumni
 organizations. Professional associations exist solely as
 another means of government control over the members of these
 organizations.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Although the Constitution provides that "citizens have
 religious liberty and the freedom of antireligious
 propaganda," the regime, in fact, has severely persecuted
 Christians and Buddhists since the late 1940's and
 discriminates against persons whose family or relatives once
 had a strong religious involvement.
 Despite these purges, the regime today uses government-
 sponsored religious organizations to proclaim the practice of
 religious freedom. The DPRK claims to have 1G,000 Christians
 who worship in 500 home churches. A few Buddhist temples are
 in operation, and the country's first two Christian churches
 were built in late 1988. The churches are included in the
 fixed itinerary for many foreign visitors to Pyongyang. Some
 visitors attest to the authenticity of the church services-and
 to the faith of the several dozen worshipers observed. Other
 visitors say the church activity appears staged. No North
 Korean religious official is ever known to have preached that
 there is any moral authority higher than that of Kim II Sung.
 Kim, his.family, and his juche (self-reliance) ideology are
 accorded reverence akin to worship, and the cult of the Kim
 family is functionally akin to organized religion.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 The DPRK regime strictly controls internal travel, requiring a
 travel pass for any movement outside one's home village; these
 passes are granted only for required official or certain
 personal travel. Personal travel is usually limited to
 attending the wedding or funeral of a close relative. Long
 delays in obtaining the necessary permit often result in denial
 
 
 926
 DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF KOREA
 of the right to travel even for these limited purposes. State
 control of internal travel is also ensured by a ration system
 that distributes coupons valid only in the region issued. In
 October 1989, the DPRK announced a liberalization of internal
 travel, but a few months later, claiming that transportation
 facilities were inadaquate, it rescinded the measure.
 Reports, primarily from defectors, indicate that forced
 resettlement, particularly of those deemed politically
 unreliable, is common. Permission to reside in, or even enter
 Pyongyang, the capital, is strictly controlled.
 Foreign travel is limited to officials and trusted artists,
 athletes, and academics. The regime does not allow
 emigration, and only 1,000 or so defectors have succeeded in
 fleeing the country. The regime retaliates against the
 relatives of those few persons who manage to escape.
 Involuntarily repatriated defectors have been jailed, or in
 some cases, executed.
 In 1989, in a rare departure from isolationist controls, the
 DPRK sent students to a short seminar in Japan. Aside from
 this, the regime does not allow students to study outside of
 Communist countries for any period. It tightened controls
 over DPRK students studying abroad when six defected from
 Eastern Europe in 1989, and in 1990 called back all foreign
 students from Eastern Europe.
 From 1959 to 1982, 93,000 Korean residents of Japan, including
 6,637 Japanese wives, voluntarily repatriated to North Korea
 in response to nationalistic appeals. Despite DPRK assurances
 that the wives, 1,828 of whom still had Japanese citizenship,
 would be allowed to go home to Japan every 2 or 3 years, none
 is known to have returned to Japan, and most have never been
 heard of again. The Asia Watch/MLIHRC report and other
 sources say most of the returnees and their families were
 categorized in the-"wavering class," were given poor food,
 clothing, and housing, were subjected to hard labor, and were
 treated with contempt. When reports of their harsh treatment
 became known overseas, voluntary repatriation dried up.
 Recent reports suggest that treatment of Japanese spouses has
 improved, since they have access to much-needed hard currency.
 North Korea has permitted entry to several thousand overseas
 Korean residents in Japan, China, North America, and elsewhere
 to visit their relatives. Recently the regime has granted
 entry to greater numbers of other visitors, including
 journalists, tourists, and 15,000 foreign participants in the
 13th World Festival of Youth and Students held in Pyongyang in
 July 1989. Visitors are closely monitored, and itineraries
 are usually fixed, although some visitors reported they were
 allowed to walk freely around the vicinity of their hotels.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 There is no mechanism by which the citizenry can effect
 transitions in leadership or changes in government. The
 political system is completely dominated by Kim Il Sung and
 heir-designate Kim Jong Il. The legislature, the Supreme
 People's Assembly, which meets only a few days a year, has
 never taken any action other than unanimous passage of
 resolutions presented to it by the leadership. In an effort
 to create an appearance of democracy, the DPRK has created
 several "minority parties." They exist only as rosters of
 
 
 DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF KOREA
 officials who have token representation in the People's
 Assembly and.completely support the government line.
 Free elections do not exist in North Korea. Although
 elections to the Supreme People's Assembly were held in
 November 1986, and to provincial, city, and county assemblies
 in November 1989, in all cases the Government approved only
 one candidate in each electoral district. According to the
 government-controlled media, over 99 percent of the voters
 turned out to elect 100 percent of the approved candidates.
 Despite the long and rigorous selection process for membership
 in the KWP, most party members have no voice in
 decisionmaking, serving only to carry out the decrees
 promulgated by party leader Kim Il Sung and his top
 subordinates.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 No organizations exist within North Korea to report on or
 observe human rights violations. North Korea does not
 participate in any international or regional human rights
 organizations.
 The Government has not allowed Amnesty AI, Asia Watch, the
 MLIHRC, or any other international organization to visit North
 Korea to monitor human rights practices. A DPRK
 representative called a preliminary version of the Asia
 Watch/MLIHRC report "full of Iies and fabrications," and
 warned that if it were published, the human rights
 organizations would "be held fully responsible for all the
 consequences arising therefrom."
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 The Constitution states that "women hold equal social status
 and rights with men." However, few women have reached high
 levels of the party or the Government. Women are represented
 proportionally in the labor force, with the exception of small
 factories where the work force is predominantly female.
 The regime discriminates against the physically handicapped.
 Handicapped persons, other than war veterans, are reportedly
 not allowed within the city limits of Pyongyang. According to
 the Asia Watch/MLIHRC report, authorities check for
 deformities in the capital city every 2 or 3 years and remove
 the disabled, some of the elderly, widows, and the sick to the
 countryside. The dwarf community has been banished to a
 remote mountain settlement.
 Nothing-is known about the extent to which violence against
 women is practiced or tolerated.
 North Korea is a homogeneous country and is relatively devoid
 of minority groups.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 Free labor unions do not exist in North Korea. Because the
 party by definition purports to represent the interests of
 labor, trade unions exist in form only. There is a single
 
 
 928
 DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF KOREA
 Labor Front, called the General Federation of Trade Unions of
 Korea, which is affiliated with the Communist-controlled World
 Federation of Trade Unions. Operating under this umbrella,
 unions function on the classical Soviet model, with
 responsibility for mobilizing workers behind productivity
 goals and state targets, and for the provision of health,
 education, cultural, and welfare facilities. They do not have
 the right to strike. North Korea is not a member of the
 International Labor Organization.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 Workers have no right to organize or to bargain collectively.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 There is no prohibition on the use of forced or compulsory
 labor. The Government routinely uses military conscripts for
 forced labor. AI's 1987 Report cited reports that some
 "political prisoners" were allegedly sentenced to "corrective
 labor," which could be served at a person's normal workplace
 (working for some or no wages) or at farms or mines in areas
 where conditions are very harsh.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 No data are available on the minimum age for employment of
 children.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 No data are available on minimum wages or occupational safety
 and health. Wages are set by government ministries. The
 State assigns all jobs; ideological purity, rather than
 professional competence, is the primary standard used in
 deciding who receives a particular job. Absence from work
 without a doctor's certificate results in a reduction in a
 worker's rations. The Constitution stipulates a workday
 limited to 8 hours, but several sources report that most
 laborers work 12 to 16 hours daily. The regime's propaganda
 euphemistically refers to these extra hours as "patriotic
 labor" done on a "voluntary" basis by the workers.
 
 
 929
