 DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF KOREA*
 The Democratic People's Republic of Korea (DPRK) is a dictatorship under the ab-
 solute rule of the Korean Workers' Pay (KWP). Kim B Sung ruled the DPRK from
 its inception until his death in July. Although he has not yet assumed his father's
 positions of President of the DPRK and Secretary General of the KWP, Kim Jong
 Il appears to be in control of the DPRK following his father's death. Both Kim
 Sung and Kim Jong R1 continue to be the objects of intensive personality cults.
 The North Korean regime subjects its citizens to rigid controls. The regime estab-
 lishes security ratings for each individual which determine access to einpoyg ent,
 schools, medical facilities and certain stores as well as admission to the KWP, but
 it may have relaxed this loyalty system somewhat in recent years. The state leader-
 ship perceives individual rights as an alien concept subversive to the goals of the
 State and party.
 The State directs all significant economic activity, and only government-super-
 vised labor union activity is permitted. The North Korean economy has contracted
 by an average of approximately 7 percent per year over the last 3years, largely due
 to the elimination of Russian Soviet concessional trade and aid. Economic develop-
 ment continues to be hindered by distribution bottlenecks, inefficient allocation of
 resources, poor international credit stemming from the DPRK's default on much of
 its foreign debt and by the diversion of a quarter of the gross national product to
 military expenditures. The rationing of food, clothing, and energy appeared to con-
 tinue in most parts of the country.
 The Government continues to deny its citizens most fundamental human rights.
 The Penal Code is draconian, stipulating capital punishment and confiscation of all
 assets for a wide variety of "crimes against the revolution," including defection, slan-
 der of the party or State, and possessing "reactionary" printed matter. The regime
 permits no independent press or associations, and little outside information reaches
 the public except that approved and disseminated by the Government.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-Political prisoners, opponents of the
 regime, repatriated defectors, and others (reportedly including military officers sus-
 pected of plotting against Kim Jong I) have been summarily executed. Article 52
 of the Criminal Law makes the death penalty mandatory for activities "in collusion
 with imperialists" aimed at "suppressing the national liberation struggle," and some
 prisoners are sentenced to death for such ill-defined "crimes" as "ideological diver-
 gence" and other "counterrevolutionary crimes."
 b. D sappearance.-There is no reliable information on disappearances within
 North Korea. There were reports in the 1980's, however, of DPRlinvolvement in
 the kidnaping abroad of South Koreans, Japanese, and other foreign citizens. The
 Japanese press estimates as many as 20 Japanese may have been kidnaped and are
 being detained in North Korea. The DPRK denies these reports.
 Amnesty International (AI) reports issued in 1993 and 1994 detail a number of
 cases, including that of the Shibata family of Japan. Shibata Kozo and his wife Shin
 Sung Suk, a Korean resident of Japan, left Japan in 1960 and resettled in North
 Korea. Mr. Shibata was reportedly charged in 1965 with spying and sent to a sana-
 torium. He reportedly is in poor health, according to former detainees, and there has
 been no word about his wife and three children since 1965. Mr. Kim Myong Se, ac-
 cording to Al, has not received any news about his wife, daughter, or other family
 members still in North Korea since he applied for political asylum in Russia in
 1992.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 There is no information on recent practices, but credible reports indicate that during
 the 1980's prisoners were routinely tortured or ill-treated, and many prisoners died
 from torture, disease, starvation, or exposure. In some cases executions reportedly
 were carried out at public meetings attended by workers, students, and school-
 children. Executions have also been carried out before assembled inmates at places
 of detention.
 *The United States does not have diplomatic relations with the Democratic People's Republic
 of Korea. North Korea does not allow representatives of foreign governments, journalists, or
 other invited visitors the freedom of movement that would eable them to assess human rights
 conditions there. Most of this report, therefore, is based on information obtained over a period
 of time extending from well before 1994. While limited in detail, the information is nonetheless
 indicative of the human rights situation in North Korea today.
 
 
 618
 According to Al, whole families, including children, are imprisoned together. "Re-
 education through labor" is common punishment, consisting of forced labor (logging,
 tending crops) under harsh conditions. A small number of people who claim to have
 escaped from North Korean detention camps report that starvation and executions
 are common. In one prison, clothing was issued only once in a 3-year period. Former
 inmates have produced photographs of an inmate we arin specially designed leg
 irons which permit walking but make running impossible. Al also reports the exist-
 ence of "punishment cells, too low to permit standing upright and too small for
 lying down flat, where prisoners are kept for up to several weeks for breaking pris-
 on rules.
 d. Arbitr"ar  Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-Uttle information is available on North
 Korea's criminal justice procedures and practices, and outside observation of its
 legal system has not been permitted.
 The law provides that prisoners may be held for interrogation for a maximum of
 2 months but this period may be extended indefinitely. Family members or other
 concerned persons find it virtually impossible to obtain information on charges
 against detained persons. Judicial review of detentions does not exist in law or in
 practice.
 Defectors claim that North Korea detains about 150,000 political prisoners and
 family members in maximum security camps in remote areas. An October 1992 re-
 port by two former inmates made reference to the severe living conditions in what
 they called "concentration camps." North Korean officials deny the existence of such
 gulags or prisons but admit the existence of "education centers" for people who
 "commit crimes by mistake."
 One credible report lists 12 such prison camps in the DPRK. It is believed that
 some former high officials are imprisoned in the camps. Visitors to, and any form
 of communication with, detainees, although once allowed, are now said to be prohib-
 ited.
 In July 1991, Cho Kap Chae, a North Korean defector who had been a ranking
 official in the DPRK Ministry of Public Security, said that there were two types of
 detention areas. One consists of closed camps fm    which prisoners never emerge,
 and where conditions are extremely harsh. In the other, prisoners can be "rehabili-
 tated," and Cho reported that a prisoner he knew was released after a 3-year deten-
 tion.
 According to an AI report, the Government is currently detaining for political of-
 fenses 58 people, some of them for as long as 30 years.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The Constitution states that courts are idepend-
 ent and that judicial proceedings are to be carried out in strict accordance with the
 law. The Constitution contains elaborate procedural guarantees. Article 138 states
 that "cases are heard in public, and the accused is guaranteed the right to defense-
 hearings may be closed to the public as stipulatedby law." However, the accepted
 international concepts of an independent judiciary and individual rights are alien
 to the DPRK. The Public Security Miistry dispenses with trials in political cases
 and refers defendants to the Ministry of State Security for imposition of punish-
 ment.
 When trials are held, lawyers are apparently assigned by the Government, and
 reports indicate that defense lawyers are not considered representatives of the ac-
 cused, but rather are independent parties who are expected to help the court by per-
 suading the accused to confess guilt. Some reports note a distinction between those
 accused of political crimes and common criminals, and state that the Government
 affords trials only to the latter. The Government considers critics of the regime to
 be "political criminals." Numerous reports suggest that political offenses have in the
 past included such forms of lese majesty as sitting on newspapers bearing Kim II
 Sung's picture.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 constitutional stipulation that "citizens are guaranteed the inviolability of person
 and residence and the privacy of correspondence" does not reflect reality. The Gov-
 ernment relies upon an extensive system of informers to identify critics and poten-
 tial troublemakers. In some cases, entire families are detained for alleged political
 offenses committed by one member of the family.
 The authorities subject citizens in all age groups and occupations to political and
 ideological indoctrination. Even after Kim I1 Sung's death, his cult of personality
 and glorification of his family and the official "juche" (self-reliance) ideology contin-
 ued to be omnipresent. The cult approaches the level of a state religion.-The goal
 of indoctrination remains to ensure loyalty to the Kim I1 Sung system and his son
 and heir Kim Jong I, as well as conformity to the State's ideology and authority.
 Indoctrination is carried out systematically not only through the mass media, but
 also in schools and through worker and neighborhood associations. Citizens with rel-
 
 
 619
 atives who fled to South Korea at the time of the Korean War appear to be still
 classified as part of the "hostile class" in the DPRK's elaborate loyalty system. Be-
 cause approximately 10 million families were separated by the war, this category
 encompasses a significant percentage of the North Korean population.
 The defector Cho Kap Chae estimated that the class of those considered politically
 "impure" may comprise 25 to 30 percent of the population. Members of this class
 may still be subject to some discrimination, although Cho claimed that their treat-
 ment has improved greatly in recent years.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-Articles of the Constitution that require citizens
 to follow the "Socialist norms of life" and to obey a "collective spirit" take precedence
 over individual political or civil liberties. While freedom of speech, press, assembly,
 association, and demonstration are formally guaranteed, they do not exist in prac-
 tice. The regime permits only activities which support its objectives.
 The Government strictly curtails the rights of freedom of expression and associa-
 tion guaranteed under the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, to
 which North Korea became a party in 1981. The authorities may punish persons
 criticizing the regime or its policies by imprisonment or "corrective labor." One de-
 fector reported in 1986 that a scientist, whose home was bugged through his radio
 set, was arrested and executed for statements made at home critical of Kim II Sung.
 In another case, AI reports that a family formerly resident in Japan was sent to
 a "reeducation through labor" center because one member of the family allegedly
 made remarks disparaging the Government.
 The Government attempts to control all information that enters and leaves the
 DPRI. It carefully manages the visits of Western journalists. The authorities re-
 stricted access to Russian publications that carried articles critical of North Korea,
 and during 1991 closed several of their offices. Domestic media censorship is strictly
 enforced, and no deviation from the official government line is tolerated. The regime
 prohibits listening to foreign media broadcasts except by the political elite, and vio-
 lators are subject to severe punishment. Radios and television sets are built to re-
 ceive only domestic programming. The Government controls artistic and academic
 works, and visitors report that the primary function of plays, movies, operas, chil-
 dren's performances, and books is to contribute to the cult of personality surround-
 ing Kim I1 Sung and Kim Jong Il.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Government prohibits any
 public meetings without authorization. There are no known organizations other
 than those created by the Government. Professional associations exist solely as an-
 other means of government control over the members of these organizations.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for the rights of "religious lib-
 erty and the freedom of antireligious propaganda." However, the regime firmly dis-
 courages all organized religious activity except that which serves the interests of the
 State. In recent years, it has facilitated the formation of government-sponsored reli-
 gious organizations to advance its foreign policy goals. The DPRK claims there are
 10,000 Christians who worship in 500 home churches, and the Chondogyo Young
 Friends Party, a government-sponsored group based on a native Korean religious
 movement, is still in existence. There are a few Buddhist temples where religious
 activity is permitted, and two Christian churches-one Protestant and one Catho-
 lic-were built in late 1988. Some visitors attest to the authenticity of the church
 services and to the faith of the worshipers observed; others say the church activity
 appears staged.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The DPRK regime strictly controls internal travel, requiring a travel
 p ass for any movement outside one's home village; these passes are granted only
 or official travel or attendance at a relative's wedding or funeral. Long delays in
 obtaining the necessary permit often result in denial of the right to travel even for
 these limited purposes. Only a very small elite have vehicles for personal use. The
 regime tightly controls access to civilian aircraft, trains, buses, food, and fuel. Most
 workers are required to live outside Pyongyang, the capital, and commute to and
 from work on foot.
 Reports, primarily from defectors, indicate that the Government routinely uses
 forced resettlement, particularly for those deemed politically unreliable. The Gov-
 ernment strictly controls permission to reside in, or even enter, Pyongyang.
 The regime limits foreign travel to officials and trusted artists, athletes, and aca-
 demics. It does not allow emigration, although there have been a limited number
 of defections. Recently, the number of defectors has increased somewhat. The regime
 retaliates against the relatives of those few persons who manage to escape. Involun-
 
 
 tarily repatriated defectors have been jailed or in some cases executed. As a rule,
 the regime does not currently allow students to study outside of friendly countries.
 From 1959 to 1982, 93,000 Korean residents of Japan, including 6,637 Japanese
 wives, voluntarily repatriated to North Korea. Despite regime assurances that the
 wives, 1,828 of whom still had Japanese citizenship, would be allowed to go home
 to Japan every 2 or 3 years, none is known to have done so. Most have not been
 heard of again.
 Over the p ast decade, the DPRK has gradually permitted an increasing number
 of overseas Korean residents of North America, Japan, China, and other countries
 to visit their relatives in North Korea.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens have no right or mechanisms by which they can effect transitions in lead-
 ership or changes in government. The political system is completely dominated by
 the KWP, with Kim II Sung's heir Kim Jong El apparently in control. (There is very
 little hard information available on intraregime politics following Kim El Sung s
 death.) The legislature, the Supreme Peoples Assembly, which meets only a few
 days a year, serves only to rubberstamp resolutions presented to it by the party
 leadership.
 In an effort to create the appearance of democracy, the DPRK has created several
 "minority parties." Lacking grass roots organizations, they exist only as rosters of
 officials with token representation in the Supreme People's Assembly. Their primary
 purpose appears to be that of promoting government objectives abroad as touring
 par iamentarians. Free elections do not exist in North Korea. Although elections to
 the Supreme People's Assembly and provincial, city, and county assemblies are held
 regularly, in all cases there is only one government-approved candidate in each elec-
 toral district. According to the media, over 99 percent of the voters turned out to
 elect 100 percent of the candidates approved by the KWP. The vast majority of the
 KWP's estimated 3 million members (in a population of 22 million) work to imple-
 ment decrees formulated by the party's small elite.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 The Government does not permit any domestic organizations to monitor human
 rights conditions or to comment on violations of such rights.
 AI representatives visited the DPRK in 1991 and met officials from the Ministries
 of Foreign Affairs and Public Security, as well as with judges, lawyers, and legal
 scholars. Subsequently, the DPRK has ignored requests for visits by AI, Asia Watch,
 and other human rights organizations.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution grants equal rights to all citizens. As noted above, however, the
 Government denies its citizens the most fundamental human rights.
 Women.-The Constitution states that "women hold equal social status and rights
 with men." However, few women have reached high levels of the party or the Gov-
 ernment. Women are represented proportionally in the labor force, with the excep-
 tion of small factories in which the work force is predominantly female.
 Neither government policy nor traditional social norms condone violence against
 women.
 Children.-Social norms reflect traditional, family-centered values in which chil-
 dren are cherished. The State provides education for all children. There is no pat-
 tern of societal or familial abuse of children.
 People With Disabilities.-There are no legally mandated provisions for accessibil-
 ity to buildings or government services for the disabled. Traditional social norms
 condone discrimination against the physically handicapped. Handicapped persons,
 other than war veterans, are reportedly not allowed within the city limits of
 Pyongyang. According to one credible report, authorities check every 2 to 3 years
 in the capital for persons with deformities and relocate them to special facilities in
 the countryside.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-Nongovernmental labor unions do not exist. The Ko-
 rean Workers' Party purports to represent the interests of all labor. There is a sin-
 gle labor organization, called the General Federation of Trade Unions of Korea,
 which is affiated with the formerly Soviet-controlled World Federation of Trade
 Unions. Operating under this umbrella, unions function on the classical Soviet
 model, with responsibility for mobilizing workers behind production goals and for
 
 
 621
 providing health, education, cultural, and welfare facilities. They do not have the
 right to strike. North Korea is not a member of, but has observer status with, the
 International Labor Organization.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectivdy.-Workers have no right to or-
 ganize or to bargain collectively. Wages are set by government ministries. The State
 assigns all jobs.-Ideological purity is as important as professional competence in de-
 ciding who receives a particular job. Factory and farm workers are organized into
 councils, which do have an impact upon management decisions.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-There is no prohibition on the use
 of forced or compulsory labor, and the Government routinely uses military
 conscripts for construction projects. "Reformatory labor" and "reeducation through
 labor" are common punishments for political offenses. AI reports that forced labor,
 such as logging and tending crops, is common among prisoners.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-No data are available on the mini-
 mum age for employment of children. However, education is universal and manda-
 tory until age 15, and it is believed that this regulation is enforced.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-No data are available on minimum wages.
 They appear to be adequate to support workers and their families at a basic subsist-
 ence level. Wages are not the primary form of compensation since the State provides
 all educational and medical needs fiee of charge, while most goods are distributed
 according to a rationing system and only token rent is charged.
 In January labor regulations for foreign-funded enterprises were reportedly adopt-
 ed by the Administration Council. Referring to labor contracts, they set out provi-
 sions on the employment and dismissal of workers, technical training, work hours,
 rest periods, remuneration, labor protection, social security, fines for violations of
 regulations, and settlement of disputes.
 The Constitution stipulates an 8-hour workday, but several sources report that
 most laborers work 12 to 16 hours daily.
