 DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE"S REPUBLIC OF KOREA*
 The Democratic People's Republic of Korea (DPRK) was formed
 in 1948 during the Soviet administration of the northern
 half of the Korean peninsula. It is a closed, authoritar-
 ian, collectivist state. Although some internationally
 respected human rights are acknowledged by the DPRK con-
 stitution and laws, individual rights are subordinated in
 practice to the overriding aim of imposing a social revolu-
 tion and marshalling a show of unanimous popular support
 for the country's governing system and its leaders.
 The North Korean people are subjected to rigid control
 measures similar to those in effect during the Stalin era
 in the Soviet Union. Persons who fail to cooperate with
 the regime face imprisonment, confiscation of property, or
 enforced removal to remote villages. Observation by
 informers is so prevalent that the average citizen is
 distrustful of even his closest associates. Any movement
 from one area to another requires documentary permission.
 Punishment for "political crimes," a recognized category of
 offenses, is severe.
 The government is controlled by the Korean Workers' (comunist)
 Party which, in turn, is under the domination and control
 of one man, Kim Il-sung, and his family. The latest constitu-
 tion, promulgated in 1972, purports to guarantee a wide
 range of rights, including: freedom of the press, religion,
 work, and association, and freedom from sex discrimination.
 Other provisions of that constitution tend to contradict or
 render many of these guarantees meaningless.
 The state's invasion of the individual's activities in
 North Korea goes well beyond those of assembly and expression.
 The authorities attempt to shape the consciousness of the
 populace. Pre-school children are drilled in adulation of
 Kim Il-sung and his family, while youths and adults are
 required to participate in daily indoctrination sessions
 conducted by youth organizations or at places of employment.
 The propaganda requires rote recitation of party maxims and
 positions, and strives f6r ideological purity. It has
 created a society in which differences of opinion on
 political issues are never seen, at least by non-Koreans.
 The result is that North Korea's society is perhaps the
 most highly regimented and controlled in the world today.
 At least two North Korean security organizations enforce
 these controls.
 *There was little, new information in 1980 on human rights
 practices in North Korea. Few, if any, significant changes
 are known to have taken place. Much of this report neces-
 sarily is based therefore on information obtained over a
 period of time. While limited in scope and detail, the
 information is generally indicative of the human rights
 situation in North Korea.
 
 
 632
 Virtually no outside information, other than that approved
 and disseminated by the North Korean authorities, is
 allowed to reach the North Korean public. Foreigners who
 have traveled to Pyongyang have been surprised to learn how
 little the North Korean populace knows of the outside
 world.
 Despite North Korean claims of being a "socialist society,"
 it is far from "classless." Security ratings for each
 person are based on such considerations as whether any of
 the individual's relatives or associates collaborated with
 the Japanese occupation, attempted to defect, or came from
 areas where there has been resistance to the regime. These
 ratings determine access to the better schools, positions,
 and stores, as well as admission to the Korean Workers'
 Party, the route to the highest levels and privileges of
 the society. Any individual whose relative or close family
 associate has settled in South Korea is treated as suspect
 by the North Korean authorities. Ideological considera-
 tions and control mechanisms have come to differentiate
 North Koreans into highly stratified classes, with the
 governing minority perched clearly on the top and having
 privileges normally associated in the past with royalty in
 pre-modern societies.
 The Sixth Congress of the Korean Workers Party was held in
 October 1980. This was the first party congress to be held
 in a decade. Kim Il-sung was "re-elected" President of the
 DPRK and Secretary General of the Party, and his son, Kim
 Chong-Il, effectively was placed in position eventually to
 succeed his father. That Kim Il-sung appears thus far able
 to ensure his succession by his own son is indicative of
 the enormous power concentrated in his hands over 35 years.
 The absence of any evidence of public debate is also
 indicative of the lack of popular participation in the
 political process. While the Supreme People's Assembly
 "unanimously endorsed" all the decisions and reports of Kim
 Il-sung and the Political Bureau of the Central Committee
 without debate or dissent, the party congress provided
 another illustration of the total concentration of political
 power in the hands of Kim Il-sung and a small group of
 relatives and close associates.
 1.   Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a.   Torture
 Information on specific criminal justice procedures in
 North Korea is extremely scarce. North Korea has refused
 to permit outside observation of its legal system and
 practices. The accounts provided by the crew members of
 the "USS Pueblo" and by Venezuelan poet Ali Lameda comprise
 virtually all specific information available on the actual
 operation of the criminal justice system in North Korea.
 The accounts of torture and beatings of crew members of the
 "USS Pueblo" are well known and documented. The only other
 reliable source on prison conditions and treatment of
 prisoners in North Korea is Venezuelan poet Ali Lameda, who
 was detained in North Korea from September 1967 through May
 1974. Prior to his arrest, Mr. Lameda worked for a branch
 of the North Korea Ministry of Foreign Affairs and was a
 sympathetic observer of North Korean society. The account
 he provided to Amnesty International of his imprisonment is
 credible. While physical torture was not used on Mr.
 Lameda, he stated that Korean prisoners were beaten. Lameda
 
 
 633
 noted that "beating was also used as a means of persuasion
 during interrogation." Further details are not available.
 b.   Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment
 Lameda reported the use of deprivation of food to force
 "confessions," as well as solitary confinement, continuous
 interrogation, enforced waking periods, poor or non-existent
 medical treatment, and twelve hours of forced labor per
 day. In addition, prisoners were denied family visits,
 parcels, correspondence, writing materials, newspapers, and
 clothing changes. Prisoners appeared to be regarded as
 persons without any rights.
 C.   Disappearances
 There have been some reports about the recall and subsequent
 disappearance of North Koreans whose ideological purity
 apparently had become suspect while working abroad for the
 DPRK. .In addition, there have been suspected instances of
 DPRK attempts to kidnap individuals and forcefully remove
 them to North Korea, where they are permitted no further
 contacts with family or previous associates. Recent such
 attempts have included unsuccessful efforts forcibly to
 abduct a South Korean delegate to the International Women's
 Conference in Copenhagen in 1980 and two Korean concert
 musicians from an Eastern European capital in 1979. A
 United States army private of Korean birth disappeared from
 his unit in Germany under suspicious circumstances in 1979,
 and North Korea claims that he is voluntarily in North
 Korea. However, repeated efforts by his family in the
 United States to contact him, which were supported by the
 Xnternational Committee of the Red Cross and the United
 States government in contacts through the Military Armi-
 stice .Commission in Panmunjom, Korea, have been rebuffed by
 North Korean authorities.
 d.   Arbitrary Arrest and Imprisonment
 LaiedA and a fellow prisoner estimated that approximately
 150,000 persons may be in detention in North Korean camps
 or prisons. (The total population of North Korea is 19
 million.) From the account Lameda provided of the North
 Korean Judicial system it is reasonable to suppose that
 many of these persons are held in substantial disregard of
 generally accepted principles of justice. North Korean law
 provides that the period prisoners may be held for inter-
 .rogation shall .not exceed two. months.. This period may be
 extended indefinitely, however, if the Interrogation
 ..Department obtains approval of the Chief Prosecutor.
 Lameda, himself, was detained for twelve months without
 trial.or charge. His requests for a lawyer of his choice
 and an open trial-were ridiculed as "bourgeois." Habeas
 corpus or its equivalent does not exist in practice.
 e.   Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The North Korean constitution-states that courts are
 independent, and judicial .proceedings are to be carried out
 in strict accordance with law. All courts, however, are
 "responsible" to the people's assemblies, which effectively
 means total governmental control of the judiciary. Article
 138 states that "cases are heard in public, and the accused
 is guaranteed the right to defense; hearings may be closed
 to the public as stipulated by law." Lameda was twice
 denied public trial. After his first arrest he was im-
 prisoned for a year without a hearing; after his second
 
 
 64
 arrest, he was put through a closed session without benefit
 of counsel of his choice, or even knowledge of the charges.
 His tribunal was under the direction of the Ministry of
 Internal Security, with one person serving as both judge
 and prosecutor. Lameda stated that, other than to admit
 guilt, he was refused the right to speak out or defend
 himself at his trial. His "defense counsel" represented
 him by making a lengthy speech praising Kim Il-sung and
 then requesting a 20-year sentence, which the tribunal
 imposed after five minutes of deliberation.
 In a 1979 interview with American journalist John Wallach,
 North Korean Supreme Court Justice Li Chun-Uk noted that,
 "his (the defense counsel's) job is to give the suspect due
 punishment." Open court appears to consist of nothing more
 than an announcement of the term of imprisonment, which has
 already been determined by the Provincial Safety Bureau.
 f.   Invasion of the Home
 Article 64 of the constitution states that "citizens are
 guaranteed the inviolability of person and residence and
 the privacy of correspondence." Lameda reported, however,
 that his residence was not respected, and that listening
 devices were used against him. He was arrested and his
 collected papers and poetry destroyed without warrant.
 2.   Government Policies Relating to the Fulfillment of
 Such Vital Needs as Food, Shelter, Health Care and
 Education
 North Korea is a less developed, socialist country with a
 highly centralized, planned economy. After a period of
 rapid growth in the 1960s and early 1970s, the economy has
 experienced difficulties in recent years due largely to an
 overemphasis on self-sufficiency, centralized planning,
 heavy industrialization and military expenditures. Although
 the standard of living is relatively low in comparison with
 that of South Korea, government policies ensure a relatively
 equitable distribution of income that is sufficient to
 provide for the basic economic needs of the population.
 North Korea claims that per capita gross national product
 is $1,900, but most independent observers consider the real
 figure to be closer to $750. Health care and education are
 free to all citizens; food and shelter are provided at
 nominal cost. 15-20 percent of North Korea's GNP con-
 sistently is committed to military expenditures, the second
 highest such level in the world. This policy has seriously
 retarded the progress of the civilian economy and delayed
 rewards for the Korean people's efforts.
 Article 22 of the constitution states that "the state
 protects the working people's personal property by law and
 guarantees their right to succeed to it." Article 19,
 however, notes that, "the nation's entire natural resources
 are owned by the state only," Article 20 states that "the
 property of cooperative organizations is collectively
 owned;" and Article 22 also notes that "personal property
 comes into being through socialist distribution." The only
 personal property most citizens appear to enjoy is the food
 they receive from the state or cooperative, the clothes on
 their backs, and a meager collection of consumer goods.
 The state owns virtually everything else, including land,
 housing and all means of production.
 
 
 635
 Article 56 of the constitution gives all citizens the right
 to work and to choose occupations according to their desires
 and talents. 'Article 57 provides for an eight hour working
 day, paid leave and accommodation at state-run guest
 houses. North Korea suffers from a labor shortage. As a
 result, unemployment reportedly does not exist, and all
 able-bodied citizens are required to work. The party
 reportedly controls individual places of residence and work.
 The party has promulgated rules preventing, among other
 things, worker transfers that would affect production,
 marriages before a certain age, or marriages that would
 require relocation of either of the two workers concerned.
 Visitors to North Korea and other sources report that
 workers often put in extremely long hours, despite the
 constitutional provision of an eight-hour workday. Com-
 bined with mandatory indoctrination sessions, the average
 worker would appear to have-little or no free time for
 leisure or rest. In addition, North Korea periodically
 conducts labor campaigns such as the recent "100-day
 combat" from July to October 1980, in preparation for the
 Sixth Congress of the Korean Workers Party. During such
 periods, workers' production schedules are further expanded
 and work often proceeds seven days a week with no day of
 rest for months at a time. Working conditions reportedly
 are often poor, with a notable lack of concern or equipment
 for safety in factories and mines.
 Per capita income in North Korea is estimated to be approx-
 imately $750. Income distribution appears to be relatively
 equitable, although the party and government elite enjoy
 significant economic privileges which are not available to
 average citizens. Average wage rates for workers reportedly
 vary from 50 - 150 won per month with rents for state
 supplied apartments averaging 15 - 20 won. Basic food
 supplies are heavily subsidized and rationed for equal
 distribution. Most of the population appears to have a
 relatively low, but equitable standard of living that is
 "adequate for health and well-being."
 Articles 58 and 59 of the constitution guarantee citizens
 the right to free health care and education. According to
 a recent congressional witness, each province has a six-
 year medical college, with an enrollment of 600-800. Each
 county has a hospital with an average of 50 beds, and each
 village a clinic with four doctors and six nurses- While
 further statistics are unavailable, North Korea appears to
 have invested considerable effort and money in developing a
 comprehensive health care system for its citizenry.
 Both pre- and post-working age citizens are cared for by
 the state, and their basic physical necessities reportedly
 are provided for. satisfactorily. The officially claimed
 life expectancy is 73 years.
 The North Korean government provides eleven years of
 compulsory free education to its citizens and claims to
 have eliminated illiteracy. While this claim cannot be
 substantiated, the literacy rate undoubtedly is very high
 in comparison with most developing countries.
 Visitors have reported a disparity in the standard of
 living-between the countryside and urban areas. North
 Korean leaders have acknowledged that a gap exists and have
 .pledged to make efforts to eliminate it.
 
 
 636
 Article 62 of the constitution states that "women hold
 equal social status and rights with men." Despite this
 provision, few women reach high levels of the party or
 government. Women are represented proportionally in the
 labor force and personnel in small factories are predom-
 inately women. Reportedly, women are often paid less than
 men for similar work.
 3.   Respect for Civil and Political Liberties, Including:
 a.   Freedom of Speech, Press, Religion and Assembly
 Article 53 of the constitution states that "citizens have
 the freedoms of speech, the press, assembly, association
 and demonstration." Article 54 provides that, "citizens
 have the religious liberty and the freedom of anti-religious
 propaganda." In fact, North Koreans enjoy none of these
 rights except in support of government objectives. Other
 articles of the constitution which require citizens to
 follow the "socialist norms of life" and to obey a "collec-
 tive spirit," take precedence over individual political or
 civil liberties. Censorship of foreign and domestic media
 is enforced and no deviation from the official government
 line is tolerated. Listening to foreign media broadcasts
 is prohibited and violators reportedly are subject to
 severe punishment. Artistic works are controlled by the
 government and visitors report that a primary function of
 plays, movies, operas, and books, apparently is to con-
 tribute to the cult of personality surrounding "the great
 leader," Kin Il-sung and his son, "the beloved leader," Kim
 Chong-Ii.
 The government has developed a pervasive system of spies
 and informers throughout the society. The slightest
 criticism of the government, voiced to a friend, colleague
 or relative, often is reported and can result in draconian
 punishment. No public meetings can be held without govern-
 mental authorization. Trade unions and professional
 associations exist solely as another method of governmental
 control over workers and have no effective rights to
 organize, negotiate or strike.
 Although freedom of religion allegedly is guaranteed, North
 Korea, in fact, severely persecuted Christians and Buddhists
 from the late 1940's, using enforced membership in North
 Korean "religious organizations" as a means of identifying
 and controlling these groups and individuals. The regime
 uses the remaining organizational facades to proclaim the
 practice of religious freedom, but has long since purged
 the membership out of existence. Not only is religious
 practice impossible in North Korea, but persons whose
 family or relatives once had a religious background are
 severely discriminated against.
 b.   Freedom of Movement within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration and Repatriation
 Internal travel in North Korea is strictly controlled.
 Documents are required for any movement away from the
 vicinity of one's residence or place of work. The police
 maintain a system of frequent checks. Visitors continue to
 note not only the absence of private automobiles in North
 Korea, but the remarkable absence of bicycles, thus forcing
 even local rural travel into the more easily monitored
 public transportation system. Foreign travel is limited
 strictly to officials or showcase performers. Tourism,
 even to allied comunist countries, is unknown. Emigration
 
 
 637
 is not allowed, and few refugees or defectors succeed in
 fleeing the country. Severe retaliation reportedly is
 taken against the relatives of those few persons who manage
 to escape.
 North Korea encourages Korean residents overseas to re-
 patriate to "the Fatherland." Some observers estimate
 that, since 1959, almost a million Korean residents of
 Japan have voluntarily repatriated to North Korea. After
 their arrival in North Korea, repatriates are isolated from
 North Korean society until they can be indoctrinated and
 their ideological reliability gauged. Some reports in-
 dicate that the property of repatriates is confiscated and,
 even after years or decades in the DPRK, they are subject
 to closer surveillance than most citizens because of their
 "corruption" by exposure to foreign influences. Many
 repatriates are never heard from again by their relatives
 abroad.
 c.   Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 The constitution states that all citizens above the age of
 17 may vote and be elected. Political processes in North
 Korea are .dominated exclusively by the leadership of the
 Korean Workers Party, which is headed by Kim Ii Sung, who
 also heads the government. The legislature, the Supreme
 People's Assembly, is a rubber-stamp body which never has
 taken any action other than unanimous passage of resolu-
 tions presented to it. In an effort to create an appearance
 of democracy, North Korea has sanctioned several "minority
 parties." They exist only as rosters of officials who have
 token representation-in the Natidnal Assembly and completely
 support the government line.
 The average citizen is completely excluded from any real
 participation in the political process unless he becomes a
 member of the Korean Worker's Party, the selection process
 for entrance to which is long and rigorous. Even the lower
 levels of the party have no voice, serving only to carry
 out the fiats, decrees, and "on the spot guidance" promulgated
 by the party's leadership, dominated by Kim Il-sung.
 Individuals from "bad social backgrounds"; i.e. those who
 have relatives who fled south during the Korean war, those
 .whose families had religious backgrounds or were once
 property owners or members of the bourgeosie, and those who
 have relatives who are political prisoners effectively are
 denied participation in the political process and are
 discriminated against in numerous ways.
 4.   Government Attitude and Record Regarding International
 and Non-governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 No organizations exist within North Korea to report on or
 observe human rights violations. North Korea does not
 participate in any international or regional human rights
 organizations nor is it a party to any international con-
 ventions on human rights. Amnesty International has
 requested a visit to North Korea; the government has not
 responded to or acknowledged this request.
 
 
 638
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 
 COUNTRY: KOREAt NORTH
 
 1978     1979     1980
 
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL...
 LOANS..........
 GRANTS..............
 A.AID .............
 LOANS..............
 GRANTS....... . o..
 (SEC.SUPP.ASSIST.)...
 B.FOOD FOR PEACE.......
 LOANS..............
 GRANTS.............
 TITLE I-TOTAL..........
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS.....
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR.....
 TITLE II-TOTAL.........
 E.RELIEF.EC.DEV & wFP.
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY.....
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST...
 LOANS..............
 GRANTS .............
 CONTR. TO IFI....
 PEACE CORPS ....
 OTHER............
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL...
 LOANS..............
 GRANTS.............
 A.MAP GRANTS..........
 B.CREDIT SALES-FNS....
 C.INTL NIL.ED.TRNG....
 D.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK...
 E.OTHER GRANTS......
 III.TOTAL ECON. & MIL...
 LOANS...............
 GRANTS.............
 OTHER US LOANs..........
 EX-IN BANK LOANS.....
 ALL OTHER...-...
 
 ASSISTANCE FROM INT
 19
 TOTAL.,**,
 IBRD
 IFC
 IDA
 IDS
 ADO
 AFOB
 UNDP
 OTHER-UN
 EEC
 
 ERNATIONAL AGNCIES
 78     1979    1980     1946-80
 0.0      0.0     0.3     26.6
 0.0      0.0     0.0      0.0
 0.0      0.0     0.0      0.0
 0.0      0.0     0.0      0.0
 0.0      0.0     0.0      0.0
 0.0      0.0     0.0      0.0
 0.0      0.0     0.0      0.0
 0.0      0.0     0.3     26.6
 0.0      0.0     0.0      0.0
 0.0      0.0     0.0      0.0
 
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 
 0.0     '.0
 0.0      0.0
 0.0      0.0
 0.0      0.0
 0.0      0.0
 0.0      0.0
 0.0      0.0
 0.0      0.0
 0.0      0.0
 0q      0.0
 0.0      0.0
 0.0      0.0
 0.0      0.0
 0.0      0.0
 0.0      0.0
 0.0      0.0
 0.0      0.0
 0.0      0.0
 0.0      0.0
 0.0      0.0
 0.0      0.0
 0.0      0.0
 0.0      0.0
 0.0      0.0
 0.0     0.0
 0.0      0.0
 0.0     0.0
 0.0      0.0
 0.0      0.0
 0.0      0.0
 0.0      0.0
 0.0      0.0
 0.0      0.0
 0.0      0.0
 0.0      0.0
 0.0      0.0
 
 ----------------------------------------------------------
 
 - - -- --- ------   ---------- ------------------------
 
 ..--...
 
 
 639
