NFIK? KFI<8
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea (North Korea) systematically violates
the basic rights of its population. Although it has signed four key international
human rights treaties and includes rights protections in its constitution, it
allows no organized political opposition, free media, functioning civil society,
or religious freedom. Arbitrary arrest, detention, lack of due process, and torture
and ill-treatment of detainees remain serious and endemic problems.
North Korea also practices collective punishment for various anti-state offenses,
for which it enslaves hundreds of thousands of citizens in prison camps,
including children. The government periodically publicly executes citizens for
stealing state property, hoarding food, and other “anti-socialist” crimes.
During 2011 observers increasingly concluded that Kim Jong-Il, North Korean
leader and chairman of the National Defense Commission (NDC), has selected
his youngest son, Kim Jong-un, to continue the Kim family’s dynastic rule of the
country. In February 2011 Jong-un was appointed vice-chairman of NDC, reinforcing
his earlier appointments in September 2010 to the Central Committee of
the Ruling Workers Party and the Central Military Commission.
The new International Coalition to Stop Crimes against Humanity in North Korea
(ICNK), comprised of 41 international NGOs, was launched in September to
advocate for the establishment of a United Nations commission of inquiry on
North Korea.
Food Shortages and Famine
In March 2011 a joint UN survey estimated that over six million vulnerable persons
in North Korea urgently required international food assistance to avoid
famine. As estimated food shortages reached more than one million metric
tons, the World Food Programme called it the worst famine in a decade, and
South Korea-based NGOs and media with informants inside North Korea reported
hunger-related deaths. Causes include dismal harvests resulting from floods
and an extremely harsh winter; economic mismanagement of a monetary devaluation
scheme in November 2009 that wiped out many peoples’ savings and
heavily damaged informal food markets; and the government’s blatantly discriminatory food policies that favor the military, government officials, and other
loyal groups. North Korea’s two largest food donors, the United States and
South Korea, refused to provide food aid until North Korea apologizes for the
sinking of the South Korean warship Cheonan and shelling of Yeonpyeong
Island in 2010.
Torture and Inhumane Treatment
Testimony from escaped North Koreans indicates that individuals arrested on
criminal charges often face torture by officials aiming to enforce obedience and
extract bribes and information. Common forms of torture include sleep deprivation,
beatings with iron rods or sticks, kicking and slapping, and enforced sitting
or standing for hours. Detainees are subject to so-called pigeon torture, in
which they are forced to cross their arms behind their back, are handcuffed,
hung in the air tied to a pole, and beaten with a club. Guards also rape female
detainees. One study done in 2010 found that 60 percent of refugee respondents
who had been incarcerated witnessed a death due to beating or torture.
Executions
North Korea’s Criminal Code stipulates that the death penalty can be applied
only for a small set of crimes, but these include vaguely defined offenses such
as “crimes against the state” and “crimes against the people” that can be and
are applied broadly. In addition, scholars and NGOs monitoring conditions in
North Korea say that a December 2007 amendment to the penal code extended
the death penalty to many more crimes, including non-violent offenses such as
fraud and smuggling.
Forced Labor Camps
Testimony from escapees has established that persons accused of political
offenses are usually sent to forced labor camps, known as gwalliso, operated
by the National Security Agency.
The government practices collective punishment, sending to forced labor
camps not only the offender but also his or her parents, spouse, children, and even grandchildren. These camps are notorious for abysmal living conditions
and abuse, including severe food shortages, little or no medical care, lack of
proper housing and clothes, mistreatment and torture by guards, and executions.
Forced labor at the gwalliso often involves difficult physical labor such as
mining, logging, and agricultural work, all done with rudimentary tools in dangerous
and harsh conditions. Death rates in these camps are reportedly
extremely high.
North Korea has never acknowledged that these camps exist, but US and South
Korean officials estimate some 200,000 people may be imprisoned in them,
including in camp No. 14 in Kaechun, No. 15 in Yodok, No. 16 in Hwasung, No.
22 in Hoeryung, and No. 25 in Chungjin.
Refugees and Asylum Seekers
North Korea criminalizes leaving the country without state permission. Those
who leave—most often by crossing the country’s northern border into China—
face harsh punishment upon repatriation, including interrogation, torture, and
punishments depend on North Korean authorities’ assessments of what the
returnee did while in China. Those suspected of simple commerce or other
money-making schemes are usually sent to work in forced labor brigades.
Others suspected of religious or political activities, including contact with
South Koreans, are given lengthier terms in horrendous detention facilities or
forced labor camps with chronic food and medicine shortages, harsh working
conditions, and mistreatment by guards.
Hundreds of thousands of North Koreans have fled since the 1990s, and some
have settled in China’s Yanbian Korean Autonomous Prefecture. Beijing categorically
labels North Koreans in China “illegal” economic migrants and routinely
repatriates them, despite its obligation to offer protection to refugees under
both customary international law and the Refugee Convention of 1951 and its
1967 protocol, to which China is a state party.
Many North Korean women in China live with local men in de facto marriages.
Even if they have lived there for years, they are not entitled to legal residence
and face the risk of arrest and repatriation. Some North Korean women and girls are trafficked into marriage or prostitution in China. Many children of such
unrecognized marriages are forced to live without a legal identity or access to
elementary education because their parents fear that if they register the children
the mother will be identified by Chinese authorities and forcibly repatriated
to North Korea.
Government-Controlled Judiciary
North Korea’s judiciary is neither transparent nor independent. All personnel
involved in the judiciary—including judges, prosecutors, lawyers, court clerks,
and jury members—are appointed and tightly controlled by the ruling Workers’
Party of Korea. In cases designated as political crimes, suspects are not even
sent through a nominal judicial process; after interrogation they are either executed
or sent to a forced labor camp, often with their entire families.
Labor Rights
North Korea is one of the few nations in the world that is not a member of the
International Labour Organization (ILO). The ruling Korean Workers’ Party firmly
controls the only authorized trade union organization, the General Federation of
Trade Unions of Korea. South Korean companies employ some 44,000 North
Korean workers in the Kaesong Industrial Complex (KIC), where the law governing
working conditions falls far short of international standards on freedom of
association, the right to collective bargaining, and protection from gender discrimination
and sexual harassment.
Freedom of Association, Information, and Movement
The government uses fear—generated mainly by threats of forced labor and
public executions—to prevent dissent, and imposes harsh restrictions on freedom
of information, association, assembly, and travel.
North Korea operates a vast network of informants to monitor and punish persons
for subversive behavior. All media and publications are state-controlled,
and unauthorized access to non-state radio or TV broadcasts is severely punished.
The government periodically investigates the “political background” of its citizens to assess their loyalty to the ruling party, and forces Pyongyang residents
who fail such assessments to leave the capital.
Key International Actors
The North Korean government continues to refuse to recognize the mandate of
the UN special rapporteur on the situation of human rights in the DPRK or
extend any modicum of cooperation to him. However, the government did permit
a visit in May 2011 by Robert King, US special envoy for North Korean
human rights issues, and during the visit released US citizen Eddie Jun after
holding him for more than a year.
In March the UN General Assembly adopted a resolution against North Korea for
the sixth straight year, citing member states’ serious concerns about continuing
reports of “systemic, widespread, and grave violations of civil, political, economic,
social, and cultural rights” and concerns about “all-pervasive and
severe restrictions on the freedoms of thought, conscience, religion, opinion
and expression, peaceful assembly and association.” In the same month, the
UN Human Rights Council (HRC) adopted a resolution against North Korea for
the fourth year in a row for abysmal, systematic human rights violations. Both
resolutions condemned North Korea’s failure to state whether it accepted any of
the 167 recommendations that it took under advisement from a HRC Universal
Periodic Review session of its record in December 2009.
In July 2010 the European Parliament adopted a resolution calling for the
European Union to sponsor a resolution to establish a UN commission of
inquiry to assess past and present human rights violations in North Korea.
The six-party talks on denuclearizing the Korean peninsula—involving North
and South Korea, China, Japan, Russia, and the US—remain stalled. The US and
South Korea demanded that North Korea halt its uranium-enrichment program,
freeze nuclear and missile tests, and allow international nuclear inspectors
back into the country before talks could start, while North Korea insisted there
be no pre-conditions to resumption of talks.
North Korean leader Kim Jong Il visited Chinese leaders in Beijing in May 2011
to discuss economic cooperation and security issues and met with Russian
President Dmitry Medvedev in August.
North Korea’s relations with Japan remain frosty, largely due to a dispute over
abductees. North Korea admitted in 2002 that its agents had abducted 13
Japanese citizens in the 1970s and 1980s for use in training North Korean spies.
It returned five to Japan, but claimed the other eight had died. Japan insists the
number of abductees is higher. No legal means of immigration between the two
countries exists; of the nearly 100,000 migrants from Japan to North Korea
between 1959 and 1984, only 200 have been able to return to Japan by escaping
clandestinely.