 DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF KOREA*
 The Democratic People's Republic of Korea (DPRK) is a dictatorship under the ab-
 solute rule of the Korean Worker Party (KWP). Kim II Sung ruled the DPRK from
 its inception until his death in July 1994. Since then his son Kim Jong II appears
 to have had unchallenged authority, although he has not assumed his father's posi-
 tions of President of the DPRK and Secretary General of the KWP. Both Kim 1I
 *The United States does not have diplomatic relations with the Democratic People's Republic
 of Korea. North Korea does not allow reprsentatives of foreign governments, journalists, or
 other invited visitors the freedom of movement that would enable them to fully assess human
 rights conditions there. This report is based on information obtained over more than a decade,
 updated where possible by information drawn from recent interviews, reports, and other docu-
 mentation. WhDe limited in detail, this information is nonetheless indicative of the human
 rights situation in North Korea today.
 
 
 Sung and Kim Jong 11 continue to be the objects of intense personality cults. The
 regime emphasizes .Juche," a national ideology of self-reliance.
 The Korean People's Armed Forces is the primary organization responsible for ex-
 ternal security. It is assisted by a large military reserve force and several quasi-
 military forces, including the Worker-Peasant Red Guards and the People's Security
 Force. These organizations assist the Ministry of Public Security and cadres of the
 KWP in maintaining internal security. Members of the security forces committed se-
 rious human rights abuses.
 The State directs all significant economic activity, and only government-super-
 vised labor unions are permitted. The North Korean economy contracted in 1996,
 as it has each year since the beginning of the decade. This decline is due in part
 to the collapse of the Soviet bloc and the elimination of Soviet and Chinese
 concessional trade and aid. It is also due to distribution bottlenecks, inefficient allo-
 cation of resources, lack of access to international credit stemming from the DPRK's
 default on much of its foreign debt, and the diversion of a quarter of the gross na-
 tional product to military expenditures. For the last 2 years, flooding damaged
 crops, forced thousands from their homes, and aggravated an already difficult eco-
 nomic situation. Significantly, North Korea admitted publicly for the first time that
 it was suffering from food shortages and sought international food aid as well as
 other forms of assistance. While the Government attributed the food shortages only
 to flooding, the flood apparently exacerbated structural shortages that have existed
 for years.Food, clothing, and energy are rationed throughout the country.
 The Government continues to deny its citizens human rights. Citizens do not have
 the right peacefully to change their government. There continued to be reports of
 extrajudicial killings and disappearances. Citizens are detained arbitrarily, and
 many are held as plitical prisoners; prison conditions are harsh. The constitutional
 prvisions for an independent judiciary and fair trials are not implemented in prac-
 tice. The regime subjects its citizens to rigid controls. The state leadership perceives
 most international norms of human rights, especially individual rights, as illegit-
 imate and alien social artifacts subversive to the goals of the State and party. The
 Penal Code is draconian, stipulating capital punishment and confiscation of all as-
 sets for a wide variety of "crimes against the revolution," including defection, at-
 tempted defection, slander of the policies of the party or State, listening to foreign
 broadcasts, writing "reactionary" letters, and possessing "reactionary" printed mat-
 ter. The Government prohibits freedom of the press and association, and all forms
 of cultural and media activities are under the tight control of the party. Radios sold
 in North Korea are constructed to receive North Korean radio broadcasts only; ra-
 dios obtained from abroad must be altered to work in a similar manner. Under
 these circumstances, little outside information reaches the public except that ap-
 proved and disseminated by the Government. The Government restricts freedom of
 religion, citizen's movements, and worker rights.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extra udicial Killing.-Defectors report that the regime
 continued executions of political prisoners, opponents of the regime, repatriated de-
 fectors, and others (reportedly including military officers suspected of plotting
 against Kim Jong I1). The criminal law makes the death penalty mandatory for ac-
 tivities "in collusion with imperialists" aimed at "suppressing the national liberation
 struggle." Some prisoners are sentenced to death for such ill-defined "crimes" as
 "ido~logical divergene," "opposing socialism," and other "counterrevolutionary
 crimes. In some cases, executions reportedly were carried out at public meetings
 attended by workers, students, and school children. Executions have also been car-
 ried out before assembled inmates at places of detention.
 Many prisoners have reportedly died from torture, disease, starvation, or exposure
 (see Section 1.c.).
 In September a North Korean submarine attempting to infiltrate an armed recon-
 naissance team into South Korean territory ran aground off the South Korean coast.
 The 26 North Korean personnel onboard abandoned the vessel. Eleven crew mem-
 bers were apparently killed by the submarine's complement of highly trained infil-
 trators. In addition, the North Korean commandos killed nine members of the South
 Korean military, a police officer engaged in the search, and three civilian bystand-
 ers.
 On December 30, the DPRK made a formal announcement of regret for the inci-
 dent. The South Korean Government later returned the remains of the North Ko-
 rean. personnel to the DPRK through the Military Armistice Commission in Pan-
 munjom.
 
 
 b. Disappearance.-There is no reliable information on disappearances. However,
 the Government is reportedly responsible for such cases. According to defector re-
 ports, individuals suspected of political crimes are often taken from their homes by
 state security officials late at night and sent directly, without trial, to camps for po-
 litical prisoners. There are also many reports of DPRK involvement in the kidnaping
 abroad of South Koreans, Japanese, and other foreign nationals. The Japanese press
 estimates that, over the last 30 years, as many as 20 Japanese may have been kid-
 naped and are being detained in North Korea. In addition, several cases of kidnap-
 ing, hostage-taking, and other acts of violence apparently intended to intimidate
 ethnic Koreans living in China and Russia have been reported. For example, there
 is credible evidence that North Korea may have been involved in the abduction of
 a South Korean citizen working in China as a missionary. The DPRK denies this
 and other similar reports.
 Amnesty International (AI) reports detail a number of cases of disappearances in-
 cluding that of Japanese citizen Shibata Kozo and his wife Shin Sung Suk, who left
 Japan in 1960 and resettled in North Korea. Shibata was reportedly arrested in
 1962 after encouraging a demonstration by former Japanese residents against the
 poor treatment given them. In 1993 Al claimed that he was still in custody, and
 in poor health, and that there had been no word about his wife and three children
 since 1965. In June 1995, AI was informed by North Korean officials that Shibata
 Kozo, his wife, and children had died in a train accident in early 1990, a few weeks
 after he was released from nearly 30 years in prison. However, AI reports that
 Shibata Kozo was still in custody at the time of the alleged accident.
 In a case cited by AI in 1993, North Korean officials informed Amnesty in April
 1995 that Japanese citizens Cho Ho Pyong, his ethnic Japanese wife Koike Hideko,
 and their three young children were killed in 1972 while attempting to leave the
 country. The authorities told Al that Cho had escaped from a detention center
 where he was being held for spying, killing a guard in the process. The cases of
 three ethnic Korean residents of Beijing, C a (16, 18, and 20 years of age), re-
 ported by Al in 1995 to have been taken to North Korea against their will, remained
 unresolved. The three were taken in apparent retaliation for criticism of North Ko-
 rean human rights violations made by their father, a former prisoner in North
 Korea, on Japanese television and in the Japanese press. The.North Korean au-
 thorities deny this allegation, claiming that the three brothers had been deported
 to North Korea for breaking Chinese law, and that they are now living with rel-
 atives. AI has been unable to confirm this account, and at year's end was still con-
 cerned about the welfare of the three brothers.
 Numerous reports indicate that ordinary citizens are not allowed to mix with for-
 eign nationals, and AI has reported that a number of North Koreans who main-
 tained friendships with foreigners have disappeared. In at least one case, AI re-
 ported that a citizen who had disappeared was executed for maintaining a friend-
 ship with a Russian national.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 While there is no information on recent practices, credible reports indicate that pris-
 oners are ill-treated and that many have died from torture, disease, starvation, or
 exposure.
 Prison conditions are harsh. According to international nongovernmental organi-
 zations (NGO) and defector sources, whole families, including children, are impris-
 oned together. "Reeducation through labor" is common punishment, consisting of
 forced labor, such as logging and tending crops, under harsh conditions. A small
 number of people who claim to have escaped from detention camps report that star-
 vation and executions are common. In one prison, clothing was reportedly issued
 only once in 3 years. Former inmates have produced photograhs of an inmate
 wearing specially designed leg irons that permit walking but make running impos-
 sible. Al reports the existence of "punishment cells," too low to allow standing up-
 right and too small for lying down flat, where prisoners are kept for up to several
 weeks for breaking prison rules. Recent visitors to North Korea report observing
 prisoners being marched in leg irons, metal collars, or shackles. Al representatives
 recently were permitted to visit one model "rehabilitation center," but the Govern-
 ment does not normally permit inspection of prisons by human rights monitors.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-There are no restrictions on the ability
 of the Government to detain and imprison persons at will and to hold them incom-
 municado.
 Little information is available on North Korea's criminal justice procedures and
 practices, and outside observation of its legal system has been limited to "show
 trials" for traffic violations and other minor offenses.
 
 
 Family members and other concerned persons find it virtually impossible to ob-
 tain information on charges against detained persons. Judicial review of detentions
 does not exist in law or in practice.
 Defectors claim that North Korea detains about 150,000 persons for political rea-
 sons, sometimes along with their family members, in maximum security camps in
 remote areas. An October 1992 report by two former inmates made reference to se-
 vere living conditions in what they called "concentration camps." North Korean offi-
 cials deny the existence of such prison camps but admit that there are "education
 centers" for people who "commit crimes by mistake."
 One credible report lists 12 such prison camps in the DPRK. It is believed that
 some former high officials are imprisoned in the camps. Visitors were formerly al-
 lowed, but currently any form of communication with detainees, including visitors,
 is said to be prohibited.
 In July 1991, a North Korean defector who had been a ranking official in the
 DPRK Ministry of Public Security, said that there were two types of detention
 areas. One consists of closed camps where conditions are extremely harsh and from
 which prisoners never emerge. In the other, prisoners can be "rehabilitated."
 The Government is not known to use forced exile abroad. However, the Govern-
 ment routinely uses forced resettlement and has relocated many tens of thousands
 of people from Pyongyang to the countryside. Often, those relocated are selected on
 the basis of famiy background. Nonetheless, there is some evidence that class back-
 ground is less important than in the past because of the regime's emphasis on the
 solidarity of the  epula masses."
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The Constitution states that courts are independ-
 ent and that judicial proceedings are to be carried out in strict accordance with the
 law. The Constitution contains elaborate procedural guarantees, and it states that
 "cases are heard in public, and the accused is guaranteed the right to defense; hear-
 ings may be closed to the public as stipulated by law." However, an independent
 judiciary and individuai rights do not exist in the DPRK. The Public Security Min-
 istry dispenses with trials in political cases and refers defendants to the Ministry
 of State Security for imposition of punishment.
 When trials are held, lawyers are apparently assigned by the Government. Re-
 ports indicate that defense lawyers are not considered representatives of the ac-
 cused; rather, they are are expected to help the court by persuading the accused to
 confess guilt. Some reports note a distinction between those accused of political
 crimes and common criminals and state that the Government affords trials or law-
 yers only to the latter. The Government considers critics of the regime to be "politi-
 cal criminals."
 Numerous reports suggest that political offenses have in the past included such
 behavior as sitting on newspapers earing Kim II Sung's picture, or (in the case of
 a professor reportedly sentenced to work as a laborer) noting in class that Kim II
 Sung had received little formal education. A foreigner hired to work on foreign
 broadcasts for the regime was imprisoned for 1 year without trial for criticizing the
 quality of the regime's foreign propaganda. He was then imprisoned for 6 more
 years (with trial) shortly after his release for claiming in a private conversation that
 his original imprisonment was unjust. While AI has listed 58 political prisoners by
 name, the total number of political prisoners being held is unknown. Several defec-
 tors and former inmates reported that the total figure is approximately 150,000.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 constitutional stipulation that "citizens are guaranteed the inviolability of_person
 and residence and the privacy of correspondence" does not reflect reality. The re-
 gime subjects its citizens to rigid controls. The state leadership perceives most inter-
 national norms of human rights, and especially individual rights, as illegitimate and
 alien social artifacts subversive to the goals of the State and party. The Government
 relies upon an extensive, multilevel system of informers to identify critics and po-
 tential troublemakers. Whole communities are sometimes subjected to massive secu-
 rity checks. According to Kim Jong II, North Korean society represents "a new way
 of thinking" that cannot be evaluated on the basis of "old yardsticks" of human
 rights imported from abroad. In this context, the DPRK celebrates the closed nature
 of its society. The possession of "reactionary material" and listening to foreign
 broadcasts are both considered crimes that may subject the transgressor to harsh
 punishments. In some cases, entire families are punished for alleged political of-
 fenses committed by one member of the family.
 The regime justifies its dicatrship with argments derived from Marxist-Len-
 inist concepts of collective consciousness and the superiority of the collective over
 the individual, appeals to nationalism, and citations of "the Juche idea," a national
 ideology of self-reliance promulgated by Kim I1 Sung. The North Koreans emphasize
 that the core concept of Juche is "the ability to act independently without regard
 
 
 to outside interference." Originally described as "a creative application of Marxism-
 Leninism" in the Korean context, Juche is a malleable philosophy reinterpreted
 from time to time by the regime as its ideological needs change and used by the
 regime as a "spiritual" underpinning for its rule.
 As defined by Kim I1 Sung, Juche is a quasi-mystical concept in which the collec-
 tive will of the people is distilled into a supreme leader whose every act exemplifies
 the State and society's needs. Opposition to such a leader, or to the rules, regula-
 tions, and goals established by his regime, is thus in itself opposition to the national
 interest. The regime therefore claims a social interest in identifying and isolating
 all opposition.
 Since the late 1950's the regime has divided society into three main classes:
 "core," "wavering,* and "hostile. These 3 classes are further subdivided into over
 50 subcategories based on perceived loyalty to the party and the leadership. Secu-
 rity ratings are assigned to each individual; according to some estimates, as much
 as 50 percent of the population is designated as either "wavering" or "hostile." These
 loyalty ratings determine access to employment, higher education, place of resi-
 dence, medical facilities, and certain stores. They also affect the seventy of punish-
 ment in the case of legal infractions. While there are signs that this rigid system
 has been relaxed somewhat in recent years-for example, children of religious
 practioners are no longer automatically barred from higher education-it remains
 a basic element of North Korean society.
 Citizens with relatives who fled to South Korea at the time of the Korean War
 appear to be still classified as part of the "hostile class" in the DPRK's elaborate
 loyalty system. This subcategory alone encompasses a significant percentage of the
 North Korean population. One defector estimated that the class of those considered
 potentially hostile may comprise 25 to 30 percent of the population; others place the
 igre at closer to 20 percent. Members of this class are still subject to discrimina-
 tion, although a defector has claimed that their treatment has improved greatly in
 recent years.
 The authorities subject citizens in all age groups and occupations to intensive po-
 litical and ideological indoctrination. Even after Kim 11 Sung's death, his cult of per-
 sonality and the glorification of his family and the official Juche ideology remained
 omnipresent. The cult approaches the level of a state religion. The goal of indoc-
 trination remains to ensure loyalty to the Kim 1l Sung system and his son and heir
 Kim Jong 1R, as well as conformity to the State's ideology and authority. The neces-
 sity for the intensification of such indoctrination is repeatedly stressed in the
 writings of Kim Jong Il, who attributes the collapse of the Soviet Union largely to
 insufficient ideological indoctrination, compounded by the entry of foreign influ-
 ences.
 Indoctrination is carried out systematically, not only through the mass media, but
 also in schools and through worker and neighborhood associations. Kim Jong I has
 stated that ideological education must take precedence over academic education in
 the nation's schools, and he has also called for the intensification of mandatory ideo-
 logical study and discussion sessions for adult workers.
 Another aspect of the State's indoctrination system is the use of mass marches,
 rallies, and staged performances, sometimes involving hundreds of thousands of peo-
 ple. Celebrations of the 50th anniversary of the founding of the Korean Workers'
 Party included hours of carefully choreographed demonstration of mass adulation of
 the leadership, reportedly involving virtually the entire population of Pyongynag
 and outlying communities. Foreign visitors have been told that nonparticipation by
 Pyongyang residents in this event was unthinkable.
 The Government monitors correspondence and telephones. Telephones essentially
 are restricted to domestic operation although some international service is available
 on a very restricted basis (see Section 2.a.).
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-Articles of the Constitution that require citizens
 to follow "Socialist norms of life" and to obey a "collective spirit" take precedence
 over individual political or civil liberties. Athough the Constitution provides for
 freedom of speech and the press, the Government prohibits the exercise of these
 rights in practice. The regime permits only activities that support its objectives.
 The Government strictly curtails freedom of expression. The authorities may pun-
 ish persons for criticizing the regime or its policies by imprisonment or "corrective
 labor." One defector reported in 1986 that a scientist, whose home was bugged
 through his radio set, was arrested and executed for statements made at home criti-
 cal of Kim I1 Sung. In another case, AI reports that a family formerly resident in
 Japan was sent to a "reeducation through labor" center because one member of the
 family allegedly made remarks disparaging the Government.
 
 
 695
 The Government attempts to control all information. It carefully manages the vis-
 its of Western journalists. In July Cables News Network was allowed to broadcast
 live, unedited coverage of the second year memorial service for the death of Kim
 Il Sung. Domestic media censorship is strictly enforced, and no deviation from the
 official government line is tolerated.
 The regime prohibits listening to foreign media broadcasts except by the political
 elite, and violators are subject to severe punishment. Radios and television sets are
 built to receive only domestic programming, radios obtained from abroad must be
 submitted for alteration to operate in a similar manner. Private tele hone lines op-
 erate on an internal system that prevents making and receiving calls from outside
 the country. International phone lines are available under very restricted cir-
 cumstances.
 The Government severely restricts academic freedom and controls artistic and
 academic works. Visitors report that one of the primary functions of plays, movies,
 operas, children's performances, and books is to contribute to the cult of personality
 surrounding Kim II Sung and Kim Jong II.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly andAssociation.-Although the Constitution pro-
 vides for freedom of assembly and association, the Government does not respect
 these provisions in practice. The Government prohibits any public meetings without
 authorization. There are no known organizations other than those created by the
 Government. Professional associations exist primarily as another means of govern-
 ment monitoring and control over the members of these organizations.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The 1992 Constitution provides for the "freedom of reli-
 gious belief," including "the right to build buildings for religious use." However, the
 same article adds that "no one can use religion as a means to drag in foreign pow-
 ers" or to disrupt the social order. In practice, the regime discourages all organized
 religious activity except that which serves the interests of the State.
 As late as the early 1980's, foreign visitors were told that there were no churches
 in the country and only a handful of Buddhist temples. However, in recent years,
 the regime has allowed the formation of several government-sponsored religious or-
 ganizations. These serve as interlocutors with foreign church groups and inter-
 national aid organizations. Some foreigners who have met with representatives of
 these organizations are convinced that they are sincere believers; others claim that
 they appeared to know little about religious dogma, liturgy, or teaching.
 There are afew Buddhist temples where religious activity is permitted, and three
 Christian churches-two Protestant and one Catholic-have been opened since 1988
 in Pyongyang. Many visitors say that church activity appears staged. Foreign Chris-
 tians who have attempted to attend services at these churches without making prior
 arrangements with the authorities report finding them locked and unattended, even
 on Easter Sunday.
 The DPRK claims that there are 10,000 Christians who worship in 500 house
 churches, and the Chondogyo Young Friends Party, a government-sponsored group
 based on a native Korean religious movement, is still in existence. The authorities
 have told foreign visitors that one Protestant seminary exists, accepting six to nine
 pu ls every 3 years.
 Freedom of Moement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The regime strictly controls internal travel, requiring a travel pass for
 any movement outside one's home village. These passes are granted only for official
 travel or attendance at a relative's wedding or funeral. Long delays in obtaining the
 necessary permit often result in denial of the right to travel even for these limited
 purposes. There are reports that North Korea's recent food shortages have forced
 the regime to allow citizens increased mobility in order to seek food. As an addi-
 tional means of control, travelers must produce special "travelers coupons" to buy
 food on trains or at restaurants or shops. Only members of a very small elite have
 vehicles for personal use. The regime tightly controls access to civilian aircraft,
 trains, buses, food, and fuel.
 Reports, primarily from defectors, indicate that the Government routinely uses
 forced resettlement, particularly for those deemed politically unreliable. The Gov-
 ernment strictly controls permission to reside in, or even enter, Pyongyang. This is
 a significant lever, since food, housing, health, and general living conditions are
 much better in Pyongyang than in the rest of the country.
 The regime limits foreign travel to officials and trusted artists, athletes, academ-
 ics, and religious figures. It does not allow emigration. In recent years, the number
 of defectors has increased. The regime reportedly retaliates harshly against the rel-
 atives of those who manage to escape. According to the Penal Code, defection and
 attempted defection (including the attempt to gain entry to a foreign embassy for
 the purpose of seeking political asylum) are capital crimes. Defectors and other
 sources report that involuntarily repatriated defectors are routinely executed. Fol-
 
 
 696
 lowing the collapse of European communism, the regime pulled back several thou-
 sand students from overseas. It no longer allows students to study abroad except
 in China and a few other places.
 From 1959 to 1982, 93,000 Korean residents of Japan, including 6,637 Japanese
 wives, voluntarily repatriated to North Korea. Despite DPRK assurances that the
 wives, more than a third of whom still had Japanese citizenship, would be allowed
 to visit Japan every 2 or 3 years, none is known to have done so. Many have not
 been heard from since, and their relatives and friends in Japan have been unsuc-
 cessful in their efforts to gain information about their condition and whereabouts.
 Although the DPRK has permitted an increasing number of overseas Korean resi-
 dents of North America, Japan, China, and other countries to visit their relatives
 in North Korea over the past decade, most requests for such visits are still denied.
 Many foreign visitors to the April 1995 International Pyongyang Sports Festival re-
 ported that they were denied permission to visit or otherwise contact their relatives,
 even those who lived only a few miles from Pyongyang.
 Although the DPRK is a member of the United Nations, it does not participate
 in international refugee forums, and it is not in contact with the U.N. High Coin-
 missioner for Refugees.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens have no right or mechanisms to change their leadership or government.
 The political system is completely dominated by the KWP, with Kim I1 Sung's heir
 Kim Jong I in full control There is very little reliable information available on
 intraregime politics following Kim 11 Sung's death. The legislature, the Supreme
 People's Assembly, which meets only a few days a year, serves only to rubber-stamp
 resolutions presented to it by the party leadership.
 In an effort to create the appearance of democracy, the DPRK has created several
 "minority parties." Lacking grass roots organizations, they exist only as rosters of
 officials with token representation in the Supreme People's Assembly. Their primary
 purpose appears to be promoting government objectives abroad as touring par-
 liamentarians. Free elections do not exist, and Kim Jong I1 has criticized the concept
 of free elections and competition among political parties as an artifact of capitalist
 decay.
 Elections to the Supreme People's Assembly and to provincial, city, and county as-
 semblies are held irregularly, In all cases there is only one government-approved
 candidate in each electoral district. According to the media, over 99 percent of the
 voters turn out to elect 100 percent of the candidates approved by the KWP. The
 vast majority of the KWP's estimated 3 million members (in a population of 22 mil-
 lion) work to implement decrees formulated by the party's small elite.
 Few women have reached high levels of the party or the Government.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 The Government does not permit any independent domestic organizations to mon-
 itor human rights conditions or to comment on violations of such rights. Although
 a North Korean Human Rights Committee was established in 1992, it denies the
 existence of any human rights violations in North Korea and is merely a propa-
 ganda arm of the regime. However, by offering international human rights organiza-
 tions an identifiable official interlocutor, the Committee has helped increase their
 ability to enter into two-way communication with the regime.
 In April a delegation from Al visited the DPRK and discussed legal reforms and
 prisoner cases with senior government officials. The Government has ignored re-
 quests for visits by other international human rights organizations.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution grants equal rights to all citizens. However, in practice the Gov-
 ernment denies its citizens most fundamental human rights.
 Women.-There is no information available on violence against women.
 The Constitution states that "women hold equal social status and rights with
 men." However, although women are represented proportionally in the labor force,
 few women have reached high levels of the party or the Government. In many small
 factories, the work force is predominantly female. Like men, working-age women
 must work. They are thus required to leave their preschool children in the care of
 elderly relatives or in state nurseries. However, according to the Constitution,
 women with large families are guaranteed shortened working hours.
 Children.-Social norms reflect traditional, family centered values in which chil-
 dren are cherished. The State provides compulsory education for all children until
 
 
 the age of 15. There is no evidence of societal or familial abuse of children. However,
 some children are denied educational opportunities and subjected to other punish-
 ments and disadvantages as a result of the loyalty classification system and the
 principle of "collective retribution" for the transgressions of their parents (see Sec-
 tion 1.1).
 Like others in society, children are the object of intense political indoctrination;
 even mathematics textbooks propound the party line. In addition, foreign visitors
 and academic sources report that children are subjected to several hours a week of
 mandatory military training and indoctrination at their schools from an early age.
 School children are sometimes sent to work in factories or in the fields for short pe-
 riods to assist in completing pecial prjects or in meeting production goals.
 People With Disabilities.-Traditiona social norms condone discrimination against
 the physically disabled. Disabled persons are almost never seen within the city lim-
 its of  yonyang, and several defectors and other former North Korea residents re-
 port that disabld persons are routinely assigned to the rural areas. According to
 one report, authorities check every 2 to 3 years in the capital for persons with de-
 formities and relocate them to special facilities in the countryside. There are no le-
 gaily mandated prvisions for accessibility to buildings or government services for
 the disabled.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Assoiation.-vNongovernmental labor unions do not exist. The Ko-
 rean Workers' Party purports to represent the interests of all labor. There is a sin-
 gle labor o   rnization, called the General Federation of Trade Unions of Korea,
 which is afiated with the formerly Sviet-contrlled World Federation of Trade
 Unions. Operating under this umbrella, unions function on the classic "Stalinist
 model," with responsibility for mobilizing workers behind production goals and for
 providing health, education, cultural, and welfare facilities. They do not have the
 right to strike. North Korea is not a member of, but has observer status with, the
 International Labor Organization.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectiely.-Workers have no right to or-
 ganize or to bargain collectively. Wages are set by government ministries. The State
 assigns all jobs. Ideological purity is as important as professional competence in de-
 ciding who receives a particular job, and foreign companies that have established
 oint ventures report that all their employees must be hired from lists submitted
 iy the KWP. Factory and farm workers are organized into councils, which do have
 an impact on management decisions.
 c. Prohibition of Forcd or Compulsory Labor.-There is no prohibition on the use
 of forced or compulsory labor, and the Government routinely uses military
 conscripts for construction projects. "Reformatory labor" and "reeducation through
 labor" are common punishments for political offenses. AI reports that forced labor,
 such as logging and tending crops, is common among prisoners. School children are
 assigned to factories or farms for short periods to help meet production goals (see
 Section 5).
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-According to the Constitution, the
 State prohibits work by children under the age of 16 years. As education is univer-
 sal and mandatory until the age of 15, it is believed that this reglation is enforced;
 however, as noted an ye school children are assigned to factories or farms for short
 periods to help meet production gala.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Cork.-hThe Constitution states that all working-age
 citizens must participate in work and "strictly observe labor discipline and working
 hours." The Penal Code states that anyone who hampers the nation's industry, com-
 meree, or transportation by intentionally failing to carry out a specific assignment
 "while pretending to be functioning normally" is subject to the death penalty; it also
 states that anyone who "shoddily caries out" an assigned duty is subject to no less
 than 5 years' imprisonment.
 Even persistent tardiness maybe defined as "anti-Socialist wrecking" under these
 articles, although as a result of food shortages absenteeism has reportedly become
 widespread as more time is spent finding food. A DPRK ofcial described the North
 Korean labor force to an audience of foreign business executives by noting that
 "therere e no riots, no strikes, and no differences of opinion" with management.
 The minimum wage for workers in North Korea's Free Economic and Trade Zone
 (FETZ) is $80 (about 168 won) a month; in foreign-owned and joint venture enter-
 prises outside  e FETZ the minimum wage is reportedly $110 (about 231 won) per
 month; no data is available on the minimum wage in state-owned industries. Until
 the increasing food shortages of recent years, wages and rations appeared to be ade-
 quate to support workers and their families at a basic subsistence level. Wages are
 not the primary form of compensation since the State provides all educational and
 
 
 698
 medical needs free of charge, while most goods are distributed according to a ration-
 ing system, and only token rent is charged.
 In 1994 new labor regulations for enterprises involving foreign investments were
 reportedly adopted by the Administration Council. The regulations on labor con-
 tracts set out provisions on the employment and dismissal of workers, technical
 training, workhours, rest periods, remuneration, labor protection, social security,
 fines for violations of regulations, and settlement of disputes.
 The Constitution stipulates an 8-hour workday; however, several sources report
 that most laborers work 12 to 16 hours daily. Some of this additional time may rep-
 resent mandatory study of the writings of K II Sung and Kim Jong Il. The Con-
 stitution provides all citizens with a "right to rest," including paid leave, holidays,
 and access to sanitariums and rest homes funded at public expense. Many worksites
 are hazardous, and the rate of industrial accidents is high.
