 DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF KOREA'
 The Democratic People's Republic of Korea (DPRK), formed in
 1948 during the Soviet administration of the northern half of
 the Korean peninsula, is a Communist dictatorship maintained
 by the ruling Korean Workers' (Communist) Party (KWP), with
 its overriding aim of retaining absolute power and enforcing
 unanimous popular support for the country's governing system
 and its leader, Kim Il Sung. Individual rights are entirely
 subordinated to the KWP. Pro forma elections to the Supreme
 People's Assembly were held in November 1986, but the
 Government allows no genuinely free elections.
 The North Korean regime subjects its people to rigid
 controls. In a society professing to be "classless," there
 are strong indications that a de facto, anachronistic caste
 system has developed. The State establishes security ratings
 for each person; these ratings determine access to jobs,
 schools, medical facilities, and stores as well as admission
 to the KWP, the route to the highest levels and privileges of
 the society. The party, government, and military elite enjoy
 significant economic privileges unavailable to the people,
 such as access to special stores and medical facilities;
 better housing, and better education.
 The Government, through its centralized economy, has been able
 to provide a basic, if Spartan, standard of living for its
 people. Despite some modest economic progress, however, North
 Korea remains a less-developed country with a stagnating
 standard of living and a worsening balance of payments problem.
 No evidence suggests that North Korea has improved its
 extremely poor human rights performance. Both short- and
 long-term trends indicate continued one-family rule with scant
 respect for basic human rights and human dignity. The regime
 severely punishes "crimes against the State." The Government
 imprisons or, more often, exiles to remote villages with their
 entire families, persons who fail to conform to the dictates
 of the State. The atavistic belief that personS are guilty by
 association,-that entire families share in the guilt of
 alleged enemies of the State, plays a dominant role in
 administering punishment. Surveillance-by informers is
 prevalent. The authorities allow no outside information other
 than that approved and disseminated by the Government to reach
 the general public, although senior government officials are
 somewhat better informed-
 President Kim Il Sung'S'14-year effort to groom his son, Kim
 Chong Il, as his successor testifies to the enormous power the
 elder Kim has amassed during 39 years of rule. The younger
 Kim has been elevated to several senior party positions during
 *The United States has no diplomatic relations with the
 Democratic People's Republic of Korea (DPRK). North Korea
 forbids representatives of governments that do have relations
 with it, as well as journalists and other invited visitors,
 the freedom of movement that would enable them to assess
 effectively human rights conditions there. Most of this
 report, therefore, is a repeat of previous human rights
 reports based on information obtained over a period of time
 extending from well before 1987. While limited in scope and
 detail, the information is indicative of the-human rights
 situation in North Korea today.
 
 
 722
 DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF KOREA
 the last few years. An absence of public debate about the
 succession also suggests a lack of real popular participation
 in,-the political process.
 RESPECTFOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Sectio , 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 - Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 Little information is available on whether politically
 motivated killing occurs in North Korea. The regime, according
 to severaldefectors, has summarily executed certain political
 criminals.
 b. Disappearance
 There is no information available on disappearance.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 According to the Freedom House 1985-86 Report, "torture is
 reportedly eommon" in North Korea. The accounts of torture.
 and beatings of crew members of the USS Pueblo after their
 capture in 1968 are well-knownand documented. Another
 reliable squrceoon prison conditions and treatment of -
 prisoners in North. Foreais Venexuelan poet Ali Lameda, whom
 the authorities detained from September 1967 through 1974,
 allegedly for attpmptedxsabotage ancd espionage. While
 physical torture :as not used on Lameda, he states-that Korean
 prisonprs were routinely.-beaten. Lameda notes that "beating
 was alsoused as a means of persuasion during interrogation."
 Lameda reports the use of deprivation of food to force
 "confessions," as well as sglitary.confinement, continuous
 interrogation, enforced waking periods, poor..or nonexistent
 medical treatment, and 12 hours of forced labor per day. In
 addition, the regime denigs-priaoners family visits, parcels,-
 correspondence, writing m~teri-l, newspapers,,.and clothing
 changes. The Government regards prisoners as.-having no rights.
 Much of whatLameda hasreportedbas-been corroborated by Choi
 Un-Wui and her husband, Shin Sang-Ok (hereinafter referred to
 as the Shins), the Korean film producer and actress, who
 reportedly were kidnaped by North.Korean.operatives and.who-
 left-North.Korea in,1986. Although Shin witnessed no beatings
 during hip incarceration, he heard repeatedhstories of such
 treatment.LShin pesonally experienced many of ,the other
 forms of torture mentioned by Lameda, including denial of
 sleep, starvation rations, and solitary confinement, as well
 as being required to sit motionless for long pefiods of time.
 d. -Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, EExile, or Forced Labor
 Information on specific criminal.justice procedures and
 practices in. North Korea is. extremely scarce North Korea has
 refused to permit outside observation of .its legal system and
 practices. The accounts provided by the crew members of the
 USS Pueblo, Lameda, and the Shins comprise virtually all the
 specific information available on the operation of the
 criminal justice Iystemin North Korea.
 
 
 723
 DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF KOREA
 North Korean law provides that prisoners may be held for
 interrogation for a period not to exceed 2 months. This
 period may be extended indefinitely, however, if the
 Interrogation Department obtains approval of the Chief
 Prosecutor. Lameda states that he was detained for 12 months
 without trial or charge. Government authorities ridiculed his
 request for a lawyer of his choice and an open trial as
 "bourgeois." Shin notes that it is very difficult for family
 members or other concerned individuals to obtain information
 regarding charges being leveled against an accused person or
 even where an accused person is being detained. Habeas corpus
 or its equivalent d6es not exist 4ni law or in practice.
 According to newspaper reports, North Korean defectors in
 South Korea estimate that in 1982 the regime was holding at
 least 105,000 "ideological offenders" in 8 major labor camps.
 The Shins believe this estimate to be understated (some
 estimates range as high as 150,000 detainees) and state that
 the plight of political prisoners has worsened over the last
 few years. As one example, the Shins note that 10 years ago
 the authorities allowed political prisoners family visitors
 and gifts, but now deny both. The Shins further report that
 the Government punishes the families of political detainees
 for the political beliefs of their relatiVes. It is not
 unusual, according to the Shins; for the State to banish
 entire families to outlying rural regions. Amnesty
 International has received unconfirmed reports of arrests of
 those opposed to heir appareht Kim Chong Il.
 There is no prohibition on the use of forced or compulsory
 labor. The Government- routinely uses military conscripts for
 forced labor. RecenE North Korean announcements that it has
 demobilized large numbers of troops may signify little more
 than that the regime is using those troops as a source of
 cheap, easily exploited labor for major construction projects.
 The Shins report that -conscripts are not told where they will
 serve or for how long. Amnesty International's 1987 Report
 cites reports that some "political prisoners" were reportedly
 sentenced to "corrective labor" which-could be served at a
 person's normal workplace (working for part or no wages) or at
 work in agriculture or mining in areas where conditions are
 very harsh.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The DPRK Constitution states that courts are independent and
 that judicial proceedings are to be carried out in strict
 accordance with the law. All courts, however, are responsible
 to the people's assemblies, which effectively provide arbitrary
 government control of the judiciary.' Article 138 states that
 "cases are heard in public, and the accused is gdaranteed the
 right to defense; hearings may be closed to the public as
 stipulated by law." Lameda claims that he was denied a public
 trial, as does Shin. Lameda reports that after his first
 arrest, the regime imprisoned him for a year without a hearing;
 after his second arrest, he was put through a closed session
 without benefit of counsel of his choice, or even knowledge of
 the charges. His tribunal was under the direction of the
 Ministry of Internal Security, with one person serving as both
 judge and prosecutor.
 The regime did n6t allow Lameda the right to speak out (other
 than to admit guilt) or to defend himself. His "defense
 counsel" represented him by making-a lengthy speech praising
 
 
 724
 DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF KOREA
 Kim Il Sung and then requesting a 20-year sentence, which the
 tribunal imposed after 5 minutes of deliberation.
 In a 1979 interviewwith American'journalist John Wallach,
 North Korean SupremeoCourt Justice Li Chun Uk noted that the
 defense counsel's job is "to give the suspect due punishment."
 Open court appears to consist of an announcement of the .term
 of imprisonment, which has already been determined by the
 Provincial Safety Bureau.
 The Shins note a-distinction between political and common
 criminals, asserting that the State only affords the latter
 trials. North Korea equates "political criminals" with those
 who criticize the regime. Other reports suggest that
 political offenses r-ange from sabotage to failing to applaud
 appropriately at political rallies.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The regime subjects the people to a pervasive program of
 indoctrination-designed to shape And control individual
 consciousness. Preschool,.children are drilled in homage to,
 Kim Il Sung and his family, while ypuths and adults are
 required to participate in daily ideological training
 conducted during school or-at places of qmployment.
 Approximately half the school day is devoted to indoctrination.
 This is also provided by government-organized neighborhood
 units for persons who neither work nor go to school. The
 daily indoctrination requires rote recitation of party maxims
 and policies and strives for ideological purity. Multiple
 North Korean security organizations enforce these controls.
 According to reports in South Korean journals, the Government
 prevents 0apanese wives of Koreans repatriated from Japan
 since 1959 from~viiit ing Japan. Because their letters are
 subject to strict censorship, many have lost contact with
 their-families. Some reports suggest that the Government
 discriminates against these Japanese wives in other ways,
 including access to jobs.
 Although the Constitution states that "citizens are guaranteed
 the inviolability of person and residence and the privacy of
 correspondence," practice is otherwise. Lameda reports the
 privacy of his residence was violated and listening devices
 used against him. When the authorities arrested him, they
 seized and destroyed without warrant all his collected papers
 and poetry.
 According to the Shins, electronic surveillance of residences
 is pervasive and it is comm6n.practice for neighbors to report
 on one another. In school, the authorities encourage children
 to discuss what their parents have said at home. The
 Government conducts monthly "sanitation" inspections to check
 on hqusehold activities. Each house is required to have
 portraits of Kim Il Sung and Kim Chong I1.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Although the Constitution states that "citizens have the
 freedoms of speech, the press, assembly, association, and
 demonstration," the regime permits such activities only in
 support of government objectives. Other articles of the
 
 
 725
 DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF KOREA
 Constitution that require citizens to follow the "Socialist
 norms of life" and to obey a "collective spirit" take
 precedence over individual political or civil liberties.
 Amnesty International in its 1987 Report stated that a range
 of sources continued to allege that the rights of freedom of
 expression and association guaranteed under the International
 Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, to which North Korea
 acceded in 1981, were strictly curtailed. According to these
 reports, persons criticizing the President or his policies
 were liable to punishment by imprisonment or "corrective
 labor."
 Foreign media are excluded, domestic media censorship is
 enforced, and no deviation from the official government line
 is tolerated. The regime prohibits listening to foreign media
 broadcasts except by high government officials, and violators
 reportedly are subject to severe punishment. Most urban
 households have a radio and some have television, but reception
 is limited to domestic programming. The Government controls
 artistic and academic works, and visitors report that the
 primary function of plays, movies, operas, and books is to
 contribute to the cult of personality surrounding "the great
 leader," Kim Il Sung, and "the beloved leader," Kim Chong Il.
 The Shins, who made a number of movies at the behest of the
 North Korean leadership, state that movie producers have
 political advisers who ensure the ideological purity of the
 final product. Actors must undergo background investigations
 prior to obtaining a role. They also undergo constant
 indoctrination.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 The Government has developed a pervasive system of informers
 throughout the society. No public meetings can be held
 without government authorization. There appear to be no
 organizations other than those created by the Government. The
 state even prohibits apolitical groups such as neighborhood or
 alumni organizations. Trade unions and professional
 associations exist solely as another method of government
 control over the members of these organizations. There are no
 effective rights to organize, bargain collectively, or strike.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Although the Constitution provides that "citizens have
 religious liberty and the freedom of antireligious
 propaganda," the regime, in fact, has severely persecuted
 Christians and Buddhists since the late 1940's. No churches
 have been rebuilt since the Korean Wak. The regime uses
 religious organizational facades to proclaim the practice of
 religious freedom, but appears to have long since purged the
 original membership. The regime discriminates against persons
 whose family or relatives once had a strong religious
 involvement. Several reports suggest that the Government does
 not currently persecute the very small number of Christians
 who continue to worship at home, although the state strictly
 prohibits public worship.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 The DPRK regime strictly controls internal travel, requiring a
 travel pass for any movement outside one's home village; these
 passes are granted only for required official or certain
 
 
 726
 DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF KOREA
 personal travel. Personal travel is usually limited to
 attending the wedding or funeral of a close relative. Long
 delays in obtaining the necessary permit often result in
 denial of the right to travel even for these limited purposes.
 State control of internal travel is also ensured by a ration
 system that distributes coupons valid only in the region
 issued.
 Reports, primarily from defectors, indicate that forced
 resettlement, particularly for those deemed politically
 unreliable, is common. Permission to reside in, or even
 enter, Pyongyang, the capital, is strictly controlled.
 Foreign travel is limited to officials or trusted artists and
 performers. The regime allows no emigration, and few refugees
 or defectors succeed in fleeing the country. The regime
 retaliates against the relatives of those few persons who
 manage to, escape. According to Freedom House, "rights to
 travel internally and externally are perhaps the most
 restricted in the world: tourism is unknown--even to
 Communist countries."
 In 1959 North Korea began actively encouraging Korean
 residents overseas to repatriate to "the Fatherland." Some
 observers estimate that during the next several years over
 100,000 overseas Koreans, almost all from Japan, voluntarily
 repatriated to North Korea. Since then, however, reports of
 the harsh treatment given repatriates has reached overseas
 Koreans, reducing~the flow to a trickle. Because of their
 "corruption" by exposure to foreign influences, repatriates
 are isolated from North Korean society until they can be
 indoctrinated and theiT ideological reliability gauged.
 North Korea has permitted entry to some overseas Korean
 residents to visit their -elatives, and several have made
 repeat visits.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 There, is no mechanism by which the citizenry as a whole can
 effect transitions in leadership or changes in government.
 The political system in North Korea is dominated by Kim Ii
 Sung, who leads the KWP and also heads the Government. Kim
 has groomed his son Kim Chong Il to succeed him. Over the
 last few years Kim Chong 1l has been acquiring increasing
 power and influence. The legislature, the Supreme People's
 Assembly, has never taken any action other than unanimous
 passage of resolutions presented to it by the leadership. In
 an effort to create an appearance of democracy, the DPRK has
 created several "minority parties." They exist only as
 rosters of officials who have token representation in the
 People's Assembly and completely support the government line.
 Free elections do not exist in North Korea. Although
 elections to the Supreme People's Assembly were held in
 November 1986, and to city and county assemblies in March
 1983, in all cases the Government approved only one candidate
 in each electoral district. According to the government-
 controlled media, 100 percent of the voters turned out to
 elect 100 percent of the approved candidates. Such
 "elections" are an exercise in which people are forced to
 participate and to approve the Government's candidate.
 
 
 727
 DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF KOREA
 Most citizens have no meaningful participation in the
 political process. To achieve even a semblance of real
 participation, one must become a member of the KWP. The
 selection process for entrance to the party is long and
 rigorous. Persons from "bad social backgrounds," (those who
 have relatives who fled south during the Korean War, those
 whose families had strong religious involvement or were once
 property owners or members of the middle class, and those who
 have relatives who are political prisoners), are effectively
 denied entry into the party. Most levels of.the party have no
 voice, serving only to carry out the decrees and "on the spot
 guidance" promulgated by party leader Kim Il Sung and his top
 subordinates.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 No organizations exist within-North Korea to report on or
 observe human rights violations. North Korea participates in
 no international or regional human rights organizations.
 Amnesty International has requested permission to visit North
 Korea. The Government has neither responded to nor
 acknowledged the request. A December 1982 request by Amnesty
 International for information on North Korean laws, on use of
 the death penalty, and on reports of arrests and long-term
 imprisonment of political figures also received no reply.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 The Constitution states that "women hold equal social status
 and rights with men.." However, few women have reached high
 levels of the party or theGovernment. Women are represented
 proportionally in the labor force, and personnel.in small
 factories are predominantly women.
 The regime discriminates against the physically handicapped.
 Handicapped persons, other than war veterans, are reportedly
 not allowed within thecity limits of Pyongyang. The dwarf
 community has been specifically singled out for harsh
 treatments all members of it have .been banished to a remote,
 rural region.
 North Korea is a homogeneous country and relatively devoid of
 minority groups.
 CONDITIONS OF LABOR
 No data are available on minimum age for employment of
 children, minimum wages, or oc6upational safety and health.
 .The State assigns-all jobs; ideological purity, rather than
 professional competence, is the standard used in deciding who
 receives a particular job. Laborers have no input into
 management decisions and free labor unions do not exist.
 Absence from work without a doctor's certificate results in a
 reduction in a worker's rations. The Constitution stipulates
 a workday limited to 8 hours, but several sources report that
 most laborers work 12-16 hour days. The regime's propaganda
 euphemistically refers to these extra hours as "patriotic
 labor" done on a "voluntary" basis by the workers.
 
 
 728
