North Korea
The government of North Korea (The Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, DPRK) remains among the world’s most repressive governments.
Leader Kim Jong Il has ruled with an iron fist and a bizarre cult
of personality since his father, former President Kim Il Sung, died in
1994. Virtually every aspect of political, social, and economic life is controlled
by the government. Although North Korea has acceded to the
International Covenants on Civil and Political Rights and on Economic,
Social, and Cultural Rights, it routinely and egregiously violates nearly
all international human rights standards.
Basic services, such as access to health care and education, are parceled
out according to a classification scheme that divides people into three
groups—“core,” “wavering,” and “hostile”—based on the government’s
assessment of their and their family’s political loyalty. There is no freedom
of the press or religion. The judiciary is neither impartial nor
independent. There is no organized political opposition, no labor
activism, and no independent civil society.
No human rights organization has direct access to the country for
research or investigation. Human Rights Watch has documented
abysmal human rights conditions through interviews with refugees and
escapees from prison camps.
According to U.S. and South Korean officials, up to 200,000 political
prisoners are believed to be toiling in prisons, while non-political prisoners,
the number of which is unknown, are also mistreated and endure
at times appalling prison conditions.
North Korea’s deadly famine in the 1990s reportedly killed as many as
two million people. Hundreds of thousands of North Koreans crossed
the border into China for both political and economic reasons and
many now live in hiding from North Korean agents who capture and repatriate them for the “crime” of leaving their country or from
Chinese authorities who categorize them as illegal immigrants and
forcibly return them to North Korea. Humanitarian groups working in
China also report a worsening problem of trafficking of North Korean
women. Many are abducted or duped into forced marriages, prostitution
or outright sexual slavery, while some voluntarily enter such servitude
to survive or make money. Chinese authorities also routinely
harass aid workers providing assistance to these refugees. Repatriated
North Koreans can face detention, torture, and even execution.
Freedom of Press and Religion
There is no freedom of the press in North Korea. All media are either
run or controlled by the state. All TVs and radios are fixed so that they
can transmit only state channels. The simple act of watching or listening
to the foreign press—or tampering with TVs or radios for this purpose—
is a crime that carries harsh punishment. All publications are subject
to supervision and censorship by the state. There is no freedom of
religion. All prayers and religious studies are supervised by the state,
and often used for state propaganda. Independent worship is not
allowed.
North Korean refugees who recently escaped the country have said that
more knowledge of the outside world is slowly spreading by word of
mouth from residents who watch Chinese TV channels despite the risk
of being arrested.
Refugees
Thousands of North Koreans escape to South Korea every year, a small
number compared to those seeking refuge in China. The vast majority
of North Korean refugees in China crossed the border without state
permission, which is required under North Korean law for travel for
any purpose inside the country or abroad. Although the restriction on movement has reportedly become more relaxed inside the country,
authorities still consider it an act of treason to leave North Korea without
permission.
If repatriated, North Korean refugees are interrogated by North
Korean police who often use torture to extract “confessions.” If they are
found to have crossed the border only once just to find food, they are
usually released. However, if they are found to be “repeat offenders” or
have had contact with westerners or South Koreans while in China,
especially missionaries, they become subject to harsh punishments
including terms in forced labor camps.
In the fall of 2004, hundreds of North Korean refugees were flown
from Southeast Asia to Seoul via Vietnam. North Korea demanded that
they be repatriated back to North Korea, accusing South Korea of kidnapping
the refugees, and stopped all government-level talks. South
Korea accepts thousands of North Korean refugees for resettlement
every year, far more than any other country that legally admits North
Korean refugees.
Detention and Torture
Those arrested in North Korea are divided into different categories,
depending on the seriousness of their “crime,” and sent to one of the
corresponding prison facilities. All individuals held in North Korean
prisons are subjected to forced labor. No legal counsel is provided or
allowed throughout the process. Those who are sent to prison face
cruel, inhuman, and degrading treatment; many die in prison because of
mistreatment, malnutrition, and lack of medical care. Torture appears to
be endemic.
Death Penalty
Under North Korea’s penal code, premeditated murder and so-called
anti-state crimes such as treason, sedition, and acts of terrorism are
punishable by death. During the famine in the mid-1990s, the North
Korean regime added another crime to the list: theft of food. Numerous
eyewitness accounts by North Korean refugees have detailed how executions
are carried out publicly, often at crowded market places, and in
the presence of children.
Right to Education and Work
North Korea’s politically determined classification system restricts nearly
all aspects of education, labor, and health care. Although all North
Korean children are required to attend school for eleven years, it is generally
children of the “core” group who are allowed to advance to college
and hold prominent occupations. Those belonging to “wavering”
or “hostile” groups have very limited or no choice in education or work.
Since the famine, even the compulsory education system is barely functioning
in many parts of the country, as many teachers and students
spend more time trying to find food than in classrooms. North Korea
advertises itself as a workers’ heaven, and has numerous trade unions in
all industrial sectors, but the unions are all controlled by the state.
Strikes and collective bargaining are illegal, as are all independently
organized labor activities.
Discrimination in Medical Care
Access to medical care is also strictly based on the class system, as hospitals
admit and treat patients depending on their social background.
While hospitals for the elite class are equipped with modern medicine
and facilities, those for the rest of the population often lack even very
basic supplies such as bandages or antibiotics. Many North Korean citizens, especially children, suffer from diseases that can be easily treated.
According to testimonies from North Korean refugees, doctors at many
hospitals are forced to conduct surgeries without anesthesia and recycle
needles and bandages.
Civil Society
There is no organized political opposition in North Korea. The ruling
Workers’ Party controls the parliament, which has only symbolic power,
and all other smaller parties are pro-government and state-controlled.
There are no independent nongovernmental organizations of any kind,
including human rights organizations. State elections are held periodically,
but all candidates are state candidates. Voting is openly monitored
by state officials, and results in an almost 100 percent voting rate and
100 percent approval rate.
Expression of dissent against government policy or doctrines is considered
a serious offense against the state. For political crimes, whether
actual or perceived, collective punishment of entire families is the norm.
Even when the family members of political offenders are not sent to
prison, their choice of schools, residence, and jobs becomes severely
restricted, potentially for generations.
Key International Actors
North Korea’s relationship with the international community is seriously
complicated by its self-proclaimed possession of nuclear weapons and
its dismal record on human rights and economic development. In this
atmosphere, North Korea’s major international interlocutors are its
immediate neighbors, South Korea and China, both of which wish to
avoid a major humanitarian catastrophe on the Korean peninsula, and
Japan and the United States, which seek to curb North Korea’s nuclear
threat.
In late September 2004, North Korea announced that it had created
nuclear weapons “to serve as a deterrent against increasing U.S. nuclear
threats.” Six nations—North Korea, South Korea, the United States,
China, Russia and Japan—have been holding talks for years with little
result to address North Korea’s nuclear weapons program.
In the summer the same year, the United Nations Commission on
Human Rights appointed Vitit Muntarbhorn, a Thai academic, as
Special Rapporteur on North Korea. The move came after the
Commission adopted a resolution for the second straight year calling on
North Korea to respect basic human rights. North Korea has largely
shunned talks with U.N. human rights experts, and has yet to engage in
dialogue with Muntarbhorn.
In an unprecedented move, two members of the Committee on the
Rights of the Child were able to visit North Korea in 2004. During
their visit, they highlighted mistreatment of children returned from
China, as well as issues of economic exploitation, trafficking, and juvenile
justice, including cases of torture.
Separately, North Korea has been aggressively pursuing better diplomatic
relations and foreign investment. In the latest move, North Korea
invited British Foreign Office Minister Bill Rammell to Pyongyang in
September 2004 to discuss its nuclear weapons program and human
rights record. According to Rammell, North Korean officials admitted
that Pyongyang attaches little importance to human rights and confirmed
the existence of labor camps for “re-education,” a small step forward
from previous blanket denials of any human rights abuse.
In October, the U.S. Congress passed and the president signed into law
the North Korea Human Rights Act of 2004, calling for more Koreanlanguage
radio broadcasts into North Korea and increased funding for
nongovernmental organizations that promote “human rights, democracy,
rule of law and the development of a market economy.”