North Korea
Human rights conditions in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea (North
Korea) remain dire. There is no organized political opposition, independent labor
unions, free media, or civil society. Arbitrary arrest, detention, and lack of due
process remain serious concerns.
North Korea runs large prison camps where hundreds of thousands of its citizens—
including children—are enslaved in deplorable conditions. Periodically, the
government publicly executes individuals for stealing state property, hoarding
food, and other “anti-socialist” crimes. There is no freedom of religion.
Individuals who leave the country without state permission are often considered
traitors and can face lengthy prison terms and possible execution upon return.
Ahead of and during the Beijing Olympic Games, China stepped up the arrest and
repatriation of North Korean refugees and migrants.
Officials in Washington and Seoul said leader Kim Jong Il was believed to have
suffered a stroke in September 2008. Because Kim Jong Il wields such extensive
power, his failing health, if true, could have far-reaching consequences for human
rights and governance in North Korea.
Right to Food
While the nationwide famine of the 1990s has not returned, food shortages persist
and the country’s vulnerable population suffered another hungry year in
2008. Non-elite members of society now purchase their food and necessities at
markets that have replaced the largely defunct ration system. Only a small minority
of the population, mostly high-ranking members of the Workers’ Party and the
security and intelligence forces, still receive regular rations.
Food prices in North Korea continued to rise in 2008, although not as steeply as
in 2007, while experts on North Korea’s agriculture industry offered widely different
assessments of the extent of food shortages.
North Koreans in China
Hundreds of thousands of North Koreans fled to China in the 1990s. Many settled
in the Yanbian Korean Autonomous Prefecture in eastern Jilin Province, near
China’s border with North Korea. As a state party to the 1951 Refugee Convention,
China has an obligation to offer protection to refugees, but Beijing categorically
labels North Koreans in China “illegal” economic migrants and routinely repatriates
them. As noted above, the consequences for returnees can be severe.
North Korean women who live with Chinese men in de facto marriages—even if
they have lived in China for years—are not entitled to legal residence and remain
vulnerable to arrest and repatriation. Some North Korean women and girls are
abducted or duped into marriage or prostitution in China.
Ahead of and during the August 2008 Olympic Games in Beijing, Chinese police
arrested and repatriated many North Koreans from Yanbian. While no official statistics
are available, local residents say that in some villages only a small minority
of North Koreans who had lived there a year ago remain. Some fled to third countries
with the ultimate goal of reaching South Korea, while others were arrested
and repatriated.
Thousands of children in Yanbian who were born to North Korean mothers live
without a legal identity or access to elementary education. North Korean children
who migrate to China have no legal right to obtain the household registration
papers that many schools demand. Children with Chinese fathers sometimes are
not registered in the household registration to avoid exposing their mothers.
By law, neither North Korean nor half-North Korean children should be required to
submit legal identity papers for admittance to schools since Chinese law provides
that all children regardless of nationality are entitled to nine years of free education,
but in reality, most schools require such documentation. Some parents and
guardians of North Korean children resort to bribery or trickery in order to ensure
children can go to school.
Refugees and Asylum Seekers outside China
A relatively small number of North Koreans in China have managed to reach South
Korea, Japan, or the United States via other countries in the region, including
Mongolia and Thailand. South Korea accepts all North Koreans as citizens under
its constitution. In 2008, South Korea has admitted more than 13,000 North
Koreans, Japan has accepted more than 100, and the US has accepted a few
dozen so far. Canada, Japan, Germany, the United Kingdom, and a few other
European countries have granted refugee status to several hundred North
Koreans in recent years.
North Korean Workers
In North Korea’s Kaesong Industrial Complex, more than 35,000 North Korean
workers produce mostly consumer goods for South Korean businesses. The law
governing working conditions in the complex falls far short of international standards
on freedom of association, the right to collective bargaining, gender discrimination
and sexual harassment, and hazardous child labor.
North Koreans are also reportedly employed in Bulgaria, China, Iraq, Kuwait,
Mongolia, and Russia. In some countries, activists have expressed concern for
workers’ basic rights, including efforts by the North Korean government to restrict
freedom of movement, expression, and association, the constant presence of
“minders” accompanying workers, and indirect salary payments under which
large portions of salaries allegedly are recouped by agencies or the North Korean
government.
Abductees
The issue of foreigners allegedly abducted by North Korea mostly in the 1970s
and 1980s remains unresolved. South Korea says 496 of its citizens, abducted by
North Korean agents, remain in North Korea against their will. Pyongyang insists
that the South Koreans defected to North Korea, and remain of their own free will,
but refuses to allow South Korean relatives to communicate with them.
North Korea, meanwhile, has admitted that it abducted 13 Japanese—returning
five to Japan in 2002, but claiming the other eight died, and that no other
Japanese citizens were abducted. Japan insists that several more of its citizens
have been abducted.
Key International Actors
South Korea’s President Lee Myung-bak took office in February 2008 with a
pledge to change South Korea’s policies on North Korea, saying he would speak
out on the latter’s human rights record and demand the return of South Korean
prisoners of war and abductees. Under former presidents Kim Dae-jung and Roh
Mu-hyun, both of whom had summit meetings with North Korea’s leader Kim Jong
Il, South Korea offered large amounts of aid and started major economic projects
in North Korea, but largely remained silent on human rights violations.
After Lee took office, relations between the Koreas deteriorated rapidly. In March,
North Korea fired missiles off its west coast, close to South Korea, and in July, a
North Korean soldier shot and killed a South Korean tourist near the Diamond
Mountain resort. In August, South Korea’s National Prosecutors’ Office
announced the arrest of a man and a woman (a North Korean refugee who had
settled in South Korea) for allegedly spying for North Korea.
The deteriorating relationship appeared responsible for an interruption in food
aid, with North Korea initially rejecting offers of aid, and South Korea then failing
to respond promptly to an August plea from the World Food Program to provide
new food aid. Together with China, South Korea has been the largest donor of
unconditional food aid to North Korea in recent years.
Pyongyang’s relationship with Washington, however, appeared to improve. On
February 26, the New York Philharmonic performed in Pyongyang, with many
observers cautiously calling it a prelude to a thaw between the two countries. In
May, the United States announced that it would offer 500,000 tons of food aid by
mid-2008; at this writing in November it had delivered about 120,000 tons. On
October 12, 2008, Washington removed North Korea from its list of state sponsors
of terrorism.
In a March 2008 report for the UN Human Rights Council, Vitit Muntarbhorn, UN
special rapporteur on human rights in North Korea, criticized North Korea for
“appalling” prison conditions and “extensive use of torture and public executions.”