 DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF KOREA*
 The Democratic People's Republic of Korea (DPRK) is a dictatorship under the ab-
 solute rule of the Korean Workers' Party (KWP). The party exercises power on be-
 half of its leader, General Secretary Kim I Sung, who is also President of the
 DPRK. Kim I1 Sung, in power for 54 years, has largely turned over day-to-day con-
 trol of the Government to his son, Kim Jong 11. The son has been gradually taking
 a higher public profle, and was named Supreme Commander of the Korean People's
 Army in 1991. The younger Kim ranks second in the party and, together with his
 father, is the subject of a personality cult.
 The North Korean regime is extremely repressive and subjects its citizens to rigid
 controls. The regime establishes security ratings for each individual which deter-
 mine access to employment, schools, medical facilities, and certain stores as well as
 admission to the KWP, but this loyalty system appears to have been relaxed some-
 what in recent years. Individual rights remain totally subordinated, however, to
 those of the State and the party.
 The State directs all significant economic activity, and only government-super-
 vised labor activity is permitted. The North Korean economy has contracted signifi-
 cantly due to the elimination of concessional trade and aid from the former U.SS.R.
 Economic development continues to be hindered by distribution bottlenecks, non-
 productive allocation of resources, and a poor international credit rating stemming
 from the DPRK's default on much of its foreign debt, as well as by the diversion
 of as much as one-fourth of the gross national product to military expenditures.
 North Korea continues to deny its citizens the most fundamental human rights.
 It has, however, allowed a growing number of foreign visitors, especially overseas
 Koreans including over 2,000 Korean-Americans, to visit the DPRK for family re-
 unions in the past few years. Furthermore, the Agreement on Reconciliation
 Nonaggression, Cooperation, and Exchange Between North and South Korea, signed
 in December 1991, calls for increased family exchanges and established a joint com-
 mittee to discuss concrete implementation. This committee has made little progress,
 and no exchanges have yet taken place under the agreement.
 The North Korean Penal Code is draconian, stipulating capital punishment and
 confiscation of all assets for a wide variety of "crimes against the revolution," includ-
 ing defection, slander of the party or state, and possessing "reactionary" printed
 matter. The regime permits no independent press or associations, and little outside
 information reaches the public except that approved and disseminated by the Gov-
 ernment.
 *The United States does not have diplomatic relations with the Democratic People's Republic
 of Korea. North Korea does not allow representatives of foreign governments, journalists, or
 other invited visitors the freedom of movement that would enable them to assess human rights
 conditions there. Most of this report, therefore, is based on information obtained over a period
 of time extending from well before 1992. While limited in detail, the information is nonetheless
 indicative o the human rights situation in North Korea today.
 
 
 589
 iPEsr FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-The regime has summarily executed
 political prisoners, political opponents of Kim 11 Sung and Kim Jong 11, repatriated
 aefectors, and others.
 North Korea has intermittently directed terrorist attacks against South Korea,
 but there has been no evidence of North Korean involvement in terrorist acts since
 November 1987. In 1992 the North Korean Foreign Ministry released a statement
 declaring that North Korea would not condone or practice terrorism.
 b. Disappearance.-There is no information available on disappearance within
 North Korea. There are several reports that over the past 10 years the DPRK has
 kidnapped South Koreans, Japanese, and other foreign citizens outside of its bor-
 ders. The Japanese press has estimated that as many as 20 Japanese have been
 kidnaped and are being held ag nint their will in North Korea.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 There is no information on recent practices, but credible reports indicate that during
 the 1980's prisoners were routinely tortured or ill-treated and many prisoners died
 from torture, disease, starvation, or exposure.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Ezie.-Little information is available on North
 Korea's specific criminal justice procedures and practices, and outside observation
 of its legal system has not been permitted.
 Under North Korean law, prisoners may be held for interrogation for a maximum
 of 2 months. This period may be extended indefinitely, however. It is very difficult
 for family members or other concerned persons to obtain information regarding
 charges against a person accused or even detained. Judicial review of detentions
 does not exist in law or in practice.
 Based on defector testimony and other sources, the Republic of Korea estimates
 that North Korea detains about 150,000 political prisoners and family members in
 maximum security camps in remote, isolated areas. North Korean officials deny the
 existence of such gulags or prisons but admit the existence of "education centers
 for people who "commit crimes by mistake." One credible report lists 12 such prison
 camps believed to exist in the DPRK. It is believed that several former high officials,
 including former prime ministers, are imprisoned in the camps, and that most maxi-
 mum security prisoners have been confined without trial or formal charges. Visitors
 and any form ofcommunication with detainees, although once allowed, are now said
 to be prohibited.
 In a July 1991, newspaper interview, Cho Kap Chae, a North Korean defector who
 had been a high-ranking official in the DPRK Ministry of Public Security, said that
 there were two types of closed areas for detention of prisoners. One, he said, is a
 system of closed camps from which prisoners never emerge and in which conditions
 are extremely difficult. In the second system of camps prisoners could be "rehabili-
 tated," and Cho reported that a prisoner he knew was released after a 3-year deten-
 tion. An October 1992 report by two former inmates made reference to the severe
 living conditions in what they called 'concentration camps".
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The Constitution states that courts are independ-
 ent and that judicial proceedings are to be carried out in strict accordance with the
 law, which contains elaborate procedural guarantees. These safeguards are not fol-
 lowed in practice, and the party exercises pervasive control over the criminal justice
 system. Article 138 of the Constitution states that "cases are heard in public, and
 the accused is guaranteed the right to defense; hearings may be closed to the public
 as stipulated by law." However, the Public Security Ministry dispenses with trials
 in political cases and refers them to the Ministry of State Security for imposition
 of punishment.
 When trials are held, lawyers are apparently assigned by the Government, and
 reports indicate that defense lawyers are not considered representatives of the ac-
 cused, but rather independent parties who are expected to help the court by per-
 suading the accused to confess guilt. Some reports, noting a distinction between po-
 litical and common criminals, state that the Government affords trials only to the
 latter. North Korea equates "political criminals* with those who criticize the regime.
 Numerous other reports suggest that in the past political offenses included such
 forms of lese majesty as sitting on newspapers bearing Kim II Sung's picture.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The re-
 gime subjects the people to a pervasive program of indoctrination designed to shape
 and control individual consciousness. Preschool children are drilled m homage to
 Kim II Sun$ and his family while school age children are subjected daily to exten-
 sive indoctrination. Youths and adults are required to participate in daily ideological
 training conducted during school or at places of employment. Government-organized
 
 
 590
 neighborhood units also provide indoctrination for persons who neither work nor go
 to school. The daily indoctrination requires rote recitation of Party maxims and poli-
 cies and strives for ideological purity. Multiple North Korean security organizations
 enforce these controls.
 Koreans with relatives who fled to the South at the time of the Korean War ap-
 pear to be still classified as part of the "hostile class" in the DPRK's elaborate loy-
 alty system. Because approximately 10 million families were separated by the end
 of the Korean War, this category encompasses a significant percentage of the North
 Korean population. The defector Cho Kap Chae noted that the "impure" or hostile
 class consists of 25 to 30 percent of the population. Members of this class may still
 be subject to some discrimination, although Cho claimed that their treatment has
 improved greatly in recent years.
 Although the Constitution states that 'citizens are guaranteed the inviolability of
 person and residence and the privacy of correspondence," the practice is otherwise.
 The Government has developed a pervasive system of informers throughout the soci-
 ety and, according to several sources, electronic surveillance of residences is also
 common. In school, the authorities encourage children to discuss what their parents
 have said at home. The Government conducts monthly 'sanitation" inspections to
 check on household activities. Each house is required to display portraits of Kim 11
 Sung and Kim Jong I1. Reports indicate that because of the pervasive surveillance,
 fear is the hallmark of most social relationships.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-Although the Constitution states that "citizens
 have the freedoms of speech, the press, assembly, association, and demonstration,"
 the regime permits such activities only in support of government objectives. Other
 articles of the Constitution that require citizens to follow the "Socialist norms of
 life" and to obey a "collective spirit" take precedence over individual political or civil
 liberties. The Government strictly curtails the rights of freedom of expression and
 association guaranteed under the International Covenant on Civil and Political
 Rights, to which North Korea became a party in 1981. Persons criticizing the Presi-
 dent or his policies are liable to punishment by imprisonment or "corrective labor."
 One defector reported in 1986 that a scientist, whose home was bugged through his
 radio set, was arrested and executed for statements made at home critical of Kim
 II Sung.
 The Government attempts to control all news that enters and leaves the DPRK.
 The visits of Western journalists admitted into the country are carefully managed.
 Russian publications that have written critically of North Korea have had access re-
 stricted, and during 1991 several had their offices closed. Domestic media censor-
 ship is strictly enforced, and no deviation from the official government line is toler-
 ated. The regime prohibits listening to foreign media broadcasts except by the politi-
 cal elite, and violators are subject to severe punishment. Radios and televisions are
 built to receive only domestic programming. The Government controls artistic and
 academic works, and visitors report that the primary function of plays, movies, op-
 eras and books is to contribute to the cult of personality surrounding "the Great
 Leader," Kim I1 Sung, and "the Dear Leader," Kim Jong I.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-No public meetings can be
 held without government authorization. There are no known organizations other
 than those created by the Government. The State even prohibits apolitical groups
 such as neighborhood or alumni organizations. Professional associations exist solely
 as another means of government control over the members of these organizations.
 c. Freedom of Religiwn.-Although the Constitution provides that "citizens have
 religious liberty and the freedom of antireligious propaganda," the regime, in fact,
 has severely persecuted Christians and Buddhists since the late 1940's and discrimi-
 nates against persons whose family or relatives once had a strong religious involve-
 ment.
 Despite its past record, the regime is making a major effort to use government-
 sponsored religious organizations to advance its foreign policy goals. The DPRK
 claims to have 10,000 Christians who worship in 500 home churches, and the
 Chondogyo Young Friends Party, a front group based on a native Korean religious
 movement is still in existence. A few Buddhist temples are in operation, and the
 country's tirst two Christian churches--one Protestant and one Catholic-were built
 in late 1988. The churches are included in the fixed itinerary for many foreign visi-
 tors to Pyongyang. Some visitors attest to the authenticity of the church services
 and to the faith of the several dozen worshipers observed; others say the church ac-
 tivity appears staged.
 Kimil]Sung, his family, and his juche (self-reliance) ideology are accorded rev-
 erence akin to worship, and the cult of the Kim family is functionally akin to orga-
 
 
 591
 nized religion. No North Korean religious official is ever known to have preached
 that there is any moral authority higher than that of Kim D Sung, and the regime
 seems to be trying to find a theological basis for melding "Kim Ilsungism7 (as it is
 called by North Korean media) and Christianity.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The DPRK regime strictly controls internal travel, requiring a travel
 pass for any movement outside one's home village; these passes are granted only
 for required official or certain personal travel. Personal travel is usually limited to
 attending the wedding or funeral of a close relative. Long delays in obtaining the
 necessary permit often result in denial of the right to travel even for these limited
 purposes. State control of internal travel is also ensured by a ration system that
 distributes coupons valid only in the region issued. Worsening economic conditions,
 particularly energy and fuel shortages, have contributed further to the limiting of
 the freedom of movement for North Korean citizens.
 Reports, primarily from defetors, indicate that forced resettlement, particularly
 for those deemed politically unreliable, is common. Permission to reside in, or even
 enter Pyongyang, the capital, is strictly controlled.
 Foreign travel is limited to officials and trusted artists, athletes, and academics.
 The regime does not allow emigration, and only 1,000 or so defectors have succeeded
 in fleeing the country since 1953. The regime retaliates against the relatives of
 those fewpersons who manage to escape. Involuntarily repatriated defectors have
 been jailed, or in some cases, executed. In 1991. for the fist time, a single North
 Korean citizen was allowed to travel to the United States to visit relatives. He was
 accompanied by a government official and returned after 2 weeks. The regime does
 not allow students to study outside of Communist or friendly Third World countries.
 It tightened controls over DPRK students studying abroad when six defected from
 Eastern Europe in 1989, and in 1990 called back its students from Eastern Europe
 and the former U.SS.R.
 From 1959 to 1982, 93,000 Korean residents of Japan, including 6,637 Japanese
 wives, voluntarily repatriated to North Korea in response to nationalistic appeals.
 Despite DPRK assurances that the wives, 1,828 of whom still had Japanese citizen-
 ship, would be allowed to go home to Japan every 2 or 3 years, none is known to
 have returned to Japan, and most have never been heard of again. Credible reports
 indicate that most of the returnees and their families were categorized in the "wa-
 vering class;" given poor food, clothing, and housing; subjected to hard labor; and
 treated with contempt. When reports of their harsh treatment became known over-
 seas, voluntary repatriation dried up. Recent reports suggest that treatment of Jap-
 anese spouses has improved, since they have access to much-needed hard currency.
 With normalization talks under way, the DPRK has indicated to Japan it is willing
 to respond to inquiries about individual Japanese spouses on a case-by-case basis.
 North Korea has permitted entry to several thousand overseas Korean residents
 of Japan, China, North America, and elsewhere to visit their relatives. Recently the
 regime has granted entry to greater numbers of other visitors, including journalists
 and tourists. Visitors are closely monitored and itineraries are usually fixed, al-
 though some visitors reported they were allowed to walk freely around the vicinity
 of their hotels.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens have no right or mechanisms by which they can effect transitions in lead-
 ership or changes in government. The political system is completely dominated by
 Kim ] Sung and hei-designate Kim Jong I1. The legislature, the Supreme People's
 Assembly, which meets only a few days a year, serves only to rubberstamp resolu-
 tions presented to it by the leadership. In an effort to create an appearance of de-
 mocracy, the DPRK has created several minority parties." They exist only as ros-
 ters of officials who have token representation in the People's Assembly and com-
 pletely support the government line. Free elections do not exist in North Korea. Al-
 though elections to the Supreme People's Assembly and to provincial, city, and coun-
 ty assemblies are held regularly, in all cases the Government approves  one can-
 dat in each electoral district. According to the government-controlled media, over
 99 percent of the voters turn out to elect 100 percent of the approved candidates.
 Such "elections" are an exercise in which people are forced to participate to mobilize
 support for the regime. Despit  e long and rigorous selection process for member-
 ship in the KWP, most party members have no voice in decisionmaking, serving
 only to carry out the decrees promulgated by party leader Kim o Sung and other
 top officials.
 
 
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 No organizations are permitted to exist or report on or observe human rights vio-
 lations. North Korea does not belong to any international or regional human rights
 organizations, but has for some years sent observers to meetings of the U.N. Human
 Rights Commission.
 The Government has not allowed Amnesty International (A), Asia Watch, or any
 other international organization to visit North Korea to monitor human rights prac-
 tices and has fulminated against reports by such groups as being "full of lies and
 fabrications."
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sej; Religion, Language, or Social Status
 The Constitution states that "women hold equal social status and rights with
 men." However, few women have reached highlevels of the party or the Govern-
 ment. Women are represented proportionally in the labor force, with the exception
 of small factories where the work force is predominantly female.
 The regime discriminates against the physically handicapped. Handicapped per-
 sons, other than war veterans, are reportedly not allowed within the city limits of
 Pyongyang. According to one credible report, authorities check for persons with de-
 formities in the capital city every 2 or 3 years and remove the disabled, some of
 the elderly, widows, and the sick to the countryside. The dwarf community has been
 banished to a remote mountain settlement.
 Nothing is known about the extent to which violence against women is practiced
 or tolerated.
 North Korea is a homogeneous country and, except for a small Chinese commu-
 nity, is relatively devoid of minority groups.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-Free labor unions do not exist in North Korea. Be-
 cause the party by definition purports to represent the interests of labor trade
 unions exist in form only. There is a single labor organization, called the General
 Federation of Trade Unions of Korea, which is affiliated with the Communist-domi-
 nated World Federation of Trade Unions. Operating under this umbrella, unions
 function on the classical Soviet model, with responsibility for mobilizing workers be-
 hind productivity goals and state targets, and for the provision of health, education,
 cultural, and welfare facilities. They do not have the right to strike. North Korea
 is not a member of the International Labor Organization.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-Workers have no right to or-
 ganize or to bargain collectively. Wages are set by government ministries. The State
 assigns all jobs; ideological purity is as important as professional competence in de-
 ciding who receives a particular job. Workers have no input into management deci-
 sions.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-There is no prohibition on the use
 of forced or compulsory labor. The Government routinely uses military conscripts for
 construction projects.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-No data are available on the mini-
 mum age for employment of children.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-No data are available on minimum wages or
 occupational safety and health. Absence from work without a doctor's certificate re-
 sults in a reduction in a worker's rations. The Constitution stipulates a workday
 limited to 8 hours, but several sources report that during production campaigns
 most laborers work 12 to 16 hours daily. The regime's propaganda euphemistically
 refers to these extra hours as "patriotic labor" done on a "voluntary" basis by the
 workers.
