North Korea
Human rights conditions in the Democratic Peoples Republic of Korea (North
Korea) remain abysmal. Authorities continue to prohibit organized political opposition,
independent news media, and civil society activities. Arbitrary arrests, lack
of due process, and executions remain of grave concern.
The government denies citizens the right to leave the country. In 2007 authorities
increased border patrols and repeatedly warned of harsher punishments for
those who attempt to leave without state permission, which is virtually impossible
to obtain. Nevertheless, many North Koreans continue to risk escaping to
China in search of food and work, a trend exacerbated in 2006 and 2007 by massive
summer flooding which damaged crops and homes.
While access to the country is strictly limited and reliable evidence is hard to
obtain, some recent escapees told Human Rights Watch of an increase in
underground Christian religious activity by individuals and families. Escapees
also described seeing denunciations of allegedly corrupt local officials written on
walls in some border cities. Such developments would have been unthinkable
prior to the famine of the mid-1990s, when the leadership lost its aura of invincibility
and some of its ability to control citizens everyday lives.
Right to Food
North Korea is still recovering from the 1990s famine, which is believed to have
killed about a million people and left many children permanently stunted. The
government continues to provide state food rations to elitesincluding high-ranking
members of the Workers Party and the security and intelligence forces
before all others. Several non-elite North Koreans told Human Rights Watch that
they had not received adequate food rations since the early 1990s, and blamed
the preferential treatment given to elites as well as corruption among food distribution
officials. Many say they receive rations only a few times each year, typically
on major national holidays such as Kim Jong Ils birthday.
Rice, corn, and potato prices continued to rise through 2007. Many attribute the
ongoing food shortage to South Koreas suspension of fertilizer and food aid in 2006, and to flooding in the summers of 2006 and 2007. North Korean interviewees
describe seeing more homeless people at train stations and markets,
including whole families living on the street after trading their homes for food as
a last resort.
South Korea resumed humanitarian aid, including food aid, in anticipation of the
inter-Korea summit on October 2-4, 2007.
North Koreans in China
Since the mid-1990s, hundreds of thousands of North Koreans have fled to China.
Many still live in hiding there because the Chinese government categorically
labels them illegal economic migrants and routinely repatriates those it arrests. In
doing so China violates its obligations to consider them refugees and offer them
protection.
The trafficking of North Korean women and girls in China persists, especially near
the border. Many are abducted or duped into marriage, prostitution, or sexual
slavery. Some North Korean women live with Chinese men in de facto marriages,
though doing so does not ensure legal residence for them or their children and
they remain vulnerable to arrest and repatriation. In 2007 officials of a small district
in northeast China reportedly granted some North Korean women formal permission
to reside within the district, but the policy apparently has not been
adopted elsewhere.
Refugees and Asylum Seekers Outside China
A relatively small number of North Koreans fortunate enough to avoid being repatriated
from China have managed to reach other countries in the region, including
Cambodia, Laos, Mongolia, Thailand, and Vietnam. Most are seeking ultimately to
reach South Korea, Japan, or the United States. At this writing, hundreds of North
Koreans remained in overcrowded immigration detention centers in Bangkok,
awaiting transfer to South Korea or the United States.
South Korea accepts all North Korean asylum seekers as citizens, under its constitution
that defines the entire Korean Peninsula as South Korean territory. In the past decade, it has admitted around 10,000 North Koreans. The US, under the
North Korea Human Rights Act of 2004, has granted refugee status to a few dozen
North Koreans. Japan has accepted over 100 North Koreans, mostly individuals
who lived in Japan in the 1960s and 1970s. In Europe, Germany, the United
Kingdom, Ireland, the Netherlands, and Denmark collectively have granted
refugee status to more than 300 North Koreans in recent years.
Treatment of Suspects and Prisoners
Leaving North Korea without state permission is considered treason and is punishable
by heavy penalties. North Korean police interrogate and sometimes torture
individuals returning from China, asking why they left, who they met, and
what they did.
Some North Koreans report that the treatment of illegal border crossers and
other criminal suspects improved in 2007, citing less verbal and physical abuse.
They also note that suspects occasionally have been visited by, though not
defended in court by, state-appointed defense lawyers. One person, for example,
said an attorney had visited him once, asking whether his human rights had been
violated since his arrest. It was not clear whether such changes were due to the
discretion of regional state officials, or a reflection of a new central government
policy.
However, many prisoners are still routinely subjected to inhuman and degrading
treatment. Lack of food and medicine in detention facilities lead to illness and
sometimes death. There are still reports of public executions, although not as frequently
as in the 1990s. The death penalty appears to apply to treason, sedition,
and acts of terrorism, as well as to lesser crimes such as selling illegal substances
or stealing state property (everything from electrical cables to coal is
deemed state property).
North Korean Workers at Kaesong Industrial Complex
The United States and South Korea signed a Free Trade Agreement in June 2007,
which at this writing had not yet been ratified by the congress of either country.
An annex to the agreement opened the possibility that products made in North Koreas Kaesong Industrial Complex (KIC)where over 15,000 North Korean workers
produce watches, shoes, clothes, kitchenware, car parts, and other items for
South Korean businesseswould be exported to the United States duty free. The
US signed the agreement even though the law governing working conditions in
the KIC falls far short of international standards on freedom of association, the
right to collective bargaining, sex discrimination and harassment, and harmful
child labor.
Key International Actors
In February 2007, North Korea agreed to disable its main nuclear reactor and
reveal all nuclear weapons related activity in return for humanitarian aid, heavy
fuel oil, and other economic benefits. The agreement was followed by six-party
talks on implementation involving the two Koreas, the United States, Japan,
China, and Russia.
On October 2-4, 2007, North Koreas leader Kim Jong Il and South Koreas
President Roh Mu-hyun held the second-ever inter-Korea summit. They discussed
humanitarian aid, economic cooperation, and ways to secure lasting peace on the
Korean Peninsula.
China, Russia, and a number of European and Middle Eastern countries have
hosted North Korean workers pursuant to agreements with North Korean state
companies. In some of those countries, local human rights activists and
journalists have expressed concern for the workers basic rights, including
restrictions on their freedom of movement, the constant presence of minders,
and indirect payments under which a large chunk of their salaries is allegedly
taken by middlemen or the North Korean government. In response to such
criticism, the Czech Republic government, for example, stopped issuing work
visas for North Korean workers in 2006. Human Rights Watch has recommended
that host countries improve protection of worker rights instead of sending workers
back home. According to media reports, North Koreans are also working in
Bulgaria, Hungary, Iraq, Kuwait, Mongolia, and Poland.
South Korea says 485 of its citizens, abducted by North Korean agents, remain in
North Korea against their will. North Korea has rejected repeated requests from the abductees families to confirm their existence and return them home, or, if
they have died, to return their remains. Japans relations with North Korea also
remain strained over the issue of abductees. While North Korea has admitted that
it abducted 13 Japanese (it returned five of them in 2002), it claims that the other
eight died and that no other Japanese citizens were abducted. Japan says that
several more of its citizens have been abducted.
North Korea has not responded to repeated requests for dialogue from Vitit
Muntarbhorn, who has been the UNs special rapporteur on human rights in
North Korea since 2004.