 DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF KOREA*
 The Democratic People's Republic of Korea, formed in 1948
 during the Soviet administration of the northern half of the
 Korean peninsula, is a rigid Communist dictatorship maintained
 by the ruling Korean Workers' (Communist) Party (KWP), with
 its overriding aim of imposing a social revolution and
 enforcing unanimous popular support for the country's
 governing system and its leader, Kim Il Sung. Individual
 rights are entirely subordinated to the KWP. Although there
 were pro forma elections to the Supreme People's Assembly in
 November, free elections do not exist since citizens have no
 choice among candidates.
 The North Korean people are subject to rigid controls. The
 State establishes security ratings for each person, and these
 ratings determine access to jobs, schools, medical facilities,
 and stores as well as admission to the KWP, the route to the
 highest levels and privileges of the society. The party,
 government, and military elite enjoy significant economic
 privileges such as access to special stores and medical
 facilities, better housing, and better education, which are
 not available to ordinary citizens.
 Persons who fail to conform to the rigid dictates of the State
 face imprisonment or, more often, enforced removal to remote
 villages. Surveillance by informers is prevalent. Punishment
 for "political crimes" against the State is severe. No
 outside information other than that approved and disseminated
 by the North Korean authorities is allowed to reach the
 general public, although senior government officials are
 somewhat better informed.
 President Kim Il Sung's 13-year effort to groom his son, Kim
 Chong Il, as his successor is testimony to the enormous power
 the elder Kim has amassed during 38 years of rule. The
 younger Kim has been elevated to several senior party
 positions during the last few years. The absence of any
 evidence of public debate about the succession is also
 indicative of the lack of real popular participation in the
 political process.
 North Korea has not been successful in producing through its
 command economy the desired economic development. It remains
 a less-developed country with a stagnant standard of living
 and a balance of payments problem that is steadily worsening.
 Kim Il Sung's commitment to bring the entire Korean peninsula
 under his control has led to periodic attempts to destabilize
 the Republic of Korea. North Korea has engaged in talks with
 South Korea, but these recent talks were suspended by North
 Korea in January 1986 and prospects for their resumption are
 poor.
 *The United States does not have diplomatic relations with the
 Democratic People's Republic of Korea. Representatives of
 governments that do have relations with the DPRK, as well as
 journalists and other invited visitors to North Korea, are not
 permitted the freedom of movement that would enable them to
 assess effectively human rights conditions there. Most of
 this report, therefore, is a repeat of previous human rights
 reports based on information obtained over a period of time
 extending from well before 1986. While limited in scope and
 detail, the information is indicative of the human rights
 situation in North Korea today.
 
 
 738
 DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF KOREA
 There is no evidence to suggest that North Korea has improved
 its extremely poor performance in the human rights area. Both
 short- and long-term trends indicate continued one-family rule
 with scant respect for basic human rights.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 Little information is available on politically motivated
 killing in North Korea. Several North Korean defectors report
 that certain political criminals have been executed publicly
 by firing squads. One such "criminal" who reportedly was
 executed by firing squad was a scientist who used a pejorative
 word in referring to Kim Il Sung. The North Korean attitude
 toward political killing also is clearly demonstrated by the
 November 23, 1984 shooting in the Joint Security Area of the
 Demilitarized Zone (DMZ) dividing North and South Korea. In
 that incident, North Korean security guards opened fire on a
 Soviet student trying to defect from a tour group, triggering
 an exchange of fire in which several lives on both sides were
 lost.
 b. Disappearance
 There is no information available on disappearance.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 According to the Freedom House 1985-86 Report, "torture is
 reportedly common" in North Korea. The accounts of torture
 and beatings of crew members of the USS Pueblo after their
 capture in 1968 are well-known and documented. Another
 reliable source on prison conditions and treatment of
 prisoners in North Korea is Venezuelan poet Ali Lameda, who
 was detained in North Korea from September 1967 through 1974,
 allegedly for attempted sabotage and espionage. While
 physical torture was not used on Mr. Lameda, he states that
 Korean prisoners were routinely beaten. Lameda notes that
 "beating was also used as a means of persuasion during
 interrogation."
 Lameda reports the use of deprivation of food to force
 "confessions," as well as solitary confinement, continuous
 interrogation, enforced waking periods, poor or nonexistent
 medical treatment, and 12 hours of forced labor per day. In
 addition, prisoners were denied family visits, parcels,
 correspondence, writing materials, newspapers, and clothing
 changes. Prisoners were regarded as having no rights.
 Much of what Lameda has reported has been corroborated by Choi
 Un-Wui and her husband Shin Sang-Ok (hereinafter referred to
 as the Shins), the famous Korean film producer and actress,
 who reportedly were kidnaped by the North Korean regime.
 Although Shin did not witness any beatings during his
 incarceration, he heard repeated stories of such treatment.
 Shin personally experienced many of the other forms of torture
 mentioned by Lameda, including denial of sleep, starvation
 rations, and solitary confinement, as well as being required
 to sit motionless for long periods of time.
 
 
 739
 DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF KOREA
 d.   Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Information on specific criminal justice procedures and
 practices in North Korea is extremely scarce. North Korea has
 refused to permit outside observation of its legal system and
 practices. The accounts provided by the crew members of the
 USS Pueblo, Lameda, and the Shins comprise virtually all the
 specific information available on the operation of the
 criminal justice system in North Korea.
 North Korean law provides that prisoners may be held for
 interrogation for a period not to exceed 2 months. This
 period may be extended indefinitely, however, if the
 Interrogation Department obtains approval of the Chief
 Prosecutor. Lameda states that he was detained for 12 months
 without trial or charge. His request for a lawyer of his
 choice and an open trial was ridiculed as "bourgeois." Shin
 notes that it is very difficult for family members or other
 concerned individuals to obtain information regarding charges
 being leveled against an accused person or even where an
 accused person is being detained. Habeas corpus or its
 equivalent does not exist in law or in practice.
 According to newspaper reports, North Korean defectors in
 South Korea estimated in April 1982 that at least 105,000
 "ideological offenders" were being held in eight major labor
 camps in North Korea. The Shins believe this estimate to be
 understated and add that the plight of political prisoners has
 worsened over the last few years. As one example, the Shins
 state that 10 years ago political prisoners were allowed
 family visitors and gifts but now are allowed neither. The
 Shins further report that the families of political detainees
 are punished for the political beliefs of their relatives. It
 is not unusual, according to the Shins, for entire families to
 be banished to outlying rural regions. Amnesty International
 has received unconfirmed reports of arrests of those opposed
 to heir apparent Kim Chong Il.
 There is no prohibition on the use of forced or compulsory
 labor. Military conscripts are routinely used for forced
 labor. According to the Shins, conscripts never know where
 they will serve or for how long.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The North Korean Constitution states that courts are
 independent and that judicial proceedings are to be carried
 out in strict accordance with the law. All courts, however,
 are responsible to the people's assemblies, which effectively
 means government control of the judiciary. Article 138 states
 that "cases are heard in public, and the accused is guaranteed
 the right to defense; hearings may be closed to the public as
 stipulated by law." Lameda claims that he was denied a public
 trial, as does Shin. Lameda reports that after his first
 arrest he was imprisoned for a year without a hearing; after
 his second arrest, he was put through a closed session without
 benefit of counsel of his choice, or even knowledge of the
 charges. His tribunal was under the direction of the Ministry
 of Internal Security, with one person serving as both judge
 and prosecutor.
 Lameda stated that at his trial he was refused the right to
 speak out, other than to admit guilt, or to defend himself.
 His "defense counsel" represented him by making a lengthy
 
 
 740
 DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF KOREA
 speech praising Kim Ii Sung and then requesting a 20-year
 sentence, which the tribunal imposed after 5 minutes of
 deliberation.
 In a 1979 interview with American journalist John Wallach,
 North Korean Supreme Court Justice Li Chun Uk noted that the
 defense counsel's job is "to give the suspect due
 punishment.   Open court appears to consist of an announcement
 of the term of imprisonment, which has already been determined
 by the Provincial Safety Bureau.
 The Shins note a distinction between political and common
 criminals, asserting that only the latter are afforded
 trials. The DPRK equates "political criminals" with those who
 criticize the regime.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The populace is subjected to regular indoctrination, designed
 to shape individual consciousness. Preschool children are
 drilled in homage to Kim Il Sung and his family, while youths
 and adults are required to participate in daily ideological
 training conducted during school or at places of employment.
 Approximately half the school day is devoted to
 indoctrination. Neighborhood units have been organized to
 provide indoctrination for persons who neither work nor go to
 school. The daily indoctrination requires rote recitation of
 party maxims and policies and strives for ideological purity.
 Multiple North Korean security organizations enforce these
 controls.
 According to reports in South Korean journals, Japanese wives
 of Koreans repatriated from Japan since 1959 have not been
 permitted to visit Japan and many have lost contact with their
 families because their letters are subject to strict
 censorship.
 Although the Constitution states that "citizens are guaranteed
 the inviolability of person and residence and the privacy of
 correspondence," practice seems to be otherwise. Lameda
 reports that the privacy of his residence was not respected
 and that listening devices were used against him. He was
 arrested and his collected papers and poetry seized and
 destroyed without warrant.
 According to the Shins, electronic surveillance of residences
 is pervasive and it is common practice for neighbors to report
 on one another. In school, children are encouraged to discuss
 what their parents have said at home. The Government conducts
 monthly "sanitation" inspections to check on household
 activities. Each house is required to have portraits of Kim
 Il Sung and Kim Chong Ii, his son and expected successor.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Although the Constitution states that "citizens have the
 freedoms of speech, the press, assembly, association, and
 demonstration," such activities are permitted only in support
 of government objectives. Other articles of the Constitution
 that require citizens to follow the "Socialist norms of life"
 
 
 741
 DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF KOREA
 and to obey a "collective spirit" take precedence over
 individual political or civil liberties.
 Foreign media are excluded, domestic media censorship is
 enforced, and no deviation from the official government line
 is tolerated. Listening to foreign media broadcasts is
 prohibited except to high government officials, and violators
 reportedly are subject to severe punishment. Most urban
 households have a radio and some have television, but
 reception is limited to domestic programming. Artistic and
 academic works are controlled by the Government, and visitors
 report that a primary function of plays, movies, operas, and
 books is to contribute to thu iult of personality surrounding
 "the great leader," Kim Il Sung, and "the beloved leader," Kim
 Chong Il.
 The Shins, who made a number of movies at the behest of the
 DPRK leadership, state that movie producers have political
 advisers who ensure the ideological purity of the final
 product. Actors must undergo background investigations prior
 to obtaining a role. They also undergo constant
 indoctrination.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 The Government has developed a pervasive system of informers
 throughout the society. No public meetings can be held
 without government authorization. There appear to be no
 organizations other than those created by the Government.
 Even apolitical groups such as neighborhood or alumni
 organizations are prohibited. Trade unions and professional
 associations appear to exist solely as another method of
 government control over their members. There are no effective
 rights to organize, bargain collectively, or strike.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Although the Constitution provides that "citizens have
 religious liberty and the freedom of antireligious
 propaganda," North Korea, in fact, has severely persecuted
 Christians and Buddhists since the late 1940's. No churches
 have been rebuilt since the Korean War. The regime uses
 religious organizational facades to proclaim the practice of
 religious freedom but appears to have long since purged the
 original membership. Persons whose family or relatives once
 had a strong religious involvement are discriminated against.
 Numerous reports suggest that the Government does not
 currently persecute the very small number of Christians who
 continue to worship at home, although public worship is
 strictly prohibited. The Shins, however, have stated that the
 Government has been very successful in convincing various
 foreign church organizations that religion is tolerated.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Internal travel in North Korea is strictly controlled. A
 travel pass is required for any movement outside one's home
 village and is granted only for required official or certain
 personal travel. Personal travel is usually limited to
 attending the wedding or funeral of a close relative. Long
 delays in obtaining the necessary permit often result in
 denial of the right to travel even for these limited
 purposes. State control of internal travel is also ensured by
 a ration system that distributes coupons valid only in the
 region issued.
 
 
 742
 DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF KOREA
 Reports, primarily from defectors, indicate that forced
 resettlement, particularly for those deemed politically
 unreliable, is common. Permission to reside in, or even
 enter, Pyongyang, the capital, is strictly controlled.
 Foreign travel is limited to officials or trusted artists and
 performers. Emigration is not allowed, and few refugees or
 defectors succeed in fleeing the country. Retaliation is
 taken against the relatives of those few persons who manage to
 escape. According to Freedom House, "rights to travel
 internally and externally are perhaps the most restricted in
 the world: tourism is unknown--even to Communist countries."
 In 1959 North Korea began actively encouraging Korean
 residents overseas to repatriate to "the Fatherland." Some
 observers estimate that during the next several years over
 100,000 overseas Koreans, almost all from Japan, voluntarily
 repatriated to North Korea. Since then, however, reports of
 the harsh treatment given repatriates reached overseas
 Koreans, reducing the flow to North Korea to a trickle.
 Because of their "corruption" by exposure to foreign
 influences, after their return repatriates are isolated from
 North Korean society until they can be indoctrinated and their
 ideological reliability gauged.
 North Korea has permitted entry to some overseas Korean
 residents to visit their relatives, and several have made
 repeat visits.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 The political system in North Korea is dominated by Kim Il
 Sung, who leads the KWP and also heads the Government. Kim
 has groomed his son Kim Chong Il to succeed him, and there are
 reports that Kim Chong Il has been acquiring increasing power
 and influence. The legislature, the Supreme People's
 Assembly, has never taken any action other than unanimous
 passage of resolutions presented to it by the leadership. In
 an effort to create an appearance of democracy, North Korea
 has created several "minority parties." They exist only as
 rosters of officials who have token representation in the
 People's Assembly and completely support the government line.
 Free elections do not exist in North Korea. Although
 elections to the Supreme People's Assembly were held in
 November 1986, and to city and county assemblies in March
 1983, in all cases only one candidate in each electoral
 district was approved by the government party and, according
 to the government-controlled media, 100 percent of the voters
 turned out to elect 100 percent of the approved candidates.
 Such "elections" in reality are an exercise in which voters
 are required to participate and to approve the party's
 candidates.
 Most citizens are completely excluded from any real
 participation in the political process. To achieve even a
 semblance of real participation, one must become a member of
 the KWP. The selection process for entrance to the party is
 long and rigorous. Persons from "bad social backgrounds,"
 i.e., those who have relatives who fled south during the
 Korean War, those whose families had strong religious
 involvement or were once property owners or members of the
 middle class, and those who have relatives who are political
 
 
 743
 DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF KOREA
 prisoners, effectively are denied entry into the party and are
 discriminated against. Most levels of the party have no
 voice, serving only to carry out the decrees and "on the spot
 guidance" promulgated by party leader Kim II Sung and his top
 subordinates.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 No organizations exist within North Korea to report on or
 observe human rights violations. North Korea does not
 participate in any international or regional human rights
 organizations.
 Amnesty International has requested a visit to North Korea.
 The Government has not responded to or acknowledged this
 request. A December 1982 request by Amnesty International for
 information on North Korean laws, on use of the death penalty,
 and on reports of arrests and long-term imprisonment of
 political figures also received no reply.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 The Constitution states that "women hold equal social status
 and rights with men." However, few women have reached high
 levels of the party or the Government. Women are represented
 proportionally in the labor force, and personnel in small
 factories are predominantly women.
 The physically handicapped are discriminated against.
 Handicapped persons, other than war veterans, are reportedly
 not allowed within the city limits of Pyongyang. The dwarf
 community has been specifically singled out for harsh
 treatment and all have been banished to a remote, rural region.
 North Korea is a homogeneous country and relatively devoid of
 minority groups.
 CONDITIONS OF LABOR
 There is no data available on minimum age for employment of
 children, minimum wages, or occupational safety and health.
 All jobs are assigned by the State and ideological purity,
 rather than professional competence, is the standard used in
 deciding who receives a particular job. Laborers have no
 input into management decisions and free labor unions do not
 exist. Absence from work without a doctor's certificate
 results in a reduction in a worker's rations. The
 Constitution stipulates that the workday is limited to 8 hours
 but several sources report that most laborers work 12-16 hour
 days. The extra hours are euphemistically referred to as
 patriotic labor" done on a "voluntary" basis by the workers.
 
 
 744
