 DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF KOREA*
 The Democratic People's Republic of Korea, formed in 1948
 during the Soviet administration of the northern half of the
 Korean peninsula, is a rigid Communist dictatorship, strictly
 dominated by one man, Kim Il-sung, and his family. Although
 some internationally respected human rights are acknowledged
 by the Constitution and laws, individual rights are entirely
 subordinated in practice to the ruling Korean Workers'
 (Communist) Party, with its overriding aim of imposing a
 social revolution and enforcing unanimous popular support for
 the country's governing system and its leaders.
 The latest Constitution, promulgated in 1972, purports to
 guarantee a wide range of rights, including: freedom of the
 press, religion, work, and association, and freedom from sex
 discrimination. Other provisions of that Constitution, as
 well as the fact of Communist Party control, render
 meaningless most of these guarantees. While there were pro
 forma elections to the Supreme People's Assembly in February
 1982, free elections do not exist in North Korea since
 citizens have no choice among candidates.
 Kim Il-sung is committed to reunification of the divided
 peninsula, by whatever means is necessary. To this end, his
 Government has periodically attempted to destabilize the
 Republic of Korea, for example by the attempt to assassinate
 the President of the Republic of Korea in a bombing attack in
 Rangoon, Burma, on October 9, 1983. Four Burmese and 17 South
 Koreans, including four cabinet ministers and a number of
 senior advisers and officials, were killed in this North
 Korean action. Despite North Korea's'delivery of flood relief
 goods to the South in 1984 and the positive response to South
 Korean proposals for bilateral talks on economic cooperation
 and family reunification, it continues to improve its military
 forces targeted against the South.
 North Korean leaders justify regimentation and militarization
 of society in the name of reunification. The North Korean
 people are subject to rigid controls. Persons who fail to
 cooperate with the regime face imprisonment, confiscation of
 property, or enforced removal to remote villages.
 Surveillance by informers is prevalent. Movement outside
 one's own village requires documented permission. Punishment
 for 'political crimes' against the state is severe. Available
 information indicates that the practices of forced relocation
 of families and ideological indoctrination have intensified in
 recent years.
 The state's intervention in the individual's activities in
 North Korea goes well beyond curtailing assembly and
 expression. The authorities attempt to shape the
 *The United States does not have diplomatic relations with the
 Democratic People's Republic of Korea; even representatives of
 governments that do, as well as journalists and other
 occasional invited visitors to North Korea, are not permitted
 the freedom of movement that would enable them effectively to
 assess human rights observance there. Most of this report,
 therefore, is a repeat of previous human rights reports based
 on information obtained over a period of time extending from
 well before 1984. While limited in scope and detail, the
 information is indicative of the human rights situation in
 North Korea today.
 
 
 790
 DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF KOREA
 consciousness of the populace. Preschool children are drilled
 in homage to Kim Il-sung and his family, while youths and
 adults are required to participate in daily ideological
 training conducted by youth organizations or at places of
 employment. The propaganda requires rote recitation of party
 maxims and positions and strives for ideological purity. The
 result is that North Korea's society is one of the most highly
 regimented and controlled in the world today. At least two
 North Korean security organizations enforce these controls.
 Virtually no outside information other than that approved and
 disseminated by the North Korean authorities is allowed to
 reach the North Korean public. Foreigners who have traveled
 to Pyongyang, the capital city, have been surprised to learn
 how little the North Korean populace knows of the outside
 world. Senior government officials, however, seem to be
 somewhat better informed.
 Security ratings for each person are based on such
 considerations as class origin, ideological fervor, and
 reliability, and whether any of the individual's relatives or
 associates collaborated with Japanese occupation authorities
 (1910-1945) or have attempted to defect to other countries.
 These ratings determine access to the better jobs, schools,
 medical facilities, and stores, as well as admission to the
 Korean Workers' Party, the route to the highest levels and
 privileges of the society. Any individual whose relative or
 close family associate has settled in South Korea is treated
 as suspect by the North Korean authorities.
 In 1984, for the first time, North Korea's government-
 controlled radio explicitly referred to Kim Il-sung's son, Kim
 Chong-il, as his father's eventual *successor.' The younger
 Kim, who was elevated to several senior leadership positions
 in 1980, is reportedly assuming increasing control of the
 Government and party. That Kim Il-sung appears thus far to be
 able to ensure his succession by his son, a first for any
 Communist country, indicates the enormous power he has assumed
 in 36 years of rule. The absence of any evidence of public
 debate about the succession is also indicative of the lack of
 real popular participation in the political process.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 No reliable information is available on politically motivated
 killing in North Korea. However, the North Korean attitude
 toward political killing was clearly demonstrated in the
 Rangoon bombing and the November 23, 1984 shooting in the
 Joint Security Area of the Demilitarized Zone(DMZ) dividing
 North and South Korea.
 After a careful investigation, the Government of Burma
 determined that the Democratic People's Republic of Korea was
 responsible for the October 9, 1983, attempt to assassinate
 Republic of Korea President Chun Doo Hwan during his visit to
 Burma. The bomb killed four cabinet ministers and a number of
 senior advisers and officials. Two North Korean army officers
 were brought to trial in Rangoon for the attack, and on
 December 9, 1983, were found guilty and sentenced to death.
 
 
 DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF KOREA
 In the DMZ incident a young Soviet student who wanted to
 defect broke away from a tour group and ran across the
 military demarcation line into the area controlled by the U.N.
 Command. The North Korean security guards opened fire on the
 fleeing Soviet, triggering an exchange of fire in which
 several lives were lost, and unsuccessfully pursued the
 defector across the line with guns blazing.
 b. Disappearance
 There is no information available on disappearance.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 Freedom House's 1983-84 report states that 'torture is
 reportedly common' in North Korea. The accounts of torture
 and beatings of crew members of the USS Pueblo after their
 capture in 1968 are well-known and documented. The only other
 reliable source on prison conditions and treatment of
 prisoners in North Korea is Venezuelan poet Ali Lameda, who
 was detained in North Korea from September 1967 through 1974,
 allegedly for attempted sabotage and espionage. While
 physical torture was not used on Mr. Lameda, he stated that
 Korean prisoners were routinely beaten. Lameda noted that
 "beating was also used as a means of persuasion during
 interrogation.*
 Lameda reported the use of deprivation of food to force
 .confessions," as well as solitary confinement, continuous
 interrogation, enforced waking periods, poor or nonexistent
 medical treatment, and 12 hours of forced labor per day. In
 addition, prisoners were denied family visits, parcels,
 correspondence, writing materials, newspapers, and clothing
 changes. Prisoners appeared to be regarded as persons without
 any rights.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Information on specific criminal justice procedures and
 practices in North Korea is extremely scarce. North Korea has
 refused to permit outside observation of its legal system and
 practices. The accounts provided by the crew members of the
 USS Pueblo and by Venezuelan poet Ali Lameda, while clearly
 from an earlier period, comprise virtually all the specific
 information available on the operation of the criminal justice
 system in North Korea.
 North Korean law provides that the period prisoners may be
 held for interrogation shall not exceed two months. This
 period may be extended indefinitely, however, if the
 Interrogation Department obtains approval of the Chief
 Prosecutor. Lameda, himself, was detained for 12 months
 without trial or charge. His request for a lawyer of his
 choice and an open trial were ridiculed as "bourgeois..
 Habeas corpus or its equivalent does not exist in practice.
 According to newspaper reports, North Korean defectors in
 South Korea estimated in April 1982 that at least 105,000
 'ideological offenders' were being held in eight major camps
 in the North. Amnesty International has received unconfirmed
 reports of arrests of those opposed to heir apparent Kim
 Chong-il.
 
 40-387 0 - 85 - 51
 
 
 792
 DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF KOREA
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The North Korean Constitution states that courts are
 independent, and judicial proceedings are to be carried out in
 strict accordance with law. All courts, however, are
 responsible to the people's assemblies, which effectively
 means total governmental control of the judiciary. Article
 138 states that "cases are heard in public, and the accused is
 guaranteed the right to defense; hearings may be closed to the
 public as stipulated by law." Lameda was twice denied public
 trial. After his first arrest he was imprisoned for a year
 without a hearing; after his second arrest, he was put through
 a closed session without benefit of counsel of his choice, or
 even knowledge of the charges. His tribunal was under the
 direction of the Ministry of Internal Security, with one
 person serving as both judge and prosecutor.
 Lameda stated that, other than to admit guilt, he was refused
 the right to speak out or defend himself at his trial. His
 'defense counsel" represented him by making a lengthy speech
 praising Kim Il-sung and then requesting a 20-year sentence,
 which the tribunal imposed after five minutes of deliberation.
 In a 1979 interview with American journalist John Wallach,
 North Korean Supreme Court Justice Li Chun-uk noted that the
 defense counsel's job is "to give the suspect due
 punishment." Open court appears to consist of an announcement
 of the term of imprisonment, which has already been determined
 by the Provincial Safety Bureau.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The populace is subjected to continuous indoctrination,
 designed to shape individual consciousness. Preschool
 children are drilled in homage to Kim Il-sung and his family,
 while youths and adults are required to participate in daily
 ideological training conducted by youth organizations or at
 places of employment. The propaganda requires rote recitation
 of party maxims and positions and strives for ideological
 purity. At least two North Korean security organizations
 enforce these controls.
 Reports, primarily from defectors, indicate that forced
 resettlement, particularly for those deemed politically
 unreliable, is common. Permission to reside in, or even
 enter, Pyongyang is strictly controlled.
 According to reports in South Korean journals, Japanese wives
 of Koreans repatriated from Japan since 1959 have not been
 permitted to visit Japan and, because their letters are
 subject to strict censorship, many have lost contact with
 their families.
 The Constitution states that "citizens are guaranteed the
 inviolability of person and residence and the privacy of
 correspondence." Lameda reported, however, that his residence
 was not respected and that listening devices were used against
 h.im. He was arrested and his collected papers and poetry
 destroyed without warrant.
 
 
 793
 DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF KOREA
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 The Constitution states that 'citizens have the freedoms of
 speech, the press, assembly, association, and demonstration.,
 In fact, North Koreans enjoy none of these rights. Such
 activities are permitted only in support of government
 objectives. Other articles of the Constitution that require
 citizens to follow the 'socialist norms of life" and to obey a
 .collective spirit* take precedence over individual political
 or civil liberties. Censorship of foreign and domestic media
 is enforced, and no deviation from the official government
 line is tolerated. Listening to foreign media broadcasts is
 prohibited, and violators reportedly are subject to severe
 punishment. Most North Koreans do not possess radios but must
 listen to government media through loudspeakers installed in
 their apartments. Artistic and academic works are controlled
 by the Government, and visitors report that a primary function
 of plays, movies, operas, and books is to contribute to the
 cult of personality surrounding 'the great leader,' Kim
 Il-sung, and his son, "the beloved leader," Kim Chong-il.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 The Government has developed a pervasive system of informers
 throughout the society. No public meetings can be held
 without governmental authorization. Trade unions and
 professional associations appear to exist solely as another
 method of governmental control over their members. They have
 no effective rights to organize, negotiate, or strike.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Although the Constitution guarantees that *citizens have
 religious liberty and the freedom of antireligious
 propaganda,' North Korea, in fact, has severely persecuted
 Christians and Buddhists since the late 1940's. No churches
 have been rebuilt since the Korean War. The regime uses
 religious organizational facades to proclaim the practice of
 religious freedom but appears to have long since purged the
 membership out of existence. Persons whose family or
 relatives once had a strong religious involvement are
 discriminated against. Though religious practice appears
 impossible, some foreign visitors to North Korea believe that
 the Government does not currently persecute the small number
 of Christians who continue to worship at home.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Internal travel in North Korea is strictly controlled. A
 travel pass is required for any movement outside one's home
 village and is granted only for required official or personal
 travel. This requirement is strictly enforced. Foreign
 travel is limited to officials or trusted artists and
 performers. Emigration is not allowed, and few refugees or
 defectors succeed in fleeing the country. Retaliation
 reportedly is taken against the relatives of those few persons
 who manage to escape. According to Freedom House, 'rights to
 travel internally and externally are perhaps the most
 restricted in the world: tourism is unknown--even to
 communist countries.-
 
 
 794
 DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF KOREA
 In 1959 North Korea began actively encouraging Korean
 residents overseas to repatriate to 'the Fatherland." Some
 observers estimate that during the next several years over
 100,000 overseas Koreans, almost all from Japan, voluntarily
 repatriated to North Korea. Since then, however, reports of
 the harsh treatment given repatriates reached overseas
 Koreans, reducing the flow to North Korea to a trickle.
 (Because of their "corruption' by exposure to foreign
 influences, repatriates are isolated from North Korean society
 after their arrival until they can be indoctrinated and their
 ideological reliability gauged.)
 North Korea has permitted some overseas Korean residents to
 enter its territory to visit their relatives, and several have
 made repeat visits.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Political processes in North Korea are dominated by Kim
 Il-sung, who leads the Korean Workers' Party, and also heads
 the Government. Kim has groomed his son Kim Chong-il to
 succeed him, and there are reports that Kim Chong-il has been
 acquiring increasing power and influence. The legislature,
 the Supreme People's Assembly, has never taken any action
 other than unanimous passage of resolutions presented to it by
 the leadership. In an effort to create an appearance of
 democracy, North Korea has created several "minority
 parties.' They exist only as rosters of officials who have
 token representation in the People's Assembly and completely
 support the government line.
 Free elections do not exist in North Korea. Although
 elections to the Supreme People's Assembly were held in
 February 1982, and to city and county assemblies in March
 1983, in all cases only one candidate was approved by the
 government party in each electoral district, and, according to
 the government-controlled media, 100 percent of the voters
 turned out to elect 100 percent of the approved candidates.
 Such "elections' in reality are a mandatory exercise in which
 voters are required to participate and to approve the party's
 candidates.
 The average citizen is completely excluded from any real
 participation in the political process. To achieve even a
 semblance of real participation, one must become a member of
 the Korean Worker's Party. The selection process for entrance
 to the party is long and rigorous. Individuals from 'bad
 social backgrounds,' i.e., those who have relatives who fled
 south during the Korean War, those whose families had strong
 religious involvement or were once property owners or members
 of the bourgeoisie, and those who have relatives who are
 political prisoners, effectively are denied entry into the
 party and are discriminated against. Most levels of the party
 have no voice, serving only to carry out the decrees and "on
 the spot guidance' promulgated by party leader Kim Il-sung and
 his top subordinates.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Non-governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 No organizations exist within North Korea to report on or
 observe human rights violations. North Korea does not
 
 
 795
 DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF KOREA
 participate in any international or regional human rights
 organizations. On September 14, 1981, North Korea acceded to
 the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
 (ICCPR) and the International Convenant on Economic, Social
 and Cultural Rights. At the March-April 1984 session of the
 Human Rights Committee, an expert body consisting of members
 elected by state parties to the ICCPR, members criticized a
 report submitted by North Korea on its human rights practices
 as too short and inadequate. The North Korean representative
 denied that his country had any problems at all, prompting an
 expert member to urge that the North Korean's assurances of
 freedom of religion, political activity, and travel outside
 Korea be made known to the North Korean people.
 Amnesty International has requested a visit to North Korea;
 the Government has not responded to or acknowledged this
 request. A December 1982 request by Amnesty International for
 information on North Korean laws, on use of the death penalty,
 and on reports of arrests and long-term imprisonment of
 political figures also received no reply.
 The Amnesty International 1984 Report noted that its work
 continued to be seriously impaired by the absence of any
 official information during the year concerning any arrests,
 trials, or death sentences, that it continued to investigate
 reports that four prominent political figures had been
 detained for several years, and that it did not receive any
 replies to correspondence directed to the Government. Freedom
 House, in its 1984-85 report, lists North Korea as "not free."
 ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND CULTURAL SITUATION
 North Korea is a less-developed country with a highly
 centralized, planned economy. Many observers believe that,
 after a short period of rapid growth in the early 1970's, the
 economy experienced difficulties in subsequent years due
 largely to economic policies that overemphasized military
 expenditures, stressed attainment of self-sufficiency, and
 pushed for rapid growth of heavy industry. More than twenty
 percent of North Korea's Gross National Product is committed
 to military expenditures, the second highest such rate in the
 world.
 In the early 1980's the Government gradually has shifted its
 policy emphasis toward expanding trade. In September 1984,
 North Korea promulgated a joint ventures law to attract
 foreign capital and technology. As yet there is little
 evidence of foreign investor interest or any shift in internal
 economic priorities away from support of military industry.
 The apparent shift in economic policy is also shown by North
 Korea's apparent willingness to discuss economic trade and
 cooperation with the Republic of Korea.
 The population of North Korea is estimated to be about 19
 million, with an annual growth rate of 2.3 percent. The 1984
 infant mortality rate was 30 per 1,000 live births. Life
 expectancy at birth was 65.8 years in 1984. The World Bank
 estimated in 1981 that the calorie supply available for
 consumption was 129 percent of nutritional requirements.
 North Korea appears to have invested considerable effort and
 money in developing a comprehensive health care system. Both
 pre- and post-working age citizens are cared for by the
 state. Basic food supplies are heavily subsidized and
 
 
 796
 rationed. There were some reports of reduced rations and food
 shortages in 1983; the proportion of rice in the grain ration
 has been steadily reduced with grains considered less
 desirable, such as millet or barley, being substituted.
 Reportedly, because quality foods are difficult to obtain,
 jobs in food-handling industries are highly prized. Foreign
 visitors have noted that North Koreans they observed appeared
 adequately fed. Per capita income was estimated to be $968 in
 1982.
 The party, government, and military elite enjoy significant
 economic privileges, such as access to special stores and
 medical facilities, better housing, and better education,
 which are not available to ordinary citizens.
 The North Korean Government provides 11 years of compulsory
 free education to its citizens and claims to have eliminated
 illiteracy. The adjusted primary school enrollment ratios for
 1976 were 96.6 for females and 101 for males, for a combined
 ratio of 98.7.
 The Constitution states that 'women hold equal social status
 and rights with men.' Despite this provision, few women reach
 high levels of the party or the Government. Women are
 represented proportionally in the labor force, and personnel
 in small factories are predominately women. Reportedly, women
 are often paid less than men for similar work.
 
 
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: KOREA. NORTH
 1982     1983     1984
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL...         0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS .............. ....0.0       0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ............. 0.0            0.0      0.0
 A.AID  ....  ................. .0.0     0.0      0.0
 LOANS ............... .     0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............   .. .0.0      0.0      0.0
 (SEC.SUPP.ASSIST.)...         0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.FOOD FOR PEACE .......        0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS ...............       0.0     0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE I-TOTAL ..........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS .....        0.0      0.0      0.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR .....        0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE 1I-TOTAL .........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.RELIEF.EC.DEV & WFP.         0.0      0.0      0.0
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY .....        0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST...         0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS ...............       0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............  ...  0.0      0.0      0.0
 PEACE CORPS ......        0.0      0.0      0.0
 NARCOTICS ........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 OTHER ............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL...         0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS ..............   ... 0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............       0.0      0.0      0.0
 A.MAP GRANTS .........         0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.CREDIT FINANCING...          0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.INTL MIL.EO.TRNG...          0.0      0.0      0.0
 D.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK..          0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS .......         0.0      0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. & MIL...         0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS ...............       0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............  ...  0.0      0.0      0.0
 ----------------------------------------------------------
 OTHER US LOANS ..........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 EX-IM BANK LOANS .......        0.0      0.0      0.0
 ALL OTHER ..............   ... 0.0      0.0      0.0
 ..........................................................
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1982     1983     1984     1946-84
 TOTAL .........    3.6      0.2      0.0      4.1
 IBRD               0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 IFC                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 IDA                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 IDB                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 ADB                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 AFDB               0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 UNDP               3.6      0.2      0.0      4.1
 OTHER-UN           0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 EEC                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 
 
 798
