North Korea
In October 2006 the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea (North Korea)
announced that it had conducted its first nuclear weapons test. The move led to a
prompt United Nations Security Council resolution condemning the test and
calling for sanctions against North Korea by member states. The nuclear
detonation followed the test firing in July of seven ballistic missiles, which also
led to a condemnatory Security Council resolution.
North Korea’s humanitarian crisis continued to deepen. Following the suspension
of its activities in December 2005, the World Food Programme (WFP) was allowed
to resume operations in May 2006, but in a much reduced capacity with far fewer
staff. Massive floods that hit North Korea in the summer further exacerbated the
nation’s chronic food shortage, while South Korea, North Korea’s largest food
donor of recent years, suspended its food aid in response to the missile firing in
July.
North Korea showed no visible sign of improvement in its dire human rights conditions.
In November 2005 the UN General Assembly adopted a resolution
expressing serious concern for “systematic, widespread and grave violations of
human rights” in North Korea, following multiple resolutions by the UN
Commission on Human Rights. North Korea allowed neither the freedom of information,
association, movement, and religion, nor organized political opposition,
labor activism, or independent civil society. Arbitrary arrests, torture, lack of due
process and fair trials, and executions remain of grave concern. Collective punishment
of entire families for “political crimes” remains the norm. North Korea
continues to block access by international human rights organizations.
Right to Food
A series of recent policy changes in North Korea jeopardized access to food for
the most vulnerable segments of the population. In late 2005 North Korea
banned the buying and selling of grain by individuals at farmers’ markets, and
announced it was reviving the Public Distribution System, under which only the
state can distribute grain. About a million people died of starvation and many
more suffered severe malnutrition under similar policies in the 1990s. The 2006 floods worsened food shortages. The WFP reports that North Korea currently faces
a deficit of some 800,000 tons of food. The food shortages are especially worrisome
for the most vulnerable populations, including young children, pregnant or
nursing women, and the elderly, as North Korea has a long history of first feeding
the elite class, including high-ranking military, intelligence, police, and other lawenforcement
officials. Smaller rations, often less than the minimum needed to
keep a person healthy, are then distributed to the general population.
Criminal Proceedings
Those who are accused of having committed a crime in North Korea seem to suffer
the most severe abuses. Legal counsel for the suspect is rarely available at
any point in the process, and many suspects are tortured or mistreated during
interrogation. Almost all prisoners are subject to forced labor and face cruel,
inhuman, and degrading treatment; many die in prison because of mistreatment,
malnutrition, or lack of medical care. Under North Korea’s penal code, premeditated
murder and so-called anti-state crimes such as treason, sedition, and acts of
terrorism are punishable by death. However, numerous testimonies by North
Korean refugees attest to executions of people charged with lesser crimes as well,
such as stealing food or other state property. Eyewitnesses say such executions
are often carried out publicly, and in the presence of children.
North Korean Escapees
Tens of thousands of North Koreans are believed to live in hiding in China, having
fled to avoid hunger and political repression. People who return from China often
face abuse and detention under North Korean law, which makes leaving North
Korea without state permission an act of treason punishable by heavy penalties.
China routinely harasses aid workers providing assistance to North Koreans. A relatively
small number of North Koreans have taken a long and dangerous journey
to other countries of the region, including Cambodia, Laos, Mongolia, Thailand,
and Vietnam, to ultimately reach South Korea, and recently, the United States.
Hundreds of others remain in detention centers in these transit countries.
At this writing, the US government has granted refugee status to 10 North
Koreans, the first group to benefit from the North Korea Human Rights Act of 2004. Separately, US immigration courts granted political asylum to four North
Koreans who had previously settled in South Korea and obtained South Korean
citizenship before applying for asylum in the United States, citing the same Act.
Jay Lefkowitz, US special envoy for human rights in North Korea, has hinted in
several press interviews that the US would admit more North Korean refugees.
According to a Radio Free Asia report from February 2006, seven EU member
states—Belgium, Denmark, Germany, Netherlands, Norway, Sweden, and the
United Kingdom—have granted refugee status to almost 300 North Koreans since
the late 1990s.
Humanitarian groups report that the trafficking of North Korean women and girls
persists, especially in the area of the border with China. Many are abducted or
duped into marriage, prostitution, or outright sexual slavery, while some voluntarily
enter such situations to survive or to earn money.
Abductees
According to the Korea Institute for National Unification, based in South Korea, a
total of 3,790 South Koreans were kidnapped and taken to North Korea between
1953 and 1995, of whom 485 remain in detention. Some of the abductees have
been used in propaganda broadcasts to South Korea, while others have been
used to train North Korean spies. Unlike its admissions regarding 13 Japanese
abductees (five of whom were allowed to return home in 2002, the others being
said to have died), North Korea has rejected repeated requests from families of
the South Korean abductees to confirm their existence, to return them, or, in the
cases of the dead, to return their remains.
Kaesong Industrial Complex
North Korea opened the Kaesong Industrial Complex (KIC) in June 2004. Two years
later, over 8,000 North Korean workers are employed by 13 South Korean companies,
producing watches, shoes, clothes, kitchenware, plastic containers, electrical
cords, and car parts, among other items. The KIC’s labor conditions came
under public scrutiny as South Korea has tried to include items produced there in
a Free Trade Agreement under negotiation with the United States. South Korean
companies, under pressure from Pyongyang, are violating the existing KIC Labor Law by paying workers’ wages to the North Korean government instead of directly
to the workers. The KIC Labor Law falls far short of international labor protection
standards on the freedom of association, the right to collective bargaining, prohibitions
on sex discrimination and harassment, and harmful child labor.
Key International Actors
North Korea’s announcement on October 9, 2006, of its first nuclear weapons test
provoked grave concern and protest internationally. The UN Security Council
resolution adopted in response condemned the test, called for sanctions
including a ban on exporting material for weapons of mass destruction and
ballistic missiles to North Korea, and authorized inspection of cargo entering or
leaving the country to prevent illegal trafficking in unconventional weapons or
ballistic missiles. In early November, North Korea agreed to return to the longstalled
six-party talks on its nuclear weapons program (involving also China,
Japan, Russia, South Korea, and the United States), which it had been boycotting
since November 2005 in reaction to US financial sanctions against it for its
alleged complicity in counterfeiting US dollars and money laundering. At this
writing the talks have yet to resume.
North Korea’s test firing of seven ballistic missiles on July 5, 2006, also led to a
UN Security Council resolution, and South Korea bilaterally protested the missile
launch in a high-level inter-Korea meeting. When North Korea refused to discuss
the issue, Seoul suspended shipment of its promised food aid, and North Korea
in turn stopped reunions of Korean families separated by the border for over half
a century.
South Korea continues to recognize all North Koreans arriving in South Korea as
southern citizens (about 9,000 North Koreans have resettled in South Korea
mostly over the last decade), and provides them with generous resettlement subsidies.
South Korea’s then-Foreign Minister Ban Ki-moon (at the time a candidate
for, and since confirmed as UN secretary-general), raised North Korean human
rights issues during his keynote speech at the inaugural session of the UN Human
Rights Council in June 2006, signaling a possible change of Seoul’s policy of
maintaining silence on North Korea’s human rights conditions. Previously, South Korea has been either absent or abstained from voting on UN resolutions condemning
North Korea’s human rights conditions.
The European Union played a more active role in calling for international attention
to North Korea’s human rights conditions. It sponsored the UN General Assembly
resolution in 2005, and its Parliament passed a separate resolution in June 2006
asking North Korea to respect international human rights treaties.
North Korea has not responded to repeated requests in the past three years by
Vitit Muntarbhorn, the UN special rapporteur on North Korea, to engage in dialogue.