 DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF KOREA*
 The Democratic People's Republic of Korea (DPRK) is a
 dictatorship under the absolute rule of the Korean Workers'
 Party (KWP). The party exercises power on behalf of its
 leader, General Secretary Kim Il Sung, who is also President of
 the DPRK. Kim Il Sung, in power for 44 years, has largely
 turned over day-to-day control of the Government to his son,
 Kim Jong Il. The son has been gradually taking a higher public
 profile and was recently named Supreme Commander of the Korean
 People's Army. The younger Kim ranks second in the party and,
 together with his father, is the subject of a personality
 cult.
 The North Korean regime subjects its people to rigid controls.
 The regime establishes security ratings for each individual
 which determine access to employment, schools, medical
 facilities, and stores as well as admission to the KWP, but
 this loyalty system appears to have been relaxed somewhat in
 recent years. Individual rights remain subordinated, however,
 to those of the State and the party.
 The State directs all significant economic activity. The North
 Korean economy has contracted significantly due to the
 elimination of Soviet concessional trade and aid. According to
 a Bank of Korea estimate, the North Korean gross national
 product (GNP) experienced a 2.7 percent contraction in 1991.
 Moreover, there have been continuing shortfalls in agricultural
 production and bottlenecks throughout the economy caused by
 chronic energy shortages. In response, the Government has
 haltingly experimented with some Chinese-style economic reforms
 --increased enterprise autonomy, a joint venture law, and
 farmers' markets-and recently announced special economic zones
 in the far Northeast. It has also exhorted the general
 population to endure even more austerity, and especially to
 make do with less food. Economic development continues to be
 hindered by inadequate distribution facilities, nonproductive
 allocation of resources, and a bad international credit rating
 stemming from the DPRK's default on its foreign debt, as well
 as by the diversion of as much as a quarter of GNP to military
 expenditures.
 North Korea continues to deny its citizens the most fundamental
 human rights. However, the Government has allowed the entry of
 a growing number of foreign visitors, especially overseas
 Koreans, and up to 2,000 Korean-Americans have visited the DPRK
 for family reunions in the past few years. Furthermore, the
 Agreement on Reconciliation, Nonaggression, Cooperation and
 Exchange Between North and South Korea, signed in December,
 1991 calls for increased family exchanges and will establish a
 joint committee to discuss concrete measures.
 The North Korean Penal Code is draconian, stipulating capital
 punishment and confiscation of all assets for a wide variety of
 *The United States does not have diplomatic relations with the
 Democratic People's Republic of Korea. North Korea does not
 allow representatives of foreign governments, journalists, or
 other invited visitors the freedom of movement that would
 enable them to assess human rights conditions there. Most of
 this report, therefore, is based on information obtained over a
 period of time extending from well before 1991. While limited
 in detail, the information is nonetheless indicative of the
 human rights situation in North Korea today.
 
 
 888
 DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF KOREA
 "crimes against the revolution," including defection, slander
 of the party or state, and having "reactionary" printed
 matter. The regime permits no independent press or
 associations, and little outside information reaches the
 public, except that approved and disseminated by the Government.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section I Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing
 The regime has in the past summarily executed some political
 prisoners, political opponents of Kim Il Sung and Kim Jong Il,
 and repatriated defectors. The South Korean press reported
 that the parents of a North Korean judo team member who
 defected in Spain were executed in 1991 as a warning to other
 North Korean sports team members who might travel abroad, but
 this has not been confirmed.
 North Korea has intermittently directed terrorist attacks
 against South Korea, including most recently the bombing of
 Korean Air Flight 858 off the coast of Burma in November 1987.
 There has been no indication of further North Korean
 involvement in terrorist acts since then, but the Government
 has not yet provided credible assurances that it forswears
 terrorism.
 b. Disappearance
 There is no information available on disappearance within North
 Korea. There are several reports that over the past 10 years
 the DPRK has kidnaped South Koreans, Japanese, and other
 foreign citizens outside of its borders. In August 1991,
 Japan, in the course of normalization talks with the DPRK,
 raised the issue of a Japanese woman kidnaped from Japan and
 used by the North Koreans to teach Japanese language and
 customs to the surviving terrorist implicated in the Korean Air
 Line Flight 858 bombing. The DPRK vehemently denied the
 kidnaping charge, but Japan has said it will continue to press
 the case. The Japanese press has estimated that as many as 20
 Japanese have been kidnaped and are being held against their
 will in North Korea.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 There is no information on recent practices, but credible
 reports indicate that during the 1980's prisoners were
 routinely tortured or ill-treated and that many prisoners died
 from torture, disease, starvation, or exposure.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Little information is available on specific criminal justice
 procedures and practices in North Korea. North Korea has
 refused to permit outside observation of its legal system and
 practices.
 North Korean law provides that prisoners may be held for
 interrogation for a period not to exceed 2 months. This period
 may be extended indefinitely, however, if the Interrogation
 Department obtains the approval of the Chief Prosecutor. There
 are reports of persons being detained for 12 months without
 
 
 889
 DEMOCRATIC P2OPLE'S REPUBLIC OF KOREA
 trial or charge. Other reports note that it is very difficult
 for family members or other concerned persons to obtain
 information regarding charges being leveled against a person
 accused or even detained. Habeas corpus or its equivalent does
 not exist in law or in practice.
 North Korean defectors to South Korea in 1989 estimated that
 the regime holds at least 105,000 political prisoners and their
 family members in "concentration camps," where they are
 prohibited from marrying and required to grow their own food.
 Based on defector testimony and other sources, the Republic of
 Korea estimates North Korea detains about 150,000 political-
 prisoners and family members in maximum security camps in
 remote., isolated areas. North Korean officials deny the
 existence of such gulags or prisons but admit the existence of
 "education centers" for people who "commit crimes by mistake."
 One credible report lists 12 such prison camps believed to
 exist in the DPRK. It is believed that several former high
 officials, including former prime ministers, are imprisoned in
 the camps, and that most maximum security prisoners have been
 confined without trial or formal charges. Visitors and any
 form of communication with detainees, although once allowed,
 are now said to be prohibited.
 In a July newspaper interview, Cho Kap Chae, a North Korean
 defector who had been a high-ranking official in the DPRK
 Ministry of Public Security; said that there were two types of
 closed areas for detention of-prisoners. One, he said, is a
 system of closed camps from which prisoners never emerge and. in
 which conditions are extremely difficult. In the second system
 of camps, prisoners could be "rehabilitated," and Cho reported
 that a prisoner he knew was released after a 3-year detention.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The Constitution states that courts are independent and that
 judicial proceedings are to be carried out in strict accordance
 with the law, which contains,-elaborate procedural guarantees.
 However, credible reports indicate that these safeguards are
 not followed in practice, add it appears the party exercises
 pervasive control over the cr.iminal justice system. Article
 138 of the Constitution states that "cases are heard in public,
 and the accused is guaranteed the right to defense; hearings
 may be closed to the public as stipulated by law." Numerous
 reports exist, however, of the Public Security Ministry
 dispensing with trials in political cases and referring cases
 to the Ministry of State Security for imposition of punishment.
 When trials are held, lawyers are apparently assigned by the
 Government, and reports indicate that defense lawyers are not
 considered representatives of the accused but- rather
 independent parties who are expected to help the court by
 persuading the accused to confess guilt. Some reports note a
 distinction between political and common criminals and state
 that the 0overnment affords trials only to the latter. North
 Korea equates "political criminals" with those who criticize
 the regime. Numerous other reports suggest that in the past
 political offenses included such forms of lese majesty as
 sitting on newspapers bearing Kim Il Sung's picture.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The regime subjects the people to a pervasive program of
 indoctrination designed to shape and control individual
 
 
 890
 DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF KOREA
 consciousness. Preschool children are drilled in homage to Kim
 Il Sung and his family while school age children are subjected
 daily to extensive indoctrination. Youths and adults are
 required to participate in daily ideological training conducted
 during school or at places of employment. Government-organized
 neighborhood units also provide indoctrination for persons who
 neither work nor go to school. The daily indoctrination
 requires rote recitation of party maxims and policies and
 strives for ideological purity. Multiple North Korean security
 organizations enforce these controls.
 Koreans with relatives who fled to the South at the time of the
 Korean War appear to be still classified as part of the
 "hostile class" in the DPRK's elaborate loyalty system.
 Because approximately 10 million families were separated by the
 end of the Korean War, this category encompasses a significant
 percentage of the North Korean population The defector Cho Kap
 Chae, previously cited, notes that the "impure" or hostile
 class consists of 25 to 30 percent of the population. Members
 of this class may still be subject to some discrimination,
 although Cho claims that their treatment has improved greatly
 in recent years. Although the Constitution states that
 "citizens are guaranteed the inviolability of person and
 residence and the privacy of correspondence," the practice is
 otherwise. The Government has developed a pervasive system of
 informers throughout the society and, according to several
 sources, electronic surveillance of residences is also common.
 In school, the authorities encourage children to discuss what
 their parents have said at home. The Government conducts
 monthly "sanitation" inspections to check on household
 activities. Each house is required to display portraits of Kim
 Il Sung and Kim Jong II. Reports indicate that because of the
 pervasive surveillance, fear is the hallmark of most social
 relationships.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Although the Constitution states that "citizens have the
 freedoms of speech, the press, assembly, association, and
 demonstration," the regime permits such activities only in
 support of government objectives. Other articles of the
 Constitution that require citizens to follow the "Socialist
 norms of life" and to obey a "collective spirit" take
 precedence over individual political or civil liberties.
 Credible reports indicate that the Government strictly curtails
 the rights of freedom of expression and association guaranteed
 under the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,
 to which North Korea became a party in 1981. Persons
 criticizing the President or his policies are believed liable
 to punishment by imprisonment or "corrective labor." One
 defector reported in 1986 that a scientist, whose home was
 bugged through his radio set, was arrested and executed for
 statements made at home critical of Kim Il Sung.
 The Government attempts to control all news that enters and
 leaves the DPRK. The visits of Western journalists admitted
 into the country are carefully managed. Soviet publications
 that have written critically of North Korea have had access
 restricted, and during 1991 several had their offices closed.
 Domestic media censorship is strictly enforced, and no
 deviation from the official government line is tolerated. The
 regime prohibits listening to foreign media broadcasts except
 by the political elite, and violators reportedly are subject to
 
 
 891
 DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF KOREA
 severe punishment. Radio and television sets are built to
 receive only domestic programming. The Government controls
 artistic and academic works, and visitors report that the
 primary function of plays, movie!, operas, and books is to
 contribute to the cult of personality surrounding "the Great
 Leader," Kim Il Sung, and "the Dear Leader," Kim Jong Il.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Government authorization is required for public meetings.
 There appear to be no organizations other than those created by
 the Government. The State even prohibits apolitical groups
 such as neighborhood or alumni organizations. Professional
 associations exist solely as another means of government
 control over the members of these organizations.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Although the Constitution provides that "citizens have
 religious liberty and the freedom of antireligious propaganda,"
 the regime, in fact, has severely persecuted Christians and
 Buddhists since the late 1940's and appears to discriminate
 against persons whose family or relatives once had a strong
 religious involvement.
 Despite its past record, the regime is making a major effort to
 use government-sponsored religious organizations to advance its
 foreign policy goals. The DPRK claims to have 10,000
 Christians who worship in 500 home churches, and the Chondogyo
 Young Friends Party, a front group based on a native Korean
 religious movement, is still in existence. A few Buddhist
 temples are in operation, and the country's first two Christian
 churches--one Protestant and one Catholic--were built in late
 1988. The churches are included in the fixed itinerary for
 many foreign visitors to Pyongyang. Some visitors attest to
 the authenticity of the church services and to the faith of the
 several dozen worshipers observed; others say the church
 activity appears staged.
 Kim Il Sung, his family, and his juche (self-reliance) ideology
 are accorded reverence akin to worship, and the cult of the Kim
 family is functionally akin to organized religion. No North
 Korean religious official is ever known to have preached that
 there is any moral authority higher than that of Kim Ii Sung,
 and the regime seems to be trying to find a theological basis
 for melding Kimilsungism (as it is called by North Korean
 media) and Christianity.
 In 1991 a North Korean Christian delegation'(including the
 pastor of one of the two chruches established in 1988, divinity
 students, Christian lay persons), and government officials in
 charge of religious affairs journeyed to the United States,
 meeting Christian groups in several cities over a 3-week
 period. Additionally, a number of Korean-American pastors
 representing a number of different churches traveled to North
 Korea in 1991, meeting Korean pastors as well as government
 officials in charge of religious ffairs. The impression of
 many of these travelers has been that while the DPRK is trying
 to accommodate the desires of the overseas Korean Christian
 community for more extensive contact with coreligionists in
 North Korea, it continues to keep an extremely tight grip, both
 organizationally and ideologically, on the practice of
 Christianity (or any other religion) in North Korea.
 
 
 892
 DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S "REPUBLIC OF KOREA
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 The DPRK regime strictly controls internal travel, requiring a
 travel pass for any movement outside one's home village; these
 passes are granted only for required official or certain
 personal travel. Personal travel is usually limited to
 attending the wedding or funeral of a close relative. Long
 delays in obtaining the necessary permit often result in denial
 of the right to travel even for these limited purposes. State
 control of internal travel is also ensured by a ration system
 that distributes coupons valid only in the region issued.
 Worsening economic conditions, particularly energy and fuel
 shortages, have contributed further to the restriction on the
 freedom of movement for North Korean citizens.
 Reports, primarily from defectors, indicate that forced
 resettlement, particularly for those deemed politically
 unreliable, is common. Permission to reside in, or even enter
 Pyongyang, the capital, is strictly controlled.
 Foreign travel is limited to officials and trusted artists,
 athletes, and academics. The regime does not allow emigration,
 and only 1,000 or so defectors have succeeded in fleeing the
 country since 1953. The regime retaliates against the
 relatives of those few persons who manage to escape.
 Involuntarily repatriated defectors have been jailed or, in
 some cases, executed. In 1991, for the first time, an
 unmarried North Korean citizen was allowed to travel to the
 United States to visit relatives. He was accompanied by a
 government official and returned after 2 weeks.
 The regime does not allow students to study outside of
 Communist or friendly Third World countries for any period. It
 tightened controls over DPRK students studying abroad when six
 defected from Eastern Europe in 1989, and in 1990 called back
 its students from Eastern Europe and the U.S.S.R.
 From 1959 to 1982, 93,000 Korean residents of Japan, including
 6,637 Japanese wives, voluntarily repatriated to North Korea in
 response to-nationalistic appeals. Despite DPRK assurances
 that the wives, 1,828 of whom still had Japanese citizenship,
 would be allowed to go home to Japan every 2 or 3 years, none
 is known to have returned to Japan, and most have never been
 heard from again. Credible reports indicate that most of the
 returnees and their families were categorized in the "wavering
 class;" given poor food, clothing, and housing; subjected to
 hard labor; and treated with contempt. When reports of their
 harsh treatment became known overseas, voluntary repatriation
 dried up. Recent reports suggest that the treatment of
 Japanese spouses has improved, since they have access to
 much-needed hard currency. With normalization talks with Japan
 under way, the DPRK has indicated it is willing to respond to
 inquiries about individual Japanese spouses on a case by case
 basis.
 North Korea has permitted entry to several thousand overseas
 Korean residents in Japan, China, North America, and elsewhere
 to visit their relatives. Recently the regime has granted
 entry to greater numbers of other visitors, including
 journalists and tourists. Large groups were admitted around
 the time of Kim Il Sung's birthday in mid-April. In addition,
 several thousand delegates and press representatives were
 admitted in June 1991 for the Inter-Parliamentary Union meeting
 held in Pyongyang. Visitors are closely monitored and
 
 
 893
 DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF KOREA
 itineraries are usually fixed, although some visitors reported
 they were allowed to walk freely around the vicinity of their
 hotels.
 Section 3  Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 There is no mechanism by which the citizenry can effect
 transitions in leadership or changes in government. The
 political system is completely dominated by Kim Ii Sung and
 heir-designate Kim Jong Il. The legislature, the Supreme
 People's Assembly, which meets only a few days a year, serves
 only to rubberstamp resolutions presented to it by the
 leadership. In an effort to create an appearance of democracy,
 the DPRK has created several "minority parties." They exist
 only as rosters of officials who have token representation in
 the People's Assembly and completely support the government
 line.
 Free elections do not exist in North Korea. Although elections
 to the Supreme People's Assembly and to provincial, city, and
 county assemblies are all regularly held, in all cases the
 Government'approved only one candidate in each electoral
 district. According to the government-controlled media, over
 99 percent of the voters turned out to elect 100 percent of the
 approved candidates. Such "elections" are an exercise in which
 people are forced to participate to mobilize support for the
 regime. Despite the long and rigorous selection process for
 membership in the KWP, most party members have no voice in
 decisionmaking, serving only to carry out the decrees
 promulgated by party leader Kim Il Sung and other top officials.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 No organizations are permitted to exist to report on or observe
 human rights violations. North Korea does not belong to any
 international or regional human rights organizations, but has
 for some years sent observers to the U.N. Commission for Human
 Rights.
 The Government has not allowed Amnesty International, Asia
 Watch, or any other international organization to visit North
 Korea to monitor human rights practices and has fulminated
 against reports by such groups as being "full of lies and
 fabrications."
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 The Constitution states that "women hold equal social status
 and rights with men.!' However, few women have reached high
 levels of the party or the Government. Women are represented
 proportionally in the labor force, with the exception of small
 factoried where the work force is predominantly female.
 The regime discriminates against the physically handicapped.
 Handicapped persons, other than war veterans, are reportedly
 not allowed within the city limits of Pyongyang. According to
 one credible report, authorities check for deformities in the
 capital city every 2 or 3 years and remove the disabled, some
 of the elderly, widows, and the sick to the countryside. The
 dwarf community has been banished to a remote settlement.
 
 
 894
 DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF KOREA
 Nothing is known about the extent to which violence against
 women is practiced or tolerated.
 North Korea is a homogeneous country and, except for a small
 Chinese community, is relatively devoid of minority groups.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 Free labor unions do not exist in North Korea. Because the
 party by definition purports to represent the interests of
 labor, trade unions exist in form only. There is a single
 labor front, called the General Federation of Trade Unions of
 Korea, which is affiliated with the Communist-dominated World
 Federation of Trade Unions. Operating under this umbrella,
 unions function on the classical Soviet model, with
 responsibility for mobilizing workers behind productivity goals
 and state targets, and for providing health, education,
 cultural, and welfare facilities. They do not have the right
 to strike.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 Workers have no right to organize or to bargain collectively.
 Wages are set by government ministries. Workers have no input
 into management decisions.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 There is no prohibition on the use of forced or compulsory
 labor. The Government routinely uses military conscripts for
 construction projects.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 No data are available on the minimum age for employment of
 children.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 No data are available on minimum wages or occupational safety
 and health. The State assigns all jobs; ideological purity is
 as important as professional competence in deciding who
 receives a particular job. Absence from work without a
 doctor's certificate results in a reduction in a worker's
 rations. The Constitution stipulates a workday limited to 8
 hours, but several sources report that during production
 campaigns most laborers work 12 to 16 hours daily. The
 regime's propaganda euphemistically refers to these extra hours
 as "patriotic labor" done on a "voluntary" basis by the workers.
 
 
 895
