 DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF KOREA*
 The Democratic People's Republic of Korea (DPRK) is a dictatorship under the ab-
 solute rule of the Korean Workers' Party (KWP). Kim I1 Sung led the DPRK from
 its inception until his death in 1994. Since then his son Kim Jong I1 appears to have
 had unchallenged authority. Kim Jong Il was named General Secretary of the KWP
 in October 1997. In September the Supreme People's Assembly reconfirmed Kim
 Jong I1 as Chairman of the National Defense Commission and declared that position
 the "highest office of state." The presidency was abolished leaving the late Kim II
 Sung as the DPRK's only president. Both Kim I1 Sung and Kim Jong Ii continue
 to be the objects of intense personality cults. The regime emphasizes "juche," a na-
 tional ideology of self-reliance. The judiciary is not independent.
 The Korean People's Army is the primary organization responsible for external se-
 curity. It is assisted by a large military reserve force and several quasi-military or-
 ganizations, including the Worker-Peasant Red Guards and the People's Security
 Force. These organizations assist the Ministry of Public Security and cadres of the
 KWP in maintaining internal security. Members of the security forces committed se-
 rious human rights abuses.
 The State directs all significant economic activity, and only government-controlled
 labor unions are permitted. The economy contracted in 1998, as it has each year
 since the beginning of the decade. This decline is due in part to the collapse of the
 Soviet bloc and the elimination of Soviet and Chinese concessional trade and aid.
 It is also due to distribution bottlenecks, inefficient allocation of resources, lack of
 access to international credit stemming from the DPRIKs default on much of its for-
 eign debt, and the diversion of an estimated quarter of the gross national product
 to military expenditures. In 1995, 1996, and 1997, bad weather damaged crops,
 forced thousands from their homes, and aggravated an already difficult economic
 situation. The 1998 harvest fell significantly short of minimum needs. The Govern-
 ment continued to seek international food aid as well as other forms of assistance.
 Food, clothing, and energy are rationed throughout the country.
 The Government continues to deny its citizens human rights. Citizens do not have
 the right peacefully to change their government. There continued to be reports of
 extrajudicial killings and disappearances. Citizens are detained arbitrarily, and
 many are held as political prisoners; prison conditions are harsh. The constitutional
 provisions for an independent judiciary and fair trials are not implemented in prac-
 tice. The regime subjects its citizens-to rigid controls. The state leadership perceives
 most international norms of human rights, especially individual rights, as illegit-
 imate, alien social concepts subversive to the goals of the State and party. The
 Penal Code is draconian, stipulating capital punishment and confiscation of all as-
 sets for a wide variety of "crimes against the revolution," including defection, at-
 tempted defection, slander of the policies of the party or State, listening to foreign
 broadcasts, writing "reactionary" letters, and possessing reactionary printed matter.
 The Government prohibits freedom of speech, the press, assembly, and association,
 and all forms of cultural and media activities are under the tight control of the
 party. Radios sold in North Korea are constructed to receive North Korean radio
 broadcasts only; radios obtained from abroad must be altered to work in a similar
 manner. Under these circumstances, little outside information reaches the public ex-
 cept that approved and disseminated by the Government. The Government restricts
 freedom of religion, citizens' movements, and worker rights.
 *The United States does not have diplomatic relations with the Democratic People's Republic
 of Korea. North Korea does not allow representatives of foreign governments, journalists, or
 other invited visitors the freedom of movement that would ensble them to fully assess human
 rights conditions there. This report is based on information obtained over more than a decade,
 updated where possible by information drawn from recent interviews, reports, and other docu-
 mentation. While limited in detail, this information is nonetheless indicative of the human
 rights situation in North Korea today.
 
 
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-Defectors report that the regime
 continued executions of political prisoners, opponents of the regime, repatriated de-
 fectors, and others (reportedly including military officers suspected of espionage or
 of plotting against Kim Jong I1). The criminal law makes the death penalty manda-
 tory for activities "in collusion with imperialists" aimed at "suppressing the national
 liberation struggle." Some prisoners are sentenced to death for such ill-defined
 "crimes"  as   "ideological  divergence,"  "opposing  socialism,"  and   other
 "counterrevolutionary crimes." In some cases, executions reportedly were carried out
 at public meetings attended by workers, students, and school children. Executions
 have also been carried out before assembled inmates at places of detention. Border
 guards reportedly have orders to shoot-to-kill potential defectors (see Section 2.d.).
 In August an unsubstantiated Reuters report stated that following a March coup
 attempt against Kim Jong Il, authorities arrested several thousand members of the
 military. Reports indicated that the Government executed numerous persons.
 Many prisoners reportedly have died from disease, starvation, or exposure (see
 Section 1.c.).
 According to unconfirmed Japanese and South Korean press reports, several sen-
 ior party officials were publicly executed in September 1997. The Kyodo News Net-
 work reported that Seo Kwan Hui, Secretary of Agriculture for the KWP, and 17
 other senior officials, including some from the army and from the Kim Ii Sung So-
 cialist Youth League, were executed for corruption and working for South Korea. In
 January Agence France-Presse (AFP) reported that among those executed were a
 four-star general who ran the Political Bureau of the Korean People's Army and
 Choe Hyon Tok, a member of the Foreign Affairs Committee of the Supreme Peo-
 ple's Assembly. According to the AFP, seven persons in this group were executed
 y firing squad before thousands of spectators.
 A South Korean newsmagazine reported that there were at least 20 public execu-
 tions during 1997 for either economic offenses, including stealing cattle and electric
 wire, or for attempting to defect. Amnesty International (AI) reported in January
 1997 that at least 23 people had been publicly executed between 1970 and 1992 for
 offenses that reportedly included "banditry" and "stealing rice from a train." Govern-
 ment officials reportedly told AI in 1995 that only one or two executions had taken
 place since 1985.
 b. Disappearance.-The Government is reportedly responsible for such cases. Ac-
 cording to defector reports, individuals suspected of political crimes are often taken
 from their homes by state security officials late at night and sent directly, without
 trial, to camps for political prisoners. There have also been reports of DPRK involve-
 ment in the kidnaping abroad of South Koreans, Japanese, and other foreign nation-
 als. The Japanese press estimates that, over the last 30 years, as many as 20 Japa-
 nese may have been kidnaped and are being detained in North Korea. In addition,
 several cases of kidnaping, hostage-taking, and other acts of violence apparently in-
 tended to intimidate ethnic Koreans living in China and Russia have been reported.
 For example, there is credible evidence that North Korea may have been involved
 in the abduction of a South Korean citizen working in China as a missionary. This
 missionary subsequently appeared publicly in North Korea and was portrayed as a
 defector. The DPRK denies it has been involved in kidnapings.
 According to news accounts, during the year, two South Korean military personnel
 captured during the Korean war, who were held for more than 45 years and forced
 to perform hard labor, escaped via a third county and made their way back to South
 Korea.
 In January AFP reported that several trade officials had been relieved of their
 duties. In March Hong Kong media reported that several North Korean officials
 with responsibilities for foreign trade and investment had vanished.
 In November. 1997, the South Korean Government arrested several alleged North
 Korean espionage agents. According to the South Korean Government's report on its
 investigation, those arrested claimed that three South Korean high school students,
 missing since 1978, had been kidnaped by the North Korean Government and
 trained as espionage agents. The three were identified as Kim Young Nam, who dis-
 appeared from Son Yu beach, and Yi Myong U and Hong Kyun Pyo, both of whom
 disappeared from Hong To island beach. According to those arrested, there have
 been severd other kidnapings.
 Al reports detail a number of cases of disappearances including that of Japanese
 citizen Shibata Kozo and his wife Shin Sung Suk, who left Japan in 1960 and reset-
 tled in North Korea. The authorities reportedly arrested Shibata in 1962 after he
 encouraged a demonstration by former Japanese residents against the poor treat-
 
 
 ment given them. In 1993 AI claimed that he was still in custody, and in poor
 health, and that there had been no word about his wife and three children since
 1965. In 1995 North Korean officials informed AI that Shibata Kozo, his wife, and
 children had died in a train accident in early 1990, a few weeks after he was re-
 leased from nearly 30 years in prison. However, AIreports that Shibata Kozo was
 still in custody at the time of the alleged accident.
 North Korean officials informed AI in 1995 that Japanese citizens Cho Ho Pyong,
 his ethnic Japanese wife Koike Hideko, and their three young children were killed
 in 1972 while attempting to leave the country. The authorities told AI that Cho had
 escaped from a detention center where he was being held for spying, killing a guard
 in the process.
 The cases of three ethnic Korean residents of Beijing, China (16, 18, and 20 years
 of age), reported by AI in 1995 to have been taken to North Korea against their
 will, remained unresolved. The three were taken in apparent retaliation for criticism
 of North Korean human rights violations made by their father, a former prisoner
 in North Korea, on Japanese television and in the Japanese press. The North Ko-
 rean authorities deny this allegation, claiming that the three brothers had been de-
 ported to North Korea for breaking Chinese law, and that they are now living with
 relatives.
 Numerous reports indicate that ordinary citizens are not allowed to mix with for-
 eign nationals, and Al has reported that a number of North Koreans who main-
 tained friendships with foreigners have disappeared. In at least one case, AI re-
 ported that a citizen who had disappeared was executed for maintaining a friend-
 ship with a Russian national.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 While there is no information on recent practices, credible reports indicate that pris-
 oners are mistreated and that many have died from disease, starvation, or exposure.
 In February a Polish newspaper reported the experiences of a woman who spent
 10 years in a. North Korean concentration camp before fleeing first to China and
 then to South Korea. The approximately 1,800 inmates in this particular camp typi-
 cally worked 16 to 17 hours a day. The woman reported severe beatings, torture in-
 volving water forced into a victim's stomach with a rubber hose and pumped out
 by guards jumping on a board placed across the victim's abdomen, and chemical and
 biological warare experiments allegedly conducted on inmates by the army. South
 Korean media reported that the DPRK State Security Agency manages the camps
 through use of forced labor, beatings, torture, and public executions.
 Prison conditions are harsh. According to international nongovernmental organi-
 zations (NGO's) and defector sources, whole families, including children, are impris-
 oned together. "Reeducation through labor" is common punishment, consisting of
 forced labor, such as logging and tending crops, under harsh conditions. A small
 number of people who claim to have escaped from detention camps report that star-
 vation and executions are common. In one prison, clothing was reportedly issued
 only once in 3 years. Former inmates have produced photographs of an inmate
 wearing specially designed leg irons that permit walking but make running impos-
 sible. AI reports the existence of "punishment cells," too low to allow standing up-
 right and too small for lying down flat, where prisoners are kept for up to several
 weeks for. breaking prison rules. Visitors to North Korea report observing prisoners
 being marched in leg irons, metal collars, or shackles.
 AI representatives recently were permitted to visit one model "rehabilitation cen-
 ter," but the Government does not normally permit inspection of prisons by human
 rights monitors.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-There are no restrictions on the ability
 of the Government to detain and imprison people at will and to hold them incommu-
 nicado.
 Little information is available on North Korea's. criminal justice procedures and
 practices, and outside observation of its legal system has been limited to "show
 trials" for traffic violations and other minor offenses.
 Family members and other concerned persons find it virtually impossible to ob-
 tain information on charges against detained persons. Judicial review of detentions
 does not exist in law or in practice.
 Defectors claim that North Korea detains between 150,000 to 200,000 persons for
 political reasons, sometimes along with their family members, in maximum-security
 camps in remote areas. An October 1992 report by two former inmates made ref-
 erence to severe living conditions in what they called "concentration camps." North
 Korean officials deny the existence of such prison camps but admit that there are
 "education centers" for people who "commit crimes by mistake."
 One credible report lists 12 such prison camps in the DPRK. It is believed that
 some former high officials are imprisoned in the camps. Visitors formerly were al-
 
 
 955
 lowed, but currently any form of communication with detainees, including visitors,
 is said to be prohibited.
 In May a foreigner of Korean descent was detained and held incommunicado for
 nearly 3 months before he was finally released. In September another foreigner of
 Korean descent was held incommunicado for more than a month for an unspecified
 "violation of law" before being released and expelled from the country.
 South Korean newspapers also have reported that family members of North Ko-
 rean defector Hwang Chang Yop, former head of the Juche Research Institute, and
 a senior advisor to Kim II Song and Kim Jong II, who defected to South Korea in
 1997, were either under house arrest or incarcerated in political prisons. Visiting
 foreigners, however, have seen some members of his family.
 In 1991 a North Korean defector who had been a ranking official in the DPRK
 Ministry of Public Security said that there were two types of detention areas. One
 consists of closed camps where conditions are extremely harsh and from which pris-
 oners never emerge. In the other, prisoners can be "rehabilitated."
 In October 1997, North Korean troops seized two South Korean farmers who had
 accidentally crossed into land controlled by the DPRK inside the demilitarized zone
 (DMZ) between North Korea and South Korea. They were released after a few days
 after apologizing for having strayed into the DMZ.
 The Government is not    own to use forced exile. However, the Government rou-
 tinely uses forced resettlement and has relocated many tens of thousands of people
 from Pyongyang to the countryside. There are also reports that physically disabled
 people and those judged to be politically unreliable have been sent to internal exile
 as well. Often, those relocated are selected on the basis of family background. None-
 theless, there is some evidence that class backgound is less important than in the
 past because of the regime's emphasis on the soldi  of the "popular masses," and
 'united frontf' efforts with overseas Koreans. According to unconfirmed September
 1997 foreign press reports some 500 senior officials were sent into internal exile.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The Constitution states that courts are independ-
 ent and that judicial proceedings are to be carried out in strict accordance with the
 law; however, an independent judiciary and individual rights do not exist in the
 DPRK. The Public Security Ministry dispenses with trials in political cases and re-
 fers defendants to the Ministry of State Security for imposition of punishment.
 The Constitution contains elaborate procedural protections and it states that
 cases are heard in public, and that the accused has the right to a defense; hearings
 may be closed to the public as stipulated by law. When trials are held, lawyers are
 apparently assigned by the Government. Reports indicate that defense lawyers are
 not considered representatives of the accused; rather, they are expected to help the
 court by persuading the accused to confess guilt. Some reports note a distinction be-
 tween those accused of political crimes and common criminals and state that the
 Government affords tria  or la  ers only to the latter. The Government considers
 critics of the regime to be "political criminals."
 Numerous reports suggest that political offenses have in the past included such
 behavior as sitting on newspapers bearing Kim I1 Sung's picture, or (in the case of
 a professor reportediy sentenced to work as a laborer) noting in class that Kim Il
 Sung had received little formal education. The KWP has a special regulation pro-
 tecting the images of Kim Il Sung and Kim Jong I All North Koreans are required
 by this regulation to protect from damage any likeness of the two Kim's. Beginning
 in the 1970's, the "10 Great Principles of Unique Ideology" directed that anyone who
 tore or otherwise defaced a newspaper photo of either of the two Kim's was des-
 ignated a political criminal and punished as such. North Korean defectors have re-
 ported families being punished because children had accidentally defaced photo-
 graphs of one of the two Kim's. Families must displaypictures of the two Kim's in
 their homes, and must keep them clean. Local party officials have conducted unan-
 nounced inspections once a month, and if the inspectors found the family had ne-
 glected its photos, the punishment was to write self-criticism throughout an entire
 year.
 A foreigner hired to work on foreign broadcasts for the regime was imprisoned for
 1 year without trial for criticizing the quality of the regime's foreign propaganda.
 He was then imprisoned for 6 more years (with trial) shortly after his release for
 claiming in a private conversation that his original imprisonment was unjust. While
 AI has listed 58 political prisoners by name, the total number of political prisoners
 being held is much larger. Several defectors and former inmates reported that the
 total figure is approximately 150,000, while South Korean authorities said the total
 figure is about 200,000.
 The South Korean Ministry of National Unification reported to its National As-
 sembly in October 1997 that North Korea had more than 200,000 political prisoners
 in camps where many have frozen or starved to death, and that famine may have
 
 
 956
 
 worsened conditions. The report went on to describe the camps as having no elec-
 tricity or heating facilities. The report claimed that those who attempted to escape
 were executed immediately. Most camps are located in remote mountain or mining
 areas. Some reports indicated an increase in the number of political prisoners as
 North Koreans had begun to complain more openly about the failure of the Govern-
 ment's economic policies.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Constitution provides for the inviolability of person and residence and the privacy
 of correspondence, but the Government does not respect these provisions in practice.
 The regime subjects its citizens to rigid controls. The state leadership perceives
 most international norms of human rights, and especially individual rights, as alien
 social concepts subversive to the goals of the State and party. The Government re-
 lies upon an extensive, multilevel system of informers to identify critics and poten-
 tial troublemakers. Whole communities are sometimes subjected to massive security
 checks. According to Kim Jong Il, North Korean society represents "a new way of
 thinking" that cannot be evaluated on the basis of "old yardsticks" of human rights
 imported from abroad. In this context, the DPRK celebrates the closed nature of its
 society. The possession of "reactionary material" and listening to foreign broadcasts
 are both considered crimes that may subject the transgressor to harsh punishments.
 In some cases, entire families are punished for alleged political offenses committed
 by one member of the family. For example, North Korean defectors have reported
 families being punished because children had accidentally defaced photographs of
 one of the two Kim's. Families must display pictures of the two Kim's in their
 homes, and must keep them clean. Local party officials have conducted unan-
 nounced inspections once a month, and if the inspectors found the family had ne-
 glected its photos, the punishment was to write self-criticism throughout an entire
 year (see Section 1.e.).
 The Constitution provides for the right to petition. However, when an anonymous
 petition or complaint about state administration is submitted, the Ministries of
 State Security and Public Safety seek to identify the author through handwriting
 analysis. The suspected individual may be subjected to a thorough investigation and
 punishment.
 The regime justifies its dictatorship with arguments derived from concepts of col-
 lective consciousness and the superiority of the collective over the individual, ap-
 peals to nationalism, and citations of "the juche idea." The North Koreans empha-
 size that the core concept of juche is "the ability to act independently without regard
 to outside interference." Originally described as "a creative application of Marxism-
 Leninism" in the Korean context, juche is a malleable philosophy reinterpreted from
 time to time by the regime as its ideological needs change and used by the regime
 as a "spiritual" underpinning for its rule.
 As defined by Kim Il Sung, juche is a quasi-mystical concept in which the collec-
 tive will of the people is distilled into a supreme leader whose every act exemplifies
 the State and society's needs. Opposition to such a leader, or to the rules, regula-
 tions, and goals established by his regime, is thus in itself opposition to the national
 interest. The regime therefore claims a social interest in identifying and isolating
 all opposition.
 Since the late 1950's the regime has divided society into three main classes:
 "core," "wavering," and "hostile." These 3 classes are further subdivided into subcat-
 egories based on perceived loyalty to the Party and the leadership. Security ratings
 are assigned to each individual; according to some estimates, nearly half of the pop-
 ulation is designated as either "wavering" or "hostile." These loyalty ratings deter-
 mine access to employment, higher education, place of residence, medical facilities,
 and certain stores. They also affect the severity of punishment in the case of legal
 infractions. While there are signs that this rigid system has been relaxed somewhat
 in recent years-for example, children of religious practitioners are no longer auto-
 matically barred from higher education-it remains a basic element of North Korean
 society.
 Citizens with relatives who fled to South Korea at the time of the Korean War
 appear still to be classified as-part of the "hostile class" in the DPRK's elaborate
 loyalty system. This subcategory alone encompasses a significant percentage of the
 North Korean population. One defector estimated that the class of those considered
 potentially hostile may comprise 25 to 30 percent of the population; others place the
 figure at closer to 20 percent. Members of this class are still subject to discrimina-
 tion, although a defector has claimed that their treatment has improved greatly in
 recent years.
 The authorities subject citizens of all age groups and occupations- to intensive po-
 litical and ideological indoctrination. Even after Kim I1 Sung's death, his cult of per-
 
 
 sonality and the glorification of his family and the official juche ideology remained
 omnipresent. The cult approaches the level of a state religion.
 The goal of indoctrination remains to ensure loyalty to the system and leadership,
 as well as conformity to the State's ideology and authority. The necessity for the
 intensification of such indoctrination is repeatedly stressed in the writings of Kim
 Jong Ii, who attributes the collapse of the Soviet Union largely to insufficient ideo-
 logical indoctrination, compounded by the entry of foreign influences.
 Indoctnation is carried out systematically, not only through the mass media, but
 also in schools and through worker and neighborhood associations. Kim Jong Il has
 stated that ideological education must take precedence over academic education in
 the nation's schools, and he has also called for the intensification of mandatory ideo-
 logical study and discussion sessions for adult workers.
 ~In 1997 te Nodong Shinmun newspaper announced that the class indoctrination
 program would be intensified aftr Kim Jong II assumed the office of General Sec-
 retary of the KWP. The program was being administered by the KWP's basic-level
 organizations in all areas of the country. The program stressed two oints: That the
 Kim Jong I1 leadership blesses the Korean people, and that the N  Koren people
 must do their best for the economy.
 Another aspect of the State's indoctrination system is the use of mass marches,
 ralies, and staged performances, sometimes involving hundreds of thousands of peo-
 ple. In September celebrations of the 50th anniversary of the founding of the DPRK
 included hours of carefully choreographed demonstration of mass adulation of the
 leadership. In October 1997, similar celebrations of the 50th anniversary of the
 KWP reportedly involved virtually the entire population of Pyongyang and outlying
 communities. Foreign visitors have been told that nonparticipation by Pyongyang
 residents in this event was unthinkable.
 The Government monitors correspondence and telephones. Telephones essentially
 are restricted to domestic operation although some international service is available
 on a very restricted basis.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-Articles of the Constitution that require citizens
 to follow "Socialist norms of life" and to obey a "collective spirit" take precedence
 over individual political or civil liberties. Although the Constitution provides for
 freedom of speech and the press, the Government prohibits the exercise of these
 rights in practice. The regime permits only activities that support its objectives.
 The Government strictly curtails freedom of expression. The authorities may pun-
 ish persons for criticizing the regime or its policies by imprisonment or "corrective
 labor." One defector reported in 1986 that a scientist, whose home was bugged
 through his radio set, was arrested and executed for statements made at home criti-
 cal of Kim Il Sung. In another case, AI reports that a family formerly resident in
 Japan was sent to a "reeducation-through-labor" center because one member of the
 family allegedly made remarks disparaging the Government.
 The Government attempts to control all information. It carefully manages the vis-
 its of Western journalists. In 1996 the Cable News Network was allowed to broad-
 cast live, unedited coverage of the 2nd year memorial service for the death of Kim
 II Sung. The regime recently has allowed foreign journalists to report on the food
 situation. Foreign journalists also were allowed to report on the Korean Peninsula
 Energy Development Organization (KEDO) light-water reactor groundbreaking at
 Kumho in 1997. Although more foreign journalists have been allowed into North
 Korea, the Government still maintains the strictest control over the movements of
 foreign visitors. Domestic media censorship is strictly enforced, and no deviation
 from the official government line is tolerated.
 The regime prohibits listening to foreign media broadcasts except by the political
 elite, and violators are subject to severe punishment. Radios and television sets are
 built to receive only domestic programming; radios obtained from abroad must be
 submitted for alteration to operate in a similar manner. Private telephone lines op-
 erate on an internal system that prevents making and receiving calls from outside
 the country. International phone lines are available under very restricted cir-
 cumstances. The Government has set up an Internet web site, based in Tokyo,
 Japan for propaganda purposes. There may be very limited Internet access in North
 Korea for government officials, according to recent reports.
 Late in 1997, the Government published threats against South Korean media for
 criticizing the North Korean leadership. The first instance was in response to a
 South Korean newspaper editorial; the second in reaction to a television drama
 about life in North Korea.
 The Government severely restricts academic freedom and controls artistic and
 academic works. Visitors report that one of the primary functions of plays, movies,
 
 
 958
 operas, children's performances, and books is to contribute to the cult of personality
 surrounding Kim I1 Sung and Kim Jong Ii.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly ad Association.-Although the Constitution pro-
 vides for freedom of assembly, the Government does not respect this provision in
 practice. The Government prohibits any public meetings without authorization.
 Although the Constitution provides for freedom of association, the Government
 does not respect this provision in practice. There are no known organizations other
 than those created by the Government. Professional associations exist primarily as
 a means of government monitoring and control over the members of these organiza-
 tions.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for the "freedom of religious
 belief," including "the right to build buildings for religious use." However, the same
 article adds that "no one can use religion as a means to drag in foreign powers"
 or to disrupt the social order. In practice, the regime discourages all organized reli-
 gious activity except that which serves the interests of the State.
 In recent years, the regime has allowed the formation of several government-spon-
 sored religious organizations. These serve as interlocutors with foreign church
 groups and international aid organizations. Some foreigners who have met with rep-
 resentatives of these organizations are convinced that they are sincere believers;
 others claim that they appeared to know little about religious dogma, liturgy, or
 teaching.
 There are a few Buddhist temples where religious activity is permitted, and three
 Christian churches-two Protestant and one Catholic-have been opened since 1988
 in Pyongyang. Many visitors say that church activity a ppears staged. Foreign Chris-
 tians who have attempted to attend services at these churches without making prior
 arrangements with the authorities report finding them locked and unattended, even
 on Easter Sunday. The authorities have told foreign visitors that one Protestant
 seminary exists, accepting six to nine pupils every 3 years.
 The DPRK claims that there are 10,000 Christians who worship in 500 house
 churches, and the Chondogyo Young Friends Party, a government-sponsored group
 based on a native Korean religious movement, is still in existence.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Be-
 patriation.-In the past, the regime has strictly controlled internal travel, requiring
 a travel pass for any movement outside one's home village. These passes were
 granted only for official travel or attendance at a relative's wedding or funeral. Long
 delays in obtaining the necessary permit often resulted in denial of the right to trav-
 el even for these limited purposes. Recently it appears that the internal controls on
 travel have eased or broken down somewhat. There are reports of significant move-
 ment of people traveling across the country in search of food. Only members of a
 very small elite hale vehicles for personal use. The regime tightly controls access
 to civilian aircraft, trains, buses, food, and fuel.
 Reports, primarily from defectors, indicate that the Government routinely uses
 forced resettlement, particularly for those deemed politically unreliable. The Gov-
 ernment strictly controls permission to reside in, or even enter, Pyongyang. This is
 a significant lever, since food, housing, health, and general living conditions are
 much better in Pyongyang than in the rest of the country.
 Amnesty International has reported serious human rights abuses involving North
 Korean workers working in the Far Eastern portion of Russia, and North Korean
 refugees living in Russia. There are about 6,000 DPRK workers in camps in the
 Russian Far East engaged in farming, mining, and construction. Conditions in these
 North Korean-run camps are harsh; food is scarce; and discipline is severe. In the
 past, there have been allegations that discipline includes physical torture such as
 placing wooden logs between the knees of offenders, after which they were forced
 to sit down, causing them excruciating pain. In recent years, offenders have been
 sent back to the DPRK, for punishment due to the increased scrutiny that the labor
 camps have been under since Russian and foreign media began reporting on the
 conditions in these camps in the early 1990's.
 North -Korean refugees in Russia comprise two groups: Those who were selected
 to work in Russia but refused to return to the DPRK, and those who have fled into
 Russia from the DPRK. Until 1993 under a "secret protocol," the DPRK Public Secu-
 rity Service reportedly was allowed to work inside Russia to track down workers
 who fled the camps. Since 1993 many North Korean refugees have been engaged
 in business in the Russian Far East.
 Many North Korean refugees in Russia face severe hardships due to their lack
 of any identification. Workers arriving in Russia usually have their passport and
 other identification confiscated by North Korean border guards.
 The DPRK Government reportedly tried to prevent defections in Russia by using
 diplomatic channels to influence Russian authorities and international organiza-
 
 
 959
 tions. In a number of cases, North Korean authorities reportedly told Russian au-
 thorities that a particular North Korean who had applied for asylum in Russia or
 elsewhere was a criminal offender in North Korea. An extradition treaty signed by
 both nations in 1957 requires that defectors with criminal records be returned to
 their country.
 The regime limits foreign travel to officials and trusted artists, athletes, academ-
 ics, and religious figures. It does not allow emigration. In recent years, there are
 p ersistent reports of a steady increase in North Korean defetors arriving in China,
 on  Kong, Vietnam, and other Asian countries. The regime reportedly retaliates
 harshly against the relatives of those who manage to escape. According to the Penal
 Code, defection and attempted defection (including the attempt to gain entry to a
 foreign embassy for the purpose of seeking political asylum) are capital crimes. De-
 fectors have stated that DRK border guards have received shoot-to-kill orders
 against potential defectors attempting to cross the border into China. Other defec-
 tors have reported that some defectors who have been involuntarily returned have
 been executed (see Section l.a.). Following the collapse of European communism, the
 regime pulled back several thousand students from overseas. It no longer allows stu-
 dents to study abroad except in China and a few other places.
 According to South Korean media accounts, the DPRK increased controls over the
 population when Hwang Chang Yop defected in 1997.
 From 1959 to 1982, 93,000 Korean residents of Japan, including 6,637 Japanese
 wives, voluntarily repatriated to North Korea. Despite DPRK assurances that the
 wives, more than a third of whom still had Japanese citizenship, would be allowed
 to visit Japan every 2 or 3 years, none were permitted to do so until 1997. Many
 have not been heard from, and their relatives and friends in Japan have been un-
 successful in their efforts to gain information about their condition and where-
 abouts.
 The DPRK and the Japanese Government held a series of bilateral meetings in
 Beijing in the second half of 1997, during which the DPRK agreed to allow some
 Japanese wives resident in North Korea to visit Japan. The first such visit occurred
 in November 1997 when 15 Japanese wives arrived for a 1-week visit. An additional
 12 Japanese wives visited for a week in January and February. In June the DPRK
 authorities cancelled a visit by Japanese-born women to Japan. In announcing the
 cancellation, the state-controlled media cited "artificial hurdles and inhuman acts
 on the Japanese side."
 Although the DPRK has permitted an increasing number of overseas Korean resi-
 dents of North America, Japan, China, and other countries to visit their relatives
 in North Korea over the past decade, most requests for such visits are still denied.
 Many foreign visitors to the 1995 International Pyongyang Sports Festival reported
 that they were denied permission to visit or otherwise contact their relatives, even
 those who lived only a few miles from Pyongyang.
 Although the DPRK is a member of the United Nations, it does not participate
 in international refugee forums, and it is not in contact with the U.N. High Com-
 missioner for Refugees. There is no known policy or provision for first asylum.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens have no right or mechanisms to change their leadership or government.
 The political system is completely dominated by the KWP, with Kim II Sung's heir
 Kim Jong I1 in full control. There is very little reliable information available on
 intraregime politics following Kim Ii Sung's death. The legislature, the Supreme
 People's Assembly, which meets only a few days a year, serves only to rubber-stamp
 resolutions presented to it by the party leadership. In October 1997, Kim Jong II
 acceded to the position of General Secretary of the Korean Worker's Party. In Sep-
 tember the Supreme People's Assembly (SPA) reconfirmed Kim as the Chairman of
 the National Defense Commission and declared that position the "highest office of
 State." The presidency was abolished, leaving the late Kim Il Sung as the DPRtCs
 only President.
 In an effort to ive the appearance of democracy, the DPRK has created several
 "minority parties.' Lacking grassroots organizations, they exist only as rosters of of-
 ficials with token representation in the Supreme People's Assembly. Their primary
 purpose appears to be promoting government objectives abroad as touring parlia-
 mentarians. Free elections do not exist, and Kim Jong II has criticized the concept
 of free elections and competition among political parties as an artifact of capitalist
 decay.
 Elections to the Supreme People's Assembly and to provincial, city, and county as-
 semblies are held irregularly. In July SPA elections were held for the first time
 since 1990. According to the government-controlled media, over 99 percent of the
 
 
 960
 voters participated to elect 100 percent of the candidates approved by the KWP. Re-
 sults of previous SPA elections have produced virtually identical outcomes. The vast
 majority of the KWP's estimated 3 million members (in a population of 23 million)
 work to implement decrees formulated by the Party's small elite.
 Few women have reached high levels of the Party or the Government.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 The Government does not permit any independent domestic organizations to mon-
 itor human rights conditions or to comment on violations of such rights. Although
 a North Korean Human Rights Committee was established in 1992, it denies the
 existence of any human rights violations in North Korea and is merely a propa-
 ganda arm of the regime. However, by offering international human rights organiza-
 tions an identifiable official interlocutor, the Committee has helped increase their
 ability to enter into two-way communication with the regime.
 In April during the 54th meeting of the U.N. Commission on Human Rights, the
 North Korean delegation accused the international community of slandering the
 DPRKs human rights record, adding that the DPRK Government would not tolerate
 "any attempt to hurt the sovereignty and dignity of the country under the pretext
 of human rights."
 In 1996 a delegation from Al visited the DPRK and discussed legal reforms and
 prisoner cases with senior government officials. The Government has ignored re-
 quests for visits by other international human rights organizations.
 In August 1997, the U.N. Subcommission on Prevention of Discrimination and
 Protection of Minorities adopted a resolution criticizing the DPRK for its human
 rights practices. The DPRK subsequently announced that it would withdraw from
 the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), calling the resolu-
 tion an attack on its sovereignty. For more than a decade, the DPRK had failed to
 report on its implementation of the ICCPR to the U.N. Human Rights Committee.
 In October 1997, the U.N. Human Rights Committee issued a statement criticizing
 the attempt by North Korea to withdraw from the ICCPR, noting that countries that
 had ratified the ICCPR could not withdraw from the covenant. In August the
 Human Rights Committee readopted a resolution urging the DPRK to improve its
 human rights record.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution grants equal rights to all citizens. However, in practice the Gov-
 ernment denies its citizens most fundamental human rights. There was pervasive
 discrimination on the basis of social status.
 Women.-There is no information available on violence against women.
 The Constitution states that "women hold equal social status and rights with
 men." However, although women are represented proportionally in the labor force,
 few women have reached high levels of the party or the Government. In many small
 factories, the work force is predominantly female. Like men, working-age women
 must work. They are thus required to leave their preschool children in the care of
 elderly relatives or in state nurseries. However, according to the Constitution,
 women with large families are guaranteed shortened working hours.
 Children.-Social norms reflect traditional, family-centered values in which chil-
 dren are cherished. The State provides compulsory education for all children until
 the age of 15. Information about societal or familial abuse of children is unavailable.
 Some children are denied educational opportunities and subjected to other punish-
 ments and disadvantages as a result of the loyalty classification system and the
 principle of "collective retribution" for the -ansgressions of their parents (see Sec-
 tion 1.f.).
 Like others in society, children are the objects of intense political indoctrination;
 even mathematics textbooks propound party dogma. In addition, foreign visitors and
 academic sources report that children from an early age are subjected to several
 hours a week of mandatory military training and indoctrination at their schools.
 School children are sometimes sent to work in factories or in the fields for short pe-
 riods to assist in completing special projects or in meeting production goals.
 In practice children in the DPRK do not enjoy any more civil liberties than adults.
 In June the U.N. Committee on the Rights of the Child (UNCRC) released its con-
 cluding observations on a February 1996 report submitted by the DPRK, detailing
 its adherence to the International Convention on the Rights of the Child. The
 UNCRC found that the DPRK "strategy, policies, and programs for children do not
 fully reflect the rights-based approach enshrined ih the convention." The UNCRC
 also expressed concern over "de facto discrimination against children with disabil-
 
 
 ities and at the insufficient measures taken by the state party to ensure that these
 children have effective access to health, education, and social services, and to facili-
 tate their full integration into society."
 According to the World Food Program, the international community is feeding
 nearly every child under the age of 7 years. In some remote provinces, many per-
 sons over the age of 6 years reportedly appear to be suffering from long-term mal-
 nutrition. In August 1997, a senior U.N. Children's Fund (UNICEF) official stated
 that about 80,000 children in North Korea were in immediate danger of dying from
 hunger and disease; 800,000 more were suffering from malnutrition to a serious but
 lesser degree.
 In September Doctors Without Borders (DWB), the largest international charity
 operating in North Korea, announced that it would withdraw from the country be-
 cause the Government had continued to deny the group access to a large population
 of sick and malnourished children. The Paris-based Doctors of the World withdrew
 in August for similar reasons. DWB officials said that they had evidence that or-
 phaned and homeless children had been gathered into so-called "9-27 camps." These
 camps reportedly were established under a September 27, 1995 order from Kim
 Jong II to "normalize" the country. North Korean refugees who have escaped from
 the 9-27 camps into China have reported inhuman conditions.
 People With Disabilities-Traditional social norms condone discrimination against
 the physically disabled. Disabled persons are almost never seen within the city lim-
 its of Pyong.yang, and several defectors and other former North Korea residents re-
 port that disabled persons are routinely assigned to the rural areas. According to
 one report, authorities check every 2 to 3 years in the capital for persons with de-
 formities and relocate them to special facilities in the countryside. There are no le-
 gally mandated provisions for accessibility to buildings or government services for
 the disabled. In a statement in April. the U.N. Committee on the Rights of the Child
 criticized "de facto discrimination" in the DPRK against children with disabilities.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-Nongovernmental labor unions do not exist. The
 KWP purports to represent the interests of all labor. There is a single labor organi-
 zation, the General Federation of Trade Unions of Korea, which is affiliated with
 the formerly Soviet-controlled World Federation of Trade Unions. Operating under
 this umbrella, unions function on the classic "Stalinist model," with responsibility
 for mobilizing workers behind production goals and for providing health, education,
 cultural, and welfare facilities. Unions do not have the right to strike.
 North Korea is not a member of, but has observer status with, the International
 Labor Organization.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-Workers have no right to or-
 ganize or to bargain collectively. Government ministries set wages. The State as-
 signs all jobs. Ideological purity is as important as professional competence in decid-
 ing who receives a particular job, and foreign companies that have established joint
 ventures report that all their employees must be hired from lists submitted by the
 KWP. Factory and farm workers are organized into councils, which do have an im-
 pact on management decisions.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-There is no prohibition on the use
 of forced or compulsory labor, and the Government frequently mobilizes the popu-
 lation for construction projects. Military conscripts are also routinely used for this
 purpose. "Reformatory labor" and "reeducation through labor" are common punish-
 ments for political offenses. AI reports that forced labor, such as logging and tending
 crops, is common among prisoners. School children are assigned to factories or farms
 for short periods to help meet production goals (see Section 5).
 d. Status of Child Labor Practices and Minimum Age for Employment.-According
 to the Constitution, the State prohibits work by children under the age of 16 years.
 As education is universal and mandatory until the age of 15, it is believed that this
 regulation is enforced. There is no prohibition" on forced labor by children, and
 school children are assigned to factories or farms for short periods to help meet pro-
 duction goals (see Section 6.c.).
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-No data is available on the minimum wage in
 state-owned industries. Until the increasing food shortages of recent years, wages
 and rations appeared to be adequate to support workers and their families-at a sub-
 sistence level. Wages are not the primary form of compensation since the State pro-
 vides all educational and medical needs free of charge, while only token rent is
 charged. The minimum wage for workers in North Korea's free economic and trade
 zone (FETZ) is approximately $80 per month; in foreign-owned and joint venture en-
 terprises outside the FETZ the minimum wage is reportedly close to $110 per
 month. It is not known what proportion of the foreign-paid wages go to the worker
 
 
 962
 and what proportion remains with the State. The Korean Peninsula Energy Devel-
 opment Organization (KEDO, the international organization charged with imple-
 mentation of a light-water reactor and other projects) has concluded a protocol and
 a related memorandum of understanding concerning wages and other working con-
 ditions for North Koreans who are to work on KEDO projects. Unskilled laborers
 receive about $110 per month while skilled laborers are paid slightly more depend-
 ing on the nature of the work performed.
 The Constitution states that all working-age citizens must work and "strictly ob-
 serve labor discipline and working hours.' The Penal Code states that anyone who
 hampers the nation's industry, commerce, or transportation by intentionally failing
 to carry out a specific assignment "while pretending to be functioning normally" is
 subject to the death penalty; it also states that anyone who "shoddily carries outV'
 an assigned duty is subject to no less than 5 years' imprisonment.
 Even persistent tardiness may be defined as "antiSocilst wrecking" under these
 articles, although as a result of food shortages absenteeism has reportedly become
 widespread as more time must be spent finding food. A DPRK official described the
 North Korean labor force to an audience of foreign business executives by noting
 that "there are no riots, no strikes, and no differences of opinion" with management.
 In 1994 the Administration Council reportedly adopted new labor regulations for
 enterprises involving foreign investments. The regulations on labor contracts set out
 provisions on the employment and dismissal of workers, technical training,
 workhours, rest periods, remuneration, labor protection, social security, fines for vio-
 lations of regulations, and settlement of disputes.
 The Constitution stipulates an 8-hour workday; however, several sources report
 that most laborers work from 12 to 16 hours daily. Some of this additional time may
 represent mandatory study of the writings of Kim II Sung and Kim Jong Il. The
 Constitution provides all citizens with a right to rest," including paid leave, holi-
 days, and access to sanitariums and rest homes funded at public expense. Many
 worksites are hazardous, and the rate of industrial accidents is high.
