 DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF KOREA*
 The Democratic People's Republic of Korea, formed in 1948
 during the Soviet administration of the northern half of the
 Korean peninsula, is a rigid Communist dictatorship, strictly
 dominated by one man, Kim Il Sung, and his family. Although
 some internationally respected human rights are acknowledged by
 the 1972 Constitution and laws, individual rights are entirely
 subordinated in practice to the ruling Korean Workers'
 (Communist) Party (KWP), with its overriding aim of imposing a
 social revolution and enforcing unanimous popular support for
 the country's governing system and its leaders. While there
 were pro forma elections to the Supreme People's Assembly in
 February 1982, free elections do not exist in North Korea
 because citizens have no choice among candidates.
 The North Korean people are subject to rigid controls. The
 State establishes security ratings for each person, and these
 ratings determine access to jobs, schools, medical facilities,
 and stores, as well as admission to the Korean Workers' Party,
 the route to the highest levels and privileges of the society.
 Persons who fail to cooperate face imprisonment, confiscation
 of property, or enforced removal to remote villages.
 Surveillance by informers is prevalent. Punishment for
 "political crimes" against the State is severe. Virtually no
 outside information other than that approved and disseminated
 by the North Korean authorities is allowed to reach the
 public. However, senior government officials seem to be
 somewhat better informed.
 President Kim Ii Sung's 12-year effort to groom his son, Kim
 Chong Ii, as successor is testimony to the enormous power the
 elder Kim has amassed during 37 years of rule. The younger Kim
 was elevated to several senior party positions in 1980. The
 absence of any evidence of public debate about the succession
 is also indicative of the lack of real popular participation in
 the political process.
 North Korea has not been successful through its command economy
 in producing the desired economic development. It remains a
 less-developed country with a low standard of living and a
 severe balance of payments problem.
 Kim Il Sung's commitment to reunification on his own terms has
 led to periodic attempts to destabilize the Republic of Korea.
 More recently, North Korea has engaged in talks with South
 Korea. These have addressed possibilities for cooperation in
 the economic, parliamentary, sports, and humanitarian fields.
 This last area of discussion has focused on the plight of
 families separated during the postwar division of the peninsula
 *The United States does not have diplomatic relations with the
 Democratic People's Republic of Korea; even representatives of
 governments that do, as well as journalists and other
 occasional invited visitors to North Korea, are not permitted
 the freedom of movement that would enable them effectively to
 assess human rights conditions there. Nor does North Korea
 publish socioeconomic statistics. Most of this report,
 therefore, is a'repeat of previous human rights reports based
 on information obtained over a period of time extending from
 well before 1985. While limited in scope and detail, the
 information is indicative of the human rights situation in
 North Korea today.
 
 
 792
 DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF KOREA
 and the Korean War (1950-53). During September 20-23, 1985,
 both sides arranged historically unprecedented exchange visits
 by separated family members.
 However, there is little evidence to suggest that North Korea
 has improved its dismal performance in the human rights area.
 Both short- and long-term trends indicate continued one-family
 rule with scant respect for basic human rights.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section I  Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 No reliable information is available on politically motivated
 killing in North Korea. However, the North Korean attitude
 toward political killing was clearly demonstrated in the
 October 9, 1983, Rangoon bombing and the November 23, 1984,
 shooting in the Joint Security Area of the Demilitarized Zone
 (DMZ) dividing North and South Korea.
 After a careful investigation, the Government of Burma
 determined that the Democratic People's Republic of Korea was
 responsible for the attempt to assassinate Republic of Korea
 President Chun Doo Hwan during his 1983 visit to Burma. Two
 North Korean army officers brought to trial in Rangoon were
 convicted and sentenced to death for the attack, in which four
 cabinet ministers and a number of officials were killed. In
 the DMZ incident, North Korean security guards opened fire on a
 Soviet student trying to defect from a tour group, triggering
 an exchange of fire in which several lives were lost.
 b. Disappearance
 There is no information available on disappearance.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 According to the Freedom House 1984-85 report, "torture is
 reportedly common" in North Korea. The accounts of torture and
 beatings of crew members of the USS Pueblo after their capture
 in 1968 are well-known and documented. The only other reliable
 source on prison conditions and treatment of prisoners in North
 Korea is Venezuelan poet Ali Lameda, who was detained in North
 Korea from September 1967 through 1974, allegedly for attempted
 sabotage and espionage. While physical torture was not used on
 Mr. Lameda, he stated that Korean prisoners were routinely
 beaten. Lameda noted that "beating was also used as a means of
 persuasion during interrogation."
 Lameda reported the use of deprivation of food to force
 "confessions," as well as solitary confinement, continuous
 interrogation, enforced waking periods, poor or nonexistent
 medical treatment, and 12 hours of forced labor per day. In
 addition, prisoners were denied family visits, parcels,
 correspondence, writing materials, newspapers, and clothing
 changes. Prisoners appeared to be regarded as persons without
 any rights.
 
 
 793
 DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF KOREA
 d.   Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Information on specific criminal justice procedures and
 practices in North Korea is extremely scarce. North Korea has
 refused to permit outside observation of its legal system and
 practices. The accounts provided by the crew members of the
 USS Pueblo and by Lameda, while clearly from an earlier period,
 comprise virtually all the specific information available on
 the operation of the criminal justice system in North Korea.
 North Korean law states that no prisoner may be held for
 interrogation over 2 months. This period may be extended
 indefinitely, however, if the Interrogation Department obtains
 approval of the Chief Prosecutor. Lameda states that he was
 detained for 12 months without trial or charge. His request
 for a lawyer .of his choice and an open trial were ridiculed as
 "bourgeois." Habeas corpus or its equivalent does not exist in
 law or practice.
 According to newspaper reports, North Korean defectors in South
 Korea estimated in April-1982 that at least 105,000
 "ideological offenders" were being held in eight major labor
 camps in the North. Amnesty International has received
 unconfirmed reports of arrests of those opposed to heir
 apparent Kim Chong Ii.
 There is no prohibition on the use of forced or compulsory
 labor. Information as to whether it is practiced is not
 available.
 e.    Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The North Korean Constitution states that courts are
 independent and that judicial proceedings are to be carried out
 in strict accordance with law. All courts, however, are
 responsible to the people's assemblies, which effectively means
 government control of the judiciary. Article 138 states that
 'cases are heard in public, and the accused is guaranteed the
 right to defense; hearings may be closed to the public as
 stipulated by law." Lameda claims that he was twice denied
 public trial. He reports that after his first arrest he was
 imprisoned for a year without a hearing; after his second
 arrest, he was put through a closed session without benefit of
 counsel of his choice or even knowledge of the charges. His
 tribunal was under the direction of the Ministry of Internal
 Security, with one person serving as both judge and prosecutor.
 Lameda stated that, other than to admit guilt, he was refused
 the right to speak out or defend himself at his trial. His
 "defense counsel" represented him by making a lengthy speech
 praising Kim Ii Sung and then requesting a 20-year sentence,
 which the tribunal imposed after 5 minutes of deliberation.
 In a 1979 interview with American journalist John Wallach,
 North Korean Supreme Court Justice Li Chun Uk noted that the
 defense counsel's job is "to give the suspect due punishment."
 Open court appears to consist of an announcement of the term of
 imprisonment, which has already been determined by the
 Provincial Safety Bureau.
 
 
 794
 DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF KOREA
 f.   Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The populace is subjected to regular indoctrination, designed
 to shape individual consciousness. Preschool children are
 drilled in homage to Kim Il Sung and his family, while youths
 and adults are required to participate in daily ideological
 training conducted by youth organizations or at places of
 employment. The propaganda requires rote recitation of party
 maxims and positions and strives for ideological purity.
 Multiple North Korean security organizations enforce these
 controls.
 Reports, primarily from defectors, indicate that forced
 resettlement is common, particularly for those deemed
 politically unreliable. Permission to reside in, or even
 enter, Pyongyang, the capital, is strictly controlled.
 According to reports in South Korean journals, Japanese wives
 of Koreans repatriated from Japan since 1959 have not been
 permitted to visit Japan and many have lost contact with their
 families because their letters are subject to strict censorship.
 The Constitution states that "citizens are guaranteed the
 inviolability of person and residence and the privacy of
 correspondence." Lameda reported, however, that the privacy of
 his residence was not respected and that listening devices were
 used against him. He was arrested and his collected papers and
 poetry seized and destroyed without warrant.
 Section 2    Respect for Civil Rights, Including:
 a.   Freedom of Speech and Press
 The Constitution states that "citizens have the freedoms of
 speech, the press, assembly, association, and demonstration."
 In fact, North Koreans enjoy none of these rights. Such
 activities are permitted only in support of government
 objectives. Other articles of the Constitution that require
 citizens to follow the "socialist norms of life" and to obey a
 "collective spirit" take precedence over individual political
 or civil liberties. Foreign media are excluded, domestic media
 censorship is enforced, and no deviation from the official
 government line is tolerated. Listening to foreign media
 broadcasts is prohibited, and violators reportedly are subject
 to severe punishment. Most urban households have a radio and
 some have television, but reception is limited to domestic
 programming. Artistic and academic works are controlled by the
 Government, and visitors report that a primary function of
 plays, movies, operas, and books is to contribute to the cult
 of personality surrounding "the great leader," Kim Il Sung, and
 his son, "the beloved leader," Kim Chong If.
 b.   Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 The Government has developed a pervasive system of informers
 throughout the society. No public meetings can be held without
 government authorization. There appear to be no organizations
 other than those created by the Government.
 Trade unions and professional associations appear to exist
 solely as another method of government control over their
 members. There are no effective rights to organize, bargain
 collectively, or strike.
 
 
 795
 DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF KOREA
 c.   Freedom of Religion
 Although the Constitution guarantees that "citizens have
 religious liberty and the freedom of antireligious propaganda,"
 North Korea, in fact, has severely persecuted Christians and
 Buddhists since the late 1940's. No churches have been rebuilt
 since the Korean War. The regime uses religious organizational
 facades to proclaim the practice of religious freedom but
 appears to have long since purged the membership out of
 existence. Persons whose family or relatives once had a strong
 religious involvement are discriminated against. Though
 religious practice appears impossible, some foreign visitors to
 North Korea believe that the Government does not currently
 persecute the very small number of Christians who continue to
 worship at home.
 d.   Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Internal travel in North Korea is strictly controlled. A
 travel pass is required for any movement outside one's home
 village and is granted only for required official or personal
 travel. This requirement is strictly enforced. Foreign travel
 is limited to officials or trusted artists and performers.
 Emigration is not allowed, and few refugees or defectors
 succeed in fleeing the country. Retaliation reportedly is
 taken against the relatives of those few persons who manage to
 escape. According to Freedom House, "rights to travel
 internally and externally are perhaps the most restricted in
 the world: tourism is unknown--even to Communist countries."
 In 1959 North Korea began actively encouraging Korean residents
 overseas to repatriate to "the Fatherland." Some observers
 estimate that during the next several years over 100,000
 overseas Koreans, almost all from Japan, voluntarily
 repatriated to North Korea. Since then, however, reports of
 the harsh treatment given repatriates have reached overseas
 Koreans, reducing the flow to North Korea to a trickle.
 (Because of their "corruption" by exposure to foreign
 influences, repatriates are isolated from North Korean society
 after their arrival until they can be indoctrinated and their
 ideological reliability gauged.)
 North Korea has permitted entry to some overseas Korean
 residents to visit their relatives, and several have made
 repeat visits.
 Section 3    Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 The political system in North Korea is dominated by Kim Il Sung,
 who leads the Korean Workers' Party, and also heads the
 Government. Kim has groomed his son Kim Chong Il to succeed
 him, and there are reports that Kim Chong Ii has been acquiring
 increasing power and influence. The legislature, the Supreme
 People's Assembly, has never taken any action other than
 unanimous passage of resolutions presented to it by the
 leadership. In an effort to create an appearance of democracy,
 North Korea has created several "minority parties." They exist
 only as rosters of officials who have token representation in
 the People's Assembly and completely support the government line.
 
 
 796
 DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF KOREA
 Free elections do not exist in North Korea. Although elections
 to the Supreme People's Assembly were held in February 1982, and
 to city and county assemblies in March 1983, in all cases only
 one candidate was approved by the government party in each
 electoral district, and, according to the government-controlled
 media, 100 percent of the voters turned out to elect 100 percent
 of the approved candidates. Such "elections" in reality are a
 mandatory exercise in which voters are required to participate
 and to approve the party's candidates.
 Most citizens are completely excluded from any real
 participation in the political process. To achieve even a
 semblance of real participation, one must become a member of the
 Korean Worker's Party. The selection process for entrance to
 the party is long and rigorous. Individuals from "bad social
 backgrounds," i.e., those who have relatives who fled south
 during the Korean War, those whose families had strong religious
 involvement or were once property owners or members of the
 middle class, and those who have relatives who are political
 prisoners, effectively are denied entry into the party and are
 discriminated against. Most levels of the party have no voice,
 serving only to carry out the decrees and "on the spot guidance"
 promulgated by party leader Kim II Sung and his top subordinates.
 Section 4   Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 No organizations exist within North Korea to report on or
 observe human rights violations. North Korea does not
 participate in any international or regional human rights
 organizations.
 Amnesty International has requested a visit to North Korea; the
 Government has not responded to or acknowledged this request. A
 December 1982 request by Amnesty International for information
 on North Korean laws, on use of the death penalty, and on
 reports of arrests and long-term imprisonment of political
 figures also received no reply.
 The Amnesty International 1985 Report noted that its work
 continued to be seriously impaired by the virtual absence of any
 official information during the year concerning any arrests,
 trials, or death sentences, that it continued to investigate
 reports that four prominent political figures had been detained
 for several years, and that it did not receive any replies to
 correspondence directed to the Government. Freedom House rates
 North Korea as "not free."
 ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND CULTURAL SITUATION
 The population of North Korea is estimated to be about 19.6
 million, with an annual growth rate of 2.3 percent. It is a
 less-developed country that has a low standard of living by most
 measures. It has a highly centralized, planned economy, with a
 gross national product (GNP) of $23 billion (1984), or $1,175
 per capita (1984 dollars).
 Many observers believe that, after a short period of rapid
 growth in the early 1970's, the economy experienced difficulties
 due largely to policies that overemphasized military
 expenditures, stressed attainment of self-sufficiency, and
 pushed for rapid growth of heavy industry. During that period,
 
 
 797
 -DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF KOREA
 North Korea imported large quantities of industrial equipment
 from the West for which it was unable to pay. It remains in
 default to Western creditors on an estimated $1.5 billion. More
 than 20 percent of North Korea's GNP is committed to military
 expenditures, the second highest such rate in the world.
 There have been recent signs of a shift in policy emphasis
 toward expanding trade. In September 1984 North Korea
 promulgated a joint venture law to attract foreign capital and
 technology. The apparent shift in economic policy was also
 suggested by North Korean willingness to discuss economic trade
 and cooperation with South Korea. North Korea's default on its
 foreign debt is in large measure responsible for scant foreign
 interest in joint ventures. The only such ventures North Korea
 has-publicized involve a project with a French company to build
 a hotel in Pyongyang and one with overseas Koreans in Japan to
 build a department store that has recently opened in Pyongyang.
 The new emphasis on expanding trade has not produced any shift
 in internal economic priorities away from support of military
 industry. North Korea receives assistance from the Soviet Union
 and China, but actual levels are difficult to estimate.
 The 1985 infant mortality rate was 30 per 1,000 live births.
 Life expectancy at birth was 65.6 years in 1985. North Korea
 appears to have invested considerable effort and money in
 developing a health care system. It includes care for
 nonworking-age citizens. Basic food supplies are heavily
 subsidized and rationed. The proportion of rice in the grain
 ration has been steadily reduced, with grains considered less
 desirable, such as millet or barley, being substituted.
 Reportedly because quality foods are difficult to obtain, jobs
 in food-handling industries are highly prized. Foreign visitors
 have noted that North Koreans appear adequately fed. The World
 Bank estimated in 1981 that the calorie supply available for
 consumption was 129 percent of nutritional requirements.
 The party, government, and military elite enjoy significant
 economic privileges, such as access to special stores and
 medical facilities, better housing, and better education, which
 are not available to ordinary citizens.
 The North Korean Government provides 11 years of compulsory free
 education to its citizens and claims to have eliminated
 illiteracy. The primary school enrollment ratios for 1976 were
 96.3 percent for females and 101 percent for males, for a
 combined ratio of 98.5 percent.
 There is no data available on minimum age for employment of
 children, minimum wages, maximum hours of work, or occupational
 safety and health.
 The Constitution states that "women hold equal social status and
 rights with men." Few women have reached high levels of the
 party or the Government. Women are represented proportionally
 in the labor force, and personnel in small factories are
 predominantly women.
 
 
 798
