North Korea
In April 2009 the parliament of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea (North
Korea) revised the country’s constitution to include, among others, a provision
that North Korea “respects and protects human rights.” North Korea seems to be
trying to improve its international image in response to continuing criticism over
its poor human rights record.
The revised constitution defines the chairman of the National Defense
Commission (currently Kim Jong Il) as “supreme leader” of the country overseeing
all “national business.” As Kim has been undisputed leader since the 1994 death
of his father Kim Il Sung, the change appears to be an attempt to quell rumors of
his weakened leadership after a reported stroke in September 2008.
Despite lip-service to human rights in the constitution, human rights conditions
in North Korea remain dire. There is no organized political opposition, free media,
functioning civil society, or religious freedom. Arbitrary arrest, detention, and torture
and ill-treatment of detainees, and lack of due process remain serious
issues. North Korea operates detention facilities including those popularly known
as “political prison camps” where hundreds of thousands of its citizens—including
children—are enslaved in deplorable conditions for various anti-state offenses.
Collective punishment is the norm for such crimes. Periodically, the government
publicly executes citizens for stealing state property, hoarding food, and
other “anti-socialist” crimes.
Food Shortages
Although the country recovered from the 1990s famine that killed millions, North
Korea’s lack of high-quality seeds, fuel, fertilizer, advanced agricultural technologies,
and even decent storage facilities have repeatedly resulted in domestic production
being far too inadequate to feed its entire population. In September 2009
the World Food Programme reported that a third of North Korean women and children
are malnourished and the country will run short by almost 1.8 million metric
tons of food, which North Korea would need to import or obtain as aid.
Since the famine, markets have replaced the practically defunct ration system as
the main source of food for most North Koreans. Very few (mostly high-ranking
members of the military or security forces) still receive full rations. Reports of
crackdowns and restrictions on market activities raise concerns about their effect
on the livelihood of the North Koreans who depend on such activities to survive.
Refugees and Asylum Seekers
North Korea criminalizes leaving the country without state permission. Bordercrossers
face grave punishments upon repatriation such as torture, lengthy terms
in horrendous detention facilities, and even execution, depending on what they
did and who they met while abroad.
In early October 2009, 11 North Koreans aboard a fishing boat drifted into South
Korean waters. South Korean authorities interrogated the arrivals and announced
that all 11 sought asylum, rejecting North Korea’s repeated demand that they be
repatriated. Some 17,000 North Korean refugees live in South Korea.
Most North Koreans escape through the country’s northern border with China.
Hundreds of thousands have fled since the 1990s, and some have settled in
China’s Yanbian Korean Autonomous Prefecture. Despite its obligation to offer
protection to refugees, Beijing categorically labels North Koreans in China “illegal”
economic migrants and routinely repatriates them. Many North Korean
women in China live with Chinese men in de facto marriages. Even if they have
lived there for years, they are not entitled to legal residence and remain vulnerable
to arrest and repatriation. Some North Korean women and girls are trafficked
into forced marriage or forced prostitution in China.
Other than South Korea, a relatively small number of North Korean refugees have
settled in other countries. At this writing, Japan has accepted about 200, and the
United States has accepted close to 100, North Koreans in total. Germany, the
United Kingdom, and a few other European countries together have accepted
more than 500 North Koreans in recent years. Some were given humanitarian status,
rather than refugee status.
Children’s Rights
In a December 2008 report, Citizens’ Alliance for North Korean Human Rights, a
Seoul-based NGO, said children in North Korea face discrimination in access to
education, humanitarian aid, and health protection, depending on which political
class their families belong to. Their status also affects whether they must perform
military service, including before age 18.
Thousands of children in China born to North Korean mothers and Chinese
fathers are forced to live without a legal identity or legal access to elementary
education, to avoid their mothers being identified and repatriated. North Korean
children who migrate to China have no legal right to obtain household registration
papers. By law, North Korean and half-North Korean children should be
admitted to schools without being required to submit household registration
papers, but in reality, most schools require such documentation. Some parents
and guardians of North Korean children resort to bribery or trickery to ensure children
can go to school.
Labor Rights
About 40,000 North Korean workers are employed in North Korea’s Kaesong
Industrial Complex (KIC) where they produce mostly consumer goods for South
Korean businesses. The law governing working conditions in the complex falls far
short of international standards on freedom of association, the right to collective
bargaining, gender discrimination and sexual harassment, and hazardous child
labor.
North Koreans are also reportedly employed in Bulgaria, China, Iraq, Kuwait,
Mongolia, and Russia. In some countries, activists have expressed concern about
Pyongyang’s attempt to restrict the workers’ freedom of movement and association,
the constant presence of “minders” accompanying workers, and that large
portions of their salaries are reportedly taken by agencies or the North Korean
government.
In an August 2009 documentary, the BBC reported that about 1,500 North Korean
workers are employed in Russian logging camps. A local official with a timber firm
told the BBC the North Koreans have only two rest days per year and face punishments when they fail to meet their production target. Some of those who escaped
such camps have been living in hiding in Russia.
Key International Actors
In 2009 North Korea’s missile and nuclear weapons program grabbed headlines
across the world and dominated diplomatic efforts by foreign governments.
North Korea launched a long-range ballistic missile in April. The United Nations
Security Council issued a statement condemning the move, and in protest North
Korea quit multilateral efforts at ending its nuclear weapons program—the socalled
Six-Party talks involving the two Koreas, the US, China, Japan, and Russia.
North Korea then conducted a nuclear test in May, sparking widespread condemnation.
In response, the UN Security Council adopted a resolution in June that
called for an expansion of an arms embargo and for UN member states to inspect
cargo vessels and airplanes suspected of carrying military materiel in or out of
North Korea.
The start of 2009 saw deteriorating relations between the two Koreas. Since
President Lee Myung-bak took office in early 2008, South Korea (North Korea’s
main donor for a decade) suspended aid and openly criticized North Korea’s
nuclear ambitions, in a new policy that emphasizes reciprocity. In March North
Korea arrested Yoo Seong-jin, a technician for South Korea’s Hyundai Group working
at the KIC, for allegedly criticizing the North Korean political system. In July
North Korea detained four South Korean fishermen who accidentally strayed into
its waters. By August, however, North Korea began sending conciliatory signals to
South Korea by releasing Yoo and the fishermen, and sending a high-level delegation
to the funeral of former President Kim Dae-jung. In September it allowed family
reunion meetings, after a two-year suspension. North Korean officials hinted
that they expect food aid from South Korea in return.
The longstanding issue of some 500 South Koreans allegedly abducted by the
North Korean government for propaganda or to train spies remains unresolved.
South Korea also believes hundreds of South Korean prisoners of war from the
1950-53 Korean War remain in North Korea against their will.
North Korea’s relations with the United States remained largely unchanged, but
the two countries held a couple of high-level meetings. In March North Korea
arrested two US journalists, Euna Lee and Laura Ling from California-based
Current TV, on charges including illegal entry. They were sentenced to 12 years of
labor, but reportedly remained in detention at a government guesthouse. In
August, upon the visit of former US president Bill Clinton, Kim Jong Il pardoned
the two and sent them home.
In September the US government appointed a new envoy on human rights in
North Korea. In late October, Ri Gun, director general of North American Affairs at
North Korea’s Foreign Ministry, visited the US to meet with Sung Kim, US special
envoy for the Six-Party talks.
In October, upon his return from a three-day visit to Pyongyang, Chinese Prime
Minister Wen Jiabao called for the US and North Korea to engage in a dialogue to
revive multilateral talks aimed at ending North Korea’s nuclear weapons program.
North Korea’s relations with Japan remained frosty, largely due to a dispute over
abductees. North Korea admitted in 2002 that its agents had abducted 13
Japanese, and returned five to Japan, but claimed the other eight had died. Japan
insists that the number of its abducted citizens is higher.
In a September 2009 report for the UN General Assembly, Vitit Muntarbhorn, UN
special rapporteur on human rights in North Korea, criticized North Korea for its
“abysmal” human rights record, citing food shortages, public executions, and torture,
and called on North Korea to stop punishing people seeking asylum elsewhere,
and institute democratic processes. In November the General Assembly
adopted a new resolution criticizing serious human rights violations in North
Korea.