 DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF KOREA*
 The'Democratic People's Republic of Korea (DPRK), formed in
 1948 during the Soviet administration of the northern half of
 the Korean peninsula, is a Communist dictatorship under the
 rule of the Korean Workers! Party (KWP). The party exercises
 absolute power on behalf of'its leader, General Secretary Kim
 Ii Sung, who is also President of the DPRK. Kim Il Sung, who
 has been in power for 41 years, has groomed his son, Kim Jong
 Il, as his successor. The younger Kim ranks second in the
 party and, likehis- father, is accorded deity-like status.
 The North Korean regime subjects its people to rigid controls.
 For each person the regime establishes security ratings which
 determine access tB employment, schools, medical facilities,
 and stores as well ap admission to the KWP. Individual rights
 are subordinated-to-the rights of the State and the party.
 In the DPRK's centralized economy, the State directs all
 significant economic activity. The type of economic reforms
 taking place in some other Communist states is absent. The
 people have a Spartan standard of living. Despite modest real
 growth in its gross national product, North Korea remains a
 less-developed country with serious distribution bottlenecks,
 nonproductive allocation of resources, and a worsening foreign
 debt.
 In 1989 North'Korea continued to deny its citizens the most
 fundamental human rights. The Government did open its first
 two Christian churches and allowed more foreign visitors. All
 religious organizations are 'ontrolled by the party, however,
 and only trusted cadres are allowed foreign contacts.
 The Go~ernment imprisons persons who fail to conform to the
 dictates of the State and often exiles them along with their
 families to remote villages. The regime permits no.
 independent press or associations, and little outside
 information reaches the general public except that which the
 Government approves and disseminates. There is no evidence
 that the Government has abandoned its intdrmittent use of
 state-sponsored terrorism.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:                -
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing
 According to several defectors who are believed to be
 reliable, the regime has.summarily executed some political
 prisoners and assassinated political opponents of Kim Il Sung
 and Kim Jong I. For over 20 years North Korea has
 *The United States does not have-diplomatic relations with the
 Democratic'People's Republic'of Korea.  North Korea forbids
 representatives of governments that do have relations with it,
 ,as well as journalists and other invited visitors, the freedom
 of movement that would enable them to assess human rights
 conditions there. Most of this report, therefore, is based on
 information obtained over a period of time extending from well
 before 1989. While limited in scope and detail, the
 information is indicative of the human rights situation in
 North Korea today.
 
 
 878
 DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF KOREA
 intermittently directed terrorist attacks against South Korea,
 including the bombing of Korean Air Flight 858 off the coast
 -of Burma in November 1987, which killed all 115 people on
 board, and the September 1983 bombing in Rangoon, Burma, which
 took the lives of 17 high-ranking South.Korean officials.
 b. Disappearance
 There is no information available on disappearance within
 North Korea. There are several reports that over the past 10
 years the DPRK has kidnaped South Koreans, Japanese, and other
 foreign citizens outside of its borders. According to a 1988
 report by Asia Watch and the Minnesota Lawyers International
 Human Rights Committee (MLIHRC), these kidnapings were
 apparently carried out to enhance Pyongyang's technical and
 espionage capabilities and to provide "defectors" to testify
 to the advances of DPRK society.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 As noted in the Asia Watch/HLIHRC report, "all available
 evidence indicates that, at least through the early 1980's,
 North Korean prisoners were routinely tortured or ill-treated
 during interrogation and at times- during later imprisonment."
 The report noted that many prisoners have died from torture,
 disease, starvation, or exposure. Little recent documentation
 is available.   However, Korean film producer Shin Sang-Ok and
 his actress wife, Choi Un-Wui (hereinafter referred to as the
 Shins), who claimed to have been kidnaped by North Korean
 operatives overseas and who escaped from North Korean
 officials in Vienna in 1986, attested to hearing repeated
 .stories of beatings during incarceration. Shin personally
 experienced many other forms of cruel and inhuman treatment,
 which he claimed-sometimes amounted to torture. This
 treatment involved denial of sleep, starvation rations, and
 solitary confinement, as well as being required to sit
 motionless for long periods of time.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Little information is available on specific criminal justice
 procedures and practices in North Korea. North Korea has
 refused to permit outside observation of its legal system and
 practices.
 North Korean law provides that prisoners may be held for
 interrogation for a period not to exceed 2 months. This
 period may be extended indefinitely,. however, if the
 Interrogation Department obtains the approval of the Chief
 Prosecutor. There are reports of persons being detained for
 12 months without trial or charge. Shin noted that it is very
 difficult for family members or other concerned persons to
 obtain information regarding charges being leveled against an
 accused person or even where an accused person is being
 detained. Habeas corpus or its equivalent does not exist in
 law or in practice.
 North Korean defectors to South Korea in 1989 estimated that
 the regime holds at least 105,000 political prisoners and
 their family members in "concentration camps," where they are
 prohibited from marrying and required to grow their own food.
 Based on defector testimony and other sources, the Republic of
 Korea estimates North Korea detains-about 150,000 political
 detainees and family members in maximum security camps in
 
 
 879
 DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF KOREA
 remote, isolated areas. North Korean officials deny the
 existence of such gulags or prisons but admit the existence of
 "education centers" for people who "commit crimes by
 mistake." The Asia Watch/MLIHRC report lists 12 such prison
 camps believed to exist in the DPRK.. The camps include four
 thought to have been added in 1982 to accommodate between
 6,000 and 15,QOO new prisoners resulting from a campaign by
 Kim Jong I to purge his critics and rivals. The report
 states that most maximum-security prisoners allegedly have
 been confined without trial or formal charges. Visitors and
 any form of communication with detainees, although once
 allowed, are said to be prohibited.
 In 1989 North Korea continued illegally to imprison two
 Japanese seamen, Isamu Beniko and Yoshio Kuriura. The DPRK
 detained them in October 1983 in retaliation for the defection
 of a DPRK army sergeant who stowed away on..their ship, the
 Fujisan Maru, and sought refuge in Japan. North Korea
 announced that the 2 seamen were tried in December 1987 and
 sentenced tg,15 years' "reformation through labor" for
 espionage gpd "abduction" of a North.Korean citizen. North
 Korea said it would release the two seamen only if Japan
 "delivers" the defector, who was-granted permanent resident
 status in 1987. North Korea has refused to allow family
 visits to the two seamen.
 With regard to forced or compulsory labor, see Section 6.c.
 e. Denil-.of Fair Public Trial
 The Constitution states that courts are independent and that
 judicial proceedings are to be carried out in strict
 accordance with the law, which contains elaborate procedural
 guarantees. According to the Asia Watch/MLIHRC report, these
 safeguards are not followed in practice, and it appears the
 party exerciaes pervasive control over the criminal justice
 system. Article 138 of the Constitution states that "cases
 are heard in public, and the'accused is guaranteed the right
 to defense; hearings may be closed to the public as stipulated
 by law.". There are numerous reports, however, of the Public
 Security Ministry dispensing with trials in political cases
 and instead referring cases to the Ministry of State Security
 for imposition of punishment.
 When trials are held, lawyers are apparently assigned by the
 Government.i-,According to the Asia Watch/MLIHRC report, defense
 lawyers are not considered representatives of the accused, but
 rather independent parties who are "expected to help the court
 by persuading the accused to confess his guilt." The report
 adds, "The counsel.must.. .only present facts to mitigate
 punishment."
 The Shins noted a distinction between political and common
 criminals, asserting that- the State affords trials only to the
 latter.. Nprth Korea equates "political criminals" with those
 who criticize the regime. Numerous other reports suggest that
 politicAl offenses include such forms of lese majesty as
 sitting on neispapers bearing Kim Ii Sung's picture.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The regime subjects the people to a pervasive program of
 indoctrination designed to shape and control individual
 consciousness. Preschool children are drilled in homage to
 
 
 880
 DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF KOREA
 Kim Ii Sung and his family while school age children are
 subjected daily to a half day of indoctrination. Youths and
 adults are required to participate in daily ideological
 training conducted during school or at places of employment.
 Government-organized neighborhood units also provide
 indoctrination for persons who neither work nor go to school.
 The daily indoctrination requires rote recitation of Party
 maxims and policies and strives for ideological purity.
 Multiple North Korean security organizations enforce these
 controls.
 The Government prevents Japanese wives of Koreans repatriated
 from Japan since 1959 from visiting Japan. Because their
 letters are subject to strict censorship, many have lost
 contact with their families.
 Although the Constitution states that "citizens are guaranteed
 the inviolability of person and residence and the privacy of
 correspondence," the practice is otherwise. The Government
 has developed a pervasive system of informers throughout the
 society and, according to the Shins and several defectors,
 electronic surveillance of residences is also pervasive. In
 school, the authorities encourage children to discuss what
 their parents have said at home. The Government conducts
 monthly "sanitation" inspections to check on household
 activities. Each house is required to display portraits of
 Kim Il Sung and Kim Jong Il. The Asia Watch/MLIHRC report
 concluded that "because of the surveillance and the attendant
 risk of consequences, fear appears to govern all social
 relationships."
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Although the Constitution states that "citizens have the
 freedoms of speech, the press, assembly, association, and
 demonstration," the regime permits such activities only in
 support of government objectives. Other articles of the
 Constitution that require citizens to follow the "Socialist
 norms of life" and to obey a "collective spirit" take
 precedence over individual political or civil liberties.
 Amnesty International's 1988 Report stated that the Government
 strictly curtails the rights of freedom of expression and
 association guaranteed under the International Covenant on
 Civil and Political Rights, to which North Korea acceded in
 1981. According to these sources, persons criticizing the
 President or his policies were liable to punishment by
 imprisonment or "corrective labor." A defector interviewed by
 Asia Watch/MLIHRC in 1986 reported that a scientist, whose
 home was bugged through his radio set, was arrested and
 executed for statements made at home critical of Kim Il Sung.
 Foreign media are excluded, domestic media censorship is
 enforced, and no deviation from the official government line
 is tolerated. The regime prohibits listening to foreign media
 broadcasts except by high government officials, and violators
 reportedly are subject to severe punishment. Most urban
 households have radio and some have television, but reception
 is limited to domestic programming. The Government controls
 artistic and academic works, and visitors report that the
 primary function of plays, movies, operas, and books is to
 contribute to the cult of personality surrounding "the great
 leader," Kim Il Sung, and "the beloyed leader," Kim Jong Il.
 
 
 881
 DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF KOREA
 b. Freedq-of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 No public meetings can be held without government
 authorization. There appear to be no organizations other than
 those create4 by the Government. The State even prohibits
 apolitical groups such as neighborhood or alumni
 organizations. Professional associations exist solely as
 another means of government control over the members of these
 organizations.
 For a discussion of freedom of association as it applies to
 labor unions, see Section 6.a.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Although the Constitution provides that "citizens have
 religious liberty and the freedom of antireligious
 propagandal" the regime, in fact, has severely persecuted
 Christians and Buddhists.since the late 1940's and
 discriminates.against.-persons whose, family or relatives once
 had a strong religious involvement.
 Despite these purges, the regime today uses government-
 sponsored reIgious organizations..to proclaim the practice of
 religious freedom.,,The DPRK claims to have 10,000 Christians
 who worship in 500&home churches. A few Buddhist temples are
 in operation, and the country's first two Christian churches
 were built in late 1988. The churches are included in the
 fixed itinerary for many foreignvisitors to Pyongyang. Some
 visitors attest to the authenticity of the church services and
 to the faith of the several dozen worshipers observed. Other
 visitors say the church activity appears staged. No North
 Korean religious official is ever known to have preached that
 there is any moral authoiity higher than that of Kim Il Sung.
 Worship of Kim, his family, and his juche (self-reliance)
 ideology is the only completely functioning religion in North
 Korea.
 d. Freedom of Movement.Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 The DPRK regime strictly controls internal travel, requiring a
 travel pass for any movement outside one's home village; these
 passes are granted only for required official or certain
 personal travel.. Personal travel is usually limited to
 attending the-wedoing or funeral of-a close relative. Long
 delays in-obtaining-the necessary permit often result in denial
 of the right to travel even for these limited purposes. State
 control of internal travel is also ensured by a ration system
 that distributes coupons valid only in the region issued.
 Reports, primarily-from defectors, indicate that forced
 resettlement, particularly for those deemed politically
 unreliable,.is con on. Permission to reside in, or even enter
 Pyongyang, the capital, is strictly controlled.
 Foreign travel is limited to officials and trusted artists,
 athletes, and academics.- The regime does not allow
 emigration, and only 1,0GO or so defectors have succeeded in
 fleeing the country. The regime retaliates against the
 relatives of those few persons who manage to escape.
 In 1989, in a rare departure from isolationist controls, the
 DPRK sent students to a short seminar in Japan. Aside from
 this, the regime does not allow students to study outside of
 
 
 882
 DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF KOREA
 Communist countries for any period. It tightened controls
 over DPRK students studying abroad when six defected from
 Eastern Europe in 1989.
 From 1959 to 1982, 93,000 Korean residents of Japan, including
 6,637 Japanese wives, voluntarily repatriated to North Korea
 in response to nationalistic appeals. Despite DPRK assurances
 that the wives, 1,828 of whom still had Japanese citizenship,
 would be allowed to go home to Japan every 2 or 3 years, none
 is known to have returned to Japan and most have never been
 heard of again. The Asia Watch/MLIHRC report and other
 sources say most of the returnees and their families are
 categorized in the "wavering class," given poor food, clothing,
 and housing, subjected to hard labor, and treated with
 contempt. When reports of their harsh treatment became known
 overseas, voluntary repatriation dried up.
 North Korea has permitted entry to several thousand overseas
 Korean residents in Japan, China, North America, and elsewhere
 to visit their relatives. Recently the regime has granted
 entry to greater numbers of other visitors, including
 journalists, tourists, and 15,000 foreign participants in the
 13th World Festival of Youth and Students held in Pyongyang in
 July 1989. Visitors are closely monitored and itineraries are
 usually fixed, although some visitors reported they were
 allowed to walk freely around the vicinity of their hotels.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 There is no mechanism by which the citizenry can effect
 transitions in leadership or changes in government. The
 political system is completely dominated by Kim II Sung and
 heir-designate Kim Jong I. The legislature, the Supreme
 People's Assembly, which meets only a few-days a year, has
 never taken any action other than unanimous passage of
 resolutions presented to it by the leadership. In an effort
 to create an appearance of democracy, the.DPRK has created
 several "minority parties." They exist only as rosters of
 officials who have token representation in the People's
 Assembly and completely support the government line.
 Free elections do not exist in North Korea. Although
 elections to the Supreme People's Assembly were held in
 November 1986, and to provincial, city, and county assemblies
 in November 1989, in all cases the Government approved only
 one candidate in each electoral district. According to the
 government-controlled media, over 99 percent of the voters
 turned out to elect 100 percent of the approved candidates.
 Such "elections" are an exercise in which people are forced to
 participate and to approve the party's candidates. Despite
 the long and rigorous selection process for membership in the
 KWP, most party members have no voice in decisionmaking,
 serving only to carry out the decrees promulgated by party
 leader Kim Il Sung and his top subordinates.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 No organizations exist within North Korea to report on or
 observe human rights violations. North Korea does not
 participate in any international or regional human rights
 organizations.
 
 
 883
 DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF KOREA
 The Government has not allowed Amnesty International (AI),
 Asia Watch, the M4LIHRC, or any other international
 organiz'atrn to visit North Korea to monitor human rights-,
 practices. A DPRK representative-called a preliminary version
 of the Asia Watch/MLIHRC report "full of lies and
 fabrications," and warned that if it were published, the human
 rights organizations would "be held fully responsible for all
 the consequences arising therefrom.""
 When Scandinavian delegates to the World Festival of Youth and
 Students attempted tO unfurl banners-reading "Where is
 Amnesty?", they wereattacked and temporarily detained by the
 policei  DPRK officials later gave assurances that two AI
 representatives would be permitted to enter, but DPRK delays
 in procds~in44the Visa applications prevented the trip.
 Section 5"'Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Ianguage, or Social Status
 The Constitution states that "women hold equal social status
 and rights with men." However, few women have reached high
 levels of the party or the Government. Women are represented
 proportionally in the labor force, with the exception of small
 factories where the work force is predominantly female.
 The regime discriminates against the physically handicapped.
 Handicapped persons, other than war veterans, are reportedly
 not allowed within the city limits of Pyongyang. According to
 the Asia Watch/HLIHRC report, authorities check for
 deformities in the capital city every 2 or 3 years and remove
 the disabled, some of the elderly, widows, and the sick to the
 countryside. The dwarf community has been banished to a
 remote mountain settlement.
 Nothing is known about the extent to which violence against
 women is practiced or tolerated.
 North Korea is a homogeneous country and is relatively devoid
 of minority groups.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 Free labor unions do not exist in North Korea. Because the
 party by definition purports to represent the interests of
 labor, trade unions exist in form only. They do not have the
 right to strike.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 Workers have no right to organize or to bargain collectively.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 There is nb prohibition on the use of forced or compulsory
 labor. The Government routinely uses military conscripts for
 forced labor. The Shins reported that conscripts are not told
 where they will serve or for how long. AI's 1987 Report cites
 reports that some "political prisoners" were allegedly
 sentenced to "corrective labor" which could be served at a
 person'snormal workplace (working for some or no wages) or at
 farms or mines in areas where conditions are very harsh.
 
 
 884
 DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF KOREA
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 No data are aailable on the-mrinimum age for employment of
 children.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 No data are available on minimum wages or occupational safety
 and health. Wages are set by government ministries. The
 State assigns all jobs; ideological purity, rather than
 professional competence, is the-primary standard used in
 deciding who receives a particular job. Laborers have no
 input into management decisions. Absence from work without a
 doctor's certificate results~in a reduction in aworker's
 rations. The Constitution stipulates a workday limited to 8
 hours, but several sources report that most laborers work 12
 to 16 hours'daily. The regime's propaganda euphemistically
 refers to these extra hours as "patriotic labor" done on a
 "voluntary" basis by the workers.
 
 
 885
