 PORTUGAL*
 The Republic of Portugal is a parliamentary democracy with a
 president and legislative assembly freely elected by secret
 ballot. Former Prime Minister and Socialist Party head Mario
 Soares was elected Portugal's first civilian President in 60
 years in 1986 and reelected by a wide margin in 1991. In 1987
 and again in October 1991, Prime Minister Cavaco Silva and his
 Social Democratic Party (PSD) were returned to power to
 continue the mandate of the first one-party majority government
 since the 1974 revolution.
 Internal security is primarily the responsibility of the
 Ministries of Justice and Internal Administration. Security
 forces are fully controlled by and responsive to the Government.
 Portugal has a market-based economy and is a member of the
 European Economic Community. An increasing proportion of the
 population is employed in industry and services, while
 employment in the agricultural sector continues to decline.
 The human rights situation in 1991 was good. The Government
 and its institutions continue to act in a manner consistent
 with respect for human rights. Civil rights are outlined in
 the Constitution in accordance with the Universal Declaration
 of Human Rights. An'Ombudsman, chosen by the Assembly of the
 Republic (legislature) to serve a 4-year term, is Portugal's
 chief civil and human rights officer. Any citizen may apply to
 him for relief. The Ombudsman receives about 3,000 complaints
 annually, most of them concerning cases of alleged
 maladministration by Portugal's cumbersome bureaucracy and
 delays in the judicial process.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing
 Government-sanctioned political killings do not occur. There
 were no killings attributed to domestic terrorist groups.
 b. Disappearance
 Government or police authorities do not abduct, secretly
 arrest, or otherwise illegally detain persons.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 The Constitution forbids torture, inhuman or degrading
 treatment or punishment, and the use of evidence obtained under
 torture in criminal-proceedings. There are, however,
 occasional complaints of mistreatment by police and prison
 authorities, and these are investigated by the Ombudsman.
 There have been allegations that the paramilitary Republican
 National Guard detachment in the village of Sesimbra mistreated
 several prisoners during the winter of 1991, causing minor
 injuries. Judicial authorities were investigating these
 accusations at year's end.
 * A separate report for Macau, a dependency of Portugal off the
 southern coast of China, follows this report.
 
 
 1208
 PORTUGAL
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Under Portuguese law, an investigating judge reviews the case
 against a person under arrest to determine whether that person
 should be detained, released on bail, or released outright.
 Persons may not be held for more than 48 hours without
 appearing before an investigating judge. Investigative
 detention is limited to a maximum of 6 months for each
 suspected crime. If a formal charge has not been filed within
 that period, the person detained must be released. In cases
 involving serious crimes, such as murder or armed robbery, or
 in cases involving more than one suspect, investigative
 detention is permitted for up to 2 years and may be extended by
 a judge to 3 years in extraordinary circumstances. A suspect
 must be brought to trial within 18 months of his or her being
 formally charged. Detainees have access to lawyers, who are
 generally effective in protecting their clients' rights.
 Exile and incommunicado detention are illegal and not practiced
 in Portugal.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Portugal has an independent and impartial judicial system. All
 trials are public except those which may offend the dignity of
 the victim, such as in cases involving the sexual abuse of
 children. The accused is presumed innocent until proven guilty.
 In trials for serious crimes, a panel of three judges (which
 does not include the investigating judge) presides. In trials
 for lesser crimes, a single judge presides. A ministerial
 delegate assists the judges in reviewing the evidence. At the
 request of the accused, a jury may be used in trials for major
 crimes. Sentence may be passed only in the presence of the
 defense attorney.
 Portugal holds no political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The Constitution forbids forced entry into homes and searches
 without a judicial warrant. In addition, entry into a person's
 home at night requires the consent of the occupant. The State
 does not intercept private correspondence or place wiretaps
 except with a court order.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Freedom of speech and press is provided for in the Constitution
 and respected by the State. The constitutionally mandated High
 Commission for Social Communication acts as a watchdog to
 protect freedom of speech and access to the media. The
 Commission, whose members are chosen by the Government and by
 the Assembly of the Republic, makes recommendations to the
 Assembly and has enforcement powers. The academic community is
 free to express its views.
 Although the State owns both television channels in Portugal,
 the provision of the Constitution making television a state
 monopoly was removed in 1990. Licenses for two private
 television stations were expected to be issued in the wake of
 the October elections.
 
 
 1209
 PORTUGAL
 In principle, the Government does not exercise direct control
 over the state-owned television system, though it does wield
 considerable-influence through personnel appointments.
 Opposition parties sometimes charge that the state network
 ignores or distorts opposition views and activities. Station
 news directors defend their decisions as based on editorial
 judgments, not political partisanship. All political parties,
 even relatively tiny ones, use their legal right to "antenna
 time'L during prime viewing and listening hours.
 In 1989 the Government passed legislation permitting private
 radio stations to operate for the first time. As of October
 1991, more than 250 such local stations had been authorized-and
 were on the air.
 The entire spectrum of political thought is represented in the
 Portuguese press. There is no press censorship. As a result
 of postrevolutionary nationalization of the banks, to which
 many of the newspapers were indebted, the State acquired title
 to a number of newspapers. These papers were state owned but
 editorially independent. In 1991 the Government divested
 itself of the last of these publications.
 "Fascist" organizations are prohibited by law, although some
 small, extreme rightwing groups function without interference.
 In addition, a person may be prosecuted for "insulting" certain
 state authorities if the "insult" is intended to undermine the
 rule of law. There were no prosecutions for "insult" in 1991.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Persons have'the right, in law and practice, to associate
 formally or informally to promote nonviolent causes. Public
 meetings or protests require 24-hour advance notice to the
 civil governor of the region in which the event is to be held.
 Permission is routinely granted. The official registration of
 a new political party requires 5,000 signatures.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Portugal does not have a state religion. The Government does
 not interfere with the free practice of religion, missionary
 work, or religious publications. These freedoms extend to
 foreign clergy, many of whom work in Portugal. Organized
 religious groups may establish places of worship, train clergy,
 and proselytize without government interference. To qualify as
 tax-exempt institutions, religious groups must be established
 as nonprofit, private societies.
 Roman Catholicism is the predominant religion in Portugal.
 Catholic religious instruction is offered as an elective course
 in public schools. Other denominations offer religious
 education in their own institutions without interference.
 Success in a civil, military, professional, or political career
 does not-depend upon adherence to a religious creed. There
 were no reported cases of religious persecution in 1991.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 The Constitution provides for the right of freedom of movement,
 foreign travel, and emigration. There are no restraints on
 domestic travel or on the right of a person to change his
 domicile. Citizenship is not revoked for political reasons.
 
 
 1210
 PORTUGAL
 Displaced persons who qualify as refugees as defined by the
 International Convention Related to the Status of Refugees are
 entitled to permanent resident status and work permits.
 Displaced persons are not forced to return to the country from
 which they fled.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Portugal is a multiparty, participatory democracy. Candidates
 for president and for legislative, regional, and municipal
 offices are freely nominated and are elected by secret ballot
 on the basis of universal suffrage.
 The unicameral Assembly of the Republic is the legislative
 body. The Prime Minister is the head of the Government.
 Opposition parties and candidates operate freely and enjoy
 access to the media.   General elections are held at least once
 every 4 years. The President has a 5-year mandate and may not
 serve more than two consecutive terms.
 There are no restrictions on the participation of women or
 minorities in the political process.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 Local and international human rights groups operate freely in
 Portugal. The Government cooperates with independent outside
 investigations of human rights conditions and actively
 participates in the monitoring of human rights by the Council
 of Europe.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 There are no laws discriminating against any racial, ethnic, or
 religious group; nor do any such groups have a privileged
 status in Portugal.
 Various women's groups in Portugal have drawn attention to the
 largely hidden problem of violence against women, particularly
 within the family. Portuguese law provides for criminal
 penalties in cases of violence between husbands and wives
 without referring specifically to violence against wives.
 Women's groups point out that traditional attitudes discourage
 many women who suffer such violence from seeking recourse in
 the judicial system. They complain that Portugal lacks
 institutions established specifically to provide relief to
 battered women. There is no apparent reluctance on the part of
 the judicial system to prosecute suspects accused of abusing
 women.
 The civil code provides for full legal equality for women.
 Women are increasing their representation in universities
 business, science, government, and the professions.-
 Traditional attitudes of male dominance persist but are
 changing gradually. The Commission on the Status of Women, al
 official organization established in 1976, is a leading
 advocate of women's rights.
 
 
 1211
 PORTUGAL
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 Workers in both the private and public sectors have the right
 to associate freely and to establish committees in the
 workplace "to defend their interests." The Constitution
 provides for the right to establish unions by profession or
 industry. Trade union associations are guaranteed the right to
 participate in the preparation of labor legislation; Strikes
 are permitted for any reason, including political causes. They
 are common and are generally resolved through direct
 negotiations between management and the unions involved.
 Lockouts are prohibited. These constitutional guarantees are
 respected in practice.
 There are two principal labor federations. The General
 Confederation of Portuguese Workers Intersindical (CGTP7IN) is
 linked to the Communist Party and engages freely in cooperative
 activities with the Communist-dominated World Federation of
 Trade Unions. The General Union of Workers (UGT) is a
 pluralist democratic federation affiliated with the
 International Confederation of Free Trade Unions and the
 European Trade Union Confederation.
 Both federations and their affiliates function free from
 government control but are closely associated with political
 parties. The CGTP-IN generally supports the Communist Party's
 policies and causes.- UGT leaders are associated with either
 the Socialist or Social Democratic parties. Although some UGT
 leaders serve in the Assembly of'the Republic- the federation
 pursues a generally independent path that occasionally puts it
 in conflict with the Socialist and/or Social Democratic
 parties. The-labor movement in Portugal exercises significant
 influence on social and economic policymaking.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain'Collectively
 Unions are free to organize without government or employer
 interference. Collective bargaining'is guaranteed by the
 Constitution and practiced extensively in the public and
 private sectors. When collective bargaining disputes lead to
 prolonged strike action in key sectors (for example, health and
 transportation), the Government is empowered to order the
 workers back to work for a specific period. The Government has
 rarely done so in practice, in part due to the fact that most
 strike activity is limited to periods of 1 to 3 days. When
 collective bargaining fails, the Government, at the request of
 either management or labor, may appoint a mediator. Despite
 recent amendments to legislation that required ministerial
 authorization of collective bargaining agreements in public
 enterprises, the International Labor Organization's Committee
 of Experts asked for assurances in 1991 that the ability of the
 concerned minister to intervene in the collective nargaining
 process -is appropriately limited.
 Union officials and members are protected by law against
 antiunion discrimination, and this law is observed in
 practice. Complaints are promptly examined by the General
 Directorate of Labor.
 Portugal has no export processing zones.
 
 
 1212
 PORTUGAL
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 Forced labor is prohibited and does not exist. This
 prohibition is enforced by the General Labor Inspectorate.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 The minimum employment age is 15 years. It will be raised to
 16 when the law providing for 9 years of compulsory schooling
 takes effect on January 1, 1997. The UGT and CGTP-IN have
 charged that a number of "clandestine" companies in the
 textile, shoe, and construction industries in northern Portugal
 exploit child labor. A report compiled by an international
 nongovernmental human rights organization at the invitation of
 the Portuguese Government and based on 2 months of
 investigation, alleged that as many as 200,000 school-age
 children could be working. Although the Government disputed
 the 200,000 figure, it acknowledged that abuses exist and
 promised to act to curb them, but it has yet to allocate
 resources sufficient to address the problem. The General Labor
 Inspectorate is responsible for enforcement of child labor laws
 but suffers from a lack of money and an inadequate number of
 inspectors.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 A national monthly minimum wage for full-time workers was first
 established in 1974. Minimum wages for rural workers and
 domestic employees were legislatively established in 1977 and
 1978 respectively. Except in 1982, minimum wages have been
 increased every year. The current minimum monthly wage,
 established on January 1, 1991, is generally enforced but
 legally does not apply to workers below the age of 18. Even
 with rent control and various social assistance subsidies, it
 is difficult for a single-income family to maintain a decent
 standard of living on the minimum wage, particularly in urban
 areas. Workers receive a Christmas bonus equal to a month's
 salary.
 Current legislation limits regular hours of work to 8 hours per
 day and 44 hours per week, but agreement has been reached to
 reduce the workweek to 40 hours by 1995. In practice, the
 average workweek is 42 hours. Overtime is limited to 2 hours
 per work period, up to 200 hours annually. Work on a normal
 day off is restricted to 8 hours. These limits are respected
 in practice. Workers are guaranteed 15 days of paid annual
 leave per year. The Ministry of Employment and Social Security
 monitors compliance through its regional inspectors.
 Employers are legally responsible for accidents at work and are
 required by law to carry accident insurance. Portugal has
 developed a body of legislation that regulates safety and
 health. Labor unions consider these regulations inadequate and
 continue to press for stiffer legislation. The General
 Directorate of Hygiene and Labor Security develops safety
 standards, and the General Labor Inspectorate is responsible
 for enforcement. Accidents average between 70,000 and 75,000
 per quarter. These figures have focused government attention
 particularly on the construction industry. There is also
 considerable concern about the poor environmental controls on
 the textile industry centered in the north of Portugal. The
 General Labor Inspectorate lacks sufficient funds and
 inspectors to combat the problem effectively, and the ability
 of workers to remove themselves from situations where these
 hazards exist is limited.
 
 
 1213
