 PORTUGAL*
 The Republic of Portugal is a parliamentary democracy with a president and legis-
 lative assembly freely elected by secret ballot. Former Prime Minister and Socialist
 Party head Mario Soares was elected Portugal's first civilian President in 60 years
 in 1986 and reelected by a wide mar     in 1991. In legislative elections in 1991,
 Prime Minister Cavaco Silva and his ocial Democratic Party (PSD) were returned
 to office with an increased majority in Parliament.
 Internal security is primarily the responsibility of the Ministries of Justice and
 Internal Administration. Security forces are fully controlled by and responsive to the
 Government. Total military expenditures for 1989, the last year for which the Unit-
 ed States Arms Control and Disarmament Agency conducted a detailed analysis,
 were $1,457 million. Plans to cut these expenditures substantially by downsizing
 and restructuring military forces are being debated. There are indications that a
 substantial reduction will be implemented during 1993.
 Portugal has a market-based economy and is a member of the European Commu-
 nity. An increasing proportion of the population is employed in services. Employ-
 ment in the agricultural sector continued to decline, and employment in the indus-
 trial sector is static.
 Portuguese citizens enjoy a broad range of civil and other human rights. Civil
 rights are outlined in the Constitution. An Ombudsman, chosen by the Assembly of
 the Republic (legislature) to serve a 4-year term, is Portugal's chief civil and human
 rights officer. Any citizen may apply to the Ombudsman or relief. The Ombudsman
 receives about 3,000 complaints annually, most of them concerning cases of alleged
 maladministration by Portugal's cumbersome bureaucracy and delays in the judicial
 process.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-Government-sanctioned political or
 other extrajudicial killings do not occur. There were no killings attributed to domes-
 tic terrorist groups.
 b. Disappearance.-Government or police authorities do not abduct, secretly ar-
 rest, or otherwise illegally detain persons.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution forbids torture, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment,
 and the use of evidence obtained under torture in criminal proceedings. The Om-
 budsman investigates complaints of mistreatment by police and prison authorities.
 It was announced in late December that the Provedor de Justica will open a for-
 mal investigation into allegations of police brutality and mistreatment of prisoners.
 The investigation is in response to increased numbers (over 30) of complaints.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Eile.-Under Portuguese law, an investigating
 judge reviews the case against a person under arrest to determine whether that per-
 son should be detained, released on bail, or released outright. Persons may not be
 held for more than 48 hours without appearing before an investigating judge. Inves-
 tigative detention is limited to a maximum of 6 months for each suspected crime.
 If a formal charge has not been filed within that period, the person detained must
 be released. In cases involving serious crimes, such as murder or armed robbery,
 or in cases involving more than one suspect, investigative detention is permitted for
 up to 2 years and may be extended by a judge to 3 years in extraordinary cir-
 cumstances. A suspect must be brought to trial within 18 months of his or her being
 formally charged. Detainees have access to lawyers, who are generally effective in
 protecting their clients' rights. Defendants who cannot afford representation have a
 awyer appointed for them by the presiding judge, who chooses from a list main-
 tained by the Lawyers Association. Fees are paid by the Government.
 Exile and incommunicado detention are illegal and not practiced in Portugal.
 *A separate report for Macau, a dependency of Portugal off the southern coast of China, fol-
 lows this reoort.
 
 
 e. Denial of Fair Public Tria/.-Portugal has an independent and impartial judi-
 cial system. All trials are public except those which may offend the dignity of the
 victim such as in cases involving the sexual abuse of children. The accusedis pre.
 surned innocent until proven guilty.
 In trials for serious crimes, a panel of three judges (which does not include the
 investigatirg judge) presides. In trials for lesser crimes, a single judge presides. A
 ministerial delegae assists the judges in reviewing the evidence. At the request of
 the accused, a jury may be used in trials for maor crimes, such as those against
 security of the State and crimes against humaity. In practice requests for jury
 trials are extremely rare. Sentence may be passed only in the presence of the de-
 fense attorney.
 Portugal holds no political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Constitution forbids both forced entry into homes and searches without a judicial
 warrant. In addition, entry into a person's home at night requires the consent of
 the occupant. The State does not intercept private correspondence or place wiretaps
 except with a court order.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-Freedom of speech and press is provided for in
 the Constitution and respected by the State. The constitutionally mandated High
 Commission for Social Communication acts as a watchdog to protect freedom of
 speech and access to the media. The Commission, members of which are chosen by
 the Government and by the Assembly of the Republic, makes recommendations to
 the Assembly and has enforcement powers. The academic community is free to ex-
 press its views.
 The State owns two television channels. However, the provision of the Constitu-
 tion making television a state monopoly was removed in 1990, and Portugal's first
 privately owned station began operating in October 1992. In principle, the Govern-
 ment does not exercise direct control over the state-owned television system, though
 it does wield considerable influence through yersonnel appointments. Opposition
 parties sometimes charge that the state network ignores or distorts opposition views
 and activities; station news directors defend their decisions as based on editorial
 judgments, not political partisanship. All political parties, even very small ones, use
 their legal right to "antenna time" during prime viewing and listening hours.
 In 1989 the Government passed legislation permitting the operation of private
 radio stations. More than 250 local stations are on the air.
 The entire spectrum of political thought is represented in the Portuguese press.
 There is no press censorship. All newspapers are privately owned.
 "Fascist" organizations are prohibited by law, although some small, extreme right-
 wing groups hold meetings ofrtheir membership and run candidates for public office
 without interference. The law provides that a person may be prosecuted for "insult-
 ing" certain state authorities if the "insult" is intended to undermine the rule of law,
 but there were no such prosecutions in recent years.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-Persons have the right, in law
 and practice, to associate formally or informally to promote nonviolent causes. Pub-
 lic meetings or protests require 24-hour advance notice to the civil governor of the
 region in which the event is to be held. Permission is routinely granted. The official
 registration of a new political party requires 5,000 signatures.
 c. Freedom of Religion. -Portugal does not have a state religion. The Government
 does not interfere with the practice of religion, missionary work, or religious publi-
 cations. These freedoms extend to foreign clergy, many of whom work in Portugal.
 Organized religious groups may establish places of worship, train clergy, and pros-
 elytize without government interference. To qualify as tax-exempt institutions, reli-
 gious groups must be established as nonprofit, private societies.
 Roman Catholicism is the predominant religion in Portugal. Roman Catholic reli-
 gious instruction is offered as an elective course in public schools. Other denomina-
 tions offer religious educatioh in their own institutions without interference. Success
 in a civil, military, professional, or political career does not depend upon adherence
 to a religious creed. There were no reported cases of religious persecution in 1992.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Constitution provides for the right of freedom of movement, foreign
 travel, and emigration. There are no restraints on domestic travel or on the right
 of a person to change his domicile. Citizenship is not revoked for political reasons.
 Displaced persons who qualify as refugees as defined by the International Conven-
 tion Relating to the Status of Refugees are entitled to permanent resident status
 and work permits. Displaced persons are not forced to return to the country from
 which they fled.
 
 
 872
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Portugal is a multiparty, participatory democracy. Candidates for president and
 for legislative, regional, and municipal offices are freely nominated and are elected
 by secret ballot on the basis of universal suffrage.
 The unicameral Assembly of the Republic is the legislative body. The Prime Min-
 ister is the head of the Government. Opposition parties and candidates operate free-
 ly and enjoy access to the media. General elections are held at least once every 4
 years. The President has a 5-year term and may not serve more than two of such
 terms consecutively.
 There are no restrictions on the participation of women or minorities in the politi-
 cal process, and women and minorities do participate. Women are represented in
 parliament, holding 19 out of 230 seats, including the office of Vice President of the
 Assembly.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Local and international human rights groups operate freely in Portugal. The Gov-
 ernment cooperates with independent outside investigations of human rights condi-
 tions and actively participates in the monitoring of human rights by the Council of
 Europe.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Language, or Social Status
 The Constitution forbids discrimination based on ancestry, sex, race, language,
 territory of origin, religion, political or ideological convictions, education, economic
 situation, or social condition. The principal minority  u s are immigrants, legal
 and illegal, from Portugal's former African colonies (Angola, Cape Verde, Guinea-
 Bissau, Mozambique, and Sao Tome and Principe). The Cape Verdian population is
 the largest-over 25,000. There is also a resident Gypsy population. The Govern-
 ment has announced a 4-month period (October 1992 to January 1993) during which
 illegal immigrants can regularize their status in Portugal. The Africans are actively
 organizing associations to serve as pressure groups. They campaign against what
 they perceive to be racism in Portugal. The Government denies that racist actions
 are taking place. There are no laws discriminating against any racial, ethnic, or reli-
 gious group; nor do any such groups have a privileged status in Portugal.
 Various women's groups in Portugal have drawn attention to the largely hidden
 problem of violence against women, particularly within the family. Portuguese law
 provides for criminal penalties in cases of violence between husbands and wives,
 without referring specifically to violence against wives. Women's groups point out
 that traditional attitudes discourage many women who suffer such violence from
 seeking recourse in the judicial system. They complain that Portugal lacks institu-
 tions established specifically to provide relief to battered women. There is no appar-
 ent reluctance on the part of the judicial system to prosecute suspects accused of
 abusing women.
 The Civil Code provides for full legal equality for women. Women are increasing
 their representation in universities, business, science, government, and the profes-
 sions. Traditional attitudes of male dominance persist but are changing gradually.
 The Commission on the Status of Women has been abolished, and its responsibil-
 ities have been assumed by the Committee for the Equality and Rights of Women.
 The Committee works under the direction of the Ministry of Employment and Social
 Security. Its principal activities have been in the area of women's rights in the
 workplace.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-Both private and public sector workers have the
 right to associate freely and to establish committees in the workplace "to defend
 their interests." The Constitution provides for the right to establish unions by pro-
 fession or industry. Trade union associations are guaranteed the right to participate
 in the preparation of labor legislation. Strikes are permitted for any reason, includ-
 ing political causes. They are common and are generally resolved through direct ne-
 gotiations between management and the unions involved. Lockouts are prohibited.
 These constitutional guarantees are respected in practice.
 There are two prncipal labor federations. The General Confederation of Por-
 tuguese Workers Intersindical (CGTP-IN) is linked to the Communist Party and has
 engaged freely in cooperative activities with the Communist-dominated World Fed-
 eration of Trade Unions. The CGTP-IN is expected, however, to make its entry into
 the European Trade Union Confederation (ETUC) in 1993. The General Union of
 
 
 873
 Workers (UGT) is a pluralist democratic federation affiliated with the International
 Confederation of Free Trade Unions and the ETUC.
 Both federations and their affiliates function free from government control but are
 closely associated with political parties. The CGTP-IN generally supports the Com-
 munist Party's policies and causes, but this position was openly criticized by ele-
 ments of the membership in 1991-92. UGT leaders are associated with either the
 Socialist or Social Democratic parties. Although some UGT leaders serve in the As-
 sembly of the Republic, the federation pursues a generally independent path that
 occasionally puts it in conflict with the Socialist anT Social Democratic Parties. The
 labor movement in Portugal exercises significant influence on social and economic
 policymaking.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-Unions are free to organize
 without government or employer interference. Collective bargaining is guaranteed
 b the Constitution and practiced extensively in the public and private sectors.
 When collective bargaining disputes lead to prolonged strike action in key sectors
 (for example, health and transportation), the Government is empowered to order the
 workers back to work for a specific period. While the Government has rarely done
 so in practice, in part due to the fact that most strike activity is limited to periods
 of 1 to 3 days, in May Lisbon subway workers were ordered back to work under
 this provision. When collective bargaining fails, the Government, at the request of
 either management or labor, may appoint a mediator.
 Union officials and members are protected by law against antiunion discrimina-
 tion, ard this law is observed in practice. Complaints are promptly examined by the
 General Directorate of Labor.
 Portugal has no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-Forced labor is prohibited and
 does not exist.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The minimum employment age is
 15 years. The UGT and CGTP-IN charged that a number of "clandestine" companies
 (operating out of homes and garges) in the textile and shoe industries in northern
 Portugal exploit child labor. A report presented by Anti-Slavery International to the
 United Nations in 1991, based on 2 months of investigation, alleged that as many
 as 200,000 school-age children could be working. Although the Government disputed
 the 200,000 figure, it acknowledged that abuses exist and promised to act to curb
 them; over a year has passed, but the problem has not been resolved. The General
 Labor Inspectorate is responsible for enforcement of child labor laws. Progress to-
 ward prosecution of those employing children has been slow, but funding of the
 Inspectorate has been increased, and the number of inspectoris growing. The
 Inspectorate has begun to levy large fines as a result of a 1991 change in the law
 which raised the maximum fine for employers using child labor more than a hun-
 dred fold.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-Minimum  wage legislation overs full-time
 workers, as well as rural workers and domestic employees age 18 or over. The cur-
 rent minimum monthly wage, established on January 1, 199ris generally enforced.
 Even with rent control and various social assistance subsidies, it is difficult for a
 single-income family to maintain a decent standard of living on the minimum wage
 income, particularly in urban areas.
 Current legislation limits regular work to 8 hours per day and 44 hours per week,
 but agreement has been reached to reduce the workweek to 40 hours by 1995. In
 practice, the average workweek is 42 hours. Overtime is limited to 2 hours per day,
 up to 200 hours annually. Work on a normal day of is restricted to 8 hours. These
 limits are respected in eractice. Workers ar guaranteed 15 days of paid annual
 leave per year. The Ministry of Employment and Social Security monitors compli-
 ance through its regional inspectors.
 Employers are legally responsibe for acidents at work and are required by law
 to carry accident insurance. Portugal has developed a body of legislation that regu-
 lates safety and health. Labor unions consider these regulations inadequate and
 continue to press for stiffer egislation. A new law was passed in 1992 as the first
 step in an agreement reached with the unions in 1991 governing hygiene, safety,
 andhealth in the workplace; it also authorizes the establiahment of an institute de-
 voted to these issues. The General Directorate of Hygiene and Labor Security devel-
 ops safety standards, and the General Labor Inspectorate is responsible for enforce-
 ment, but it lacks sufficient funds and inspectors to combat the problem eltectively.
 Accidents average between 70,000 and 75,000 per quarter. These figures have fo-
 cused government attention particularly on the construction industry. There is also
 considerable concern about poor environmental controls on the textile industry cen-
 tered in northern Portugal. The ability of workers to remove themselves from situa-
 tions where hazards exist is limited, but it is difficult to fire workers for any reasen.
 
 
 About 4 percent of the strikes in Portugal in 1991 were over health and safety.
 related issues. Three-quarters of those strikes saw the workers' demands completely
 refused. In the remaining quarter, the workers' demands were only partially satis-
 fied. Lawsuits are rarely initiated in accident cases.
