 PORTUGAL *
 The Republic of Portugal is a constitutional democracy with a president, an inde-
 pendent judiciary, a prime minister and a legislative assembly freely elected by se-
 cret I     i    tiparty elections.
 Internal security is primarily the responsibility of the Ministries of Justice and
 Internal Administration. Security forces are controlled by, and responsive to, the
 Government.
 *A separate report on Macau, recognized by both China and Portugal as Chinese territory
 under Portuguese administration, follows this report.
 
 
 975
 
 Portugal has a market-based economy and is a member of the European Union.
 An increasing proportion of the population is employed in services, wile employ-
 ment in agriculture continues to decline and has been static or declining slightly in
 the industrial sector.
 Citizens enjoy a broad range of civil and other human rights which the Govern-
 ment gene    y respects. Civil rights are outlined in the Constitution with specific
 reference to the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. The principal human
 rights problem is the occasional beatings of detainees or prisoners by police or pris-
 on personnel. Credible-although infrequent-reports of this problem continued in
 1995, as did reports of poor conditions in prisons. Domestic violence against women
 is reportedly common.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from:
 a. Political and other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no reports of political or
 other extrajudicial killings.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degradi   eatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution forbids torture, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment,
 and the use of evidence obtained under torture in criminal proceedings. An inde-
 pendent Ombudsman, chosen by the Legislative Assembly (pariament), investigates
 complaints of mistreatment by police and prison authorities.
 The Government and Amnesty International (Al) have continued their dialogue
 on allegations of police brutality. One case of mistreatment of two citizens by the
 National Republican Guard (GNR), which Al had been following since 1992, was ap-
 parently resolved by the sentencing of several GNR soldiers to prison terms. They
 remained free on appeal, however. At the same time, new credible allegations of po-
 lice brutality were lodged, including a widely publicized incident involving injuries
 to a prominent lawyer and employee of the Lisbon city government. Al and the
 United Nations Committee Against Torture lamented the delay in investigating
 such allegations. While the Government admits to some problems with control and
 supervision of police officers, it characterizes the operation of the public security
 forces as positive overall and says violations of citizens' rights by the security forces
 are  xceptional cases."
 The Council of Europe's Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman
 or Degrading Punishment and the International Observer of Prisons maintained a
 dialogue with the Government on rison conditions. Based on visits to prisons, these
 observers noted instances of brutal treatment by guards and general failure to meet
 minimum standards. Corrective steps such as improvig access to counsel and to
 medical treatment have been recommended. A lacki of resources inhibits progress in
 this area.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Etie.-Under the law, an investigating judge de-
 termines whether an arrested person should be detained, released on bail, or re-
 leased outright. Persons may not be held more than 48 hours without appearing be-
 fore an invesiti ng judge. Investiative detention is limited to a maximum of 6
 months for each suspected crime. ara formal charge has not been filed within that
 period, the detainee must be released. In cases of serious crimes, for example mur-
 der or armed robbery, or of mre than one suspect, investigative detention may be
 for up to 2 years and may be extended by a judge to 3 years in extraordinary cir-
 cumstances. A suspect in investigative detention must be brought to trial within 18
 months of being formally charg.d. If the suspect is not in detention, there is no
 specified period for going to trial. A detainee has access to lawyers; the State as-
 sumes the cost if necessary.
 Exile and incommunicado detention are illegal and not practiced.
 e. Denial of Fair Public TriaL-The judiciary is independent and impartial. The
 judicial system provides citizens with a fair legal process; it has been much criti-
 cized, however, or a large backlog of pending trials resulting from inefficient func-
 tioning of the courts. The court system, laid out in the Constitution, consists of a
 Constitutional Court, a Supreme Court of Justice, and judicial courts of first and
 second instance. There is also a court of accounts, which functions as a court of ap-
 peaL.
 All trials are public except those which may offend the dignity of the victim, such
 as in cases of sexual abuse of children. The accused is presumed innocent. In trials
 for serious crimes, a panel of three judges presides. For lesser crimes, a single judge
 presides. At the request of the accused, a jury may be used in trials for major
 crimes; in practice, requests for jury trials are extremely rare.
 There were no reports of political prisoners.
 
 
 976
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Famiy, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Constitution forbids such practices and its provisions are respected in practice. Vio-
 lations are subject to effective legai sanctions.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-Freedom of speech and the press is provided
 for in the Constitution, and the Government respects these rights in practice. An
 independent press, an effective judiciary, and a functioning democratic political sys-
 tem combine to ensure freedom of speech and of the press, including academic free-
 dom.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The law provides for these
 rights, and the authorities  nerally respect these provisions.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-CTe Constitution provides for freedom of religion, and the
 Government respects this rig*ht in practice.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Constitution and laws provide for these rights, and the Govern-
 ment respects them in practice.
 The Government cooperates with the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees and
 other humanitarian organizations in assisting refugees. Persons who qualify as refu-
 gees are entitled to residence permits. There were no reports of forced expulsions
 of those having a valid claim to refugee status.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Portugal is a multiparty, parliamentary democracy. The Constitution provides
 citizens with the right to change their government peacefully, and citizens exercise
 this right in practice through periodic, free, and fair elections on the basis of univer-
 sal suffrage.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 A number of local and international human rights groups operate freely, inves-
 tigating and publishing their findings on human rights cases. Government officials
 generally cooperate, although most groups complain of slow investigations or reme-
 dial actions.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution forbids discrimination based on ancestry, sex, race, language,
 territory of origin, religion, political or ideological convictions, education, economic
 situation, or social condition, and the Government enforces these prohibitions.
 Women.-Women's groups continued to draw attention to the largely hidden but
 reportedly common problem of domestic and other violence against women. The law
 provides for criminal penalties in cases of violence by a spouse. Traditional societal
 attitudes discourage many battered women from recourse to the judicial system.
 Women's groups complain that Portugal lacks institutions established specifically to
 provide relief to battered women. The judicial system shows no apparent reluctance
 to prosecute suspects accused of abusing women.
 The Civil Code provides for full legal equality for women. Sexual harassment, an
 issue gaining public attention, is covered in the Penal Code as a sex crime, but only
 if perpetratdby a superior and in the workplace. As in the case of violence, socially
 ingrained attitudes discourage many women from taking advantage of their legal
 protection in this area.
 Women are increasingly represented in universities, business, science, govern-
 ment, and the professions. Traditional attitudes of male dominance persist but are
 changing  r~.ually. The Commission forthe Equality and Rights of Women, an offi-
 cia orgamzation under te Miistry of Employment and Social Security, is a lead-
 ing and effective advocate of women s rights.
 Chldren.-The Government is committed to the rights and welfare of children,
 and has established mechanisms to protect children through the Institute for Sup-
 port of Children. This governmental body complains that it has not been allocated
 adequate funds to fulfl its responsibilities. Most of the funds it does receive are
 spent on campaigns publicizing the abuse of child labor, which occurs mainly in low
 technology home based industries (see Section 6.d.). Otherwise there is no pattern
 of societal abuse of children.
 People With Disabilities.-There is no discrimination against disabled persons in
 employment, education, or the provision of other state services. Their access to pub-
 lic facilities is mandated by legislation, which is generally complied with. There is
 no such legislation covering private businesses or other facilities.
 
 
 NationallRaciallEthnic Minorities.-The principal minority groups are immi-
 grants legal and illegal, from Portugal's former African colonies; there is also a resi-
 dent R1oma population. African immigrants continued to organize to protest what
 theyperceive as racism. The press has continued to report occasional racially moti-
 yatd incidents  rpetrated by small unorganized skinhead groups. Government de-
 nials that significant racist offenses have occurred were called into question by an
 incident in [une in which a large number of skinheads rampaged through a down-
 town Lisbon neighborhood, assaulting numerous persons they believed to be African
 immigrants and killing one. The police pursued this and other such incidents as vig-
 orously as other crimes.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-Workers in both the private and public sectors have
 the right to associate freely and to establish committees in the workplace to defend
 their interests. The Constitution provides for the right to establish unions by profes-
 sion or industry. Trade union associations have the right to pariciate in the prepa-
 ration of labor legislation. Strikes are constitutionally permitted or any reason, m-
 cluding political causes; they are common and generally are resolved through direct
 negotiations. The authorities respect all provisions of the law on labor's rights.
 Two principal labor federations exist. There are no restrictions on the formation
 of additional labor federations. Unions function without hindrance by the Govern-
 ment and are closely associated with political parties. There are no restrictions on
 the ability of unions to join federations or on federations affiliating with inter-
 national labor bodies.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-Unions are free to organize
 without interference by the Government or by employers. Collective bargaining is
 provided for in the Constitution and practiced extensively in the public and private
 sectors.
 Collective bargaining disputes rarely lead to prolonged strike action. Should a
 long strike occur in an essential sector such as health, energy, or transportation,
 the Government may order the workers back to work for a specific period. This did
 not occur in 1995. The Government has rarely invoked this power, in part because
 most strikes are limited to periods of 1 to 3 days. The law requires a "minimum
 level of service" to be provided during strikes in essential sectors, but this has been
 infrequently applied. When it has, minimum levels of service have been established
 by agreement between the Government and the striking unions, although unions
 have complained, including to the International Labor Organization, that the mini-
 mum levels have been set too high. When collective bargaining fails, the Govern-
 ment may appoint a mediator, at the request of either management or labor.
 The law prohibits antiunion discrimination, and the authorities enforce this prohi-
 bition in practice. Complaints are promptly examined by the General Directorate of
 Labor.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition f Forced or Compulsory Labor.-Forced labor is prohibited and
 does not occur.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The minimum employment age is
 15 years. It is to be raised to 16 years when the period of 9 years of compulsory
 schooling takes effect on January 1, 1997. The two main labor federations and ob-
 servers from other European countries have charged that a number of "clandestine
 companies in the textile, shoe, and construction industries exploit child labor.
 The Government's General Labor Inspectorate, which is responsible for enforce-
 ment of child labor laws, admits that thousands of children under age 15 are em-
 ployed illegally, but says the number is declining. The Inspectorate's funding has
 been increased, and the number of inspectors and inspections continues to grow.
 The Inspectorate has levied increasinglylarge fines on employers who are found em-
 ploying child labor. Government statistics derived from labor inspections indicate
 that the incidence of child labor has been greatly reduced in recent years. Critics
 rejoin that most children are employed in h~ome workshops and other settings be-
 yond the reach of inspectors.
 Union observers agree that the number of illegally employedchildren is falling,
 but they attribute this to the general rise in unemployment. Unions continued to
 form local alliances with church grups, citizens groups, and local government bod-
 ies to address the multiple social and economic causes of child labor. While some
 improvements have been effected, the Government does not allocate resources suffi-
 cient to address the problem full.
 e. Acceptable Conditions f Work.-Minimum.wage legislation covers full-time
 workers, as well as rural workers and domestic employees age 18 or over. The
 monthly minimum wage of about $340 (Esc 52,000) is generally enforced. Even with
 
 
 978
 rent control and various social assistance subsidies, it is difficult for a single-income
 family to maintain a decent standard of living on the minimum wage, particularly
 in urban areas.
 The law limits regular hours of work to 8 hours per day and 44 hours per week.
 Overtime is limited to 2 hours a day, up to 200 hours annually. Work during what
 is normally a day off is restricted to 8 hours. These limits are respected in practice.
 Workers are guaranteed 22 days of paid annual leave per year. The Ministry of Em-
 ployment and Social Security monitors compliance through its regional inspectors.
 Employers are legally responsible for accidents at work and are required by law
 to carry accident insurance. An existing body of legislation regulates safety and
 health, but labor unions continue to argue for stiffer laws. The General Directorate
 of Hygiene and Labor Security develops safety standards, and the General Labor
 Inspectorate is responsible for enforcement, but the Inspectorate lacks sufficient
 funds and inspectors to combat the problem of work accidents effectively. A rel-
 atively large proportion of accidents is in the construction industry. Poor environ-
 mental controls in textile production also cause considerable concern. While the abil-
 ity of workers to remove themselves from situations where these hazards exist is
 limited, it is difficult to fire workers for any reason. Workers injured on the job rare-
 ly initiate lawsuits.
