 PORTUGAL
 The Republic of Portugal is a parliamentary democracy with a
 president and legislative assembly freely elected by secret
 ballot. Former Prime Minister Mario Soares was elected
 Portugal's first civilian President in 60 years in 1986; in
 1987 Prime Minister Cavaco Silva was reelected with a
 parliamentary majority.
 Macau, a small, Portuguese-administered island group off the
 coast of China, has limited representative government. Macau
 is regarded by both the Portuguese and Chinese Governments as
 Chinese territory operating under Portuguese administration.
 Under an agreement between the two Governments, Macau will
 become a Special Administrative Region of China in 1999.
 Internal security operations are primarily the responsibility
 of the judicial police and the civilian and military
 intelligence services, which are under the control of the
 Government.
 Large segments of the economy were nationalized in the wake of
 the 1974 revolution. However, recent governments have opened
 the banking sector to private competition and have returned to
 the private sector many companies acquired as subsidiaries of
 state enterprises or acquired indirectly via the bank
 nationalizations. The Government also has permitted up to 49
 percent private ownership of some state-run companies, and it
 continues efforts to revise the Constitution to permit fuller
 denationalization.
 The human rights situation in 1988 was stable. The Government
 of Portugal and its institutions continue to act in a manner
 consistent with respect for human rights. Civil rights are
 outlined in the Constitution in accordance with the Universal
 Declaration of Human Rights. An ombudsman, elected by the
 Assembly to serve a 5-year term, is Portugal's Chief Civil and
 Human Rights Officer. Any citizen may apply to him for
 relief. The Ombudsman receives about 3,500 complaints
 annually. The vast majority concern cases of alleged
 maladministration by the cumbersome bureaucracy.
 The fundamental human rights contained in the Portuguese
 Constitution apply also to Macau, although in practice there
 are significant differences in some areas, including political
 institutions and worker rights practices.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 Government-sanctioned political kilrings do not occur. There
 were no killings attributed to domestic terrorist groups in
 1988.
 b.- Disappearance
 Government or police authorities do not abduct, secretly-
 arrest, or otherwise illegally detain persons. There were no
 terrorist abductions in 1988.
 
 
 1162
 PORTUGAL
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 The Constitution forbids torture, inhuman or degrading
 treatment or punishment, and the Ombudsman did not receive any
 complaints of such treatment in 1988.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Under Portuguese law, a prosecuting judge reviews the case
 against a person arrested and accused of a crime to determine
 whether that person should be detained or released on bail.
 No person may be held for more than 48 hours unless a
 prosecuting judge orders preventive detention which is limited
 to a maximum of 4 months for each crime. Because of the
 cumbersome, backlogged judicial system, detention beyond
 4 months is not unusual in major crimes such as murder or
 armed robbery. Detainees and persons in preventive detention
 have access to lawyers, who have been successful in protecting
 their clients' rights.
 Exile and incommunicado detention are illegal and not
 practiced in Portugal. With regard to forced or compulsory
 labor,- see Section 6.c.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Portugal has an independent and impartial judicial system.
 All trials are public except those which may offend the
 dignity of the victim, such as in cases involving the sexual
 abuse of children. The accused is presumed innocent until
 proven guilty.
 A clear procedural distinction exists between the arrest phase
 and the trial. A panel of three judges (which does not
 include the prosecuting judge) presides over cases which go to
 trial. A ministerial delegate assists the judges in reviewing
 the evidence. At the request of the accused, a jury may be
 used in trials for major crimes. The judges or jury may
 render the verdict. Sentence may be passed only in the
 presence of the defense attorney.
 Portugal holds no political prisoners. Some radical leftist
 opponents of the regime have claimed that certain persons
 imprisoned for participation in terrorist organizations are
 political prisoners, including 64 persons found guilty of
 membership in FP-25 (translated as the "Popular Front of the
 25th of April," referring to the April 25, 1974, revolution)
 and sentenced to prison terms in 1987. Most noteworthy of
 these is Otela Saraiva de Carvalho, one of the leaders of the
 1974 coup and convicted leader of the FP-25"s shadowy "global
 project" organization, which advocates the overthrow of the
 Government by armed rebellion. While there has been criticism
 of the Government's handling of Otelo Carvalho's case, his
 conviction was upheld under appeal by the Portuguese Supreme
 Court in 1988.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 There were no reports of governmental intrusion into the
 private life of citizens in 1988. The State does not tamper
 with private correspondence or telephones except with a court
 order. The Constitution forbids forced entry into homes and
 
 
 1163
 PORTUGAL
 searches without a judicial warrant. In addition, entry into
 a person's home at night requires the consent of the occupant.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Freedom of speech and press is provided for in the
 Constitution and respected by the State. The constitutionally
 mandated Council of Social Communication acts as a watchdog to
 protect freedom of speech and access to the media. The
 Council, whose members are elected by the Assembly of the
 Republic, makes recommendations to the Assembly and has
 enforcement powers.
 "Fascist organizations" are prohibited by law. In addition, a
 person may be prosecuted for "insulting" civil or military
 authorities if such an "insult" was intended to undermine the
 rule of law. There were no prosecutions for "insult" in 1988.
 The State owns both television channels and two of the three
 national radio stations. In principle, the Government does
 not control television or radio programming. In practice,
 however, the Government wields considerable influence in the
 broadcast media through personnel appointments. Opposition
 parties sometimes charge that state-owned television and radio
 ignore or distort opposition views and activities.
 The State indirectly subsidizes the press (through its
 postrevolutionary nationalization of the banks, to which the
 press is heavily indebted), but does not control editorial
 comment. The entire spectrum of political thought is
 represented in the Portuguese press. The Government is
 attempting to eliminate subsidies and in 1988 announced plans
 to reduce its interest in the print media. Obstacles to
 further broadening of the private sector role in the press are
 administrative and economic, not political or ideological.
 One newspaper, A Capital, was privatized in September 1988.
 The academic community is free to express its views.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Persons have the right, in law and practice, to.associate
 formally or informally, to promote nonviolent causes, and to
 protest government policies. Public meetings or protests
 require 24-hour advance notice to the civil governor of the
 region in which the event is to be held. Permission is
 routinely granted. The official registration of a new
 political party requires 5,00i signatures.'
 For a discussion of freedom of associatiorr as it applies to
 labor unionz, see Section &.a.
 c. Freedom of Reliqion
 Portugal does not have a state religion. The Government does
 not interfere with the free practice of religion, missionary
 work, or religious publications. Organized religious groups
 may establish places of worship, train clergy, and proselytize
 without government interference. These freedoms extend to
 foreign clergy, many of whom work in Portugal. To qualify as
 a tax-exempt institution, religious groups must be established
 as nonprofit, private societies.
 
 
 1164
 PORTUGAL
 Roman Catholicism is the prevailing religion in Portugal.
 Catholic religious instruction is offered as an elective
 course in public schools. Other denominations offer religious
 education in their own institutions without interference.
 Success in a civil, military, professional, or political
 career does not depend upon adherence to a religious creed.
 There were no reported cases of religious persecution in 1988.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 The Constitution ensures freedom of movement, foreign travel,
 and emigration. There are no restraints on domestic travel or
 on the right of a person to change domicile. Some currency
 restrictions still affect travel. Citizenship is not revoked
 for political reasons.
 Displaced persons who qualify as refugees, as defined by the
 United Nations, are entitled to permanent resident status and
 work permits. Displaced persons are not forced to return to
 the country from which they fled.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Portugal is a multiparty, participatory democracy in which
 candidates for the presidency and for legislative, regional,
 and municipal offices are freely nominated and elected by
 secret ballot on the basis of universal suffrage. The
 unicameral Assembly is the legislative body. The Prime
 Minister is the head of the Government. Except for the United
 Popular Front (FUP), which was excluded from participation in
 elections because of evidence linking it with the terrorist
 organization FP-25, opposition parties and candidates operate
 freely and enjoy access to the media. General elections are
 held at least every 4 years. The President has a 5-year
 mandate and may not serve more than two consecutive terms.
 Women are active in political life at all levels. The
 Government includes one female minister and three junior
 ministers (state secretaries).
 In Macau, representative government exists on a limited
 basis. The 17-member Legislative Assembly is an
 organizational hybrid in which 6 members are chosen by means
 of universal, direct elections, 6 are indirectly elected by
 local community economic or cultural associations, and 5 are
 appointed by the Governor. There is also popular
 representation in the Consultative Council, an advisory group
 to the Governor. The Macau Government, by tradition, also
 consults informally on a regular basis with local business and
 cultural leaders.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 Portugal cooperates with independent outside investigations of
 human rights conditions and actively participates in the
 monitoring of human rights by the Council of Europe. Amnesty
 International, the Portuguese branch of the International
 Commission of Jurists, and other private international human
 rights groups operate freely in Portugal.
 
 
 1165
 PORTUGAL
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion
 Language, or Social Status
 There are no laws discriminating against any racial, ethnic,
 or religious group; nor do such groups benefit from a
 privileged status in Portugal.
 The Civil Code provides full legal equality for women. Women
 play an active role in political parties, but remain
 underrepresented in party and government leadership
 positions. A woman served as Prime Minister in 1979 and was a
 serious candidate for the Presidency in 1985. Currently,
 women occupy 1 of 16 ministerial positions and 3 state
 secretary or undersecretary positions. Women are increasing
 their representation in universities, business, science,
 government, and the professions. Traditional attitudes of
 male dominance persist in some areas, but are changing
 gradually. Women constitute 30 percent of the employed work
 force. According to the Democratic Labor Federation, women's
 average salaries are 28 percent lower than those of male
 workers. The Commission on the Status of. Women, an official
 organization established in 1976, is a leading advocate for
 women's rights.
 In Macau, as a consequence of governmental and legal systems
 which place a premium on knowledge of the Portuguese language
 and metropolitan law, top leadership positions in the
 territorial administration are almost without exception filled
 by officials recruited from Portugal. Nevertheless, efforts
 are under way to change this. Legislation is now being
 drafted in both Chinese and Portuguese, and both languages
 have equal status in the Legislative Assembly and Consultative
 Council.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 Workers have the right to associate freely and to establish
 committees in the workplace "to defend their interests." The
 Constitution ensures the right to establish unions by
 profession or industry. Trade union associations are
 guaranteed the right to participate in the preparation of
 labor legislation. Strikes are permitted for any reason,
 including political causes. Lockouts are prohibited. These
 constitutional provisions are respected in practice.
 Neither the Government nor unions publish membership
 statistics. It is estimated that approximately one-third of
 Portugal's work force is unionized. There are two labor
 federations. The General Confederation of Portuguese Workers
 Intersindical (CG-TP-IN), which is controlled.by the Communist
 Party,, is Portugal's most militant federation. The General
 Union of Workers (UGT) is a pluralist democratic federation
 affiliated with the International Confederation of Free Trade
 Unions and the European Trade Union Congress. Membership in
 the two federations is roughly equal.
 Both federations and their affiliates function free from
 government control, but they are closely associated with
 political parties. The CGTP-IN generally supports the
 Communist Party's policies and causes. UGT leaders are
 associated with either the Socialist or Social Democratic
 Parties. Although some UGT leaders serve in Parliament, the
 federation pursues a generally independent path that
 
 
 1166
 PORTUGAL
 occasionally puts it in conflict with the Socialist and/or
 Social Democratic parties. The labor movement in Portugal
 exercises significant influence on social and economic
 policymaking.
 In Macau, current laws recognize the freedom of workers to
 join unions and to strike. The Government does not impede the
 formation of unions nor practice discrimination against union
 members. Neither the PRC Government nor the Chinese Communist
 Party exercises any direct control over Macau labor unions.
 Chinese mainland influence is considerable in a number of
 sectors, however; on the labor front, this influence has
 resulted in a quiescent labor movement in keeping with PRC
 aims to maintain domestic stability in Macau in the period up
 to 1999. Such influence indeed complements the local
 traditional view of unions as centers for social and cultural
 activities.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 Unions are free to organize without government or employer
 interference.
 Collective bargaining is guaranteed by the Constitution and
 practiced extensively in the public and private sectors. When
 collective bargaining fails, the Government can, at the
 request of management and labor, make a mediator available.
 When collective bargaining disputes lead to prolonged strike
 action in key sectors (for example health and transportation),
 the Government is empowered to order the workers back to work
 for a specific period. It has rarely done so in practice.
 Union officials and members are protected by law against
 antiunion discrimination. There are no export processing
 zones in Portugal, and labor law and practice are generally
 uniform throughout the country.
 In Macau, unions tend to resemble traditional neighborhood
 associations, promoting social and cultural activities rather
 than issues related to the workplace. Local custom, moreover,
 favors employment without the benefit of written labor
 contracts, the exception being the import of contract labor
 from China. Unions traditionally have not attempted to engage
 in collective bargaining. Accordingly, while the Macau
 Government does not impede or discourage collective
 bargaining, there are no government mechanisms to promote
 voluntary negotiations. There are no export processing zones
 in Macau.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 Forced labor does not exist.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 The minimum employment age is 14 years. The Government has
 cited plans to boost the minimum age to 16 years once new
 educational reforms take effect. Child labor is not a general
 problem in Portugal, but there are cases of companies
 operating outside the law. The UGT and CGTP-IN have charged
 that a number of companies in the textile, shoe, and
 construction industries in northern Portugal exploit child
 labor. The Government has acknowledged that abuses exist and
 has vowed to eliminate them.
 
 
 1167
 PORTUGAL
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 A national monthly minimum wage for full-time workers was
 first established in Portugal in 1974. Minimum wages for
 rural workers and domestic employees were legislatively
 established in 1977 and 1978 respectively. Except in 1982,
 minimum wages have increased every year. The current minimum
 monthly wage for general workers is $181; for agricultural
 workers and domestics, it is $165 and $130 respectively. The
 minimum wage is generally enforced. While it is difficult for
 a single income family to maintain a decent standard of living
 on a minimum wage income, particularly in urban areas, rent
 control and various social assistance subsidies ameliorate the
 situation.
 Workers receive a Christmas bonus equal to 1 month's salary.
 Workers are required by law to be granted an individual
 written contract which must include their professional
 category and salary, the work site, the starting date, and the
 duration of the contract (in the case of temporary workers).
 Employers are required to contribute to an employee's social
 security fund. Legislation limits regular hours of work to 8
 hours daily and 48 hours per week. Overtime is limited to 2
 hours per work period, up to 160 hours annually. Overtime
 work on a normal day off is restricted to 8 hours. Workers
 are guaranteed 21 days of paid annual leave per year. The
 Ministry of Employment and Social Security monitors compliance
 with the above regulations through its regional inspectors.
 Employers are required by law to hold accident insurance or to
 assume responsibility for accidents at the work site.
 Portugal has developed a compendium of legislation that
 regulates safety and health. Labor unions deem these
 regulations inadequate and continue to urge the Government to
 implement and enforce stiffer legislation.
 In Macau, existing labor legislation provides for a 48-hour
 workweek (normally 8 hours per day and no more than 10.5 hours
 per day), overtime, annual leave, medical and maternity care,
 and employee compensation insurance. The labor department is
 responsible for processing complaints. However, government
 enforcement of the labor laws appears to be lax at times;
 partly owing to limited fiscal resources and personnel skills,
 but also to a lack of policy emphasis. In the absence of any
 statutory minimum wage or publicly administered social
 security program, some large companies have provided private
 welfare and security packages. Calls for reform of the
 existing labor law, for medical insurance, a social security
 system, and increases in employee compensation figured in
 campaign platforms of various candidates in the October
 elections for directly elected seats in the Legislative
 Assembly. To offset the current labor shortage, the Macau
 Government allows the importation of labor f-rom China under
 contract. There are heavy fines on employers harboring
 illegal immigrants. The number of imported workers in Macau
 is between 1,500 and 3,000 out of an estimated work force of
 195,000.
 
 
 1168
