 PORTUGAL*
 The Republic of Portugal is a parliamenta  democracy with a President and Leg-
 islative Assembly freely elected by secret balot. Former Prime Minister and Social-
 ist Party head Mario Soares was elected Portugal's first civilian president in 60
 years in 1986 and reelected by a wide marn in 1991. In legislative elections in
 1991, Prime Minister Cavaco Silva and his Social Democratic Farty (PSD) were re-
 turned to office with an increased majority in Parliament.
 Internal security is primarily the responsibility of the Ministries of Justice and
 Internal Administration. Security forces are fully controlled by and responsive to the
 Government.
 Portugal has a market-based economy and is a member of the European Commu-
 nity. An increasing preportion of the population is employed in services, while em-
 ployment in the agricultural sector continues to decline and employment in the in-
 dustrial sector has been static.
 Portuguese citizens enjoy a broad range of civil and other human rights. Civil
 rights are outlined in the Constitution with specific reference to the Universal Dec-
 laration of Human Rights. An Ombudsman, chosen by the Assembly of the Republic
 (legislature) to serve a 4-year term, is Portugal's chief civil and human rights officer.
 Any citizen may apply to the Ombudsman for relief. The Ombudsman receives about
 3,000  complaints  annually, most    of them   concerning  cases  of alleged
 misadministration by Portugal's cumbersome bureaucracy and delays in the judicial
 process. A government investigation of allegations of police brutality, begun in 1992,
 continued, in 1993 with no results announced by years end.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no known instances of
 government-sanctioned political or other extrajudicial killings. No killings were at-
 tributed to domestic terrorist groups.
 b. Disappearance.-Government or police authorities do not abduct, secretly ar-
 rest, or otherwise illegally detain persons.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution forbids torture, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment,
 and the use of evidence obtained under torture in criminal proceedings. The Om-
 budsman investigates complaints of mistreatment by police and prison authorities.
 A formal investigation by the Provedor de Justica of allegations of police brutality
 and mistreatment of prisoners, including the seven unresolved complaints cited in
 Amnesty International's (Al) Annual Report, began at the end of 1992. This inves-
 tigation continued through 1993, with no announced results. In 1993 Portugal sub-
 mitted to the Geneva-based Committee Against Torture a report on torture and mis-
 treatment allegedly inflicted by Portuguese public security forces. Al, an observer
 at the proceedings in Geneva, criticized this report as lacking detailed information
 and statistics, particularly concerning alleged incidents involving public security po-
 *A separate report on Macau, a dependency of Portugal off the southern coast of China, fol-
 lows this report.
 
 
 1006
 
 lice (PSP). AI noted also the lack of results from the Provedor de Justica's inquiry.
 The PSP responded through a press release by noting improvements in its selection
 and training processes, internal disciplinary actions taken against agents accused
 of maltreatment of citizens, and the dismissal of 64 PSP members between 1991 and
 1993 for disciplinary reasons.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-Under Portuguese law, an investigating
 judge reviews the case against a person under arrest to determine whether that per-
 son should be detained, released on bail, or released outright. Persons may not be
 held for more than 48 hours without appearing before an investigating judge. Inves-
 tigative detention is limited to a maximum of 6 months for each suspected crime.
 I a formal charge has not been filed within that period, the person detained must
 be released. In cases involving serious crimes, such as murder or armed robbery,
 or in cases involving more than one suspect, investigative detention is permitted for
 up to 2 years and may be extended by a judge to 3 years in extraordinary cir-
 cumstances. A suspect must be brought to trial within 18 months of being formally
 charged if the suspect is held in preventive detention. If not held, there is no speci-
 fied period within which the suspect must be brought to trial. The justice system
 has been subjected to considerable criticism for a reported backlog of half a million
 cases awaiting trial. The Government is taking no specific actions to eliminate the
 backlog, which exacerbates the problem through further buildup. Detainees have ac-
 cess to lawyers, who are generally effective in protecting their clients' rights. De-
 fendants who cannot afford representation have a lawyer a ppointed for them by the
 presiding judge, who chooses from a list maintained by the Lawyers Association.
 Fees are paid by the Government.
 Exile and incommunicado detention are illegal and not practiced.
 e. Denial of Fair Public 7rial.-Portugal has an independent and impartial judi-
 cial system. All trials are public except those which may offend the dignity of the
 victim, such as in cases involving the sexual abuse of children. The accused is pre-
 sumed innocent unless proven guilty. In trials for serious crimes a panel of three
 judges (which does not include the investigating judge) presides. In trials for lesser
 crimes, a single judge presides. A ministerial delegate assists the judges in review-
 ing the evidence. At the request of the accused, a jury may be used in trials for
 major crimes. In practice, requests for jury trials are extremely rare. Sentence may
 be passed only in the presence of the defense attorney.
 Portugal holds no political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Constitution forbids forced entry into homes and searches without a judicial war-
 rant. In addition, entry into a person's home at night requires the consent of the
 occupant. The State does not intercept private correspondence or place wiretaps ex-
 cept with a court order.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-Freedom of speech and press is provided for in
 the Constitution and respected by the State. The constitutionally mandated High
 Commission for Social Communication acts as a watchdog to protect freedom of
 speech and access to the media. The Commission, members of which are chosen by
 the Government and by the Assembly of the Republic, makes recommendations to
 the Assembly and has enforcement powers. The academic community is free to ex-
 press its views.
 The State owns two television channels. However, the provision of the Constitu-
 tion making television a state monopoly was removed in 1990, and two privately
 owned television channels now operate. One of them is owned by the Catholic
 Church.
 In principle, the Government does not exercise direct control over the state-owned
 television channels, though it does wield considerable influence through personnel
 appointments. Opposition parties sometimes charge that the state network ignores
 or distorts opposition views and activities; station news directors defend their deci-
 sions as based on editorial judgments, not political partisanship. All political par-
 ties, even very small ones, use their legal right to "antenna time" during prime
 viewing and listening hours.
 Privately owned radio stations have operated in Portugal since1989. More than
 250 local privately owned stations are on the air. The entire spectrum of political
 thought is represented in the press. There is no press censorship. All newspapers
 are privately owned.
 "F   it" organizations are prohibited by law, although some small, extreme right-
 wing groups hold meetings of their members and run candidates for public office
 without interference. In September, however, the Constitutional Court began for the
 first time to consider whether a group-the National Action Movement-should be
 
 
 1007
 banned as Fascist and for its involvement in violent incidents. The Court did not
 reach a decision in 1993.
 The law provides that a person may be prosecuted for "insulting" certain state au-
 thorities if the "insult" is intended to undermine the rule of law. There were no
 known prosecutions for "insult" in this sense in 1993.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-People have the right, in law
 and practice, to associate formally or informally to promote nonviolent causes. Pub-
 lic meetings or protests require 24-hour advance notice to the civil governor of the
 region in which the event is to be held. Permission is routinely granted. The official
 registration of a new political party requires 5,000 signatures.
 c. Freedom of Religaon.-Portugal does not have a state religion. The Government
 does not interfere with the free practice of religion, missionary work or religious
 publications. These freedoms extend to the foreign clergy, many of wiom work in
 Potuga. Organized religious groups may establish places of worship, train clergy,
 and proselytize without government interferene. To qualify as tax-exempt institu-
 tions, religious gups must be established as nonprofit, private societies.
 Roman Catholicism is the predominant religioCathatholic religious instruction is
 offered as an elective course in public schools. Other denominations offer religious
 education in their own institutions without interference. Success in a civil, military,
 professional, or political career does not depend upon adherence to a religious creed.
 There were no reported cases of religious persecution in 1993.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Constitution provides for the right of freedom of movement, foreign
 travel, and emigration. There are no restraints on domestic travel or on the right
 of a person to change his domicile. Citizenship is not revoked for political reasons.
 Displaced persons who qualify as refugees as defined by the 1951 Convention Re-
 lating to the Status of Refugees and its 1967 Protocol are entitled to permanent
 resident status and work permits. Such displaced persons are not forced to return
 to the country from which they fled.
 Faced with a rapidly increasing number of asylum requests, which the Govern-
 ment characterized as 98- or 99-percent economically motivated, and a burgeoning
 illegal immigration problem, Portugal tightened its lenient 1980 asylum law in Sep-
 tember 1993. Under the new law, Portugal continues to meet its international obli-
 gations concerning refugees but provides for more rapid processing of applicants.
 e possibility of permanent residence is retained. The law places the decision on
 granting asylum with the Interior Ministry instead of the judicial system.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Portugal is a multiparty, participatory democracy. Candidates for president and
 for legislative, regional, and municipal offices are freely nominated and are elected
 by secret ballot on the basis of universal suffrage.
 The unicameral Assembly of the Republic is the legislative body. The Prime Min-
 ister is the head of the Government. Opposition parties and candidates operate free-
 ly and enjo access to the media. General elections are held at least once every 4
 years. The    sident has a 5-year mandate and may not serve more than two con-
 secutive terms.
 Women and minorities participate in the political process without restriction.
 Women are represented in the Parliament, holding 24 out of 230 seats, including
 the office of Vice President of the Assembly.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Local and international human rights groups operate freely in Portugal. The Gov-
 ernment cooperates with independent outside investigations of human rights condi-
 tions and actively participates in the monitoring of human rights by the Council of
 Europe.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution forbids discrimination based on ancestry, ex, race, language,
 territory of origin, religion, political or ideological convictions, education, economic
 situation, or social condition.
 Women.-Various women's groups in Portugal have drawn attention to the largely
 hidden problem of violence against women, particularly within the family. Por-
 tuguese law provides for criminal penalties in cases of violence between husbands
 and wives without referring specifically to violence against wives. Women's groups
 point out that traditional attitudes discourage many women who suffer such vio-
 lence from seeking recourse in the judicial system. They complain that Portugal
 
 
 1008
 
 lacks institutions established specifically to provide relief to battered women. No
 specific institutions were established in 1993 to provide such relief. However, when
 complaints are brought, the judicial system is not reluctant to prosecute those ac-
 cused of abusing women.
 The Civil Code provides for full legal equality for women. Women are increasing
 their representation in universities, business, science, government, and the profes-
 sions. Traditional attitudes of male dominance persist but are changing graduall
 The Commission for Equality and Rights of Women, an official organization esta%-
 lished in 1976, is a leading advocate of women s rights.
 The Commission for Equality in Work and Employment, an entity of the Ministr
 of Employment and Social Security, commissioned a study, completed in 1993, enti-
 tled "Sexual Harassment in the Workplace." The study reported that 72 percent of
 respondents believed incidents of sexual harassment in the workplace were frequent
 and 87 percent believed the incidents that occurred were serious. The study noted
 that the reaction of victims of such harassment was characterized by passivity. The
 study concluded that sexual harassment and its usual nonrecognition, as well as the
 absence of legal means to fight harassment, are factors in discrimination that injure
 the dignity of female workers in Portugal.
 Children.-The government entity to promote the welfare of children is the Insti-
 tute for Support or Children. According to the Institute, it has been allocated inad-
 equate funds. Most of the funds it does receive are spent on publicity campaigns
 against the abuse of child labor. It attempts to discourage the use of children as
 a means of reducing labor costs in low-technology, home-based industries (see Sec-
 tion 6.d.).
 National/ Racial /Ethnic Minorities.-The principal minority groups are immi-
 grants, legal and illegal from Portugal's former African colonies (Angola, Cape
 Verde, Guinea-Bissau, Mozambique, and Sao Tome and Principe). Cape Verdeans
 comprise the largest such group, over 25,000. There is also a resident Gypsy popu-
 lation. Societies for African immigrants publicize the problems of their members, in-
 cluding those stemming from what they perceive as racism. The Government denies
 that racist actions are taking place. The press reported, however, a number of ra-
 cially motivated incidents in 1993 that were apparently perpetrated by small, loose-
 ly knit "skinhead" groups. In a September incident with racial overtones, the Em-
 bassy of Sao Tome and Principe claimed that one of its diplomats was assaulted
 without provocation by a policeman in a Lisbon train station. Although he did not
 admit intentional wrongdoing by the police, President Mario Soares closed this inci-
 dent with an apology to the Government of Sao Tome and Principe.
 People with Disabilities.-While there have been no reported allegations of dis-
 crimination against persons with disabilities in the areas of employment or provi-
 sion of state services, handicapped individuals consider there is much room for im-
 provement. Legislation mandates access to public facilities for persons with disabil-
 ities, and it is generally complied with. No such legislation covers private businesses
 or other facilities. While there is no legislation prohibiting discrimination against
 persons with disabilities, the Portuguese Government has issued administrative de-
 crees and regulations to that effect.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-Workers in both the private and public sectors have
 the right to associate freely and to establish committees in the workplace "to defend
 their interests." The Constitution provides for the right to establish unions by pro-
 fession or industry. Trade union associations are guaranteed the right to participate
 in the preparation of labor legislation. Strikes are permitted for any reason, includ-
 ing political causes. They are common and are generally resolved through direct ne-
 gotiations between management and the unions involved. Lockouts are prohibited.
 ese constitutional guarantees are respected in practice.
 There are two principal labor federations. The General Union of Workers (UGT)
 is a pluralist democratic federation affiliated with the International Confederation
 of Free Trade Unions and the European Trade Union Confederation (ETUC). The
 General Confederation of Portuguese Workers Intersindical (CGTP-IN) is linked to
 the Communist Party and engages freel in cooperative activities with the formerly
 Soviet-controlled World Federation of Trade Unions (WFTU). The CGTP was ex-
 ected to enter the ETUC in 1993 but this did not occur, partly as the result of con-
 cts within the CGTP itself.
 Both federations and their affiliates function free from government control but are
 closely associated with political parties. The CGTP-IN generally supports the Com-
 munist Party's policies and causes, but this position continued to be openly criticized
 by elements of the membership in 1993. UGT leaders are associated with either the
 Socialist or the Social Democratic Party. Although some UGT leaders serve in the
 
 
 1009
 Assembly of the Republic, the Federation pursues a generally independent path that
 occasionally puts it in conflict with the Socialist or the Social Democratic Party or
 both, as well as the Government. The labor movement in Portugal exercises signifi-
 cant influence on areas of social and economic policy-making.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-Unions are free to organize
 without government or employer interference. Collective bargaining is guaranteed
 by the Constitution and practiced extensively in the public and private sectors. Col-
 lective bargaining disputes rarely lead to prolonged strike action. Should a long
 strike occur in a key sector (for example, health or transportation), the Government
 is emowered to order the workers back to work for a specific period. The Govern-
 ment has rarely done so, in part because most strikes are limited to periods of 1
 to 3 days. Under a modification of the strike law, a "minimal level of service" must
 be provided during certain strikes, including those in the public health, energy, and
 transportation sectors. The modified law was first applied in a rail workers strike
 in March. Minimal levels of service were successfully established by common agree-
 ment with the Government. When collective bargaining fails, the Government, at
 the request of either management or labor, may apoint a mediator.
 Union officials and menbers are protected bylaw against antiunion dicrimina-
 tion, and this law is observed in practice. Complaints are promptly examined by the
 General Directorate of Labor.
 Portugal has no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-Forced labor is prohibited and
 does not exist in Portugal. This prohibition is enforced by the General Labor
 Inspectorate.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The minimum employment age
 has been 15 years since 1992. It is to be raised to 16 when the period of 9 years
 of compulsory schooling takes effect on January 1, 1997.
 The VGT and CGTP-IN have charged that a number of "clandestine" companies
 in the textile, shoe, and construction industries in northern Portugal exploit child
 labor. It is difficult to quantify the extent of child labor exploitation because much
 child labor has been transferred to home facilities. Government inspection teams
 can enter such facilities only with search warrants. In practical terms, control is ex-
 tremely difficult because of the dispersed nature of the problem and the administra-
 tive complexity of police entry for investigative purposes. Control of underage em-
 ployment is thereby frustrated. According to the Government's General Labor
 nspectorate, which is responsible for enforcement of child labor laws, between
 30,000 and 35,000 children from 12 to 15 years of age are working in Portugal. The
 Inspectorate's funding has been increased, and the number of inspectors is growing.
 Since the law was changed to raise the maximum fine, the Inspectorate has begun
 to levy large fines on employers found to be using child labor. The Government has
 yet to allocate resources sufficient to cope effectively with the problem, however,
 which has thus remained essentially unresolved.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-Minimum wage legislation covers full-time
 workers, as well as rural workers and domestic employees aged 18 or over. The cur-
 rent minimum monthly wage of about $278, established on January 1, 1993, is gen-
 erally enforced. Even with rent control and various social assistance subsidies, it is
 difficult for a single-income family to maintain a decent standard of living on the
 minimum wage income, particularly in urban areas.
 Current legislation limits regular hours of work to 8 hours per day and 44 hours
 per week, but agreement has been reached to reduce the workweek to 40 hours by
 1995. Overtime is limited to 2 hours per day, up to 200 hours annually. Work on
 a normal day off is restricted to 8 hours. These limits are respected in practice.
 Workers are guaranteed 30 days of paid annual leave per year. The Ministry of Em-
 ployment and Social Security monitors compliance through its regional inspectors.
 Employers are legally responsible for accidents at work and are required by law
 to carry accident insurance. Portugal has developed a body of legislation that regu-
 lates safety and health. Labor unions consider these regulations inadequate and
 continue to press for stiffer legislation. The General Directorate of Hygiene and
 Labor Security develops safety standards, and the General Labor Inspectorate is re-
 sponsible for enforcement but, as in the case of alleged child labor abuses, the
 Inspectorate lacks sufficient funds and inspectors to combat the problem effectively.
 Accidents average between 70,000 and 75,000 per quarter. These figures have fo-
 cused government attention particularly on the construction industry. Poor environ-
 mental controls on the textile industry, concentrated in the north of Portugal,
 caused considerable concern. The ability of workers to remove themselves from situ-
 ations where these hazards exist is limited, but it is difficult to fire workers for any
 reason. Civil lawsuits are rarely initiated in accident cases.
 
 
 1010
