 PORTUGAL
 The Republic of Portugal is a parliamentary democracy with a
 president of the republic and legislative assembly freely
 elected by secret ballot. Former Prime Minister Mario Soares
 was elected Portugal's first civilian President in 60 years in
 1986. In 1987 Prime Minister Anibal Antonio Cavaco Silva was
 reelected and formed the first majority Government since the
 1974 revolution.
 Macau, a small Portuguese-administered island group off the
 coast of China, has limited representative government. Macau
 is regarded by both the Portuguese and the Chinese Governments
 as Chinese territory operating under Portuguese administration.
 Under a 1987 agreement between the two Governments, Macau will
 become a special administrative region of China in 1999.
 Inte'rnal security is primarily the responsibility of the
 Ministries of Justice and Internal Administration. Security
 forces are fully controlled by and responsive to the
 Government.
 Portugal has a market-based economy and is a member of the
 European Community. An increasing percentage of the
 population is employed in industry and services, while
 employment in the agricultural sector continues to decline.
 Unemployment in 1989 was low by European standards at under
 7 percent; however, underemployment remains a chronic
 problem. Current government policies aim at encouraging
 investment, reducing inflation, and cutting the public sector
 deficit. In order to reduce government obligations, the
 Government initiated in 1988 a privatization program for state
 firms nationalized following the 1974 revolution.
 The human rights situation in 1989 was stable. Government
 authorities continue to demonstrate respect for human rights.
 Civil rights are outlined in the Constitution in accordance
 with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. An ombudsman,
 elected by the Assembly of the Republic (legislature) to serve
 a 4-year term, is Portugal's chief civil and human rights
 officer. Any citizen may apply to him for relief. The
 Ombudsman receives about 3,500 complaints annually; the vast
 majority concern cases of alleged maladministration by the
 cumbersome bureaucracy.
 The fundamental rights and guarantees contained in the
 Portuguese Constitution apply also to Macau. Violent
 repression of dissidents by authorities in the People's
 Republic of China (PRC) in the spring of 1989 left many in
 Macau concerned about the future, and Portuguese officials
 actively tried to reassure Macau residents that Portugal will
 remain concerned with their well-being. Under the terms of
 the 1987 agreement, Macau's current social, economic, and
 legal systems are to remain basically unchanged during the
 first 50 years after 1999.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing
 Government-sanctioned political killings do not occur. There
 were no killings attributed to domestic terrorist groups.
 
 
 1221
 PORTUGAL
 b. Disappearance
 Government or police authorities do not abduct, secretly
 arrest, or otherwise illegally detain persons. There were no
 abductions by terrorist organizations.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 The Constitution forbids torture and inhuman or degrading
 treatment or punishment, as well as the use in criminal
 proceedings of evidence obtained under torture. There were no
 reports of complaints of such treatment in 1989.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Under Portuguese law, a prosecuting judge reviews the case
 against a person arrested and accused of a crime to determine
 whether that person should be detained or released on bail. A
 person may not be held for more than 48 hours unless a
 prosecuting judge orders preventive detention. Preventive
 detention is limited to a maximum of 4 months for each crime.
 Because of the cumbersome, backlogged judicial system,
 detention beyond 4 months is not unusual for major crimes such
 as murder or armed robbery. Detainees and persons in
 preventive detention have access to lawyers, who are generally
 effective in protecting their clients' rights.
 Exile and incommunicado detention are illegal and not
 practiced in Portugal. With regard to forced or compulsory
 labor, see Section 6.c.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Portugal has-an independent and impartial judicial system.
 All trials are public except those which may offend the
 dignity of the victim, such as in cases involving the sexual
 abuse of children. The accused is presumed innocent until
 proven guilty.
 A clear procedural distinction is made between arrest and
 trial. A panel of three judgev (which does not include the
 prosecuting judge) presides over cases which go to trial. A
 ministerial delegate assists the judges in reviewing the
 evidence. At the request 6f the accused, a jury may be used
 in trials for major crimes. The judges or jury may render the
 verdict. Sentence may be passed only in the presence of the
 defense attorney.
 Portugal holds no political prisoners. Some radical leftist
 opponents 6' the regime have claimed that certain persons
 imprisoned for participation in terrorist organizations were
 political prisoners, including 64 persons found guilty of
 membership ift FP-25 (translated as the "Popular Front of the
 25th of'April," referring to the April 25, 1974 revolution)
 and sentenced to prison terms in 1987. Most noteworthy of
 these was Otelo Saraiva de Carvalho, one of the leaders of the
 April 25, 1974 coup and convicted leader of the FP-25's
 shadowy "Global Project" organization, which advocates the
 overthrow of the Government by armed rebellion. Otelo Saraiva
 de Carvalho and 27 other defendants were released from prison
 in May on constitutional and procedural grounds, but an
 appeals court reaffirmed their convictions in September.
 
 
 1222
 PORTUGAL
 Carvalho and the other defendants remain at liberty, however,
 pending a ruling by the Supreme Court.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The Constitution forbids forced entry into homes and searches
 without a judicial warrant. In addition, entry into a
 person's home at night requires the consent of the occupant.
 The State does not tamper with private correspondence or
 telephones except with a court order.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Freedom of speech and press is provided for in the
 Constitution and respected by the State. The constitutionally
 mandated Council of Social Communication acts as a watchdog to
 protect freedom of speech and access to the media. The
 Council, whose members are elected by the Assembly of the
 Republic, makes recommendations to the Assembly and has
 enforcement powers. The academic community is free to express
 its views.
 "Fascist organizations," however, are prohibited by law. In
 addition, a person may be prosecuted for "insulting" civil or
 military authorities if the "insult" is intended to undermine
 the rule of law. There were no prosecutions for "insult" in
 1989.
 Although the State owns both television channels, the
 provision of the Constitution making television a state
 monopoly was removed in 1989. There is as yet no firm
 schedule for the introduction of implementing legislation to
 authorize the operation of one or more private television
 stations, but the Government is committed to this step.
 In principle, the Government does not exercise direct control
 over the state-owned television system, though it does wield
 considerable influence through personnel appointments.
 Opposition parties sometimes charge that the state network
 ignores or distorts opposition views and activities. Station
 news directors defend their decisions as based on editorial
 judgments, not political partisanship. All political parties
 use their legal right to "antenna time" during prime
 viewing/listening hours.
 During 1989 the Government passed legislation permitting
 private radio stations to operate. As of October, more than
 100 such local stations had been authorized and were on the
 air, breaking what had previously been the dominant role of
 the Catholic Church and two government networks.
 The entire spectrum of political thought is represented in the
 Portuguese press. There is no press censorship. More than a
 dozen new national publications appeared in 1988-1989 and
 several more are planned. Their rise and fall is determined
 by economic and editorial competitiveness.
 As a result of postrevolutionary nationalization of the banks,
 to which many of the newspapers were indebted, the State
 acquired title to a number of newspapers. These papers are
 editorially independent but state owned. The Government in
 
 
 1223
 PORTUGAL
 1989 sold three of these publications and announced that the
 two remaining state-owned papers would also be sold.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Persons have the right, in law and practice, to associate
 formally or informally and to promote nonviolent causes.
 Public meetings or protests require 24-hour advance notice to
 the civil governor of the region in which the event is to be
 held. Permission is routinely granted. The official
 registration of a new political party requires 5,000
 signatures.
 For a discussion of freedom of association as it applies to
 labor unions, see Section 6.a.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Portugal does not have a state religion. The Government does
 not interfere with the free practice of religion, missionary
 work, or religious publications. Organized religious groups
 may establish places of worship, train clergy, and proselytize
 without government interference. These freedoms extend to
 foreign clergy, many of whom work in Portugal. To qualify as
 tax-exempt institutions, religious groups must be established
 as nonprofit, private societies.
 Roman Catholicism is the prevailing religion in Portugal.
 Catholic religious instruction is offered as an elective
 course in public schools. Other denominations offer religious
 education in their own institutions without interference.
 Success in a civil, military, professional, or political
 career does not depend upon adherence to a religious creed.
 There were no reported cases of religious persecution.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 The Constitution provides for freedom of movement, foreign
 travel, and emigration. There are no restraints on domestic
 travel or on the right of a person to change domicile. Some
 currency restrictions still affect travel.' Citizenship is not
 revoked for political reasons.
 Displaced persons who qualify as refugees as defined by the
 United Nations are entitled to permanent resident status and
 work permits. Displaced persons are not forced to return to
 the country from which they fled.
 The Macau Government has followed an unofficial policy since
 1982 of towing all Vietnamese boat people arriving in Macau
 into or near Hong Kong territorial waters. This policy has
 the tacit coopbration of the Hong Kong Government. In July,
 according to reports by the United Nations High Commissioner
 for Refugees and the Hong Kong Government, a boat carrying
 approximately 35 Vietnamese broke apart while being towed at
 high speed by Macau marine police. The Macau authorities
 reportedly towed the boat to a deserted Chinese island nearby
 and abandoned the refugees with no food, water, or other
 provisions. Two of the boat people eventually succeeded in
 reaching Hong Kong and gaining assistance from Hong Kong
 marine police. There were no fatalities. The Macau
 authorities denied any knowledge of this incident.
 
 
 1224
 PORTUGAL
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Portugal is a multiparty, participatory democracy. Candidates
 for president and for legislative, regional, and municipal.
 offices are freely nominated and elected by secret ballot on
 the basis of universal suffrage. The unicameral Assembly of
 the Republic is the legislative body. The Prime Minister is
 the head of the Government. Opposition parties and candidates
 operate freely and enjoy access to the media. General
 elections are held at least every 4 years. The President has
 a 5-year mandate and may not serve more than two consecutive
 terms.
 In Macau, representative government exists on a limited
 basis. The 17-member Legislative Assembly is an
 organizational hybrid in which 6 members are chosen by means
 of universal, direct elections, 6 are indirectly elected by
 local communities' economic or cultural associations, and 5
 are appointed by the Governor. There is also popular
 representation in the Consultative Council, an advisory group
 to the Governor. The Macau Government, by tradition, also
 consults informally on a regular basis with local business and
 cultural leaders.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 Portugal cooperates with independent outside investigations of
 human rights conditions and actively participates in the
 monitoring of human rights by the Council of Europe. Portugal
 was elected to the United Nations Human Rights Commission in
 1988 and plays an active role. International and local human
 rights groups operate freely in Portugal.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 There are no laws discriminating against any racial, ethnic,
 or religious group, nor does any group benefit from a
 privileged status in Portugal.
 The civil code guarantees full legal equality for women.
 Women are increasing their representation in universities,
 business, science, government, and the professions.
 Traditional attitudes of male dominance persist but are
 changing gradually. The Commission on the Status of Women, an
 official organization established in 1976, is a leading
 advocate for women's rights.
 Various women's groups in Portugal have drawn attention to the
 largely hidden problem of violence against women, particularly
 in the family. Portuguese law provides for criminal penalties
 in cases of violence between couples without referring
 specifically to wife beating. Women's groups point out that
 traditional attitudes discourage many women who suffer such
 violence from seeking recourse in the judicial system and
 complain that Portugal lacks official institutions established
 specifically to provide relief to battered women.
 Reported cases of violence against women in Macau are not
 common. Macau's criminal statutes prohibiting domestic
 violence are enforced, and violators are prosecuted. Abuses
 are reported by police and doctors to the Social Welfare
 
 
 1225
 
 PORTUGAL
 Department where they are investigated. If hospital treatment
 is required, a resident medical social worker offers the
 victim counseling and information on social welfare services.
 Battered women may be placed in publi housing until their
 complaints are resolved, althdugh there are no facilities
 reserved for battered women.
 Because Macau's governmental and legal systems place a premium
 on' knowledge of the Portuguese language and metropolitan law-,
 top leadership ppsitions in the territorial administration are
 almost without exception filled by officials recruited from
 Portugal.- Nevertheless, efforts are under way to change
 this. Legislation'is now being drafted in both Chinese and
 Portuguese, and both languages have equal status in the
 Legislative Assembly and Consultative Council.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 Workers have the..right to associate freely and to establish
 committees in the workplace "to jdefend their interests." The
 Constitution ensures the right to establish unions by
 profession or.industry. Trade union associations are
 guaraiteed the right to participate in the preparation of
 labor legislation. Strikes are permitted for any reason,
 including political causes. Lockouts are prohibited. These
 constitutional guarantees are respected in practice.
 Veither the tovernment nor unions publish membership
 statistics. It is estimated that approximately one-third of
 Portugal's work f6rce is unionized. There are two labor
 federations... The General Confederation of Portuguese Workers
 Intersindical (CGTP-IN) is controlled by the Communist Party
 and engages freely in cooperative activities with the
 Communist labor international, the World Federation of Trade
 Unions. The General Union of Workers (UGT) is a pluralist,
 democratic federation affiliated with theTnterpational
 Confederation of Free Trade Unions and the European Trade
 Union CQnfederation. The UGT and the CGTP participate jointly
 in tbe*anhual meetings of the. International Labor Organization.
 Both "federations and their affiliates function free of
 government control but are closely associated with political
 parties. The CGTP-IN generally. Supports the Communist Party's
 policies and causes. UGT leaders areassociated with either
 the.-ocialist or Social Democratic Parties. Although some UGT
 leaders serve in Parliament, the federation pursues a
 generally independent path that occasionally puts it in
 conf)ict with the Socialist and/or Social Democratic Parties.
 The labor movement,'in Portugal exercises significant influence
 on social and economic policymaking.
 In Macau, current laws recognize the freedom of workers to
 join unions and to strike. The Government neither impedes the
 formation of unions nor practices discrimination against union
 members., The PRC Government .and the Chinese Communist Party
 do not exercise any direct control over Macau labor unions.
 Chinpse mainland influence is considerable in a number of
 sectors, however. This influence has resulted in a quiescent
 labor movement in keeping with PRC aims to maintain domestic
 stability in Macau in the period up to 1999. Such influence
 indeed complements the local traditional view of unions as
 centers for social and cultural activities.
 
 
 1226
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 Unions are free to organize without government or employer
 interference. Collective bargaining is guaranteed by the
 Constitution and practiced extensively in the public and
 private sectors. When collective bargaining fails, the
 Government, at the request of management and labor, may make a
 mediator available. When collective bargaining disputes lead
 to prolonged strike action in key sectors (for example, health
 and transportation), the Government is empowered to order the
 workers back to work for a specific period. The Government
 has rarely done so in practice. Union officials and members
 are protected by law against antiunion discrimination, and
 this law is observed in practice. There are no export
 processing zones in Portugal.
 In Macau, unions tend to resemble traditional neighborhood
 associations, promoting social and cultural activities rather
 than issues related to the workplace. Local custom, moreover,
 favors employment without the benefit of written labor
 contracts, the exception being the import of labor from China
 which is under. contract. Unions traditionally have not
 attempted to engage in collective bargaining. Accordingly,
 while the Macau Government does not impede or discourage
 collective bargaining, there are no government mechanisms to
 promote voluntary negotiations. There are no export
 processing zones in Macau.
 A legal requirement for Government approval before collective
 agreements in public enterprises can become effective is the'
 subject of a pending union complaint before the ILO.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 In both Portugal and Macau, forced labor is illegal and does
 not exist.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 The minimum employment age is 14 years. The Government has
 cited plans to boost the minimum age to 16 years once new
 educational reforms take effect. Child labor is not common
 but does exist. The UGT and CGTP-IN have charged that a
 number of "clandestine" companies in the textile, shoe, and
 construction industries in northern Portugal exploit child
 labor. The Goverment has acknowledged that abuses exist and
 has vowed-to.e1iminate them but had not taken any steps by the
 end of the year.
 In Macau, minors under the age of 14 are forbidden by law to
 work. Nevertheless, child labor reportedly is not uncommon in
 Macau.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 A national monthly minimum wage for full-time workers was
 first established in Portugal in 1974. Minimum wages for
 rural workers and domestic employees were legislatively
 establishednin-1977 and 1-978 respectively. Except in 1982,
 minimum wages hive been increased every year. The current
 minimum monthly wage for general workers is $203; for
 agricultural workers and domestics, it is $193 and $155
 respectively. The minimum wage is generally enforced. Even
 with rent control and various social assistance subsidies, it
 s difficult for a single income family to maintain a decent
 
 
 1227
 RQRTUGAL
 standard of living on a minimum wage income, particularly in
 urban areas. Various social assistance subsidies are
 available to ameliorate the situation somewhat.
 Workers receive a Christmas bonus equal to 1 month's salary.
 Workers are required by law to be granted an individual
 written contract which must include their professional
 category and salary, the work site, the starting date, and the
 duration of the contract (in the case of temporary workers).
 Employers are required to contribute to an employee's social
 security'fund. The average workweek is 42 hours, and the
 Government'has submitted a draft bill to reduce the maximum
 workweek to 44 hours. Current legislation limits regular
 hours of work to 8 hours daily and 48 hours per week.
 Overtime is limited to 2 hours per work period, up to 160
 hours annually..Work on a nQrmal day off is restricted to 8
 hours. *These limits are respected in practice. workers are
 guaranteed 21 days of paid annual leave per year. The
 Ministry of Employment and Social Security monitors compliance
 with the above regulation' through its regional inspectors.
 Employers are required by law to hold accident insurance or to
 assume responsibility for accidents at the work site.
 Portugal has developed a compendium of legislation that
 regulates safety and health. Labor unions deem these
 regutatiQns ihadeguate and continue to urge the Government to
 ehat and enforce stiffer legislation.
 In Macau, existing labor legislation provides for a 48-hour
 workweek (normally 8 hours per day and no more, than 10.5 hours
 per day), overtime, annual leave, medical and maternity care,
 and employee cpmpensation iliurance. The Labor Department is
 responsible for processing complaint*., However, government
 enforcement'of. the labor laws, appears lax at'times, partly
 owing to limired fiscal resources and personnel skills but
 also to a lack of policy emphasis. In the absence of any
 statutory minimum wage or publicly admtnistered social
 security p ogram some large companies have provided private
 welfare'and s~curity packages; Candidates for public officb
 in'iacau have called for reform of the existing labor law, for
 medical"insurance, a social security system; and increases in
 employee'qompensaioh. TO offset the current labor shortage,
 the Macau Government allows the importation of labor from
 China under contract. There are heavy fines on employers
 harboring illegal immigrants. The number of imported workers
 in Macau is between 1,500 and 3,000 out of an estimated work
 foiqe of 195,000".
 
 
 1228
