 PORTUGAL
 The Republic of Portugal is a parliamentary democracy with a President, a Prime
 Minister and a Legislative Assenbly freely elected by secret ballot.
 Internal security is primarily the responsibility of the Ministries of Justice and
 Internal Administration. Security forces are controlled by, and responsive to, the
 Government.
 Portugal has a market-based economy and is a member of the European Union.
 An increasing proportion of the population is employed in services, while employ-
 ment in agriculture continues to decine, and has been static or declining slightly
 in the industrial sector.
 Citizens ejy a broad range of civil and other human rights. Civil rights are out-
 lined in the Constitution with specific reference to the Universal Declaration of
 Human Rights. An Ombudsman, chosen by the Assembly of the Republic (legisla-
 ture) to serve a 4-year term, is Portugal's chief civil and human rights officer. Any
 citizen may apply to the Ombudsman for relief. The Ombudsman receives about
 3,000 complaints annually, most of them concerning cases of alleged maladministra-
 tion by the bureaucracy or delays in the judicial process. The principal human
 rights problem concerns credible, though limited, reports of beatings of detainees or
 prisoners by police or prison personnel. The Government, criticized for being slow
 to investigate such reports, has dismissed or forcibly retired some officials found
 guilty of such abuse (see Section 1.c.).
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial ]Kiling.-There were no known instances of
 government-sanctioned political or other extrajudicial killings. No killings were at-
 tributed to any domestic terrorist groups.
 b. Disappearance.--Government or police authorities do not abduct, secretly ar-
 rest, or oth~erwise illegally detain persons.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution forbids torture, inhuman or  egrading treatment or punishment,
 and the use of evidence obtained under torture incriminal proceedings. The Om-
 budsman investigates complaints of mistreatment by police and prison authorities.
 In 1994 the Government and Amnesty International (Al) continued their dialog
 on allegations of police brutality in Portugal. The AI annual report added three new
 allegations of police mistreatment of detainees. Three previous AI cases were re-
 ported as apparently resolved by disciplinary action although in some the dis-
 ciplined agents were appealing the action. AI and the Y.N. Committee Against Tor-
 ture lamented the delay in investigating such allegations.
 In January a delegation of the Council of Europe's Committee for the Prevention
 of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Punishment (CPT) visited police and jprison
 establishments in response to allegations of maltreatment of detainees and pris-
 oners. The CPT's report, issued in July, found the allegations to be corroborated.
 It recommended corrective steps such as improving detainees' access to counsel and
 to medical treatment. In response, the Government admitted to some problems with
 control and supervision of police officers; but it characterized the operation of the
 public security forces as positive overall, and said violations of citizens' rights by the
 security forces were "exceptional cases.* The Government established a continuing
 dialog with the CPT.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-Under the law, an investigatve judge de-
 termines whether an arrested person should be detained, released on bail, or re-
 leased outright. Persons may not be held more than 48 hours without appearing be-
 fore an investigating judge. Investigative detention is limited to a maximum of 6
 months for each suspected crime. Ifa formal charge has not been filed within that
 period, the detainee must be released. In cases of serious crimes (e.g. murder or
 armed robbery), or more than one suspect, investigative detention may be for up to
 2 years and may be extended by a judge to 3 years in extraordinary circumstances.
 A suspect in preventive detention must be brought to trial within 18 months of
 being formally charged. If the suspect is not in detention, there is no specified pe-
 riod for going to trial A detainee has access to lawyers; the State assumes the cost
 if necessary.
 The judicial system has been much criticized for a large backlog of pending trials.
 Exile and incommunicado detention are illegal and not practiced.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-Portugal has an independent and impartial judi-
 cial system. All trials are public except those which may offend the dignity of the
 victim, such as in cases of sexual abuse of children. The accused is presumed inno-
 
 
 920
 cent. In trials for serious crimes, a panel of three judges presides. For lesser crimes,
 a single judge presides. At the request of the accused, a jury may be used in trials
 for major crimes; in practice, requests for jury trials are extremely rare.
 Portugal holds no political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Constitution forbids forced entry into homes and searches without a judicial war-
 rant. In addition, entry into a person's home at night requires the consent of the
 occupant. The Government may intercept private correspondence, or make wiretaps,
 only on the basis of a court order.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-Freedom of speech and press is provided for in
 the Constitution and respected by the State. The constitutionally mandated High
 Commission for Social Communication acts to protect this freedom; its members,
 chosen by the Government and the Assembly of the Republic, make recommenda-
 tions to the Assembly and have enforcement powers. The law provides that a person
 may be prosecuted for insulting certain state authorities if the insult is intended
 to undermine the rule of law; there were no known prosecutions on this basis in
 1994.
 The State owns two television channels, and two are privately owned. The Gov-
 ernment does not directly control the state-owned channels, but it wields consider-
 able influence through personnel appointments. Opposition parties sometimes
 charge that state network with political bias; station news directors deny this. The
 law gives all political parties, even relatively tiny ones, the right to use "antenna
 time during prime hours, and all do so. More than 250 local privately owned radio
 stations are now on the air. There is no press censorship. AUl newspapers are pri-
 vately owned.
 Academic freedom is respected.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The law provides for this free-
 dom, and the authorities respect these provisions. Public meetings or protests re-
 r 24-hour advance notice to the civil governor of the region. Permission is rou-
 tinely granted. The official registration of a new political party requires 5,000 signa-
 tures.
 The law prohibits Fascist organizations. Some small, extreme rightwing groups
 hold meetings and run candidates for public office without interference. In January
 the Constitutional Court refused to rule on whether the rightwing National Action
 Movement (MAN) was Fascist and should be banned; the Court ruled that the orga-
 nization had dissolved itself during the course of the Court's consideration. The
 question had been raised by the Attorney General, after the involvement of some
 MAN members in violent acts.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-Portugal does not have a state religion, and the Govern-
 ment does not interfere with the free practice of religion.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Constitution provides for the right of freedom of movement foreign
 travel, and emigration. There are no restraints on domestic travel or on the right
 of a citizen to change domicile. Citizenship is not revoked for political reasons.
 Displaced persons who qualify as refugees (as defined by the International Con-
 vention Relating to the Status of Refugees) are entitled to permanent resident sta-
 tus and work permits.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Portugal is a multiparty, parliamentary democracy. Candidates for president or
 for legislative, regional, or municipal offices are freely nominated and are elected
 by secret ballot on the basis of universal suffrage.
 Elections to the unicameral Assembly of the Republic are held at least once every
 4 years. The President has a 5-year mandate and may not serve more than two con-
 secutive terms.
 Women and minorities participate in the political process without formal restric-
 tion. Women hold 24 of 230 seats in the Assembly, including the Vice Presidency
 of that body.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Local and international human rights groups operate freely. The Government co-
 operates with independent outside investigations of human rights conditions, re-
 sponds to the findings of such investigations, and actively participates in the mon-
 itoring of human rights by the Council of Europe.
 
 
 921
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution forbids discrimination based on ancestry, sex, race, language,
 territory of origi, religion, political or ideological convictions, education, economic
 situation, or social condition.
 Women.-Women's groups have drawn increasing attention to the largely hidden
 problem of domestic and other violence against women. The law provides or crimi-
 nal penalties in cases of violence by a spouse. Traditional societal attitudes discour-
 age many battered women from recourse to the judicial system. Women's groups
 complain that Portugal lacks institutions established specifically to provide relief to
 battered women. The judicial system shows no apparent reluctance to prosecute sus-
 pects accused of abusing women.
 The Civil Code provides for full legal equality for women. Sexual harassment, an
 issue gaining public attention, is covered in the Penal Code as a sex crime, but only
 if perpetratedby a superior and in the workplace. As in the case of violence, socially
 ingrained attitudes discourage many women from taking advantage of their legal
 protection in this area.
 Women are increasing their representation in universities, business, science, gov-
 ernment, and the professions. Traditional attitudes of male dominance persistlt
 are changing gradually. The Commission for the Equality and Rights of Women, an
 official organization under the Ministry of Employment and Social Security, is a
 leading and effective advocate of womena rights.
 Children.-The Government is committed to the ri hts and welfare of children,
 and has established mechanisms to protect children. The responsible governmental
 entity, the Institute for Suppo rt of Children, omplains that it has not been allo-
 cated adequate funds to fulfill its responsibilities. Most of its funds are spent on
 campaigns publicizing abuse of child labor, which occurs mainly in low-technology,
 home-based industries (see Section 6.d).
 National/Racial/Ethnic Minorities.-The principal minority groups are immi-
 grants legal and illegal, from Portugal's former Africanre is also a resi-
 dent Rma population. African immgrants continued to organize to protest what
 they perceive as racism in Portugal. The Government continued to deny that signifi-
 cant racist offenses have been occurring, while the press continued to report occa-
 sional racially motivated incidents apparently perpetrated by small, unorganized
 skin head groups. The police pursue such incidents as vigorously as they pursue
 other crimes.
 People With Disabilities.-There is no discrimination against disabled persons in
 employment or in provision of state services. Their access to public facilities is man-
 dated by legislation, which is generally complied with. There is no such legislation
 covering private businesses or other facilities.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-Workers in both the private and public sectors have
 the right to associate freely and to establish committees in the workplace "to defend
 their interests." The Constitution provides for the right to establish unions by pro-
 fession or industry. Trade union associations have the right to participate in the
 p reparation of labor legislation. Strikes are permitted for any reason, including po-
 litical causes; they are commn and generally are resolved through direct negotia-
 tions. The authorities respect all provisions of the law on labor's rights.
 There are two principal labor federations. Unions function without hindrance by
 the Government, and are closely associated with political parties. The labor move-
 ment exercises significant influence on social and economic policymaking.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-Unions are free to organize
 without interference by the Government or by employers. Collective bargaining is
 guaranteed by the Constitution and practiced extensively in the public and private
 sectors.
 Collective bargaining disputes rarely lead to prolonged strike action. Should a
 long strike occur in an essential sector such as health, energy, or transportation,
 the Government may order the workers back to work for a specific period.The Gov-
 ernment has rarely done so, in part because most strikes are limited to periods of
 1 to 3 days. The law requires a "minimum level of service" to be provided during
 strikes in essential sectors, but this has been infrequently applied. When it has been
 applied, minimum levels of service have been establishedby agreement between the
 Government and the striking unions, although unions complain the levels have been
 too high. When collective bargaining fails, the Government may appoint a mediator,
 at the request of either management or labor.
 The law prohibits antiunion discrimination, and the authorities respect this prohi-
 bition. Complaints are promptly examined by the General Directorate of Labor.
 
 
 922
 Portugal has no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forcd or Compulsory Labor.-Forced labor is prohibited and
 does not occur.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The minimum employment age is
 15 years. It is to be raised to 16 when the period of 9 years of compulsory schooling
 takes effect on January 1, 1997. The two main labor federations, and observers from
 other European countries, have charged that a number of "clandestine" companies
 in the textile, shoe, and construction industries exploit child labor.
 The Government's General Labor Inspectorate, which is respnsible for enforce-
 ment of child labor laws, admits that thousands of children under age 15 are em-
 ployed illegally, but says the number is declining. The Inspectorate's funding has
 been increased, and the number of inspetos and inspections continues to grow.
 The Inspectorate has levied increasingly large fines on employers who use child
 labor.
 Union observers agree that the number of illegally employed children in Portugal
 is falling, but the attribute this to the general rise in unemployment. Unions are
 entering into local alliances with church groups, citizens groups, and local govern-
 ment bodies to attack the multiple causes of child labor. While some improvements
 have been effected, the Government does not allocate resources sufficient to address
 the problem fully.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-Minimumwage legislation covers full-time
 workers, as well as rural workers and domestic empoyees age 18 or over. The cur-
 rent minimum monthly wage of about $320 (49,500 escudos) is generally enforced.
 Even with rent control and various sociai assistance subsidies, it is difficult for a
 single-income family to maintain a decent standard of living on the minimum wage,
 particularly in urban areas.
 Current legislation limits regular hours of work to 8 hours per day and 44 hours
 per week, but agreement has been reached in principle to reduce the workweek to
 40 hours by 1995. Implementation remains under discussion in connection with
 other broad issues affecting labor. Overtime is limited to 2 hours a day, up to 200
 hours annually. Work during what is normally a day off is restricted to 8 hours.
 These limits are respected in practice. Workers are guaranteed 30 days of paid an-
 nual leave per year. The Ministry of Employment and Social Security monitors com-
 pliance through its regional inspectors.
 Employers are legally responsible for accidents at work, and are required by law
 to carry accident insurance. Portugal has developed a body of legislation that regu-
 lates safety and health, but labor unions continue to argue for stiffer legislation.
 The General Directorate of Hygiene and Labor Security develops safety standards,
 and the General Labor Inspectorate is responsible for enforcement; but the
 Inspectorate lacks sufficient funds and inspectors to combat the problem effectively.
 Accidents average between 70,000 and 75,000 per quarter. A relatively large propor-
 tion are in the construction industry. Poor environmental controls in textile produc-
 tion also cause considerable concern. While the ability of workers to remove them-
 selves from situations where these hazards exist is limited, it is difficult to fire
 workers for any reason. Workers injured on the job rarely initiate lawsuits.
