 PORTUGAL
 The Portuguese Republic is a constitutional democracy with a President, a Prime
 Minister, a Legislative Assembly freely elected by secret ballot in multiparty elec-
 tions, and an independent judiciary.
 Internal security is primarily the responsibility of the Ministries of Justice and
 Internal Administration. Security forces are controlled by, and responsive to, the
 government.
 Portugal has a market-based economy. An increasing proportion of the labor force
 is employed in services, while employment in agriculture continues to decline and
 has been static or declining slightly in the industrial sector.
 Citizens enjoy a broad range of civil and other human rights, which the Govern-
 ment generally respects. Credible reports continued that security personnel occa-
 sionally beat detainees. Prison conditions remained poor. A large case backlog leads
 to lengthy delays in trials. Violence against women, discrimination against Roma,
 and child labor are problems. Reports increased of both pedophilia and trafficking
 in women.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no reports of political or
 other extrajudicial killings.
 No progress was reported in the investigation of the 1996 deaths in suspicious cir-
 cumstances of two persons in custody.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution forbids torture, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment,
 and the use of evidence obtained under torture in criminal proceedings. However,
 credible but infrequent reports continued that police and prison guards beat and
 otherwise abused detainees, particularly non-Europeans. In January the Council of
 Europe's Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman Treatment or Pun-
 ishment (CPT) published its report on its October 1996 visit to Portugal. The CPT
 noted credible reports of mistreatment of detainees, including blows with batons,
 punches, and kicks.
 In late 1997, two police officers were accused of having violated sexually a female
 drug addict in 1994. The supervisors of the officers in question initially delayed the
 opening of an investigation, but in December 1997 the divisional commander in Lis-
 bon suspended the officers and ordered an investigation.
 Prison conditions continue to be poor; overcrowding continues to be the main prob-
 lem. The prison in Caxias, designed for 640 inmates, currently houses 908. The pris-
 on at Tires, built for 511 inmates, holds 994. Prison administration generally is re-
 garded poorly. The level of sanitary conditions, medical care, security, and food qual-
 ity remains poor.
 The Government permits prison visits by human rights monitors. Human rights
 organizations reported no difficulties in gaining access to inmates at detention facili-
 ties.
 An independent ombudsman, chosen by the Legislative Assembly, investigates
 complaints of mistreatment by police and prison authorities. The police Inspector
 General conducts internal investigations in cases of alleged mistreatment. Police of-
 ficers receive training in human rights and proper investigative procedure. Non-
 governmental organizations (NGO's) have been critical of the slow pace of police in-
 vestigations in general and internal investigations by the police in particular.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-Under the law, an investigating judge de-
 termines whether an arrested person should be detained, released on bail, or re-
 leased outright. A person may not be held more than 48 hours without appearing
 before an investigating judge. Investigative detention is limited to a maximum of
 6 months for each suspected crime. If a formal charge has not been filed within that
 period, the detainee must be released. In cases of serious crimes, for example, mur-
 der or armed robbery, or of more than one suspect, investigative detention may last
 for up to 2 years and may be extended by a judge to 3 years in extraordinary cir-
 cumstances. A suspect in investigative detention must be brought to trial within 18
 months of being charged formally. If a suspect is not in detention, there is no sped-
 fled period for going to trial. A detainee has access to lawyers; the state assumes
 the cost if necessary.
 Exile is illegal and is not practiced.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The judiciary is independent and impartial.
 
 
 1422
 The court system, laid out in the Constitution, consists of a Constitutional Court,
 a Supreme Court of Justice, and judicial courts of first and second instance. There
 is also a Supreme Court of Administration, which deals with administrative and tax
 disputes, and which is supported by lower administrative courts. An audit court is
 in the Ministry of Finance.
 All trials are public except those that may offend the dignity of the victim, such
 as in cases of sexual abuse of children. The accused is presumed innocent. In trials
 for serious crimes, a panel of three judges presides. For lesser crimes, a single judge
 presides. At the request of the accused, a jury may be used in trials for major
 crimes; in practice, requests for jury trials are extremely rare.
 The judicial system provides citizens with a fair legal process. However, it has
 been much criticized for a large backlog of pending trials resulting from inefficient
 functioning of the courts. Frequent criticism of this backlog nonetheless did not re-
 sut in any specific actions by the Government during the year. The extremely slow
 pace of the judicial system was cited as contributing to a violation of Article 6 of
 the European Convention on Human Rights in a report from the European Court
 for Human Rights. The European Court also criticized Portugal for its handling of
 the Juan Carlos Daud case, in which an Argentine citizen was found not to have
 received adequate legal representation..
 There were no reports of political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Constitution forbids such practices, and the Government respects these provisions
 in practice. Violations are subject to effective legal sanction.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-Freedom of speech and the press is provided
 for in the Constitution, and the Government respects these rights in practice.
 In July libel laws were relaxed. Previously, journalists who were sued for defama-
 tion of character related to a criminal case had to wait for the criminal case to be
 concluded before a libel trial could be held. This meant that if the defendant in the
 criminal case was found not guilty (or benefited from an amnesty), the journalist
 could then be prosecuted for what he or she had written earlier while the trial was
 going on. Under the new Penal Code any such libel case would be settled before the
 criminal case was concluded.
 The Government respects academic freedom.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The law provides for these
 rights, and the authorities generally respect these provisions.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for freedom of religion, and the
 Government respects these rights in practice. Although the overwhelming majority
 of citizens are Roman Catholic, other religious communities practice their faiths
 freely.    -                                                   .
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Constitution and laws provide for these rights, and the Govern-
 ment respects them in practice.
 The Government cooperates with the United Nations High Commissioner for Ref-
 ugees and other humariitarian organizations in assisting refugees. Persons who
 qualify as refugees are entitled to residence permits. There were no reports of forced
 expulsions of persons having a valid claim to refugee status. However, the Govern-
 ment almost never rules that an asylum seeker has a "valid" claim. A new law at-
 tempts to distinguish among political, humanitarian, and temporary refugees, but
 the Government continues to maintain that the majority are economic refugees
 using Portugal as a gateway to the other European Union "Schengen" Countries. In
 mid-1998 the Government repatriated 120 Moldovan refugees by air. This was the
 largest mass expulsion since the 1980's.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 The Constitution provides citizens with the right to change their government
 peacefully, and citizens exercise this right in practice through periodic, free, and fair
 elections on the basis ofuniversal suffrage. Portugal is a multiparty, parliamentary
 democracy.
 In December 1997 the National Election Commission (CNE) dropped charges of
 favoritism in local elections against the Prime Minister that were lodged jointly by
 opposition parties. The opposition then attacked the CNE for subservience to the
 Government and for lacking objectivity. Concern also arose about registrars of vot-
 ers, especially in less-populated areas. One registrar listed approximately 86,000
 electors over the age of 90, including several over the age of 100. This led to exten-
 
 
 1423
 sive press coverage and a widespread review that increased the accuracy of the reg-
 ister.
 Women and minorities have full political rights and participate fully in political
 life: women head the Ministries of Health and of Environment. There are 34 female
 Members of Parliament. Proposals to require a female quota on political party lists
 are the subject of public debate. Race is rarely an issue in politics; persons of minor-
 ity origin have achieved prominence in politics.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 A number of local and international groups operate freely, investigating and pub-
 lishing their findings on human rights cases. Government officials generally are co-
 operative, although most groups complain of slow investigations or remedial actions.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution forbids discrimination based on ancestry, sex, race, language, or-
 igin, religion, political or ideological convictions, education, economic situation, or
 social condition, and the Government enforces these prohibitions.
 Women.-Domestic and other violence against women is reportedly a common but
 hidden problem for which few seek legal recourse. A 1995 survey of 1,000 women
 (latest statistics available) reported that 254 had experienced some form of sexual
 assault during their lives. The law provides for criminal penalties in cases of vio-
 lence by a spouse, and the judicial system shows no apparent reluctance to pros-
 ecute suspects accused of abusing women. Changes to the Penal Code in September
 granted prosecutors the ability to file charges independent of the victim when pros-
 ecution is judged "in the victim's interest." However, traditional societal attitudes
 discourage many battered women from recourse to the judicial system. In November
 the Government inaugurated a toll-free hot line for victims of domestic violence.
 In 1998 the Government began a series of new and expanded programs dealing
 with women's issues. Through its Commission for Equality and the Rights of
 Women, a series of high-quality books and pamphlets on women's issues were dis-
 tributed in both cities and rural areas. The police began to receive special domestic
 violence training (including a guidebook and video) through a successful pilot pro-
 gram. The Government made a commitment to increase the percentage of women
 in the police (a figure currently at less than 1 percent), but progress has been slow.
 Trafficking in women continues to be an issue of concern. International trafficking
 rings take Portuguese women abroad, often to Spain, and bring foreign women to
 Portugal. The Portuguese women involved tend to be from poorer areas of the coun-
 try and are often, but not always, drug users. Women from Brazil and from
 Lusophone Africa also are involved, as are women from non-Lusophone countries
 such as Senegal. Under the Penal Code, trafficking in women is punishable by 2
 to 8 years in prison.
 Prostitution is linked closely to other types of organized crime, especially inter-
 national narcotics trafficking. Specific legislation prohibits forced prostitution and
 trafficking in human beings. The Nest, an NGO, operates economic and social recov-
 ery programs for prostitutes.
 The Civil Code provides for full legal equality for women. Sexual harassment, a
 problem that continues to gain public attention, is covered in the Penal Code as a
 sex crime, but only if perpetrated by a superior and in the workplace. As in the case
 of violence, socially ingrained attitudes discourage many women from taking advan-
 tage of the legal protection available.
 The Commission on Equality in the Workplace and in Employment, made up of
 representatives of the government, employers' organizations, and labor unions, is
 empowered to examine, but not adjudicate, complaints of sexual harassment but re-
 ceives few. It does review numerous complaints of discrimination by employers
 against pregnant workers and new mothers, who are protected by law.
 Women increasingly are represented in university student bodies, business,
 science, and the professions. A gap remains between male and female salaries. The
 majority of university degrees are earned by women.
 Children.-A 9-year period of education is compulsory. A study by the European
 Commission indicated that only 50 percent of children receive preschool education.
 To counter this problem, the Ministry of Education instituted a pilot project on early
 childhood education in the Algarve region in 1997. This program proved successful.
 More teachers were hired, new schools were constructed in remote areas, and the
 law now mandates preschool as a prerequisite to entry into the first grade.
 
 
 1424
 In 1998 the student population stood at 1,816,000. The number of preschoolers
 has increased and currently stands at 206,000. In view of this trend, more resources
 and attention have been focused on the preschool population.
 The National Children's Rights Commission is charged with implementing the
 principles of the International Convention on the Rights of the Child. The Commis-
 sion operates under the aegis of the High Commissioner for the Promotion of Equal-
 ity and of the Family and includes representatives from the Ministries of Justice,
 Health, Education, and Solidarity, as well as from leading NGO's. The quasi-inde-
 pendent Institute for the Support of Children organized a network of 48 NGO's dedi-
 cated to helping at-risk youth. The University of Minho's Institute for the Study of
 Children is a research center dedicated solely to the study of children's issues.
 There is no societal pattern of abuse of children, although child labor remains a
 problem (see Section 6.da.).
 Pedophilia continues to be a problem of concern. Apedophile ring was uncovered
 in Maeira in the fall of 1997. The ring involved Made  children and may have
 involved children from elsewhere in Europe. In addition to Madeiran adults, Belgian
 and Dutch adults were involved. In 1998 a Belgian parliamentarian made a fact-
 finding trip to the islands, as the case continued to expand. The Government ap-
 pointed a special prosecutor (a former Minister of Justice) to investigate. As the case
 received greater publicity, more families came forward. In September Parliament
 passed a new law that enlarged the definition of pedophilia to include the consum-
 ers of child pornography as well as the producers. Opposition parties in Madeira
 and affiliate  pa  es in metropolitan Portugal have attacked the Government for
 moving too slowly with the investigation. Other cases outside of Madeira have been
 reported.                                           h
 People With Disabilities.-There is no discrimination against disabled persons in
 employment, education, or the provision of other state services. Their access to pub-
 lic facilities is mandated by legislation, which generally is complied with. However,
 no such legislation covers private businesses or other facilities.
 National/Racial/Ethnic Minorities.-The principal minority groups are immi-
 grants, legal and illegal, from Portugal's former African colonies. There is also a
 resident Romani population, which is the subject of some discrimination. The law
 permits victims andantiracism associations to participate in race-related criminal
 trials by lodging criminal complaints, retaining their own lawyers, and calling wit-
 nesses.
 The Council of Europe commented favorably on the country's antidiscrimination
 and antiracism laws. Although the Council noted isolated difficulties with the Roma,
 African, and Afro- Portuguese populations, the populace generally is tolerant.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-Workers in both the private and public sectors have
 the right to associate freely and to establish committees in the workplace to defend
 their interests. The Constitution provides for the right to establish unions by profes-
 sion or industry. Trade union associations have the right to participate in the prepa-
 ration of labor legislation. Strikes are permitted by the Constitution for any reason,
 including political rcauses; they are common and generally are resolved through di-
 rect negotiations. The authorities respect all provisions of the law on labor's rights.
 Two principal labor federations exist. There are no restrictions on the formation
 of additional labor federations. Unions function without hindrance by the Govern-
 ment and are associated ciosely with political parties.
 There are no restrictions on the ability of unions to join federations or of federa-
 tions to afliate with international labor bodies.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-Unions are free to organize
 without interference by the Government or by employers. Collective bargaining is
 provided for in thr  Constitution and is practiced extensively in the public and pi-
 vate sectors.
 Collective bargaining disputes rarely lead to prolonged strikes. Should a long
 strike occur in an essential sector such as health, energy, or transportation, the gov-
 ernment may order the workers back to work for a specific period. The government
 rarely has invoked this power, in part because most strikes are limited to 1 to 3
 days, but the law was invoked in one transport strike in 1998. The law requlres
 a "minimum level of service" to be provided during strikes in essential sectors, but
 this requirement has been applied infrequently. When it has, minimum levels of
 service have been established by agreement between the government and the strik-
 ing unions, although unions have complained, inciuding to the International Labor
 Organization, that the minimum levels have been set too high. When collective bar-
 gaining fails, the government may appoint a mediator at the request of either man-
 agement or labor.
 
 
 1425
 The law prohibits antiunion discrimination, and the authorities enforce this prohi-
 bition in practice. The General Directorate of Labor promptly examines complaints.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-Forced labor, including by chil-
 dren, is prohibited and does not occur.
 d. Status of Child Labor Practices and Minimum Age for Employment.-The mini-
 mum working age is 16 years. There are instances of child labor, but the overall
 incidence is small and is concentrated geographically and sectorally. The greatest
 problems are reported in Braga, Porto, and Aveiro and tend to occur in the clothing,
 footwear, construction, and hotel industries. The Government prohibits forced and
 bonded child labor and enforces this prohibition effectively (see Section 6.c.).
 The Government has worked actively to eliminate child labor and created a multi-
 agency body, the National Commission to Combat Child Labor (CNCTI) in 1996 to
 coordinate those efforts. In 1997 the CNTCI expanded its efforts by enhancing co-
 operation with NGO's, establishing regional commissions and local intervention
 teams, and expanding its public education campaign. The Ministry of Education also
 has increased its budget allocated to alternative education plans for students in
 danger of dropping out of school.
 As a result of these government efforts and a move towards a higher technology
 industrial base (with a corresponding need for higher skilled labor), the number of
 child labor cases detected by inspectors fell from 341 to 167 over the last 4 years.
 Additional reductions may require fundamental social changes. Government officials
 are concerned that child labor continues in the home, where inspections are prohib-
 ited without a search warrant. Also, child labor among migrant agricultural workers
 appears to be facilitated by parents who are paid for every box of vegetables picked.
 These conditions make it difficult to root out child labor through increased enforce-
 ment alone; the authorities believe that public education measures also are needed
 over the longer term.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-Minimum wage legislation covers full-time
 workers as well as rural workers and domestic employees ages 18 years and over.
 For 1998 the monthly minimum    wage was about $336 (Esc 58,900) and generally
 was enforced. Along with widespread rent controls, basic food and utility subsidies,
 and phased implementation of an assured minimum income, the minimum wage af-
 fords a basic standard of living for a worker and family. According to the latest fig-
 ures available (October 1997), the average monthly wage was $777 (Esc 136,300).
 With respect to income distribution, average wages ranged from a high of $2,316
 (Esc 405,300) per month for managers to $587 (Esc 102,700) per month for manual
 laborers. Only 9.2 percent of the work force received the minimum wage.
 Employees generally receive 14 months' pay for 11 months' work: the extra 3
 months' pay are for a Christmas bonus, a vacation subsidy, and 22 days of annual
 leave. The maximum legal workday is 8 hours, and the maximum workweek is 40
 hours. For public sector employees, the maximum workweek is 39 hours, with a re-
 duction to 35 hours to be phased in by 1999. There is a maximum of 2 hours of
 aid overtime per day and 200 hours of overtime per year, with a minimum of 12
 hours between workdays. The Ministry of Employment and Social Security monitors
 compliance through its regional inspectors.
 Employers legally are responsible for accidents at work and are required by law
 to carry accident insurance. An existing body of legislation regulates safety and
 health, but labor unions continue to argue for stiffer laws. The General Directorate
 of Hygiene and Labor Security develops safety standards in harmony with European
 Union standards, and the General Labor Inspectorate is responsible for their en-
 forcement, but the Inspectorate lacks sufficient funds and inspectors to combat the
 problem of work accidents effectively. A relatively large proportion of accidents oc-
 curs in the construction industry. Poor environmental controls in textile production
 also cause considerable concern.
 While the ability of workers to remove themselves from situations where these
 hazards exist is limited, it is difficult to fire workers for any reason. Workers in-
 jured on the job rarely initiate lawsuits.
