 PORTUGAL
 Since Portugal's transition from authoritarian to democratic
 rule in 1974, vigorous democratic institutions have been
 established, and Portugal today enjoys a pluralistic,
 multiparty, parliamentary democracy with broad popular
 legitimacy. The President and deputies to the Assembly of the
 Republic are freely elected by the people. The Government is
 appointed by the President and is dependent upon the support
 of the Assembly.
 Portuguese democracy was consolidated in 1982 with a revision
 of the Constitution which reinforced the guarantees of civil
 liberties contained in the 1976 Constitution and which
 provides for a more open economy. Nationalizations and
 agrarian reform shortly after the 1974 revolution established
 the primary role of the State in certain areas of commerce,
 industry, and agriculture. The Government in 1984 allowed the
 operation of certain private domestic banks as part of an
 economic reform program designed to open the nationalized
 banking and certain other sectors to competition from private
 enterprise.
 In 1985 Portugal formally created its first civilian and
 military intelligence services since the abolition of the
 secret police in 1974. A number of terrorist attacks since
 1983, involving both foreign and domestic organizations,
 convinced the Government that such services were necessary.
 Terrorist actions, aimed primarily at Portuguese businessmen,
 and incidents at the U.S. Embassy and NATO installations have
 not altered the good human rights climate. Unsubstantiated
 charges have been made, however, that prison conditions for
 the 56 persons arrested for terrorist activity in June 1984
 and tried in October 1985 are substandard. There are also
 occasional foreign and domestic complaints about lengthy
 delays in the handling of cases in Portuguese courts. There
 have been instances of the excessive use of force by the
 police, but these seem to reflect inadequate training rather
 than policy. Respect for civil and political rights, due
 process, and the integrity of the person are supported by the
 Government and reinforced by a free press. The state-owned
 national television network is alleged on occasion to have
 tailored its programming and news coverage in accord with
 political considerations, but opposing points of view can be
 and usually are aired.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 Government-sanctioned political killings do not occur in
 Portugal. A domestic ultraleftist terrorist group, the
 "Popular Forces of April 25" (FP-25, which refers to the
 revolution of April 25, 1974), has claimed responsibility for
 several murders, other armed attacks on Portuguese nationals,
 and numerous bombings and attempted bombings of industrial and
 other sites. This group also took responsibility for the July
 1985 assassination of one of its own members who had agreed to
 testify against his former colleagues and had been
 provisionally released pending the trial of accused group
 members. The FP-25 began to target foreign installations for
 
 
 1068
 PORTUGAL
 the first time in the autumn of 1984, using mortars to attack
 the U.S. Embassy, NATO ships at anchor in Lisbon harbor,
 NATO's Iberlant Command Headquarters, and an airbase in Beja
 district used by the Federal Republic of Germany. Despite
 FP-25's activity, Portugal continues otherwise to have a low
 level of violence.
 b. Disappearance
 The police, the armed forces, and other government agencies do
 not abduct or secretly arrest and detain individuals. In
 1985, there were no terrorist abductions or hostage-takings by
 Portuguese opposition groups.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 The Constitution forbids torture and the use of evidence
 obtained by torture in criminal proceedings. It also
 prohibits inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, which
 is punishable by fine or imprisonment. A number of the FP-25
 suspects apprehended and indicted in 1984 have engaged in
 periodic hunger strikes and other protests against prison
 conditions. Beyond these protests, no independent evidence in
 support of the alleged inadequacies has appeared. Ten
 prisoners accused of crimes associated with FP-25 activity
 escaped from Lisbon's main penitentiary in September 1985. A
 stricter regime was imposed on those accused remaining under
 detention.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 No one can be held legally for more than 48 hours unless a
 prosecuting judge orders preventive detention, which may last
 a maximum of 4 months for each alleged crime. In some cases
 where persons have been detained longer than 48 hours on an
 order of preventive detention, defense lawyers have succeeded
 in protecting their clients' rights through legal means and
 publicity. Because of the cumbersome judicial system,
 preventive detention beyond the authorized 4 months and up to
 6 to 9 months before trial is not unusual in the cases of
 individuals accused of serious crimes,.'such as murder or armed
 robbery. A large backlog of cases in the courts and vacant
 judgeships have caused delays. Judges are required to give
 priority to the cases of those under preventive detention.
 Forced labor does not exist in Portugal. On February 1, 1985,
 the International Labor Organization (ILO), in response to a
 complaint filed by the General Confederation of Portuguese
 Workers (CGTP), criticized the failure of some Portuguese
 companies, which claimed economic distress, to pay salaries
 owed to their workers. The ILO report rejected the CGTP claim
 that the practice was a form of forced labor in violation of
 ILO Conventions 29 and 105 and accepted the Government's
 report outlining measures it was taking to combat the
 problem. The ILO did recommend that the Government impose
 sanctions against companies not paying salaries. It also said
 it was not enough for laws forbidding nonpayment of salaries
 to be on the books if effective penalties were not imposed.
 On July 30, the CGTP asserted that the number of workers with
 unpaid salaries had dropped from 130,000 to 109,000.
 
 
 1069.
 PORTUGAL
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Portugal has an independent judiciary and a fair judicial
 system. All trials are public except those which may offend
 the dignity of the victim, such as cases involving the sexual
 abuse of children. The accused is presumed innocent until
 convicted. A public prosecutor develops the case against the
 accused. A prosecuting judge reviews the evidence and
 determines whether the accused should be detained or released
 on bail. A panel of three judges (which does not include the
 prosecuting judge) presides over cases which go to trial. A
 ministerial delegate assists the judges in reviewing the
 evidence. At the request of the accused, a jury may be used
 in trials for major crimes. The judges or jury renders.the
 verdict. Sentence may be passed only in the presence of the
 defense attorney.
 Foreign and domestic complaints continue to be made about the
 lengthy delays in the handling of cases in Portuguese courts.
 The European Court in Strasbourg in July 1984 found that
 Portugal had violated Article 6 of the European Convention on
 Human Rights, which provides that "every person has the right
 to have his case disposed of justly and publicly within a
 reasonable time." The Portuguese chapter of the International
 Commission of Jurists, the main local human rights watchdog
 qrganization, is becoming increasingly concerned about this
 problem.
 There are no political prisoners, although some elements of
 the extreme left often claim that persons who have been
 sentenced to prison for violent acts, conspiracy, or
 incitement to violence are, in fact, political prisoners.
 Some foreign and domestic groups have charged that the accused
 FP-25 members, particularly Otelo Saraiva De Carvalho, one of
 the leaders of the 1974 revolution, are political prisoners.
 There appears to be substantial evidence, however, for the
 criminal charges brought in these cases.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 No cases of governmental interference with the privacy of the
 individual were reported in 1985. The Government does not
 tamper with private correspondence or telephones. The
 Constitution forbids forced entry into homes and searches
 without a judicial warrant. In addition, entry into an
 individual's home at night requires his consent.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Freedom of speech and press is guaranteed by the Constitution
 and respected by the Government. The constitutionally mandated
 Council of Social Communication, the members of which are
 elected by the Assembly, acts as a watchdog to protect freedom
 of speech and access to the media. It publicizes abuses,
 makes recommendations to the Assembly, and has enforcement
 powers (which have never been exercised). The opposition is
 free to voice its point of view, and the Government tolerates
 criticism with two restrictions:
 First, "Fascist" organizations and activities, including
 discussions of corporativism, are prohibited by the so-called
 
 
 1070
 PORTUGAL
 "anti-Fascist" law of June 1978. Violators are liable to
 imprisonment for from 2 to 8 years. In practice, both
 politicians associated with the former regime and the "Force
 of Popular Unity", charged with being the political front
 group for the terrorist organization FP-25, participated in
 political activities preceding the legislative elections of
 October 6, 1985.
 Second, anyone convicted of "insulting" civil or military
 bodies or the President of the Republic, if the "insult" was
 deemed intended to undermine the rule of law, may be
 imprisoned for 3 years. There were no prosecutions for
 "insult" in 1985.
 Although the Government indirectly subsidizes the press
 (through its nationalization of the banks to which the press
 is indebted), it does not control editorial content, and the
 entire political spectrum is represented. The two television
 channels and most radio stations are owned by the State. The
 Government appoints their administrators, who are usually
 replaced when new governments take office. In principle, the
 Government should not influence television and radio policies
 or reporting decisions. In practice, it usually does so
 indirectly through its power of appointment.
 Opposition parties sometimes charge that television or radio
 ignores or distorts their views and activities. In the
 preelection period those charges became a campaign issue as
 the Government was accused of manipulating television coverage
 to favor the Socialist Party. However, political parties,
 trade unions, and other organizations have a right to periodic
 access to exclusive television time after the evening news.
 The Communist Party and the unions use it vigorously.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Individuals have the right, in law and practice, to associate
 formally or informally, to promote nonviolent causes, and to
 protest government policies. Formation of a political party
 requires 5,000 subscribers. The new Party of Democratic
 Renewal acquired formal legal status in 1985 after having
 presented the required number of signatures to the appropriate
 authorities. Public meetings or protests require 24-hour
 advance notice to the civil governor of the area involved.
 Permission is routinely granted.
 Workers have the constitutional right to set up unions by
 profession or industry. Collective bargaining is guaranteed
 by law and practiced in both the public and private sectors.
 Such issues as wage levels, working conditions, pay grades,
 and fringe benefits are regularly the subject of collective
 bargaining. Strikes are permitted for any, including
 political, reasons. Approximately 45 percent of the workers
 are unionized. Unions are free of governmental control but
 closely associated with political parties.
 There are two labor federations. One, the General
 Confederation of Portuguese Workers (CGTP), is controlled by
 the Communist Party and is active in Communist-sponsored
 causes. The other, the General Union of Workers (UGT), is a
 pluralist democratic union affiliated with the International
 Confederation of Free Trade Unions and the European Trade
 Union Congress. Its leadership is associated with the
 Socialist and Social Democratic parties, and several members
 
 
 1071
 PORTUGAL
 have been elected to the Assembly. Since both federations
 want to represent Portugal in the International Labor
 Organization, the Minister of Labor has decided that each will
 do so in alternate years.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 There is no state religion in Portugal, and the Government
 does not interfere with the free practice of religion,
 including missionary work and religious publishing. Organized
 religions may freely establish places of worship, train their
 clergy, proselytize, and convert. In order to qualify as a
 tax-exempt institution, an organized religion must legally
 establish itself as a nonprofit, private society.
 The prevailing religion is Roman Catholicism. Catholic
 religious instruction is offered as an elective in the public
 schools. Pursuit of a civil, military, professional, or
 political career does not depend on adherence to a particular
 creed.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 The Constitution guarantees freedom of movement, foreign
 travel, and emigration. There are no formal restraints on
 domestic travel, on the right of a citizen to change residence
 or place of employment, or on emigration. However, currency
 restrictions, resulting from a chronic balance of payments
 problem, in practice impose some limitations on foreign
 travel. Emigrants and those who travel abroad are free to
 return. Citizenship is not revoked for political reasons.
 An 1980 law established a humane refugee program. Displaced
 persons who qualify as refugees under the technical definition
 established by the United Nations are given permanent resident
 status and allowed to work. In practice, displaced persons
 are not forced to return to the land from which they fled or
 in which they fear persecution.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 The President and the Assembly are elected by secret ballot
 and universal adult suffrage under a democratic system.
 Opposition parties and candidates operate freely and enjoy
 access to the media. Only "Fascist" organizations are
 outlawed. General elections for the Assembly are held at
 least every 4 years. The President has a 5-year mandate and
 may serve no more than two consecutive terms.
 The population is overwhelmingly European and ethnically
 homogeneous. There is a small African minority, most of which
 emigrated to Portugal when the former African colonies won
 their independence following the 1974 revolution. There are
 no legal restrictions on political activity by Portuguese of
 African heritage.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 Portugal has cooperated with independent outside
 investigations of human rights conditions and actively
 
 
 1072
 PORTUGAL
 participates in the monitoring of human rights by the Council
 of Europe. Amnesty International and other private
 international human rights groups operate freely in Portugal.
 The most important domestic human rights group is the
 Portuguese section of the International Commission of Jurists,
 which considers the human rights situation in Portugal to be,
 "on the whole, positive and satisfactory." Amnesty
 International did not mention Portugal in its 1985 Report.
 Freedom House rated Portugal "free."
 ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND CULTURAL SITUATION
 According to World Bank data, Portugal's population is
 10,046,000, and the per capita gross national product is
 $2,230. A worsening of the economic situation, including
 deficits in both balance of payments and domestic budget, has
 forced the Government to reduce its subsidies of basic food
 and agricultural commodities. Portugal imports about 60
 percent of its food needs.
 In theory, food, shelter, health care, and education are
 available to all inhabitants regardless of race, religion,
 sex, ethnic background, or political opinion. In practice,
 many still suffer from an inadequate diet, inferior housing,
 poor quality and frequently unavailable health care, and
 substandard education. Life expectancy at birth is 71.7
 years, and the infant mortality rate is 17.6 per 1,000 live
 births.
 The Government has instituted a large-scale school
 construction program to improve educational opportunities.
 New regional colleges are spreading higher education beyond
 the traditional centers of Coimbra, Lisbon, and Oporto.
 Despite these encouraging advances, illiteracy is still about
 20 percent. A shortage of buildings and teachers makes it
 impossible for all children of primary school age to attend
 classes, and the quality of personnel and facilities is
 frequently substandard.
 Child labor in industry is not a problem in Portugal. To
 combat school drop-out rates, the Government in 1984 enacted
 an apprentice program for youths between the ages of 14 and
 24. The Government has said that "thousands" of youth leave
 school annually without graduating. Given the high proportion
 of the population engaged in agriculture and other traditional
 work sectors, it is likely that large numbers of youth leave
 school prior to graduation to work on family farms or at
 traditional trades.
 A national monthly minimum wage for full-time workers was
 first established in Portugal in 1974. Minimum wages for
 rural workers and domestic employees were legislatively
 established in 1977 and 1978 respectively. In every year
 since then, with the exception of 1982, minimum wages were
 adjusted upward. Workers are required by law to be granted an
 individual written work contract which must include their
 professional category and salary, the work site, the starting
 date, and, in the case of temporary workers, the duration of
 the contract.
 Legislation limits hours of work to 8 hours daily and 48 hours
 per week. Overtime is limited to 2 hours per work period and
 up to 120 hours per year. Work on a normal day off is
 restricted to 8 hours. These limits are respected in practice.
 
 
 1073
 PORTUGAL
 On May 24, 1985, the Government notified the ILO that it had
 ratified Convention 95 on conditions of security, health, and
 environment in the workplace. Ratification followed an ILO
 visit designed to advise Portugal on changes needed to comply
 with the Convention.
 The Civil Code guarantees full legal equality to women in
 accordance with the Constitution. Women play an active role
 in the political parties but remain underrepresented in party
 and government leadership positions. In 1979 a woman served
 as Prime Minister, and the current Minister of Health is a
 woman. Women are gradually increasing their representation in
 business, government, and the professions. Traditional
 attitudes of male dominance persist in most areas but are
 slowly changing.
 
 
 1074
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: PORTUGAL
 1983     1984      1985
 I.ECON. A$SIST.-TOTAL...         20.0     40.0      80.0
 LOANS ..............     .. 0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............    ... 20.0     40.0     80.0
 A.AID .....................    20.0     40.0      80.0
 LOANS ..............     .. .0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............    ... 20.0     40.0     80.0
 (SEC.SUPP.ASSIST,)...         20.0     40.0     80.0
 B.FO00 FOR PEACE ......          0.0      0.0       0.0
 LOANS ..............     ... 0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................     0.0      0.0       0.0
 TITLE I-TOTAL ..........         0.0      0.0       0.0
 REPAY. IN $-LOANS .....         0.0      0.0       0.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR.....          0.0      0.0       0.0
 TITLE I-TOTAL .........         0.0      0.0       0.0
 E.RELIEF.EC.DEV & NFP.          0.0      0.0      0.0
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY.....          0.0      0.0       0.0
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST...          0.O      0.0       0.0
 LOANS ..............     ... 0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................      0.0      0.0      0.0
 PEACE CORPS ......         0.0      0.0      0.0
 NARCOTICS ........         0.0      0.0      0.0
 OTHER .............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 II.NIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL...        111.2    107.9    128.0
 LOANS ..............   .... 52.5     45.0     55.0
 GRANTS .............    ... 58.7     62.9     73.0
 A.MAP GRANTS ..........     . 56.6     60.0      70.0
 B.CREDIT FINANCING,....        52.5     45.0      55.0
 C.INTL IL.E.TRNG ....         2.1      2.9       3.0
 O.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK...*         0.0      0.0       0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS ........         0.0      0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. & IL...        131.2    147.9    208.0
 LOANS ..............   .... 52.5     45.0     55.0
 GRANTS .............    ... 78.7    102.9    153.0
 OTHER US LOANS ..........         0.0      0.0       0.0
 EX-IM BANK LOANS .......         0.0      0.0       0.0
 ALL OTHER ..............     ... 0.0      0.0       0.0
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1983     1984      1985     1946-85
 TOTAL. .......    248.0    172.3    146.2   1736.4
 IBRO             166.7      72.6     66.0   1081.8
 IFC                0.3      14.5      0.2     26.2
 IDA                0.0       0.0      0.0      0.0
 lOB                 0.0      0.0.     0.0      0.0
 AOB                0.0       0.0      0.0      0.0
 AFOB                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 UNOP                1.0      0.2      0.0       3.2
 OTHER-UN            0.0      0.0      0.0      0.2
 EEC               80.0      85.0     80.0    625.0
 
 
 1075
