 PORTUGAL
 During 1977 and 1978, the Portuguese Government and
 private Portuguese human rights organizations
 maintained a strong commitment to human rights.
 President Eanes has frequently emphasized human
 rights in his public statements. Former Prime-Minister
 Soares publicly lauded the human rights initiatives
 of the Carter Administration and sought to promote
 human rights and democratic practices during recent
 travel to Latin America. The National Assembly, in
 its 1977/78 session, ratified the United Nations
 Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the Covenant
 on Social and Cultural Rights, and the European
 Convention on Human Rights. The Portuguese Govern-
 ment delivered the instruments of ratification of
 the European Convention on November 12, 1978. The
 Assembly also passed motions condemning human rights
 violations in South Africa, Brazil, Chile, Czechoslo-
 vakia, Ethiopia and the Soviet Union. Portugal
 was elected a member of the United Nations Human
 Rights Commission in May 1978.
 In the last year, private organizations with an
 interest in human rights increased their activities.
 To increase public awareness of human rights abuses,
 they sponsored a public demonstration protesting
 the trials of Soviet dissenters. They also hosted
 lunches and seminars with human rights advocates as
 principal speakers, including Jerome Shestack,
 President of the International League for Human
 Rights. Additionally, the Portuguese media have
 augmented their attention to this subject.
 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person,
 Including Freedom from:
 a. Torture
 Portugal has been free from torture since the dis-
 mantling of the secret police in 1974.
 b. Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 
 (483)
 
 
 484
 Since the leftist counter-coup attempt in November
 1975, there have been no documented cases of cruel
 or unusual punishment. Nine officials of the former
 State Security Police who had trials pending in 1976
 were subsequently tried. Six were acquitted, two
 were sentenced under due process to short prison
 terms followed by parole and one, at his own request,
 has chosen to remain in jail.
 c. Arbitrary Arrest or Imprisonment
 Since November 1975, there have been a few cases of
 Portuguese citizens being detained without specific
 charges beyond the 48-hour period allowed by the
 Constitution. In those cases, defense lawyers
 obtained due process through legal efforts and
 publicity.
 d. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Portugal allows no secret trials and the judicial
 system is fair.
 e. Invasion of the Home
 The constitutional prohibitions against illegal
 searches and illegal entries into homes have been
 observed since 1975.
 2. Governmental Policies Relating to the Fulfillment
 of Such Vital Needs as Food, Shelter, Health
 Care, and Education
 The Government has taken about a dozen significant
 steps to improve the lot of its rural and low-income
 citizens. It is continuing its programs for con-
 struction of low-income housing. Water, sewage and
 sanitation facilities, many targeted on the poorest
 sections of the country, are being built. To attack
 the estimated 30 percent illiteracy rate, a large-
 scale primary, preparatory, and secondary school
 construction program has been undertaken; a substan-
 tial portion of the 1978 budget was devoted to this.
 
 
 485
 In 1978, the Social Security program was included in
 the general budget for the first time. To alleviate
 the effects of the present 22 percent inflation rate,
 the Government has sought to maintain the purchasing
 power of the poor by subsidies for essential goods.
 The tax system, and particularly the personal income
 tax schedules, are generally highly progressive.
 Capital gains are not taxed.
 The Government has sought to restrain the growth of
 unemployment. Government personnel who served in
 overseas colonies, but for whom there are no jobs
 in Portugal, receive subsidies amounting to 60 percent
 of their previous salaries until new employment can
 be found. The Government provides extensive credits
 to public and private firms to help maintain their
 employment levels. The revised foreign investment
 code and new foreign investment institute are geared
 to create jobs through new and increased foreign
 investment. The Government has also actively sought
 to open emigration possibilities for its nationals.
 Although beset by an unemployment rate which surpasses
 13 percent, Portugal continues to devote substantial
 public funds to help provide both clothing and
 employment to its refugees and to reintegrate them
 into the society. Some refugees of Asian descent
 have experienced difficulties, because of a lack of
 documentation, in obtaining recognition of their
 Portuguese citizenship and then in securing available
 assistance. The Government is working to ameliorate
 this situation.
 3. Respect for Civil and Political Liberties,
 Including:
 a. Freedom of Thought, Speech, Press, Religion
 and Assembly
 These freedoms are respected. However, in June 1978,
 the Assembly passed the so-called "Anti-Fascist Law"
 prohibiting Fascist organizations, discussions of
 corporatism and other activities related to "Fascism."
 
 
 486
 The bill was found constitutional and became law when
 officially published October 6, 1978. Because of its
 vagueness, the law is worrisome to Portuguese human
 rights advocates.
 Workers exercise their constitutional right to orga-
 nize trade unions and trade union associations. The
 law prohibiting the establishment of more than one
 national labor confederation (i.e., giving a monopoly
 to the CGTP, the Communist-dominated General
 Confederation of Portuguese Workers-Intersindical)
 was revoked in 1976. The newly formed democratic
 General Union of Workers (UGT) seeks to become an
 important counter-balance to the CGTP.
 Portugal's new Civil Code, effective from April 1,
 1978, accords equality under the law between men and
 women. Among other things, the law allows a wife to
 pursue her own profession and either partner may sue
 for divorce after two years of marriage. The
 Commission on the Status of Women is an official
 department attached to the Prime Minister's office.
 b. Freedom of Movement within the Country,
 Foreign Travel and Emigration
 There is freedom of movement, foreign travel and
 emigration. In practice, however, currency exchange
 restrictions, imposed because of balance of payments
 constraints, limit foreign travel by Portuguese
 citizens.
 c. Freedom to Participate in the Political
 Process
 The Government has rigorously respected the consti-
 tutional provision for universal, secret, and equal
 suffrage for all citizens over 18 years of age.
 Foreign observers have confirmed that Portugal's
 four elections over the past four years have honored
 these principles. The Assembly of the Republic pass-
 ed a law which, when promulgated, should enfzanchise
 nearly a million new voters, including returnees
 from the former colonies.
 
 
 487
 4. Government Attitude and Record Regarding Inter-
 national and Non-Governmental Investigation of
 Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Portugal's Government has cooperated with several
 independent outside investigations of human rights
 conditions. Amnesty International in 1975 and 1977
 and the International League for Human Rights in
 1977 reported favorably on Portugal's human rights
 record. The Portuguese branch of the League has
 embarked on a significant program. A prominent
 Portuguese lawyer was elected to the board of the
 International League for Human Rights.
 
 
