 PORTUGAL
 The definitions in the new post-revolution Constitu-
 tion of the rights of Portuguese citizens were con-
 sciously modelled after the Universal Declaration of
 Human Rights. The Portuguese Government has honored
 in practice the Constitutional guarantees to prevent
 abuses of human rights. With the exception of the
 leaders of the Communist Party, Portuguese politicians
 and high-ranking officials have actively supported
 improvement of human rights. President Eanes issued
 an edition of the Charter of the Rights of Man with
 a special introduction stressing his own commitment
 to human rights. The International League of Human
 Rights honored Prime Minister Soares for his thirty-
 year struggle to restore human rights in Portugal
 by granting him its Annual Award on April 19, 1977.
 Prime Minister Soares sponsored the visit to Portugal
 of prominent Soviet dissident Andrei Amalrik. In the
 past year the Assembly of the Republic has passed
 motions condemning human rights violations in Brazil,
 Chile, Ethiopia, Czechoslovakia and the Soviet Union.
 The Assembly also passed a motion calling for an
 institution to supervise fulfillment of the Helsinki
 Agreement of the Conference for Security and Cooperation
 in Europe.
 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Torture
 Since dismantling of the secret police, the Direc-
 torate General for Security (DGS), Portugal has been
 free from torture. The security policy now are limited
 to non-political routine police work.
 b. Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment
 Since the leftist counter-coup attempt in November 1975,
 there have been no documented cases of cruel or unusual
 punishment. Charges have been filed against those
 responsible for alleged mistreatment of prisoners during
 the pro-Communist government of Prime Minister Vasco
 Goncalves.
 
 (306)
 
 
 307
 c. Arbitrary Arrest or Imprisonment
 Since November 1975 Portuguese citizens have not been
 detained without specific charges longer than the
 48-hour period allowed by the Constitution.
 d. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Portugal allows no secret trials or condemnations, and
 the judicial system is fair.
 e. Invasion of the Home
 The Constitutional prohibitions against illegal searches
 ,and illegal entries into homes have been observed since
 1975.
 2. Governmental Policies Relating to the Fulfillment
 of Such Vital Needs as Food, Shelter, Health Care
 and Education
 Since the installation of Portugal's first democratic
 government in almost fifty years and despite a worsening
 economic crisis, the government has clearly focussed on
 alleviating the hardship of the least advantaged.
 a. Housing
 The government has targeted for construction in 1977
 an estimated 11,500'housing units throughout Portugal
 for slum residents and refugees.
 b. Health
 In order to improve health conditions among Portugal's
 rural and low income population, government programs
 are underway to construct water and sewage and other
 sanitation facilities throughout the country at a cost
 in 1977 of $50 million.
 c. Education
 Portugal is attacking a present 35 percent illiteracy
 rate and lack of educational opportunity in rural areas
 
 
 308
 through a large-scale primary and secondary school
 construction program. Approximately 19 percent
 of the 1977 government budget is directed toward
 education.
 d. Social Security and Welfare Benefits
 Since the April, 1974 revolution Portugal has expanded
 social security and welfare benefits and extended the
 length of time benefits can be claimed. To alleviate
 the effects of the present 25 percent inflation rate,
 the government has sought to maintain the purchasing
 power of the poor by subsidizing prices of essential
 goods.
 e. Refugee Assistance
 Portugal's most dramatic humanitarian gesture has
 been the massive government and private effort to
 absorb and assist more than half a million former
 residents of the African colonies to which it granted
 independence during 1975. Although beset by a 15-17
 percent unemployment rate and similarly high under-
 employment, Portugal devoted a remarkable 9 percent
 of its 1976 budget to help feed, clothe and provide
 employment for residents of its former colonies.
 Since its installation, the government has escaped
 any known allegations that significant resources are
 diverted toward the nation's elites and away from the
 majority of the population.
 3. Respect for Civil and Political Liberties,
 Including:
 a. Freedom of Thought, Speech, Press, Religion,
 and Assembly
 These freedoms are in effect.
 b. Freedom of Movement Within the Country,
 Foreign Travel and Emigration
 There is freedom of movement, foreign travel and
 emigration.
 
 
 309
 
 c. Freedom to Participate in the Political
 Process
 The government has rigorously respected the Consti-
 tutional provision for universal, secret and equal
 suffrage for all citizens over 18 years of age.
 Foreign observers have confirmed that Portugal's
 four elections over the past three years honored
 these principles.
 Workers have the Constitutional right to set up
 trade unions and trade union associations and.have
 done so. The law establishing the Communist-dominated
 General Confederation of Portuguese Workers-Inter-
 sindical as the country's sole labor confederation
 has been revoked. Workers have not yet established
 a rival union confederation, but a small group of
 independent unions has been formed.
 4.   Government Attitude and Record Regarding
 International and Non-Governmental Investigation
 of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Portugal's government has cooperated with independent
 outside investigations of human rights conditions.
 For example, the Amnesty International mission visited
 Portugal in June, 1975.
 
 
