 PORTUGAL *
 The Republic of Portugal is a constitutional democracy with a president, an inde-
 pendent judiciary, a prime minister, and a legislative assembly freely elected by se-
 cret ballot in multiparty elections.
 Internal security is primarily the responsibility of the Ministries of Justice and
 Internal Administration. Security forces are controlled by, and responsive to, the
 Government.
 Portugal has a market-based economy and is a member of the Europan Union.
 An increasing proportion of the population is employed in services, whe employ-
 ment in agriculture continues to decline and has been static or declining slightly in
 the industrial sector.
 Citizens enjoy a broad range of civil and other human rights which the Govern-
 ment generally respects. Civil rights are outlined in the Constitution with specific
 reference to the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. The principal human
 rights problem is the occasional beating of detainees or prisoners by police or prison
 personnel. Credible although infrequent reports of this problem continued, as did re-
 ports of poor conditions in prisons. Also, violence against women, child labor, and
 discrimination against Roma are problems.
 *A separate report on Macau, recognized by both China and Portugal as Chinese territory
 under Portuguese administration, follows this report.
 
 
 1067
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and other Extrajudicial Rllling.-There were no reports of political
 killings.
 A criminal suspect was killed while in police custody in a widely publicized inci-
 dent in May. A National Republican Guard officer confessed to the crime. A trial
 is pending.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution forbids torture, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment,
 and the use of evidence obtained under torture in criminal proceedings. An inde-
 pendent Ombudsman, chosen by the Legislative Assembly (parliament), investigates
 complaints of mistreatment by police and prison authorities. A recently appointed
 police inspector general has also begun examining cases of alleged mistreatment.
 The Government and Amnesty International (AI) have continued their dialogue
 on allegations of police brutality. One case of mistreatment of two citizens by the
 National Republican Guard (GNR), which AI had been following since 1992, was fi-
 nally resolved when the conviction and sentencing of several GNR soldiers to prison
 terms was upheld on appeal. The trial continued at year's end of six other GNR offi-
 cers charged with assaulting another citizen in 1991. New credible complaints of po-
 lice brutality continue to be lodged, including a widely publicized case in which a
 magstrate in the public prosecutor's office claimed to have been punched and kicked
 by GNR officers. Icontinues to lament the delay in investigating such allegations.
 The Council of Europe's Committee for the Prevention of Torture also continued
 its dialogue with the Government. In a November report, the Committee released
 the findings of its 1995 visit to prisons and  lice stations. The 1995 visit was a
 followup to a 1992 visit of the same facilities. The Committee's report cited improve-
 ments in prison conditions but criticized the continued high incidence of allegations
 of beatings of detainees at the time of arrest or while in police custody. The report
 further criticized the failure of police agencies to investigate allegations of mistreat-
 ment by their officers, or to adequately punish those found guilty of such offenses.
 It recommended that human righrts training for the police receive increased empha-
 sis, that allegations of mistreatment be fully investigated, and that persons alleging
 mistreatment be given a forensic medical examination for use in evidence. The Gov-
 erment announced plans in May to address problems of police mistreatment by
 sending veteran officers for training in human rights and proper police procedure.
 New recruits have been receiving such training for several years.
 Prison conditions are poor. The Ombudsman submitted a critical report on prison
 conditions to the Government and parliament in June. He cited overcrowding, sani-
 tation, medical care, security, and food quality as among the problem areas and rec-
 ommended numerous corrective measures. Two new prisons opened during the year.
 The Government permits prison visits by human rights monitors. Human rights
 organizations report no difficulties in gaining access to inmates at detention facili-
 ties.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-Under the law, an investigating judge de-
 termines whether an arrested person should be detained, released on bail, or re-
 leased outright. Persons may not be held more than 48 hours without appearing be-
 fore an investigatn judge. Investigative detention is limited to a maximum of 6
 months for each suspected crime. If a formal charge has not been afied within that
 period, the detainee must be released. In cases of serious crimes, for example mur-
 der or armed robbery, or of mere than one suspect, investigative detention may be
 for up to 2 years and may be extended by a judge to 3 years in extraordinary cir-
 cumstances. A suspect in investigative detention mst be brought to trial within 18
 months of being formally charged. If the suspect is not in detention, there is no
 specified period for going to trial. A detainee has access to lawyers; the State as-
 sumes the cost if necessary.
 Exile is illegal and is not practiced.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The judiciary is independent and impartial. The
 court system, laid out in the Constitution, consists of a Constitutional Court, a Su-
 preme Court of Justice, and judicial courts of first and second instance. There is also
 a supreme court of administration, which deals with administrative and tax dis-
 puts, and which is supported by lower administrative courts. An audit court is in
 the Ministry of Finance.
 All trials are public except those which may offend the dignity of the victim, such
 as in cases of sexual abuse of children. The accused is presumed innocent. In trials
 for serious crimes, a panel of three judges presides. For eser crimes, a single judge
 
 
 1068
 presides. At the request of the accused, a jury may be used in trials for major
 crimes; in practice, requests for jury trials are extremely rare.
 The judicial system provides citizens with a fair legal process. It has been much
 criticized, however, for a large backlog of pending trials resulting from inefficient
 futinctioning of the courts.
 There were no reports of political prisoners.
 f Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Constitution forbids such practices, and the Government respects these provisions
 in practice. Violations are subject to effective legal sanctions.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-Freedom of speech and the press is provided
 for in the Constitution, and the Government respects these rights in practice. An
 independent press, an effective judiciary, and a ftnctioning democratic political sys-
 tem combine to ensure freedom of speech and of the press, including academic free-
 dom.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The law provides for these
 rights, and the authorities generally respect these provisions.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for freedom of religion, and the
 Government respects this right in practice.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.L-The Constitution and laws provide for these rights, and the Govern-
 ment respects them in practice.
 The Government cooperates with the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees and
 other humanitarian organizations in assisting refugees. Persons who qualify as refu-
 gees are entitled to residence   rmits. The issue of first asylum did not arise in
 1996. There were no reports f forced expulsions of those having a valid claim to
 refugee status.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Portugal is a multipart, parliamentary democracy. The Constitution provides
 citizens with the right to change their government peacefully, and citizens exercise
 this right in practice through periodic, free, and fair elections on the basis of univer-
 sal suffrage.
 Women and minorities have full political rights. Women currently head 3 of 17
 ministries: Health, employment, and environment. Women are represented in all
 major political parties but constitute ony 13 percent of the deputies in the legisla-
 ture, where 3 of the 15 committees are chaired by a woman. Race is rarely an issue
 in politics. Persons of minority origin have achieved prominence in politics.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 A number of local and international human rights groups operate freely, inves-
 tigating and publishing their findings on human rights cases. Government officials
 are generally cooperative, although most groups complain of slow investigations or
 remedial actions.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution forbids discrimination based on ancestry, sex, race, language, or-
 igin, religion, political or ideological convictions, education, economic situation, or
 social condition, and the Government enforces these prohibitions.
 Women.-The deaths of three women in March drew attention to the reportedly
 common but largely hidden problem of domestic and other violence against women.
 Hundreds of battered women seek help each year from the Portuguese Association
 for the Support of Victims. The law provides for criminal penalties in cases of vio-
 lence by a spouse. Traditional societal attitudes discourage many battered women
 from recourse to the judicial system. In 1996 a shelter for battered women opened
 in Oporto, and a Lisbon shelter is planned. The judicial system shows no apparent
 reluctance to prosecute suspects accused of abusing women.
 The Civil Code provides for full legal equality for women. Sexual harassment, an
 issue gaining public attention, is covered in the Penal Code as a sex crime, but only
 if perpetrated by a superior and in the workplace. As in the case of violence, socially
 ingrained attitudes discourage many women from taking advantage of their legal
 protection.
 The Commission on Equality in the Workplace and in Employment, made up of
 representatives of the Government, employers organizations, and labor unions, is
 empowered to examine complaints of sexual harassment but receives few. It does
 
 
 1069
 review numerous complaints of discrimination by employers against pregnant work-
 ers and new mother., who are protected by law.
 Women are increasingly represented in universities, business, science, and the
 professions. Traditional attitudes of male dominance prist but are changing gradu-
 saly. The Commission for the Equality and Rights of Women, an official organiation
 reporting to the newly-established High Commissioner for the Promotion of Equality
 and of the Family, is a leading and effective advocate of women's rights.
 Children.-Nine years of education are compulsory. The Government is increas-
 igly committed to improving children's welfare and has convened an interministe-
 rial commission reporting to the High Commissioner for the Promotion of Equality
 and of the Family to study whether the Government should implement a "global pol-
 icy on children.' The quasi-independent Institute for the Support of Children and
 the University of Minho's Institute for the Study of Children contribute to efforts
 to improve conditions for children. The primary role of the former is to promote the
 Government's child welfare policies by advi   local authorities and employers as
 to the legal rights of minors. The mission or-the newly-created Institute for the
 Study of Children is to research children's issues and to improve child care. There
 is no societal pattern of abuse of children, although child labor remains a problem
 (see Section 6.d.).
 People With Disabilities.-There is no discrimination against disabled persons in
 employment, education, or the provision of other state services. Their access to pub-
 lic Tacilities is mandated by legislation, which is generally complied with. There is
 no such legislation covering _private businesses or other facilities.
 National/Racial /Ethnic Minorities.-The principal minority groups are immi-
 grants, legal and illegal, from Portugal's former African colonies. There is also a
 resident Romani population. The Government devoted signfficant police resources to
 investigating the 1995 skinhead street attack on persons of African origin in which
 one victim died. The investigation led to the prosecution of at least 15 persons be-
 lieved to have been involved in planning or carrying out the attack. Racism was a
 suspected motive in another case in which a person of African origin died; the ac-
 cused was acquitted, but the prosecutor has appealed the verdict. A new law de-
 signed to combat race-related crimes permits antiracism associations as well as vic-
 tims to lodge criminal complaints and to participate by retaining their own lawyers
 and calling witnesses. The Government appointed a High Commissioner for Immi-
 gration and Ethnic Minorities, an  in order to reduce exploitation of illegal work-
 ers, passed a law to regularize the status of many illegal immigrants, particularly
 those of Lusophone African or Brazilian origin. When one local government, report-
 edly pressured by popular suspicion of criminal activity by Roma, demolished alleg-
 edly illegal residential structures in an apparent attempt to evict a Romani family,
 the civil governor of the district was actively involved in efforts to resolve the issue
 and to assist the dislocated family to find shelter in a more tolerant community
 nearby. The incident focused press and public attention on the hostile local attitudes
 encountered by Romani communities in some areas.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-Workers in both the private and public sectors have
 the right to associate freely and to establish committees in the workplace to defend
 their interests. The Constitution provides for the right to establish unions by profes-
 sion or industry. Trade union associations have the right to participate in the prepa-
 ration of labor legislation. Strikes are constitutionally permitted for any reason, in-
 cluding political causes; they are common and generally are resolved through direct
 otiations. The authorities respect all prvisions of the law on labor's rights.
 Tw0 principal labor federations exist. There are no restrictions on the formation
 of additional labor federations. Unions function without hindrance by the Govern-
 ment and are closely associated with political parties. There are no restrictions on
 the ability of unions to join federations or on federations affiliating with inter-
 national labor bodies.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-Unions are free to organize
 without interference by the Government or by employers. Collective bargaining is
 provided for in the Constitution and is practiced extensively in the public and pri-
 vate sectors.
 Collective bargaining disputes rarely lead to prolonged strikes. Should a long
 strike occur in an essential sector such as health, energy, or transportation, the
 Government may order the workers back to work for a specific period. This did not
 occur in 1996. The Government has rarely invoked this power, in part because most
 strikes are limited to periods of 1 to 3 days. The law requires a "minimum level
 of service" to be provided during strikes in essential sectors, but this requirement
 has been infrequently applied. When it has, minimum levels of service have been
 
 
 1070
 established by agreement between the Government and the striking unions, al-
 though umons have complained, including to the International.Labor Organization,
 that the minimum levels have been set too high. When collective bargaining fails,
 the Government may appoint a mediator, at the request of either management or
 labor.
 The law prolhbits antiunion discrimination, and the authorities enforce this prohi-
 bition in practice. Complaints are promptly examined by the General Directorate of
 Labor.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition f Forced or Compulsory Labor.-Forced labor is prohibited and
 does not occur.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The minimum employment age is
 15 years. It is to be raised to 16 years on January 1, 1997, to ensure that the Labor
 Code does not conflict with the decree mandating 9 years of compulsory education.
 The first students bound by the 9-year rule will complete 9 years of study in 1997.
 The two main labor federations and observers from other European countries have
 charged that a number of "clandestine" companies in the textile, shoe, and construc-
 tion industries exploit child labor. In September the Government created a new
 intergovernmental Commission to Combat Child Labor (CNCTI) tasked with eradi-
 cating child labor. New measures that the CNCTI is charged with implementing in-
 clude stiffer fines for employers with children on the payroll, subsidies for vu ner-
 able families with children, and curriculum changes to keep children in school. The
 CNCTI is tasked with presiding over an upgrade of the Government's General Labor
 Inspectorate, which is responsible for enforcing child labor laws. An increase is
 planned in the Inspectorate's funding, the number of inspectors, and inspections.
 The Inspectorate reports that thousands of children under age 15 are employed ille-
 gaiy but believes the number is declining. Government statistics derived from labor
 inspections suggest the incidence of child labor has been greatly reduced in recent
 years. Nevertheless, the Inspectorat acknowledges that the transfer of work involv-
 ing children from factories and workshops into the home and other settings beyond
 the rach of iespectors complicates the task of accurately measuring and stopping
 chil labor viOlations.
 hUniOn observers agriee that the number of illegally employed chil dren is falling,
 ut hey atriute tis development to the general rise i unemployment. Unions
 continued to form local alliances with church gups, citizens groups, and local gov-
 ernment bodies to address the multiple social and economic causes of child la or.
 While some improvements have been made, the Government does not allocate
 enough resources to address the problem fully.
 e. Acceptable Condition  Work.-Minimum wage legislation covers full-time
 workers, as well as rural workers and domestic employees age 18 or over. The
 monthly minimum wage of about $360 (Es 54,600), which came into effect on Janu-
 ary 1, is generally enforced Along with widespread rent controls, basic food and
 utility subsidies, and phased implementation of a guaranteed minimum income, the
 minimum wage affords a basic standard of living for a worker and family.
 A new law adopted in July provides for phased reduction of the normal maximum
 workweek from 44 hours to 40 hours by December 1997. The new law limits regular
 work hours to 8 hours per day, with a maximum of 2 hours paid overtime per day
 and 200 hours of overtime per year, and with a minimum interval of 12 hours be-
 tween normal working days. The law also introduces ob flexiblity--employers may
 assign workers tasks beyond those aecifically included in their job category. An-
 other new law provides for the phased reduction of the normal maximum workweek
 for all public sector employees rom 40 hours to 35 hours by 1999, beDin.ing with
 a reduction to 39 hours in 1996. These working hour limits are respected in practyie.
 Workers receive 22 days of paid annual leave per year, plus vacation and Christmas
 ("13th month") bonuses.
 The Ministry of Employment and Social Security monitors compliance through its
 regional inspectors.
 Employers are legally responsible for accidents at work and are required by law
 to carry accident insurance. An existing body of legislation regulates safety and
 health, but labor unions continue to argue for stiffer laws. The General Directorate
 of Hygiene and Labor Security develops safety standards, and the General Labor
 rnspectorate is responsible for enforcement, but the Inspectorate lacks sufficient
 funds and inspectors to combat the problem of work accidents effectively. A rel-
 atively large proportion of accidents is in the construction industry. Poor environ-
 mental controls in textile production also cause considerable concern. While the abil-
 ity of workers to remove themselves from situations where these hazards exist is
 limited, it is difficult to fire workers for any reason. Workers injured on the job rare-
 ly initiate lawsuits.
 
 
 1071
