 PORTUGAL
 Portugal's parliamentary political system is genuinely
 democratic and enjoys broad popular support. Civil rights are
 outlined in the Constitution in-accordance with the Universal
 Declaration of Human Rights. The President of the Republic
 and the members of the legislative Assembly of the Republic
 are freely elected by secret ballot. Former Prime Minister
 Mario Soares was elected as Portugal's first civilian President
 in 60 years in 1986; in 1987 Prime Minister Cavaco Silva was
 reelected with a majority in the Assembly.
 Although large segments of the economy were nationalized in
 the wake of the 1974 revolution, recent governments have
 opened the banking sector to private competition and have"
 permftted private participation in some state-run companies.
 The Government proposes to revise the Constitution in 1987-88
 to remove the current ban on denationalization. If it is
 successful, a step-by-step process will begin to open other
 state-run firms in such key industries as pulp/paper,
 petrochemicals, and the press/media to majority private
 participation.
 There have been no terrorist attacks in Portugal since July
 1986. Prior to that time, however, terrorists occasionally
 struck both Portuguese businessmen and U.S. or NATO targets in
 Portugal. To combat terrorism, the Government set up in 1986
 the first civilian/military intelligence service since the
 abolition of the secret police after the 1974 revolution.
 An ombudsman, elected by the National Assembly to serve a
 5-year term, is Portugal's chief civil and human rights
 officer. Any citizen may apply to the Ombudsman for relief.
 He receives about 3,500 complaints annually, the vast majority
 of which involve cases of alleged maladministration by the
 cumbersomePortuguese bureaucracy.
 The human rights scene in 1987 was stable. The Government and
 its institutions continued to act in a manner consistent with
 overall respect for human rights.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 Portugal experiences a low level of violence, and government-
 sanctioned political killings do not occur. In recent years,
 a radical terrorist group, FP-25 (translated as the "Popular
 Forces of the 25th of April," referring to the April 1974
 revolution), has claimed responsibility for several murders,
 armed attacks on Portuguese nationals, and numerous bombings
 and attempted bombings of Portuguese and foreign (U.S. and
 NATO) installations. Active law enforcement efforts and the
 absence of public support have sharply cut into the FP-25*s
 ability to carry out violent operations during the last 2
 years.
 b. Disappearance
 The police and armed forces did not arrest anyone secretly,
 nor was anyone abducted by terrorist organizations in 1987.
 
 
 1001
 PORTUGAL
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment.
 The Constitution forbids torture and the use of evidence
 obtained under torture in criminal proceedings. It also
 prohibits inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.
 According to the Ombudsman, in 1987 there were no allegations
 of the use of torture or other cruel, inhuman, or degrading
 treatment or punishment.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, Exile, or Forced Labor
 According to Portuguese law, a prosecuting judge reviews cases
 against persons arrested and accused of a crime to determine
 whether they should be detained or released on bail. No one
 may be held for more than 48 hours unless a prosecuting judge
 orders preventive detention which is limited to a maximum of
 4 months for each crime. Detention beyond the authorized 4
 months, however, is not unusual in capital crimes such as
 murder or armed robbery because of delays in Portugal's
 cumbersome, backlogged judicial system. Detainees and persons
 in preventive detention have access to lawyers, who are able
 to protect their clients' rights through legal channels and
 through publicity in the free press.
 Exile and incommunicado detention are illegal and not
 practiced in Portugal. Forced labor does not exist.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Portugal has an independent and impartial judicial system.
 All trials are public except those which may offend the
 dignity of the victim, such as in cases involving sexual abuse
 of children. The accused is presumed innocent until convicted.
 A clear procedural distinction exists between the arrest and
 trial of an individual. A panel of three judges (which does
 not include the prosecuting judge) presides over cases which
 go to trial. A ministerial delegate assists the judges in
 reviewing the evidence. At the request of the accused, a jury
 may be used in trials for major crimes. The judges or jury
 may render the verdict; sentence may be passed only in the
 presence of the defense attorney.
 Portugal holds no political prisoners, although some radical
 leftist opponents of the regime have claimed that certain
 persons imprisoned for participation in terrorist organizations
 are political prisoners. These have included 64 persons found
 guilty of membership in FP-25 and sentenced to terms of from
 10 to 17 years in May 1987 at the conclusion of a 2-year trial.
 Most noteworthy of these was Otelo Saraiva de Carvalho, leader
 of the April 25, 1974 coup and mastermind of the shadowy,
 terrorist "Global Project" organization, whose program
 included overthrow of the Government by armed rebellion.
 The convictions, which were widely viewed as dealing a major
 blow to terrorist operations in Portugal and strengthening
 Portuguese democratic institutions, were generally welcomed by
 the Portuguese press, public, and legal community. At a
 September 1987 conference in Portugal sponsored by the
 partisan "National and International Committees for Justice
 for Otelo," however, former U.S. Attorney General Ramsey Clark
 criticized the law under which Otelo Carvalho was convicted
 and alleged that both human rights violations and judicial
 irregularities had occurred. Clark's charges, which received
 
 
 1002
 PORTUGAL
 considerable press coverage in Portugal, were dismissed by the
 Public Prosecutor, lawyers, and local human rights observers
 as reflecting "profound ignorance" about the trial and
 Portugal's independent judicial-system.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 According to the Ombudsman, there were no reports in 1987 of
 governmental intrusion into the private life of citizens. The
 State does not tamper with private correspondence or
 telephones. Wiretapping requires a court order. The
 Constitution forbids forced entry into homes and searches
 without a judicial warrant. In addition, entry into a
 persdn's homq at night requires the consent of the occupant.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Freedom of speech and the press is provided for by the
 Constitution and respected by the State. The constitutionally
 mandated Council of Social Communication acts as a watchdog to
 protect freedom of speech and access to the media. The
 Council, whose members are elected by the Assembly of the
 Republic, makes recommendations to the Assembly and has
 enforcement powers (which have never been exercised). The
 opposition is free to voice its point of view, and the State
 tolerates criticism, with two restrictions:
 First, "Fascist organizations" are prohibited by law, but
 elements on both the extreme right and left have participated
 in elections without state interference.
 Second, a person may be punished legally for "insulting" civil
 or military authorities if such an "insult" was intended to
 undermine the rule of law. There were no prosecutions for
 "insult" in 1987.
 Although the State indirectly subsidizes the press (through
 its postrevolutionary nationalization of the banks, to which
 the press is heavily indebted), it does not control editorial
 comment. The entire spectrum of political thought is
 represented in the Portuguese press. The Cavaco Silva
 Government's economic program is also expected to eliminate
 government subsidies to and ownership of some of the print
 media. Obstacles to the conclusion of these sales are
 administrative and economic rather than political or
 ideological.
 The State also owns Portugal's two television channels and two
 of the three national radio stations. Under the new
 Government's program, television and radio are expected to be
 opened up to private channels. In principle, the Government
 does not control television or radio programming. Since it
 appoints'the broadcast media's administrators, however, the
 Government probably has some indirect influence on programming.
 Opposition parties sometimes charge that television or radio
 ignores or distorts their views and activities. Nonetheless,
 as was particularly evident during the 1987 election campaign,
 all views are aired, and political parties, trade unions, and
 other organizations have a right to periodic access to
 exclusive television time after the evening news program.
 
 
 1003
 PORTUGAL
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Persons have the right, in law and practice, to associate
 formally or informally, to promote nonviolent causes, and to
 protest government policies. Public meetings or protests
 require 24-hour advance notice to the civil governor of the-
 area in which the event is to be held. Permission is
 routinely granted. Official registration of new political
 parties requires 5,000 signatures.
 Workers have the constitutional right to establish unions by
 profession or industry. Collective bargaining is guaranteed
 by law and practiced in both the public and private sectors.
 Issues such as wages, working conditions, and fringe benefits
 are regularly the subject of collective bargaining. Strikes
 are permitted for any reason, including political causes.
 Neither the Government nor unions publish membership
 statistics, but approximately 45 percent of Portugal's work
 force is unionized. Unions are free of government control but
 are closely associated with political parties.
 There are two labor federations in-Portugal. The General
 Confederation of Portuguese Workers (CGTP), which is
 controlled by the Communist Party, is active in Communist-
 sponsored causes. The General Union of Workers (UGT) is a
 pluralist democratic union affiliated with the International
 Confederation of Free Trade Unions and the European Trade
 Union Congress. UGT leaders are associated with either the
 Socialist or Social Democratic Parties, and some have been
 elected to the Assembly of the Republic. Membership in the
 two federations is roughly equal, although the CGTP has been
 gradually losing ground from its once prominent position after
 the 1974 revolution. Since both federations want to represent
 Portugal in the International Labor Organization, the Minister
 of Labor has decided that they will do so in alternate years.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Portugal. does not have a state religion, and the Government
 does not interfere with the free practice of religion,
 missionary work, or religious publications. Organized
 religions may freely establish places of worship, train their
 clergy, and proselytize. To qualify as a tax-exempt
 institution, an organized religion must legally establish
 itself as a nonprofit, private society.
 Roman Catholicism is the prevailing religion in Portugal, and
 Catholic religious instruction is offered as an elective
 course in public schools. Success in a civil, military,
 professional, or political career does not depend upon
 adherence to a religious creed. There were no reported cases
 of religious persecution in 1987.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 The Constitution ensures freedom of movement, foreign travel,
 and emigration and places no formal restraints on domestic
 travel or on the right of an individual to change domicile.
 Some currency restrictions affecting foreign travel,
 instituted during past periods of balance of payments
 difficulties, remain in force although some have been
 liberalized, and the Government is considering further
 liberalization. Many Portuguese emigrate each year for
 economic reasons or family reunification. A large number of
 
 
 1004
 PORTUGAL
 these emigrants eventually return to Portugal, however, to
 resettle or retire. Citizenship is not revoked for political
 reasons.
 A humane refugee program was established in Portugal by law in
 1980. Displaced persons who qualify as refugees under the
 United Nations definition are given permanent resident status
 and work permits. In practice, displaced persons are not
 forced to return to the country from which they fled.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Portugal is a multiparty, participatory democracy in which
 candidates for the presidency or for the Assembly of the
 Republic are freely nominated and elected. The unicameral
 Assembly is the legislative body with the Prime Minister as
 Head of Government. The President and the members of the
 Assembly are elected by secret ballot and universal adult
 suffrage. Opposition parties and candidates operate freely
 and enjoy access to the media. The United Popular Front party
 (FUP), however, was excluded from participating in elections
 because of evidence linking the party with the terrorist
 organization FP-25. General elections are held at least every
 4 years. The President has a 5-year mandate and may serve no
 more than two consecutive terms.
 The-population is predominantly European and ethnically
 homogeneous. Portugal has a small African minority, most of
 whose members emigrated to Portugal when the former Portuguese
 colonies became independent following the 1974 Revolution.
 There are no restrictions on political participation by
 minority groups.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 Portugal cooperates with independent outside investigations of
 human rights conditions and actively participates in the
 Council of Europe's monitoring of human rights. Amnesty
 International, the Portuguese branch of the International
 Commission of Jurists, and other private international human
 rights groups operate freely in Portugal.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 There are no laws discriminating against any racial, ethnic,
 or religious group nor complaints of any such group benefiting
 from a privileged status in Portugal.
 The Civil Code guarantees full legal equality for women in
 accordance with the Constitution. Women play an active role
 in political parties but remain underrepresented in party and
 government leadership positions. A woman served as Prime
 Minister in 1979 and was a serious candidate for the
 presidency in 1985. Currently, women occupy 1 of 16
 ministerial positions and 2 of 31 secretary of state (junior
 minister) positions. Women are steadily increasing their
 representation in universities, business, science, government,
 and the professions. Traditional attitudes of male dominance
 persist in some areas but are changing gradually.
 
 
 1005
 PORTUGAL
 CONDITIONS OF LABOR
 A nationwide monthly minimum wage for full-time workers was
 first established in 1974 in Portugal. Minimum wages for
 rural workers and domestic employees were legislatively
 established in 1977 and 1978 respectively. With the exception
 of 1982, minimum wages have increased every year. Workers are
 required by law to be granted an individual written contract
 which must include their professional category and salary, the
 work site, the starting date, and the duration of the contract
 (in the case of temporary workers). Employers are required to
 contribute to an employee's social security fund. Legislation
 limits work schedules to 8 hours per day and 48 hours per
 week. Overtime is limited to 2 hours per work period, up to
 120 annually. Work on a normal day off is restricted to 8
 hours. These limits are respected in practice.
 Child labor is not a general problem in Portugal, but there
 appear to be some cases of companies operating outside the
 law. The CGTP has charged that a number of "clandestine"
 companies in the textile, shoe, and construction industries in
 Northern Portugal exploit child labor. The Government has
 acknowledged that abuses exist and has vowed to eliminate them.
 
 
 1006
