 PORTUGAL*
 The Republic of Portugal is a parliamentary democracy with a
 president and legislative assembly freely elected by secret
 ballot. Former Prime Minister Mario Soares was elected
 Portugal's first civilian President in 60 years in 1986. In
 1987 Prime Minister Cavaco Silva was reelected and formed the
 first one-party majority government since the 1974 revolution.
 Internal security is primarily the responsibility of the
 Ministries of Justice and Internal Administration. Security
 forces are fully controlled by and responsive to the
 Government.
 Portugal has a-market-based-economy and is a member of the
 European Economic Community. An increasing proportion of the
 population is employed in industry and services, while
 employment in the agricultural sector continues to decline.
 Unemployment in 1990 was low by European standards at under 6
 percent.
 The human rights situation in 1990 was good. The Government
 of Portugal and its institutions continue to act in a manner
 consistent with respect for human rights. Civil rights are
 outlined in the Constitution in accordance with the Universal
 Declaration of Human Rights. An Ombudsman, chosen by the
 Assembly of the Republic (legislature) to serve a 4-year term,
 is Portugal's chief civil and human rights officer. Any
 citizen may apply to him for relief. The Ombudsman receives
 about 3,000 complaints annually; the vast majority concern
 cases of alleged maladministration by Portugal's cumbersome
 bureaucracy and delays in the judicial process.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial killing
 Government-sanctioned political killings do not occur. There
 were no-killings attributed to domestic terrorist groups.
 b. Disappearance
 Government or police authorities do not abduct, secretly
 arrest, or otherwise illegally detain persons.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 The Constitution forbids torture, inhuman, or degrading
 treatment or punishment, and the use of evidence obtained
 under torture in criminal proceedings. There are, however,
 occasional complaints of mistreatment by police and prison
 authorities, which are investigated by the Ombudsman. In its
 1990 report, Amnesty International cited two such cases, in
 one of which a prisoner was alleged to have died in June 1989
 of injuries received during a beating by prison guards. The
 Procurator General's office initiated judicial and
 administrative inquiries, and the case continued under
 'investigation and was being monitored by the Ombudsman.
 * A separate report for Macau, a dependency of Portugal off
 the southern coast of China, follows this report on Portugal.
 
 
 1244
 PORTUGAL
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Under Portuguese law, an investigating judge reviews the case
 against a person under arrest to determine whether that person
 should be detained, released on bail, or released outright.
 Persons may not be held for more than 48 hours without
 appearing before an investigating judge. Preventive detention
 is limited to a maximum of 6 months for each crime. If a
 formal charge has not been filed within that period, the
 person detained must be released. In cases involving serious
 crimes, such as murder or armed robbery, or in cases involving
 more than one suspect, preventive detention is permitted for
 up to 2 years and may be extended by a judge to 3 years in
 extraordinary circumstances. A suspect must be brought to
 trial within 18 months of his or her being formally charged.
 Detainees have access to lawyers, who are generally effective
 in protecting their clients' rights.
 Exile and incommunicado detention are illegal and not
 practiced in Portugal.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Portugal has an independent and impartial judicial system.
 All trials are public except those which may offend the
 dignity of the victim, such as in cases involving the sexual
 abuse of children. The accused is presumed innocent until
 proven guilty. In trials for serious crimes, a panel of three
 judges (which does not include the investigating judge)
 presides. In trials for lesser crimes, a single judge
 presides. A ministerial delegate assists the judges in
 reviewing the evidence. At the request of the accused, a jury
 may be used in trials for major crimes. Sentence may be
 passed only in the presence of the defense attorney.
 Portugal holds no political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 The Constitution forbids forced entry into homes and searches
 without a judicial warrant. In addition, entry into a
 person's home at night requires the consent of the occupant.
 The State does not intercept private correspondence or place
 wiretaps except with a court order.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Freedom of speech and press is provided for in the
 Constitution and respected by the State. The constitutionally
 mandated High Commission for Social Communication acts as a
 watchdog to protect freedom of speech and access to the
 media. The Commission, whose members are chosen by the
 Government and by the Assembly of the Republic, makes
 recommendations to the Assembly and has enforcement powers.
 The academic community is free to express its views.
 "Fascist organizations" are prohibited by law, although some
 small, extreme rightwing groups function without
 interference. In addition, a person may be prosecuted for
 "insulting" certain state authorities if the "insult" is
 intended to undermine the rule of law. There were no
 prosecutions for "insult" in 1990.
 
 
 1245
 PORTUGAL
 Although the State owns both television channels in Portugal,
 the provision of the Constitution making television a state
 monopoly was removed in 1990. Legislation to authorize the
 operation of two private television stations was approved in
 July. In principle, the Government does not exercise direct
 control over the state-owned television system, though it does
 wield considerable influence through personnel appointments.
 opposition parties sometimes charge that the state network
 ignores or distorts opposition views and activities. Station
 news directors defend their decisions as based on editorial
 judgments, not political partisanship. All political parties
 use their legal right to "antenna time" during prime viewing
 and listening hours.
 In 1989 the Government passed legislation permitting private
 radio stations to operate for the first time. As of October
 1990, more than 250 such local stations had been authorized
 and were on the air.
 The entire spectrum of political thought is represented in the
 Portuguese press. There is no press censorship. A variety of
 new national newspapers and other publications have appeared
 during the last several years. Their success or failure is
 determined by economic and editorial competitiveness. As a
 result of postrevolutionary nationalization of the banks, to
 which many of the newspapers were indebted, the State acquired
 title to a number of newspapers. These papers were state
 owned but editorially independent. The Government has
 divested itself of all but one of these publications, and the
 last is expected to be sold before 1991.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Persons have the right, in law and practice, to associate
 formally or informally to promote nonviolent causes. Public
 meetings or protests require 24-hour advance notice to the
 civil governor of the region in which the event is to be
 held. Permission is routinely granted. The official
 registration of a new political party requires 5,GO
 signatures.
 c. Freedom of Reliqion-
 Portugal does not have a state religion. The Government does
 not interfere with the free-practice of religion, missionary
 work, or religious publications. Organized religious groups
 may establish places of worship, train clergy, and proselytize
 without government interference. These freedoms extend to
 foreign clergy, many of whom work in Portugal. To qualify as
 tax-exempt institutions, religious groups must be established
 as nonprofit, private- societies.
 Roman Catholicism is the predominant religion in Portugal.
 Catholic religious instruction is offered as an elective
 course in public schools. Other denominations offer religious
 education in their own institutions without interference.
 Success in a civil, military, professional, or political
 career does .not depend upon adherence to a religious creed.
 There were no reported cases of religious persecution.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 The Constitution provides for the right of freedom of movement,
 foreign travel, and emigration. There are no restraints on
 
 
 1246
 
 PORTUGAL
 domestic travel or on the right of a person to change his
 domicile. Some currency restrictions still affect foreign
 travel. Citizenship is not revoked for political reasons.
 Displaced persons who qualify as refugees as defined by the
 United Nations are entitled to permanent resident status and
 work permits. Displaced persons are not forced to return to
 the country from which they fled.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Portugal is a multiparty, participatory democracy. Candidates
 for president and for legislative, regional, and municipal
 offices are freely nominated and elected by secret ballot on
 the basis of universal suffrage. The unicameral Assembly of
 the Republic is the legislative body. The Prime Minister is
 the head of the Government. Opposition parties and candidates
 operate freely and enjoy access to the media. General
 elections are held at least once every 4 years. The President
 has a 5-year mandate and may not serve more than two
 consecutive terms.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 International and local human rights groups operate freely in
 Portugal. The Government cooperates with independent outside
 investigations of human rights conditions and actively
 participates in the monitoring of human rights by the Council
 of Europe.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 There are no laws discriminating against any racial, ethnic,
 or religious group; nor do such groups have a privileged
 status in Portugal.
 The civil code provides for full legal equality for women.
 Women are increasing their representation in universities,
 business, science, government, and the professions.
 Traditional attitudes of male dominance persist but are
 changing gradually. The Commission on the Status of Women, an
 official organization established in 1976, is a leading
 advocate of women's rights.
 Various women's groups in Portugal have drawn attention to the
 largely hidden problem of violence against women, particularly
 within the family. Portuguese law provides for criminal
 penalties in cases of violence between husbands and wives
 without referring specifically to violence against wives.
 Women's groups point out that traditional attitudes discourage
 many women who suffer such violence from seeking recourse in
 the judicial system, and complain that Portugal lacks
 institutions established specifically to provide relief to
 battered women. There is no apparent reluctance on the part
 of the judicial system to prosecute suspects accused of
 abusing women, but it is probable that many victims do not
 seek recourse in the courts.
 
 
 1247
 
 PORTUGAL
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 Workers in both the private and public sectors have the right
 to associate freely and to establish committees in the
 workplace "to defend their interests." The Constitution
 provides for the right to establish unions by profession or
 industry. Trade union associations are guaranteed the right
 to participate in the preparation of labor legislation.
 Strikes are permitted for any reason, including political
 causes. Eighty-nine strikes occurred between January and
 March. In February an attempted strike by air traffic
 controllers was forestalled by government requisition.
 Strikes are common and are generally resolved through direct
 negotiations between management and the unions involved.
 Lockouts are prohibited. These constitutional guarantees are
 respected in practice.
 Neither the Government nor unions publish membership
 statistics. It is estimated that approximately one-third of
 Portugal's work force is unionized. There are two labor
 federations. The General Confederation of Portuguese Workers
 Intersindical (CGTP-IN) is dominated by the Communist Party
 and engages freely in cooperative activities with the
 Communist-controlled World Federation of Trade Unions. The
 General Union of Workers (UGT) is a pluralist democratic
 federation affiliated with the International Confederation of
 Free Trade Unions and the European Trade Union Confederation.
 The UGT and the CGTP participate jointly in the annual
 meetings of the International Labor Organization.
 Both federations and their affiliates function free from
 government control but are closely associated with political
 parties. The CGTP-IN generally supports the Communist Party's
 policies and causes. UGT leaders are associated with either
 the Socialist or Social Democratic parties. Although some UGT
 leaders serve in the Assembly of the Republic, the federation
 pursues a generally independent path that occasionally puts it
 in conflict with the Socialist and/or Social Democratic-
 parties. The labor movement in Portugal exercises significant
 influence on social and economic policymaking.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 Unions are free to organize without government or employer
 interference. Collective bargaining is guaranteed by the
 Constitution and practiced extensively in the public and
 private sectors. When collective bargaining disputes lead to
 prolonged strike action in key sectors (for example, health
 and transportation), the Government is empowered to order the
 workers back to work for a specific period. The Government
 has rarely done so in practice. When collective bargaining
 fails, the Government, at the request of either management or
 labor, may appoint a mediator. Union officials and members
 are protected by law against antiunion discrimination, and
 this law is observed in practice. Complaints are promptly
 examined by the General Directorate of Labor. Portugal has no
 export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 Forced labor is illegal and does not exist.
 
 
 1248
 PORTUGAL
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 The minimum employment age is 14 years. The Government has
 proposed raising the minimum age to 15 years, and the trade
 union confedefations have proposed 16 years as the minimum.
 The UGT and CGTP-IN have charged that a number of
 "clandestine" companies in the textile, shoe, and construction
 industries in northern Portugal exploit child labor. The
 Government acknowledges that abuses exist and has promised to
 act to curb them, although to date it has yet to allocate
 resources sufficient to address the problem. The General
 Labor Inspectorate is responsible for enforcement of child
 labor laws but suffers from a lack of money and an inadequate
 number of inspectors.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 A national monthly minimum wage for full-time workers was
 first established in 1974. Minimum wages for rural workers
 and domestic employees were legislatively established in 1977
 and 1978 respectively. Except in 1982, minimum wages have
 been increased every year. The current minimum monthly wage
 for general workers is $250; for agricultural workers, $243;
 and for domestics, $200. The minimum wage is generally
 enforced. Even with rent control and various social
 assistance subsidies, it is difficult for a single income
 family to maintain a decent standard of living on a minimum
 wage income, particularly in urban areas. Workers receive a
 Christmas bonus equal to 1 month's salary.
 Workers are required by law to be granted an individual
 written contract which must include their professional
 category and salary, the work site, the starting date, and the
 duration of the contract (in the case of temporary workers).
 Employers are required to contribute to an employee's social
 security fund. Current legislation limits regular hours of
 work to 8 hours daily and 48 hours per week, and the
 Government has submitted a bill to reduce the maximum workweek
 to 44 hours. In practice, the average workweek is 42 hours.
 Overtime is limited to 2 hours per work period, up to 160
 hours annually. Work on a normal day off is restricted to 8
 hours. These limits are respected in practice. Workers are
 guaranteed 21 days of paid annual leave per year. The
 Ministry of Employment and Social Security monitors compliance
 through its regional inspectors.
 Employers are legally responsible for accidents at work and
 are required by law to carry accident insurance. Portugal has
 developed a body of legislation that regulates safety and
 health. Labor unions consider these regulations inadequate
 and continue to press for stiffer legislation. The General
 Directorate of Hygiene and Labor Security develops safety
 standards, and the General Inspectorate of Labor is
 responsible for enforcement. Accidents average between 70,000
 and 75,000 per quarter. These figures have focused government
 attention particularly on the construction industry, but the
 General Inspectorate of Labor lacks sufficient funds and
 inspectors to combat the problem effectively.
 
 
 1249
