 PORTUGAL
 The Portuguese Republic is a constitutional democracy with a President, an inde-
 pendent judiciary, a Prime Minister, and a Legislative Assembly freely elected by
 secret ballot in multiparty elections. '
 Internal security is primarily the responsibility of the Ministries of Justice and
 Internal Administration. Security forces are controlled by, and responsive to, the
 Government.
 Portugal has a market-based economy and is a member of the European Union.
 An increasing proportion of the labor force is employed in services, while employ-
 ment in agriculture continues to decline and has been static or declining slightly in
 the industrial sector.
 Citizens enjoy a broad range of civil and other human rights, which the Govern-
 ment generally respects. Civil rights are outlined in the Constitution with specific
 reference to the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. The principal human
 rights problem is the occasional beating of detainees or prisoners by police or prison
 personnel. Credible although infrequent reports of this problem continued, as did re-
 ports of poor conditions in prisons. Violence against women, child labor, and dis-
 crimination against Roma are problems.
 1A separate report on Macau, reconized by both China and Portugal as Chinese territory
 under Portuguese administration, follows this report.
 
 
 1228
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no reports of political or
 other extrajudicial killings.
 A Public Security Police officer in the city of Evora was detained in December
 1996 after fatally shooting a suspected burglar at the time of arrest. The police offi-
 cer's apprehension and his subsequent beating at the hands of inmates were pro-
 tested  y police across the country. These events led to the dismissal of the head
 of the Public Security Police for ailing to maintain discipline and to the appoint-
 ment in January of the first nonilitary chief of that organization. The inspector
 general of the Interior Ministry is investigating the auspicious deaths of two other
 detainees in late 1996.
 The trial of a National Republican Guard (GNR) officer, Fernando Alexio dos
 Santos, who confessed to the highly ublicized 1996 killing and decapitation of a de-
 tainee, resulted in a sentence in December of 17 years in prison. Another GNR
 member who was present at the killing was sentenced to 6 years in prison, and a
 third soldier received a 5-year suspended sentence. Four other accused GNR mem-
 bers were found innocent.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution forbids torture, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment,
 and the use of evidence obtained under torture in criminal proceedings. An inde-
 pendent Ombudsman, chosen by the Legislative Assembly (parliament), investigates
 complaints of mistreatment by police and prison authorities. The police inspector
 general conducts internal investigations in cases of alleged mistreatment.
 In December 1996, delegates from Amnesty International (Al) met with the Presi-
 dent and with senior government ministers to discuss continuing mistreatment of
 detainees by the police. Al and the Council of Europe's Committee for the Preven-
 tion of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment cite kicking,
 punching, and beating with truncheons or other blunt objects as the most common
 forms of mistreatment. Both organizations were critical of the slow pace of inves-
 tigations into allegations of mistreatment. According to civil rights groups, the vic-
 tims of abuse are often African immigrants and other non-Eurpeans.
 However, the inspector general of the Interior Ministry released a rert in No-
 vember citing improvements in the treatment of detainees by the police. In 200 sur-
 prise visits to jails and prisons by insptors, no recent cases of police violence were
 uncovered. The report added that "this is the opposite of 1996, one of the worst
 years for police brutality .... Police officers receive training in human rights and
 proprer investigative proedure.
 The 1996 case of a magistrate who claimed to be mistreated by the GNR ended
 with the magistrate's dismissal from his position and his conviction on charges of
 drunk driving and assault of a police officer, for which he was fined.
 The case of Paulo Portugal of Almada, who brought charges against six GN offi-
 cers for alleged brutality in 1991, was finally resolved in 1996, w hen the judge ruled
 in May that all charges-including countercharges by the GNR officers-be drpped.
 Prison conditions are poor. The Council of Europe Committee and the national di-
 rector of prisons identified overcrowding as the main problem, which the Govern-
 ment plans to remedy through a combination of new prisons and the increased use
 of noncustedial penalties. A 1996 report by the independent Ombudsman identified
 sanitary conditions, medical care, security, and food quality as problem areas. Pris-
 oners complain of insufficient heating during the cool, wet winters.
 The Government permits prison visits by human rights monitors. Human rights
 organizations report no difficulties in gaining access to inmates at detention facili-
 ties.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-Under the law, an investigating judge de-
 termines whether an arrested person should be detained, released on bail, or re-
 leased outright. Persons may not be held more than 48 hours without appearing be-
 fore an investigating judge. Investigative detention is limited to a maximum of 6
 months for each suspected crime. If a formal charge has not been filed within that
 period, the detainee must be released. In cases of serious crimes, for example, mur-
 der or armed robbery, or of more than one suspect, investigative detention may last
 for up to 2 years and may be extended by a judge to 3 years in extraordinary cir-
 cumstances. A suspect in investigative detention must be brought to trial within 18
 months of being formally charged. If a suspect is not in detention, there is no speci-
 fied period for going to trial. A detainee has access to lawyers; the State assumes
 the cost if necessary.
 Exile is illegal and is not practiced.
 
 
 1229
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The judiciary is independent and impartial. The
 court system, laid out in the Constitution, consists of a Constitutional Court, a Su-
 preme Court of Justice, and judicial courts of first and second instance. There is also
 a supreme court of administration, which deals with administrative and tax dis-
 putes, and which is supported by lower administrative courts. An audit court is in
 the Ministry of Finance.
 All trials are public except those which may offend the dignity of the victim, such
 as in cases of sexual abuse of children. The accused is presumed innocent. In trials
 for serious crimes, a panel of three judges presides. For lesser crimes, a single judge
 presides. At the request of the accused, a jury may be used in trials for major
 crimes; in practice, requests for jury trials are extremely rare.
 The judicial system provides citizens with a fair legal process. It has been much
 criticized, however, for a large backlog of pending trials resulting from inefficient
 functioning of the courts.
 There were no reports of political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Constitution forbids such practices, and the Government respects these provisions
 in practice. Violations are subject to effective legal sanctions.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-Freedom of speech and the press is provided
 for in the Constitution, and the Government respects these rights in practice. An
 independent press, an effective judiciary, and a functioning democratic political sys-
 tem combine to ensure freedom of speech and the press, including academic free-
 dom.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The law provides for these
 rights, and the authorities generally respect these provisions.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for freedom of religion, and the
 Government respects these rights in practice. Although the overwhelming majority
 of citizens are Roman Catholic, the President underscored the importance of reli-
 gious tolerance and diversity through such gestures as attending in March the open-
 ing of an Ismailite center in Lisbon.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Constitution and laws provide for these rights, and the Govern-
 ment respects them in practice.
 The Government cooperates with the United Nations High Commissioner for Ref-
 ugees and other humanitarian organizations in assisting refugees. Persons who
 qualify as refugees are entitled to residence permits. The issue of first asylum did
 not arise in 1997. There were no reports of forced expulsions of persons having a
 valid claim to refugee status.
 However, the Government almost never rules that an asylum seeker has a "valid"
 claim. During 1997, 220 persons filed for asylum, most of them from Zaire, Liberia,
 and Sierra Leone, and none were found to have valid claims. Persons arriving at
 the airport were returned either to their country of origin or to the country from
 which their flights originated. Persons already in the country were given 15 days
 to depart voluntarily. Of these, most remained in the country clandestinely.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Poitugal is a multiparty, parliamentary democracy. The Constitution provides
 citizens with the right to change their government peacefully, and citizens exercise
 this right in practice through periodic, free, and fair elections on the basis of univer-
 sal suffrage.
 Women and minorities have full political rights. Women head 2 of 17 ministries:
 Health and Environment. Women are represented in all major political parties but
 constitute only 13 percent of the deputies in the legislature, where 3 of the 15 com-
 mittees are chaired by women. Race is rarely an issue in politics. Persons of minor-
 ity origin have achieved prominence in politics.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 A number of local and international groups operate freely, investigating and pub-
 lisliing their findings on human rights cases. Government officials are generally co-
 operative, although most groups complain of slow investigations or remedial actions.
 
 
 1230
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution forbids discrimination based on ancestry, sex, race, language, or-
 igm, religion, political or ideological convictions, education, economic situation, or
 social condition, and the Government enforces these prohibitions.
 Women.-Domestic and other violence against women is reportedly a common but
 hidden problem for which few seek legal recourse. The Portuguese Association for
 the Support of Victims received 400 calls for assistance during 1996. With greater
 p ublicity and a new tll-free telephone line, over 700 women sought help or shelter
 from the Association in 1997. The law prvides for criminal penalties in cases of vio-
 lence by a spouse. However, traditional societal attitudes discourage many battered
 women from recourse to the judicial system.
 In March the Goveroment enacted the "Global Plan for Equal Opportunity," which
 is aimed at improving social, political, and workplace conditions for women. The
 new law also addresses violence against women and provides funds for new women's
 shelters, a hot line for battered women, and training for police officials. The Govern-
 ment's high commissioner for the promotion of equality and of the family conducted
 an awareness campaign to raise the profile of domestic abuse. A subsidiary organi-
 zation, the Commission on Equality and the Rights of Women, initiated a program
 in Lisbon to provide free legal advice to victims of abuse. The judicial system snows
 no apparent reluctance to prosecute suspects accused of abusing women.
 In March a special parliamentary session was held to discuss the problem of traf-
 ficking in women. Speakers noted that trafficking involves both Portuguese women
 being taken abroad, usually to Spain, and foreign women being brought into Por-
 tugal. Press reports indicate that about half of the women in organized prostitution
 rings are foreign nationals, usually from Latin America or central Europe. The
 deaths of eight women in an arson attack on a nightclub by a rival nightclub owner
 focused public attention on the problem. Prostitution is closely linked to other types
 of organized crime, especially international narcotics trafficking. Specific legislation
 prohioits forced prostitution and trafficking in human beings. "The Nest, a non-
 governmental organization, operates economic and social recovery programs for
 prostitutes.
 The Civil Code provides for full legal equality for women. Sexual harassment, an
 issue gaining public attention, is covered in the Penal Code as a sex crime, but only
 if perpetrated by a superior and in the workplace. As in the case of violence, socially
 ingrained attitudes discourage many women from taking advantage of their legal
 protection.
 The Commission on Equality in the Workplace and in Employment, made up of
 representatives of the Government, employers' organizations, and labor unions, is
 empowered to examine complaints of sexual harassment but receives few. It does
 review numerous complaints of discrimination by employers against pregnant work-
 ers and new mothers, who are protected by law.
 Women are increasingly represented in universities, business, science, and the
 professions. Traditional attitudes of male dominance persist but are changing gradu-
 all."ulo                                           Asd         thEuo      a
 hildren.-Nine years of education are compulsory. A study by the European
 Commission indicated that only 50 percent of children receive preschool education,
 compared with at least 75 percent in most European Union countries. To counter
 this problem, the Ministry of Education instituted a pilot project on early childhood
 education in the Algarve region. The Ministry plans to expand the program to the
 national level, if it proves successful during the 1997 schoolyear. The Government's
 goal is to provide preschool education for 60 to 70 percent of 3- and 4-year-olds and
 90 percent of 5-year-olds by the year 2000.
 The National Children's Rights Commission was inaugurated in January with the
 mission of implementing the principles of the International Convention on the
 Rights of the Child. The Commission operates under the aegis of the High Commis-
 sioner for the Promotion of Equality and of the Family and includes representatives
 from the Ministries of Justice, Health, Education, and Solidarity, as well as from
 leading nongovemental organizations. The quasi-independent Institute for the
 Support of Chldren organized a network of 48 nongovenmental organizations dedi-
 cated to helping at-risk youth. The University of Minho's Institute for the Study of
 Children is a research center dedicated solely to the study of children's issues.
 There is no societal pattern of abuse of cildren, although child labor remains a
 problem (see Section 6.d.). A pdophile ring was uncovered in Madeira in the fall
 involving Madeiran children and Madeiran, Belgian, and Duteh adults.
 People With Disabilities.-There is no discrimination against disabled persons in
 employment, education, or the provision of other state services. Their access to pub-
 
 
 1231
 lic facilities is mandated by legislation, which is  nerally complied with. However,
 no such legislation covers private businesses or other facilities.
 National/Racial lEthnic Minorities.-The principal minority groups are immi-
 grants, legal and illegal, from Portugal's former African colonies. There is also a
 resident Romani population. Fifteen skinheads were convicted in June for the 1995
 beating death of a Cape Verdean immigrant; they received jail sentences ranging
 from 2 to 18 years. The law permits victims and antiracism associations to partici-
 pate in race-related criminal trials by lodging criminal complaints, retaining their
 own lawyers, and calling witnesses.
 A Romani family forced to move in 1996 in the face of local hostility was evicted
 by another municipal government following complaints by local residents that al-
 leged Romani involvement in criminal activity. In April all adult members of this
 family were jailed on drug charges, although one package of alleged narcotics was
 later revealed to be flour. The family patriarch accused the police of unfairly
 targeting him because a family member had earlier implicated 13 National Repub-
 lican Guard members in narcotics trafficking. Press coverage of the incident focused
 on the fact that the Government's High Commissioner for Immigration and Ethnic
 Minorities submitted a report to the Prime Minister that called on the central Gov-
 ernment to act against popular militias, which are groups of citizens who engage
 in intimidation of Romani communities with the aim of forcing them to abandon set-
 tlements.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-Workers in both the private and public sectors have
 the right to associate freely and to establish committees in the workplace to defend
 their interests. The Constitution provides for the right to establish unions by profes-
 sion or industry. Trade union associations have the right to participate in the prepa-
 ration of labor legislation. Strikes are constitutionally permitted for any reason, in-
 cluding political causes; they are common and generally are resolved through direct
 negotiations. The authorities respect all provisions of the law on labor's rights.
 Two principal labor federations exist. There are no restrictions on the formation
 of additional labor federations. Unions function without hindrance by the Govern-
 ment and are closely associated with political parties. There are no restrictions on
 the ability of unions to join federations or on federations affiliating with inter-
 national labor bodies.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-Unions are free to organize
 without interference by the Government or by employers. Collective bargaining is
 provided for in the Constitution and is practiced extensively in the public and pri-
 vate sectors.
 Collective bargaining disputes rarely lead to prolonged strikes. Should a long
 strike occur in an essential sector such as health, energy, or transportation, the
 Government may order the workers back to work for a specific period. This did not
 occur in 1997. The Government has rarely invoked this power, in part because most
 strikes are limited to 1 to 3 days. The law requires a "minimum level of service"
 to be provided during strikes in essential sectors, but this requirement has been in-
 frequently applied. Wen it has, minimum levels of service have been established
 by agreement between the Government and the striking unions, although unions
 have complained, including to the International Labor Organization, that the mini-
 mum levels have been set too high. When collective bargaining fails, the Govern-
 ment may appoint a mediator, at the request of either management or labor.
 The law prohibits antiunion discrimination, and the authorities enforce this prohi-
 bition in practice. Complaints are promptly examined by the General Directorate of
 Labor.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-Forced labor, including by chil-
 dren, is prohibited and does not occur.
 d. Status of Child Labor Practices and Minimum Age for Employment.-On Janu-
 ary 1, the minimum working age was raised from 15 to 16 years. The Government
 prohibits forced and bonded child labor and enforces this prohibition effectively (see
 Section 6.c.).
 The two main labor federations and observers from other European countries have
 charged that a number of companies in the footwear, textile, construction, and hotel
 industries exploit child labor. The Ministry of Employment's Inspectorate General
 of Labor (IGT) reports that hundreds of children under age 16 are employed ille-
 gally, mainly in the northern cities of Porto and Braga, but that the number is de-
 clining. Union observers agree that the number of illegally employed children is fall-
 ing but believe that the Government should allocate more resources to combat the
 problem.
 
 
 1232
 The Government created the National Commission to Combat Child Labor
 (CNCTI) in 1996 with the aim of eradicating child labor. The Commission coordi-
 nates the efforts of the four ministries with primary responsibility for combating
 child labor Employment, Education, Social Security, and Justice. It has stiffened
 sanctions against companies caught violating the minimum working age law, devel-
 oped alternative curriculums for schools to retain students, and targeted subsidies
 for poor families vulnerable to the temptation to permit their underage children to
 work. The "medium-term social pact" signed by business, labor, and government
 representatives in 1996 contains a specific commitment to support CNCTrs oper-
 ations.
 In 1997 the CNCTI, the Ministry of Employment, and the General Union of Work-
 ers (UGT) undertook a public education campaign targeted at high-risk communities
 to convince parents to keep their children in school. The Ministry of Employment
 pubished a "blackist" of ompanies caught illegaly employing chldren and denied
 those companies access to European Union funding or bonefits.__
 e. Acceptable Conditions of-Wor.-Miunum wage legislation covers full-time
 workers as well as rural workers and domestic employees ages 18 years and over.
 For 1997 the monthly minimum wage was about $315 (Esc 56,700) and was gen-
 erally enforced. Along with widespread rent controls, basic food and utility sub-
 sidies, and phased implementation of a minimum guaranteed income, the minimum
 wage affords a basic standard of living for a worker and family. Average monthly
 earnings range from about $460 (Esc 83,469) for skilled and low-level personnel to
 about $1,580 (Esc 284,263) for higher management personnel.
 Employees generally receive 14 months' pay for 11 months' work: 1 month's pay
 for a Christmas bonus, 1 for a vacation subsidy, and 1 for 22 da s of annual leave.
 The maximum legal workday is 8 hours and the maximum worweek is 40 hours.
 For public sector employees, the maximum workweek is 39 hours, with a reduction
 to 35 hours to be phased in by 1999. There is a maximum of 2 hours of paid over-
 time per day and 200 hours of overtime per year, with a minimum of 12 hours be-
 tween workdays. The Ministry of Employment and Social Security monitors compli-
 ance through its regional inspectors.
 Employers are legally responsible for accidents at work and are required by law
 to carry accident insurance. An existing body of legislation regulates safety and
 health, but labor unions continue to argue for stiffer laws. The General Directorate
 of Hygiene and Labor Security develops safety standards, and the General Labor
 Inspectorate is responsible for their enforcement, but the Inspectorate lacks suffi-
 cient funds and inspectors to combat the problem of work accidents effectively. A
 relatively large proportion of accidents is in the construction industry. Poor environ-
 mental controls in textile production also cause considerable concern. While the abil-
 ity of workers to remove themselves from situations where these hazards exist is
 limited, it is difficult to fire workers for any reason. Workers injured on the job rare-
 ly initiate lawsuits.
