 PORTUGAL
 Portugal has a parliamentary political system which is
 genuinely democratic and enjoys broad popular legitimacy.
 Civil rights are outlined in the Constitution in accordance
 with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
 The President of the Republic and the members of the
 Legislative Assembly of the Republic are freely elected by
 secret ballot. In 1986 former Prime Minister Mario Soares was
 elected as Portugal's first civilian President in 60 years.
 Though much of the Portuguese economy was nationalized in the
 wake of the 1974 revolution, recent governments have opened
 the banking sector to private competition and have allowed
 private participation in some state-controlled firms.
 Terrorists have struck both Portuguese businessmen and U.S. or
 NATO targets in Portugal in recent years. The Government has
 responded by setting up the first civilian/military
 intelligence service since the abolition of the secret police
 after the 1974 revolution. Many suspected terrorists have
 been arrested and put on trial. Complaints have been made
 about lengthy pretrial delays, and there have been charges
 about substandard prison conditions and excessive use of force
 by the police. These problems, however, are due to inadequate
 training and resources rather than to state policy. Respect
 for civil and political rights, due process, and the integrity
 of the person are supported by the State and are reinforced by
 a lively free press.
 An Ombudsman, elected by the Assembly to serve a 5-year term,
 is Portugal's chief civil and human rights officer. Any
 citizen may apply to the Ombudsman for relief.  The Ombudsman
 receives about 4,000 complaints annually, but the vast
 majority of these complaints concern cases of alleged
 maladministration on the part of the cumbersome Portuguese
 bureaucracy.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 Government-sanctioned political killings do not occur in
 Portugal. A shadowy radical terrorist group, FP-25
 (translated as the "Popular Forces of the 25th of April,"
 referring to the 1974 revolution), has claimed responsibility
 for several murders, armed attacks on Portuguese nationals,
 and numerous bombings and attempted bombings of Portuguese and
 foreign (typically U.S. or NATO) installations. Despite these
 sporadic terrorist incidents, Portugal has a low level of
 violence.
 b. Disappearance
 The police and armed forces did not arrest anyone secretly,
 nor was anyone abducted by terrorist organizations in 1986.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 The Constitution forbids torture and the use of evidence
 obtained under torture in criminal proc6edings. The
 
 
 1007
 PORTUGAL
 Constitution also prohibits inhuman or degrading treatment or
 punishment. The Ombudsman investigated two cases of alleged
 mistreatment of inmates by prison officials and concluded that
 such cases are due to overcrowded prisons and inadequately
 trained personnel.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 According to Portuguese law, a prosecuting judge reviews the
 case against a person arrested and accused of a crime to
 determine whether that person should be detained or released
 on bail. No one may be held for more than 48 hours unless a
 prosecuting judge orders preventive detention limited to a
 maximum of 4 months for each crime. Because of the cumbersome
 judicial system with its large backlog of cases and vacant
 judgeships, detention beyond the authorized 4 months is not
 unusual in cases of persons accused of serious crimes such as
 murder or armed robbery. Detainees and persons in preventive
 detention have access to lawyers, who have succeeded in
 protecting their clients' rights through legal channels and
 through publicity in the free press.
 Exile and incommunicado detention are illegal and not
 practiced in Portugal. Forced labor also does not exist.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Portugal has an independent and fair judicial system. All
 trials are public except those which may offend the dignity of
 the victim, such as in cases involving the sexual abuse of
 children. The accused is presumed innocent until convicted.
 A clear procedural distinction exists between the arrest and
 the trial of an individual. A panel of three judges (which
 does not include the prosecuting judge) presides over cases
 which go to trial. A ministerial delegate assists the judges
 in reviewing the evidence. At the request of the accused, a
 jury may be used in trials for major crimes. The judges or
 jury render the verdict; sentence may be passed only in the
 presence of the defense attorney.
 Foreign and domestic complaints continue to be made about
 lengthy delays in the handling of cases in Portuguese courts.
 The Portuguese chapter of the International Commission of
 Jurists is concerned about this problem. The Ombudsman would
 like to see a reform of the present trial process to
 compensate defendants who are incarcerated during lengthy
 trials but are eventually acquitted.
 There are no political prisoners, although some radical
 leftist elements claim that certain persons who are in prison
 or on trial for participation in terrorist organizations are
 political prisoners. There is evidence, however, implicating
 these persons in the commission of violent crimes. The police
 and armed forces do not attempt to influence trials, and
 terrorists have not succeeded in intimidating participants in
 trials, although the FP-25 terrorist organization claimed
 responsibility for the murder in 1985 of one of their former
 members who had agreed to testify against them.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 There were no reports in 1986 of governmental intrusion into
 the private life of citizens. The State does not tamper with
 
 
 1008
 PORTUGAL
 private correspondence or telephones. The Constitution
 forbids forced entry into homes and searches without a
 judicial warrant. In addition, entry into a person's home at
 night requires the consent of the occupant.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Freedom of speech and the press is guaranteed by the
 Constitution and respected by the State. The constitutionally
 mandated Council of Social Communication acts as a watchdog to
 protect freedom of speech and access to the media. The
 council, whose members have been elected by the national
 legislators, makes recommendations to the Assembly and has
 enforcement powers (which have never been exercised). The
 opposition is free to voice its point of view, and the State
 tolerates criticism with two restrictions:
 First, "Fascist organizations" are prohibited by law, but
 elements on both the extreme right and extreme left have
 participated in elections without state interference.
 Second, a person may also be legally punished for "insulting"
 civil or military authorities if such an "insult" was intended
 to undermine the rule of law. There were no prosecutions for
 "insult" in 1986.
 Although the State indirectly subsidizes the press (through
 its postrevolutionary nationalization of the banks, to which
 the press was heavily indebted), it does not control editorial
 comment. The entire spectrum of political thought is
 represented in the Portuguese press. The State also owns the
 two television channels and some radio stations. In
 principle, the Government does not influence television or
 radio programing. However, since the Government appoints
 television and radio administrators, it probably has some
 indirect influence on the broadcast media.
 Opposition'parties sometimes charge that television or radio
 ignores or distorts their views and activities, but political
 parties, trade unions, and other organizations have a right to
 periodic access to exclusive television time after the evening
 news program.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Persons have the right, in law and in practice, to associate
 formally or informally, to promote nonviolent causes, and to
 protest government policies. Public meetings or protests
 require a 24-hour advance notice to the civil governor of the
 area in which the event is to be held. Permission is
 routinely granted. The official registration of a new
 political party requires 5,000 subscribers.
 Workers have the constitutional right to set up unions by
 profession or industry. Collective bargaining is guaranteed
 by law and practiced in both the public and private sectors.
 Such issues as wage levels, working conditions, pay grades,
 and fringe benefits are regularly the subject of collective
 bargaining. Strikes are permitted for any reason, including
 political causes. Approximately 45 percent of the workers are
 unionized. Unions are free from government control but are
 closely associated with political parties.
 
 
 1009
 PORTUGAL
 There are two labor federations in Portugal: The General
 Confederation of Portuguese Workers (CGTP) is controlled by
 the Communist Party and is active in Communist-sponsored
 causes; the General Union of Workers (UGT) is a pluralist
 democratic union affiliated with the International
 Confederation of Free Trade Unions and the European Trade
 Union Congress. UGT leaders are associated with the Socialist
 and Social Democratic parties, and some have been elected to
 the Assembly of the Republic. Since both federations want to
 represent Portugal in the International Labor Organization,
 the Minister of Labor has decided that they will do so in
 alternate years.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Portugal does not have an established religion, and the State
 does not interfere with the free practice of religion,
 missionary work, or religious publications. Organized
 religions may freely establish places of worship, train their
 clergy, and proselytize. To qualify as a tax-exempt
 institution, an organized religion must legally establish
 itself as a nonprofit, private society.
 Roman Catholicism is the prevailing religion in Portugal, and
 Catholic religious instruction is offered as an eleccive
 course in the public schools. The pursuit of a civil,
 military, professional, or political career does not depend on
 adherence to a religious creed. There were no reported cases
 of religious persecution in Portugal in 1986, although some
 Portuguese entered Canada claiming to be refugees from
 religious persecution in Portugal. Authorities believe that
 such claims were made to take advantage of Canadian
 immigration laws.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 The Constitution guarantees freedom of movement, foreign
 travel, and emigration, and places no formal restraints on
 domestic travel or on the right of an individual to change
 domicile or employment. Some currency restrictions remain,
 reflecting past difficulties in the balance of payments. The
 Government has committed itself to removing these restrictions
 in the near future. Large numbers of Portuguese emigrate
 every year due to economic necessity or family reunification.
 Many Portuguese emigrants return to Portugal to resettle or
 retire. Citizenship is not revoked for political reasons.
 A 1980 law established a humane refugee program in Portugal.
 Displaced persons, who qualify as refugees under the technical
 definition established by the United Nations, are given
 permanent resident status and allowed to work; in practice,
 displaced persons are not forced to return to the country from
 which they fled.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Portugal is a multiparty, participatory democracy in which
 candidates for the presidency or for the Assembly of the
 Republic are freely nominated and elected. The unicameral
 Assembly is the legislative body with the Prime Minister at
 the head of the Government. The President and the members of
 the Assembly are elected by secret ballot and universal adult
 suffrage. Opposition parties and candidates operate freely
 
 
 1010
 PORTUGAL
 and enjoy access to the media. Only "Fascist" organizations
 are outlawed. General elections are held at least every
 4 years. The President has a 5-year mandate but may serve no
 more than two consecutive terms.
 The population is predominantly European and ethnically
 homogeneous. Portugal has a small African minority, most of
 whose members emigrated to Portugal when the former Portuguese
 colonies in Africa became independent following the 1974
 revolution. There are no restrictions on political activity
 by Portuguese of African heritage.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 Portugal cooperates with independent outside investigations of
 human rights conditions and actively participates in the
 monitoring of human rights by the Council of Europe. Amnesty
 International and other private international human rights
 groups operate freely in Portugal. The most important
 domestic human rights group is the Portuguese section of the
 International Commission of Jurists, which considers the human
 rights situation in Portugal to be, "on the whole, positive
 and satisfactory."
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 There are no complaints of any one ethnic or religious group
 benefiting from a privileged status in Portugal. The Civil
 Code guarantees full legal equality for women in accordance
 with the Constitution. Women play an active role in the
 political parties but remain underrepresented in party and
 government leadership positions. A woman served as Prime
 Minister in 1979 and was a serious candidate for the
 Presidency in 1985. There is one woman currently in the
 Cabinet. Women are steadily increasing their representation
 in universities, business, government, and the professions.
 Traditional attitudes of male dominan.e persist in some areas,
 but these are changing.
 CONDITIONS OF LABOR
 A national monthly minimum wage for full-time workers was
 first established in.Portugal in 1974. Minimum wages for
 rural workers and domestic employees were legislatively
 established in 1977 and 1978 respectively. With the exception
 of 1982, minimum wages have been increased every year.
 Workers are required by law to be granted an individual
 written contract which must include their professional
 category and salary, the work site, the starting date, and the
 duration of the contract (in the case of temporary workers).
 Employers are required to contribute to an employee's social
 security fund. Legislation limits hours of work to 8 hours
 daily and 48 hours per week. Overtime is limited to 2 hours
 per work period, up to 120 annually. Work on a normal day off
 is restricted to 8 hours. These limits are respected in
 practice.
 Child labor in industry is not a generalized problem in
 Portugal although there may be some cases of companies
 operating outside of the law. The CGTP has charged that a
 number of "clandestine" companies in the textile and
 construction sectors in northern Portugal exploit child labor.
 
 
 1011
 U.S.OV RSiAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: PORTUGAL
 1984     1985     1986
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL,..         40.0     80.0     76.6
 LOANS ................. 0.0          0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............        40.0     80.0     76.6
 AAD.....................   40.0      80.0     76.6
 LOANS ..............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS.............        40.0     80.0     76.6
 (SEC.SUPP.ASSIST,.,,         40.0      80.0     76.6
 B.FOO FOR PEACE .......         0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS ..............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............. 0.0             0.0      0.0
 TITLE  I-TOTAL ..........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 REPAY. IN $-LOANS .....         0.0      0.0      0.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR.....          0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE II-TOTAL .........         0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.RELIEF.EC.OEV & WFP.         0.0       0.0      0.0
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY .....         0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST,..          0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS ..............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ...............      0.0      0.0      0.0
 PEACE CORPS ......        0.0       0.0      0.0
 NARCOTICS ........        0.0       0.0      0.0
 OTHER ..............      0;0       0.0      0.0
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL,,.        107.9    128.0    11Z.4
 LOANS ..............    ... 45.0     55.0     43.1
 GRANTS ................    62.9     73.0     69.3
 A.MAP GRANTS ............     60.0     70.0     67.0
 S.CREOIT FINANCING ....        45.0     55.0     43.1
 :.INTL MILEO.TRNG ....         2.9      3.0      2.3
 O.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK.           0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS ........         0.0      0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. & MIL...        147.9    208.0    189.0
 LOANS ..............    ... 45.0     55.0     43.1
 GRANTS .............   ... 102.9    153.0    145.9
 OT4ER  US  LOANS ..........       0.0      0.0      0.0
 E -IM SANX LOANS .......         0.0      0.0      0.0
 ALL  OTHER ..............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1984     1985     1986      1946-86
 TOTAL ........   172.3    146.4     125.0   1861.6
 IBRDO             72.6      66.0     25.0   1106.8
 IFC               14.5       0.2      0.0     26.2
 IDA                0.0       0.0      0.0      0.0
 103                0.0       0.0      0.0      0.0
 AOB                0.0       0.3      0.0      0.0
 AFDB               0.0       0.0      0.0      0.0
 UNDP               0.2       0.2      0.0      3.4
 OTHER-UN            0.0      0.0      0.0      0.2
 EEC               33.O      80.0    100.0    725.0
 
 
 1012
