 PARAGUAY
 Para     has been independent since 1811, but until 1989 was ruled almost con-
 tinuously by authoritarian regimes. On August 15, Juan Carlos Wasmosy, Para-
 guay's first freely elected civilian President, completed his second year of a 5-year
 term. Wasmosy pledged to consolidate the nation's democratic transition which
 began following the February 1989 overthrow of dictator General Afredo
 Stroessner. Paraguay is a constitutional republic with a strong executive branch and
 an increasingly important bicameral legislature. The President is the Head of Gov-
 ernment and cannot succeed himself. The Colorado Party and the armed forces con-
 tinue to exercise substantial influence although the opposition's power has in-
 creased as a result of the changes brought about by the June 1992 Constitution and
 the subsequent election of a civilian President and an opposition-controlled Con-
 gress. The Constitution provides for an independent judiciary. A new nine-member
 Supreme Court was installed in April, and started the difficult task of reforming the
 judicial system.
 
 
 497
 The national police force, under the overall authority of the Ministry of the Inte-
 rior, has responsibility for maintaining internal security and public order. The civil-
 ian authorities maintain effective control of the security forces. Instances of police
 abuses of human rights, including at least two possible cases of extrajudicial
 killings, took place during the year.
 Paraguay has a market economy with a large informal sector. The formal economy
 is oriented towards services, with less than half of the $8 billion gross domestic
 product resulting from agriculture and industry. Over 40 percent of the population
 is engaged in agriculturai activity. Wealth continues to be concentrated, with bath
 urban and rural areas supporting a large subsistence sector. Agricultural commod-
 ities (soybeans, cotton, lumber, and cattle) continue to be the most important export
 items. The formal economy has grown an average of 3 to 3.5 percent over the past
 5 years, but population has increased at 3 percent a year over the same period. Both
 growth rates are expected to continue. Annual per capita income (excluding the in-
 formal economy) is approximately $1,500. Government reform efforts, including pri-
 vatization, continued but advanced little in 1995.
 The Government's human rights record improved somewhat, although serious
 problems remain in certain areas. Principal human rights problems included pos-
 sible instances of extrajudicial killings, torture and mistreatment of criminal sus-
 pects and prisoners, overcrowded prisons, police and military corruption, detention
 of suspects without judicial orders, general weaknesses within the judiciary, firings
 of labor organizers, and military intrusions into the judicial and political systems.
 Discrimination against women and indigenous people are also problems. However,
 the Government acted with restraint by using unarmed policemen to control dem-
 onstratrs during a general strike in September. In addition, the Government con-
 tinued its efforts to convict and punish those who committed human rights abuses
 during the Stroessner era, bringing several cases to a successful conclusion.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were at least two reported in-
 stances of possible extrajudicial killings involving security force officials. On July 2
 in Canindeyu department near the Brazilian border, 48 policemen stormed a house
 in pursuit of a man suspected of having killed a police officer. The suspect and four
 of his relatives (all Brazilians) were killed in the ensuing shoot-out. Neighbors and
 surviving relatives accused the police of torturing and executing several of the vic-
 tims after they had surrendered. A police investigation resulted in a determination
 of no criminal liability. In another case, Francisco Torales, a 23-year-old carpenter,
 was walking home with his brother from a party when he became involvedin an
 argument with a policeman and was killed; the policeman fled and has not yet been
 ap rhended.
 Pedr Jimenez, a 17-year-old participant in a peasant protest march on Septem-
 ber 7, was shot in the head and later died, wiesevera other marchers received
 bullet wounds. The brother of the slain protester claimed that he had seen a police-
 man fire the fatal bullet. However, the bullet retrieved from Jimenez's body was me-
 tallic (police claimed that they used rubber bullets), and was not of a caliber nor-
 mally used by the police. Other eyewitness accounts of the shooting are inconsistent.
 The case remains under investigation.
 The 1994 shooting case of peasant leader Sebastian Larrsa (reportedly by local
 police official August Palacios) is still under investigation. The trial for the 1994
 killing of Leonardo Molinas ended with the acquittal of the defendant, Walter Arce,
 on grounds of self-defense. The 1994 killing of peasant leader Esteban Balbuena by
 Elena Cubas, who recanted a confession that she had acted at the behest of
 unnamed officials, remains under investigation.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reported cases of abductions by security forces.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 Torture aundsbrutalrand degrading treatment of convicted prisoners and other de-
 tainees continued. There was no evidence that senior officers encouraged or con-
 doned such conduct, which was apparently committed by undisciplined security
 force members. A human rights group, the Committee of Churches, filed several
 lawsuits on behalf of tortured prisoners, and these cases remained pending in the
 courts. There were credible reports of mistreatment of women and minors and of
 brutal attempts to force confessions out of detainees. No administrative action was
 taken in these cases.
 Another human rights group, Tekojoja, reported in 1994 that children in police
 custody were particularly susceptible to physical punishment. It stated that torture
 and abuse, typically beatings and placing a plastic bag over the head, occur against
 
 
 juveniles at a higher rate than against adult detainees. This pattern of police con-
 duct reportedly continued, and the Committee of Churches fied several new cases
 against detention officials for the abuse of minors in their custody. These cases were
 pending in the courts at year's end; no administrative action was taken.
 An activist in the conscientious objector movement claimed to have been forcibly
 removed from a bus and taken to a military barracks at Ciudad del Este on Novem-
 ber 4. The individual reported that he was beaten and abused. However, he did not
 fie a complaint, and thuis the police have not opened an investigation.
 Prison conditions remained poor. Overcrowding and mistreatment of prisoners
 were the most serious problems. The Government permits independent monitoring
 of prison conditions by interested nongovernmental organizations (NGO's).
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The Constitution prohibits detention
 without an arrest warrant signed by a judge and stipulates that any person arrested
 must appear before a judge within 48 hours to make a statement. The police can
 arrest persons without a warrant if they catch them in the act of committing a
 crime, but must bring them before a judge within 24 hours. However, the authori-
 ties often violated these provisions. More than 90 percent of an estimated 1,700
 prisoners are being held pending trial. As of June, courts had passed sentence on
 only 99 out of 1,366 detainees at Tacumbu Prison, 10 out of 95 at Emboscada Pris-
 on, 6 out of 117 at Buen Pastor Women's Prison, and 7 out of 140 minors at the
 Panchito Lopez Juvenile Prison. Although a bail system exists for most crimes, juve-
 niles cannot post bond. Furthermore, judges frequently set relatively high bail, and
 many accused are unable to post bond.
 Throughout the year, the authorities arrested and imprisoned individuals without
 following the constitutional legal process. There were a number of cases similar to
 that of Octaciano Nunez Goiburu, released in September, who spent nearly 2 years
 injail because police had mistaken him for another man and ailed to bring him
 bore a judge on charges within a reasonable time.
 The Supreme Court, the Public Ministry (Attorney General's office), and a judicial
 working group took steps to reduce the large number of detainees held without
 being sentenced or without cause. During the year, they reduced by over 20 percent
 the number of criminal cases pending more than 1 year. The Supreme Court and
 many criminal court judges also made quarterly visits to the prisons to identify and
 release improperly held individuals. For example, Aquino Alcaraz was sentenced to
 10 years in prison for abuse of a minor, but actually made to serve 13Y2 years before
 a Supreme Court order finally released him.
 Credible reports continued that landowners, many of them Brazilians living near
 the border in the Alto Parana, Canindeyu, and Amambay departments, acted with-
 out court orders and armed their employees for the purpose of removing squatters
 from their property. Some of the evictions reportedly were violent, and there were
 unsubstantiated reports of fatalities. However, the authorities undertook no effec-
 tive action in response to these reports.
 The Constitution does not expressly prohibit forced exile but states that all citi-
 zens have the right to reside in their country.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The Constitution provides for an independent judi-
 ciary, and the new nine-member Supreme Court is independent in practice. The new
 Supreme Court was selected jointly by an independent Magistrates' Council, the
 Senate, and the executive earlier in the year. There are four types of appellate tri-
 bunals: civil and commercial criminal, labor, and juvenile. Several minor courts and
 justices of the peace fall within these four functional areas. Based on recommenda-
 tions from the Mag*strates' Council, the Supreme Court has begun selecting some
 650 lower court judges and magistrates. Many of the judges active during 1995 were
 holdover appointments made by former dictator Alfredo Stroessner, who were serv-
 ing in an interim capacity beyond their established 5-year term. The Chief Justice
 accused many of them of making judicial decisions in return for bribes. Intimida-
 tion, political motives, and friendship with senior military officers and Colorado
 Party officials are also suspected as factors influencing judicial decisions.
 Although the 1992 Constitution stipulates that aldeendants have the right to
 an attorney, at public expense if necessary, there are only 31 public defenders avail-
 able to the transient and the indigent. Many destitute suspects receive little legal
 assistance, and few have access to an attorney sufficiently in advance of the trial
 to prepare a defense. A Public Ministry official is responsible in most cases for
 bringing charges against accused prsons.
 Trials are conducted almost exclusively by presentation of written documents to
 a judge who then renders a decision. Defendants and the Public Ministry can
 present written testimony of witnesses as well as evidence. All interested parties
 have access to all documents reviewed by the judge, and defendants can rebut wit-
 nesses. Defendants enjoy a presumption of innocence. The judge alone determines
 
 
 499
 guilt or innocence and decides punishment. During the pretrial phase, the  dge re-
 ceives and may request investigative reports. In this phase, the judge is aso likely
 to make a personal inspection of the scene of the crime and of the available physical
 evidence. The accused often appears before the court" only twice: to plead and to be
 sentenced. An appellate judge automatically reviews all verdicts, and the law pro-
 vides for appeals to the Supreme Court. The military has its own judicial system.
 In March a separate documentation center and repository was created to hold the
 government archives discovered in December 1992, which document various human
 rights abuses and implicate many former government officials of the Stroessner re-
 gime. The courts continued to convict several Stroessner-era officials-Lucilo
 Benitez, Pastor Coronel, Martinez Chavez, Augustin Belotto, and Camilo Almada
 Morel-for human rights abuses and imposed sentences of up to 25 years. However,
 the Committee of Churches still had several cases against alleged Stroessner-era
 human rights abusers pending at year's end.
 There were no reports of political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Intefference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-While
 the Government and its security forces generally did not interfere in the private
 lives of citizens, there were exceptions. The Constitution provides that police may
 not enter private homes except to prevent a crime in progress or when the police
 possess a judicial warrant. There were allegations that the Government occasionally
 spied on individuals and monitored communications for political and security rea-
 sons. There were also accusations that some government agencies required or pres-
 sured their employees to join the ruling Colorado Party.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of expres-
 sion and the press, including academic freedom, and the Government respects these
 rights in practice. The public and the press exercised these rights more freely than
 at any time in the nation's recent history. Opposition viewpoints were freely dis-
 cussed, and criticism of the Government was ubiquitous in the media. However, in
 July Judge Carlos Monges issued an injunction ordering Radio Nanduti, a respected
 independent station, to refrain from commenting on allegedly corrupt actions by
 former President Andres Rodriguez. This decision was subsequently rescinded on
 appeal. In September a judicial ethics tribunal ordered Monges removal for misuse
 of office, unprofessional behavior, and suspected corruption in numerous cases.
 The 1994 case of former presidential candidate Ricardo Canese remains under ju-
 dicial appeal. He was found guilty of criminal slander and sentenced to 4 months
 in prison and a $7,000 fine for accusing President Wasmosy of providing kickbacks
 to the family of former dictator Alfredo Stroessner during the construction of the
 Itaipu Dam. The Vice Minister of the Interior had promised to investigate police be-
 havior after police officers beat several news photographers who were attempting to
 photograph a clash between police and striking workers at a cooking oil plant in
 taugua on August 17 1994. However, the authorities made no effort to fulfill that
 promise. No suspects have yet been found in connection with a May 1993 election
 day attack on independent television Channel 13.
 b. Freedom of Peacefid Assembly and Association.-The Constitution provides for
 the right of all citizens to free association and peaceful assembly. A law regulating
 demonstrations in Asuncion limits the areas where and the hours when they may
 take place, and requires that organizers notify the Asuncion police 24 hours before
 any rally in the downtown area. The police may ban a protest but must provide
 written notification of such a ban within 12 hours of receipt of the organizers' re-
 quest. The law permits a police ban onl if a third party has already given notice
 of plans for a similar rally at the same pace and time. In addition, the law prohibits
 public meetings or demonstrations in front of the presidential palace and outside
 military or police barracks.
 Most political and social demonstrations and rallies occurred without incident.
 Some rallies, however, ended in violent clashes with the police. On July 25, Armed
 Forces Day, opposition Senator Nilda Estigarriba received wounds to her head after
 a confrontation with police during a protest march. The police investigation con-
 cluded that the demonstrators had provoked the police. The September 7 death of
 Pedro Jimenez occurred during a melee that ensued when police attempted to pre-
 vent protesting peasants from blocking a major road (see Section L.a.). However, the
 authorities showed increased restraint in dealing with a general strike in September
 (see Section 6.b.).
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for freedom of conscience for
 all persons and recognizes no official religion; the Government continued to respect
 this freedom. Roman Catholicism is the predominant religion, but all denominations
 are free to worship as they choose. Adherence to a particular creed confers no legal
 
 
 500
 advantage or disadvantage, and foreign and local missionaries proselytize freely. All
 religious groups must be registered with the Ministry of Education and Worship,
 but the Government imposes no controls on these groups.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-All citizens travel freely within the country with virtually no restric-
 tions. Nor are there any restrictions on foreign travel or emigration. There are no
 established provisions to grant asylum or refgee status; the Immigration Depart-
 ment determines each request on a case by case basis in consultation with the Min-
 istries of Foreign Relations and the Interior. There were no reports of refugees
 forced to return to countries in which they feared persecution.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens have the right and ability to change their government through demo-
 cratic means. Multiple parties and candidates contest the nation's leadership posi-
 tions. Four parties are represented in the Congress, and nine candidates ran for the
 presidency in 1993. The Constitution and the Electoral Code mandate general elec-
 tions every 5 years, voting by secret ballot, and universal suffrage. The executive
 and legislative branches govern the country; opposition political parties control the
 Congress. Debate is free and frank; it is not uncommon for legislators to trade in-
 sults or physical blows. The Congress routinely rejects important government pro-
 posals and overrides presidential vetoes.
 Vestiges remain of the Stroessner-era merging of the State and the ruling Colo-
 rado Party. The press has reported the use of state resources, particularly vehicles,
 to support party political rallies. There were also credible reports of government offi-
 cials requiring public employees to attend Colorado Party functions and contribute
 to party coffers. In addition, the military continues to wield significant political
 power.
 There are no formal legal impediments to women seeking to participate in govern-
 ment and politics. Five women serve in the Congress (3 of 45 Senators and 2 of 80
 National Deputies), and there is 1 woman, the Secretary for Women's Affairs, in the
 Cabinet. Seven women served as judges, and 30 women served as Public Ministry
 prosecutors.
 Members of indigenous groups are entitled to vote, and the percentage of indige-
 nous people who exercised this right grew dramatically in recent years. Neverthe-
 less, the inhabitants of some indigenous communities report being threatened and
 inhibited from fully exercising their political rights.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Several human rights groups operate in Paraguay, including the Committee of
 Churches (an interdenominational group that monitors human rights and provides
 legal assistance), Prodemos (a group linked to the Catholic Church), Tekojoja (a
 group dedicated to protection of children's rights), and the local chapter of the Asso-
 ciation of Latin American Lawyers for the Defense of Human Rights. The Govern-
 ment did not restrict the activities of any human rights groups.
 The office of the Director General of Human Rights, located in the Ministry of
 Justice and Labor, continued to sponsor seminars to promote human rights aware-
 ness. This office has access to congressional, executive, and judicial authorities. It
 does not have subpoena or prosecutorial powers, but may forward information con-
 cerning human rights abuses to the Attorney General for action. It also serves as
 a clearing house for information on human rights and has trained thousands of edu-
 cators in human rights law.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 Although the Constitution and other laws prohibit discrimination, certain groups
 faced significant discrimination in practice.
 Women.-Reports of spousal abuse are rare, but the Government has recently
 begun to press charges in cases of domestic violence. To date, however, the courts
 have not yet convicted any perpetrators of domestic violence against women.
 There is legislation which prohibits trafficking in women and sexual exploitation,
 but it is not enforced effectively. Exploitation of women, especially teenage pros-
 titutes, remains a serious problem. In 1994 the municipal health department of
 Asuncion reported that 58 percent of the prostitutes in the capital are minors under
 18 years of agie, a. figure that reportedly reflects conditions in 1995. In October 1994
 the police arrested- several brothel owners, including one former police commis-
 sioner, but the cases were eventually dropped for alleged lack of criminal evidence,
 and because the municipality declined to prosecute.
 
 
</pre>
<pre>
 The office of the Secretary for Women's Affairs continued to sponsor programs to
 enable women to have free and equal access to employment, social security, housing,
 ownership of land, and business opportunities. However, authorities paid insuffi-
 cient attention to sex-related job discrimination. Some women complained that job
 promotions were conditioned upon their granting sexual favors.
 Several groups work in Asuncion to improve conditions for women. One is
 SEFEM, which highlights successfully such issues as women and public policy,
 women and social policy at the local level, participation of women in local develop-
 ment, and women in the Americas. Other groups include Sumando, a NGO promot-
 ing educational reform policy and voter participation in elections, and Women for
 Democracy, active in civic and electoral education. These groups are effective advo-
 cates for change.
 Children.-The Constitution protects certain children's rights, including a stipula-
 tion that parents and the State care for, feed, educate, and support children. Boys
 and girls are entitled to equal treatment in education and health care. There is no
 pattern of societal abuse of children. However, approximately 26,000 children work
 in urban areas as street vendors or as prostitutes. The majority of these children
 suffer from malnutrition, lack of access to education, and disease. The employers of
 some young girls working as domestic servants or nannies deny them access to edu-
 cation and mistreat them. Employers sometimes falsely charge those who seek to
 leave domestic jobs with robbery and turn them over to the police.
 Baby trafficking continued to be a serious problem, as foreign adoptive parents
 were willing to pay from $20,000 to $40,000 in adoption fees and costs for a healthy
 child. In September the President signed a law providing for a 1-year suspension
 of international adoptions in order to study and pass new legislation to alleviate the
 problem.
 The armed forces Chief of Staff ordered all officers responsible for recruiting to
 ensure that all conscripts met the constitutionally mandated minimum age of 17
 years for military service. There were reported violations, however, and the military
 took no known disciplinary action against those responsible, although in one in-
 stance President Wasmosy publicly berated the offending officer. In October a 16-
 year-old conscript died reportedly while performing disciplinary physical exercises.
 The case is now under investigation by military authorities. The media regularly re-
 port cases of conscripts allegedly mistreatedby non-commissioned and commis-
 sioned officers.
 People With Disabilities.-The 1992 Constitution guarantees equal opportunity to
 people with disabilities and mandates that the State provide them with health care,
 education, recreation, and professional training. It further requires that the State
 formulate a policy for the treatment, rehabilitation, and integration into society of
 people with disabilities. Legislation establishing these programs, however, has not
 yet been enacted. Many people with disabilities face significant discrimination in
 employment; others are unable to seek employment because of a lack of accessible
 public transportation. Other than the constitutional provisions establishing equal
 opportunity, accessibility for the disabled has not been mandated through law; the
 vast majority of the nation's buildings, both public and private, are inaccessible to
 people with disabilities.
 Indigenous People.-Paraguay has an unassimilated and neglected indigenous
 population estimated at 75,000 to 100,000. Weak organization and lack of financial
 resources continued to limit access by indigenous people to the political and eco-
 nomic system. Indigenous groups relied primarily upon parliamentary commissions
 to promote their particular interests, notwithstanding the fact that the Constitution
 provides indigenous people with the right to participate in the economic, social, po-
 litical, and cultural life of the nation. The Constitution also protects their property
 interests, but these constitutional rights are still not fully codified. In accordance
 with the Constitution, Public Ministry officials may represent indigenous people in
 matters involving the protection of life and property.
 The Government's National Indigenous Institute has the authority to purchase
 land on behalf of indigenous communities and to expropriate private property under
 certain conditions to establish tribal homelands. However, many indigenous people
 find it difficult to travel to the capital to solicit land titles or process the required
 documentation associated with land ownership. The main problems facing the indig-
 enous population are lack of education, malnutrition, lack of medical care, and eco-
 nomic displacement resulting from development and modernization. Despite fre-
 quent media attention and meetings with government officials, little progress was
 made in dealing with these problems.
 
 
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The Constitution allows both private and public sec-
 tor workers (with the exception of the armed forces and the police) to form and join
 unions without government interference. The Constitution contains several pmvi-
 sions which protect fundamental worker rights, including an antidiscrimination
 clause, provisions for employment tenure, severance pay for unjustified firings, col-
 lective bargaining, and the right to strike. Approximately 9 percent of workers are
 organized.
 In general, unions are independent of the Government and political parties. How-
 ever, one of the nation's three labor centrals, the Confederation of Paraguayan
 Workers (CPT), has traditionally been closely aligned with the ruling Colorado
 Party. The Government does not require the CPT to comply with union election re-
 quirements to the same extent that it requires compliance from the other labor cen-
 trals.
 All unions must be registered with the Ministry of Justice and Labor. The reg-
 istration process is cumbersome and can take several months. Employers who wish
 to oppose the formation of a union can further delay union recognition by filing a
 writ opposing it. However, virtually all unions that request recognition eventually
 receive it. The Constitution provides for the right to strike, bans binding arbitration,
 and prohibits retribution against strikers and leaders carrying out routine union
 business. Although high-level officials from the Ministry of Justice and Labor are
 available to mediate labor disputes, the International Labor Organization (ILO)
 Committee on Freedom of Association criticized the Government for failing to pro-
 tect worker rights in four cases concluded in November.
 Unions are free to form and join federations or confederations and affiliate with
 and participate in international labor bodies.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The law provides for collec-
 tive bargaining, and many collective contracts were successfully concluded. The
 number of successfully negotiated collective contracts continued to grow; however,
 they were still the exception rather than the norm in labor-management relations
 and typically reaffirmd minimum standards established by law. When wages are
 not set in free negotiations between unions and employers, they are made a condi-
 tion of individual offers of employment made to employees.
 While the Constitution prohibits antiunion discrimination, the firing and harass-
 ment of some union organizers and leaders in the private sector continued. Fired
 union leaders can seek redress in the courts, but the labor courts have been slow
 to respond to complaints and typically favored business in disputes. The courts are
 not required to order the reinstatement of workers fired for union activities. As in
 previous years, in some cases where judges ordered reinstatement of discharged
 workers, the employers disregarded the court order with impunity. There are a
 number of cases in which trade union leaders, fired as long as 5 years ago, have
 not yet received a decision from the courts.
 There were more than 15 strikes by unions affiliated with the Unitary Workers
 Central (CUT) alone. The vast majority of these were directly related to the firing
 of union organizers, to management violations of a collective contract, to manage-
 ment efforts to prevent the free association of workers, or to demands for benefits
 such as payment of the minimum wage or contribution to the social security system.
 The failure to meet salary payments frequently precipitated labor disputes. Prin-
 cipal problems included bottlenecks in the judicial system and the inability of the
 Government to enforce labor laws. There were also complaints of management creat-
 ing parallel or "factory" unions to compete with independently formed unions. There
 were several cases of workers who chose not to protest because of fear of reprisal
 or anticipation of government inaction. The CUT and the National Workers Central
 cosponsored a general strike on September 25 to protest government economic policy
 and the alleged "repression" of peasant land squatters. The general strike was
 marked by shuttered shops, scattered violence, roadblocks, and demonstrations, but
 no deaths occurred. A judge threatened to charge labor leaders with inciting vio-
 lence, but no action was taken.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The law prohibits forced labor.
 However, cases of abuse of national service obligations occurred. There were several
 reports of draftees forced to work as servants for military officers in their residences
 or privately owned businesses. Apart from abusing national service obligations, the
 authorities appear to effectively enforce the law. Domestics, children, and foreign
 workers are not forced to remain in situations amounting to coerced or bonded
 labor.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The office of the Director General
 for the Protection of Minors in the Ministry of Justice and Labor is responsible for
 
 
 enforcing child labor laws. Minors between 15 and 18 years of age may be employed
 only with parental authorization and cannot be employed in dangerous or unhealthy
 conditions. Children between 12 and 15 years of age may be employed only in family
 enterprises, apprenticeships, or in agriculture. The Lor Code prohibits work by
 children under 12 years of age, and all children are required to attend elementary
 school. In practice, however, many thousands of chldr~en, many of them younger
 than 12, may be found in urban areas engaged in informal employment such as sell-
 ing newsaes and sundries, shining shoes, and cleaning car windows. In rural
 areas, it s not unusual for children as young as 10 to work beside their parents
 in the field. Local human rights groups, however, do not regard families harvesting
 the crop together as an abuse of childlabor.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The executive, through the Ministry of Justice
 and Labor has established a private sector minimum wage sufficient to maintain
 a minimallyadequate standard of living. The minimum salary was adjusted by 15
 percent in May to approximately $222 a month (436,425 guaranies) in response to
 a loss in real purchasing power of more than 40 percent since 1989. The Ministry
 is unable, however, to enforce the minimum wage, and most analysts agree that
 from 50 to 70 percent of workers earn less than the decreed minimum.
 The Labor Code allows for a standard legal workweek of 48 hours (42 hours for
 night work), with 1 day of rest. The law also provides for an annual bonus of 1
 month's salary and a minimum of 6 vacation days a year. The law requires overtime
 payment for hours in excess of the standard, but there are no prohibitions on exces-
 sive compulsory overtime. Many employers, however, violate these provisions. Work-
 ers in the transport sector staged several strikes to demand that their work day be
 limited to 8 hours and that they be paid the minimum wage.
 The Labor Code also stipulates conditions of safety, hygiene, and comfort. How-
 ever, the Ministry of Justice and Labor did not effectively enforce these provisions,
 partially due to the lack of inspectors. This led the labor movement to sponsor in-
 spector training programs designed to ensure that violations were registered with
 the Ministry. Workers do not have the right to remove themselves from situations
 which endanger health or safety without jeopardy to their continued employment.
 Although workers who file complaints about such conditions are protected by law,
 many employers reportedly took disciplinary action against protesting employees.
