 PARAGUAY
 Paraguay, independent since 1811, has been ruled almost
 continuously by authoritarian regimes. In early 1989,
 however, a new Government committed itself to democracy and
 respect for human rights and subsequently took important steps
 toward those goals. Nonetheless, the military and the
 Colorado Party remain the dominant forces in the political
 system of the country.
 The police forces, under the overall authority of the Ministry
 of Interior, hold primary responsibility for internal security
 and maintaining public order. The military occasionally
 supplemented the police for crowd control, and for the first 8
 months of 1990 it was used in this function primarily to
 remove peasant squatters from land. A presidential order
 ended that military role in August. The police recurrently
 were accused of excessive use of force and brutal treatment of
 suspects in custody.
 Paraguay has a free market economy oriented toward the
 exportation of primary agricultural products. In 1990 the
 Government continued its efforts to reform the economy by
 pursuing market-oriented economic policies. Business
 associations continued to wield considerable influence, both
 politically and economically, but they were confronted by the
 growing strength of organized labor.
 The principal human rights problems in 1990 included violent
 evictions by police of squatters from privately held lands, a
 situation which was primarily a result of the Government's
 failure to develop and implement a comprehensive agrarian
 reform program to provide for the land needs of Paraguay's
 peasant majority. Other problem areas included police torture
 of common criminals, police corruption, the limited
 independence of the judiciary, and the Government's
 ineffectiveness in protecting workers from violations of their
 rights by employers.
 In 1990 the Government significantly'increased the potential
 for free and fair elections when it approved a new and
 distinctly improved electoral code. The new law will be put
 into practice for the first time in the municipal elections
 scheduled for May 1991.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing
 There were no substantiated cases of politically motivated
 deaths in 1990. There was one publicized case of a criminal
 suspect, Herminio de Jesus Romero, who died while in police
 custody in March. Family members claimed that there were
 definite torture marks on the cadaver. The police failed to
 give a satisfactory account of his death, and an official
 investigation had not announced any results by year's end.
 There were two publicized but unsubstantiated cases of
 peasants who were killed under unclear circumstances. In
 April Arsinio "Paeg, head of a local landless peasant movement,
 was killed, allegedly by two Brazilians in Ype Jhu on the
 Paraguayan side of the border. In August another peasant,
 Nicolas Caceres, died during a confrontation between
 
 
 728
 PARAGUAY
 a local peasant group and vigilantes answering the Rural
 Association of Paraguay's (ARP) call for the defense of private
 property against squatters, according to a peasant group
 spokesman.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no reported cases of disappearance by security
 forces.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 There are frequent and credible reports of police brutality in
 the treatment of criminal suspects in detention, including the
 use of torture. During the year there were at least 10
 publicized reports charging police torture of dozens of people,
 including minors. Some reports were graphic about specific
 techniques; most referred to beatings and similar rough
 treatment.
 In March six criminal suspects were reported to have been
 beaten while in police custody. One, Jorge Rojas Aguero,
 claimed he was suffocated, beaten on the soles of his feet, and
 had a fire hose turned on him. At the invitation of the chief
 of police, Francisco Sanchez, the Chamber of Deputies'
 Committee on Human Rights interviewed the suspects. The
 Committee denounced the physical abuse of detainees, and
 General Sanchez pledged that he would pursue all cases of
 police abuse of authority. In April Supreme Court Justice
 Jeronimo Irala Burgos ordered an investigation into the case,
 marking the first time that a high court justice has intervened
 in a human rights case. However, investigations into this and
 similar cases are slow and often fail to result in a
 satisfactory resolution in a timely manner.
 Reports of police brutality, mostly beatings, against several
 minors awaiting transfer to the Embocada detention center
 became a major press story in November. By late 1990 the
 Parliament's Committee on Human Rights was significantly more
 active in investigating cases of abuse, especially claims of
 those held in police custody.
 There were at least four known cases of dismissal of police
 officers accused of physical abuse of detainees, and the
 Minister of Justice and Labor established a General Directorate
 on Human Rights to assist monitoring and promoting human rights
 issues.
 Throughout the year, security forces dislodged peasant
 squatters. Peasants detained on judicial orders to protect
 private property were often held in poor conditions under
 nonspecific warrants and without prompt'judicial processing;
 most were released from custody within a few hours.  Reports
 also surfaced of land owners taking justice into their own
 hands by.arming their employees and aggressively removing
 squatters from their property without court orders. Most of
 the evictions were violent, often accompanied by shots fired
 into the air, but there were no reports of fatalities.
 Peasants frequently suffered bruises and beatings during these
 evictions. Police also have been known to use tear gas against
 the squatters and to burn down their dwellings. Investigations
 into abuses by landowners are notoriously slow.
 
 
 729
 PARAGUAY
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 The Constitution provides for a judicial determination of the
 legality of detention. It stipulates that any person arrested
 without a warrant must be presented formally before a judge
 within 24 hours of his detention and have charges filed
 against him within 48 hours. Authorities continued to violate
 these provisions in 1990, although not as routinely as in the
 past. Some detainees continued to be held incommunicado. Two
 members of the militant pro-Stroessner faction of the Colorado
 Party were detained without charges for less than 24 hours in
 August in an effort to dissuade them from engaging in
 political activity.
 Exile no longer was used as a means of polit cal control in
 1990. Although the Paraguayan Communist Party still is
 officially outlawed, all of its members, including its leader
 Ananias Maidana, have been allowed to return to Paraguay.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 In general accordance with civil law tradition, trials are
 conducted almost exclusively by the presentation of written
 documents to a judge, who then renders a decision. Since
 there is no trial by jury, the judge alone determines guilt or
 innocence and decides the punishment. During the pretrial
 phase, the judge receives and may request police and
 prosecution investigative reports. In this phase, the judge
 is also likely to make a personal inspection of the scene of
 the crime and of all physical evidence available. The accused
 often appears before the court only twice-to plead and to
 hear sentencing. All judgments automatically are reviewed by
 an appellate judge, and the law provides for appeals to the
 Supreme Court. Court proceedings in cases of a sensitive
 political nature are held in secret, and any subsequent press
 reports are based only on the attorneys' or judges' comments.
 While nominally independent, the judiciary is subordinate to
 the executive branch, which exercises its influence through
 the presidential appointment of judges and control over the
 judiciary's budget. Although the new Government has included
 some independent jurists and opposition party members on the
 ,Supreme Court, the vast majority of lower court judges were
 appointed by the Stroessner government (1955-89) and often act
 arbitrarily. Meanwhile, judicial prosecutions of Stroessner-
 era torturers and corrupt officials continued to drag on
 without resolution.
 The judiciary's inadequate budget and the cumbersome written
 trial process, combined with the lack of adequately trained
 personnel at all -levels, limit the right of an accused to a
 fair and speedy trial. More than 90 percent of prisoners have
 not been sentenced, but serve the time prescribed as a penalty
 for the crime of which they are accused and are then
 released. The Government worked with the United Nations, the
 U.S. Agency for International Development, and other donors to
 reform various provisions in the Code of Penal Procedure that
 would improve the administration of justice.
 Police and judicial institutions still tend to serve those
 with political, military, or economic power, which discourages
 some citizens from reporting police abuse. Public confidence
 in the equal application of the law was not enhanced when
 high-level Stroessner-era public officials accused of the
 theft of public funds were allowed to evade punishment by
 
 
 PARAGUAY
 donating land or money to the State. In March the release
 from prison of Justo Eris Almada, former administrator of the
 Paraguayan free port at Paranagua, Brazil, caused a public
 uproar. Almada, who was in prison for misappropriation of
 public funds, left Paraguay soon after his release and was
 again being sought by Paraguayan legal authorities at year's
 end. Several days after therelease ruling, Supreme Court
 Justice Jeronimo Irala Burgos suspended the judge and
 prosecuting attorney in the case, and in September the Supreme
 Court voted to remove the judge and prosecutor from their jobs
 for their handling of the Almada case. Meanwhile, human
 rights groups applauded the dismissal of Attorney General
 Diogenes Martinez, who failed to prosecute cases of human
 rights abuses and corruption.
 Paraguay no longer has political offenses on its statutes, nor
 are there any political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 While government and security forces generally do not
 interfere in the private lives of citizens, there have been
 exceptions. Although private homes are protected
 constitutionally from police entry except under the terms of a
 judicial warrant or to prevent a crime, this protection at
 times was ignored
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 The Paraguayan'press in 1990 continued to enjoy the freedom it
 acquired in 1989. However, editors exercised a considerable
 degree of self-restraint in what they did and did not publish;
 radio and television were more aggressive and provocative.
 One taboo remained: material critical of President Rodriguez
 or his family rarely was published or broadcast.
 There was little change in academic freedom in 1990. Students
 continued to protest against corruption and staged a number of
 student strikes without government intervention.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Following several clashes between police and downtown
 demonstrators after the Interior Ministry decreed a ban in
 February 1989 on protests in the heart of Asuncion, the
 Congress in June 1990 passed a law that supersedes the decree
 regulating demonstrations in Asuncion. The new law, which was
 universally viewed as an improvement over previous
 legislation, limits the areas where demonstrations may take
 place. It also requires notice to the Asuncion police at
 least 24 hours before any rally in the downtown area. Under
 the new law, the police could ban the rally only if a third
 party already had given notice of plans for a similar rally at
 the same place and time, and police refusal of the permit
 would have to be given in writing to the organizers within 12
 hours of receipt of the organizers' request. In addition, the
 bill prohibits public meetings or demonstrations in front of
 the Presidential Palace and outside military or police
 barracks.
 
 
 PARAGUAY
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Roman Catholicism is the predominant and official religion in
 Paraguay, but the Constitution provides for freedom "of
 religion for all persons, and the Government continued to
 respect that freedom in 1990.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign'
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Paraguayan citizens travel freely within the country with
 virtually no restrictions. Although Paraguayan passports are
 not valid for travel to Communist countries, the Government
 has taken no action to stop citizens from visiting Communist
 countries, The Government continued the practice of not
 allowing citizens of Communist countries to enter Paraguay.
 There are no restrictions on other foreign travel or
 emigration.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 In 1990 Paraguay continued its transition to democracy begun
 in 1989, which is scheduled to culminate in 1993 with the
 election of a new President. The Congress slowly began to
 assert itself, modifying the Executive's legislative proposals
 and seeking detailed reports from ministries on their
 expenditures and execution of policy. Early in the year, the
 Colorado-controlled Congress, with the help of the opposition
 Authentic Radical Liberal Party (PLRA) leadership, weakened
 the President's stronger reform-oriented proposal to revise
 the electoral code.
 The electoral code reform law, passed by the Congress in
 February and signed into law by the President in March,
 contains several important changes, including proportional
 representation in the Congress, the electoral tribunal, and
 other elected bodies; direct municipal elections; independent
 (nonparty) and coalition candidacies; direct internal party
 elections of party candidates and officers; government
 financing for campaigns; regulation of media time; and the
 establishment of a nonpartisan electoral tribunal to rule on
 conflicts or questions pertaining to elections or political
 parties. The electoral tribunal is a nonpartisan court that
 rules on all conflicts or questions pertaining to elections or
 political parties. Reform of the Constitution is planned for
 1992.
 General elections are held every 5 years; the next will take
 place in 1993. Municipal elections, also held nationwide
 every 5 years, had originally been scheduled for October 1990,
 but were postponed after the passage of the new electoral code
 and then again to permit increased voter registration. The
 elections are now set for May 1991, when for the first time
 local governments will be elected directly. The law requires
 all Paraguayans between 18 and 60 years of age to vote, but
 does not define any sanctions for not voting.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 Four major human rights groups operate in Paraguay: the
 Committee of Churches (supported by foreign churches), the
 Paraguayan Human Rights Commission (which publishes a periodic
 
 
 PARAGUAY
 newsletter), Prodemos (a group that includes Roman Catholic
 Bishop Mario Melanio Medina among its leaders), and the local
 chapter of the Association of Latin American Lawyers for the
 Defense of Human Rights. The Catholic Church also is an
 active advocate of human rights. The Church's weekly
 newspaper, Sendero, includes reports on alleged human rights
 violations as a major part of its editorial format. Two of
 Paraguay's leading human rights advocates, Carmen Casco de
 Lara Castro of the Paraguayan Human Rights Commission and
 Francisco Jose de Vargas of the Committee of Churches,
 continued to serve as opposition members in the Congress.
 In June the Government allowed the leftist, nongovernmental
 human rights organization, the Permanent Tribunal of the
 People, to meet in Asuncion. The 3-day mock tribunal, which
 received extensive local press coverage, provided a forum for
 victims of the Stroessner regime's repression. The "hearings"
 also examined cases of public corruption. The Government of
 President Rodriguez also came in for some criticism, mostly
 for its failure to punish Stroessner-era officials.
 During 1990, the Government welcomed discussion of human
 rights in Paraguay with a variety of outside governmental and
 nongovernmental organizations. After more than a decade of
 stalling by the previous regime, the Inter-American Human
 Rights Commission (IACHR) of the Organization of American
 States (OAS) was invited to make an on-site visit to Asuncion
 on February 6-10. The five-person delegation met with
 representatives .of various sectors of the Government and
 society, including President Rodriguez, Cabinet ministers,
 lawmakers, the Supreme Court, the political opposition,
 organized labor, human rights, and peasant, Indian, and
 women's groups. The Commission received written reports from
 a number of the organizations. In general, the Commission was
 told that the Government deserved high-marks for its political
 liberalization, but had failed to solve economic and social
 maladies, particularly the explosive problem of landless
 peasants. Paraguay hosted the 20th OAS General Assembly in
 June, at which the IACHR's Annual Report on Paraguay was
 debated.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 Ethnical-ly, socially, and culturally, Paraguay hat one of the
 most homogeneous populations in South America. More than 90
 percent of the people are of mixed Guarani Indian and Spanish
 descent. An even larger percentage of the population is Roman
 Catholic. A large majority of Paraguayans speak both Guarani
 and Spanish. In fact, in political, cultural, and military
 circles fluency in Guarani and ties to peasant or rural
 origins are considered positive, and, in the case of the
 military, necessary attributes.
 There are significant expatriate Korean and Chinese
 communities which experience de facto social and economic
 discrimination. Koreans and Chinese are routinely denied
 access to the same financial institutions and terms that are
 enjoyed by non-Asian Paraguayans. They are often
 discriminated against in the housing market, and do not have
 equal access to private institutions and schools.
 The participation of women in the social and political system
 is limited in this still male-dominated society. There are
 several nongovernmental women's organizations, which focus
 
 
 733
 PARAGUAY
 primarily on encouraging civic education and greater
 participation in the democratic transition process. As a role
 model, Dr. Cymthia Prieto, Minister of Public Health and
 Paraguay's first female Cabinet Minister, continued to receive
 high marks for her leadership and performance, both in
 Paraguay and at the Pan-American Health Organization. While
 the traditional social system limits the participation of
 women in politics, they long have been active in the economy,
 particularly those women from lower income groups, and they
 increasingly participate in business, the professions, and the
 artistic world.
 Paraguay's civil code, reformed in 1988 by the Stroessner
 government, discriminates against married women through such
 requirements as the husband's permission for employment, male
 ownership of a couple's property, and male control over travel
 of the wife and-children. Violence against women such as wife
 beating is common in Paraguay. Such abuse is against the law,
 but the law has not consistently been well enforced. During
 the year there were several cases of husbands killing their
 wives in marital disputes. The murders were universally
 condemned and the husbands arrested on criminal charges. In
 1990 a Department of the Family, one of whose functions is to
 assist battered women, was opened within the Asuncion police
 force.
 Paraguay has an unassimilated Indian population estimated at
 75,000-100,000, which is generally ignored and neglected. The
 Government's National Indigenous Institute (INDI) has the
 authority to purchase land on behalf of Indian communities and
 to expropriate private property under certain conditions to
 establish tribal homelands, but the entity is not well
 funded. Social services, (schools, health posts, and so
 forth) in Indian areas are generally of relatively poor
 quality compared to those in other areas of the country, and
 the Government actively encourages church groups to work with
 indigenous populations in health and welfare, as well as in
 religious matters. The problems of the indigenous population,
 particularly those involving land claims, continued to receive
 frequent media attention during the year.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 Paraguay has been denied trade preferences under the U.S.
 Generalized System of Preferences (GSP) program since 1987,
 when it was found not to be in compliance with the GSP
 statutory requirements regarding the provision of
 internationally recognized worker rights. Paraguay was
 removed from the program after a review of charges that
 Paraguayan workers were being denied freedom of association
 and that their leaders were being harassed. A request by the
 Government for reinstatement in the program based on claimed
 improvements since the Rodriguez Government took power was
 under consideration at the end of 1990.
 Private sector workers were free to form and join unions of
 their choosing without government interference. Public sector
 workers, however, continued to be prohibited by law from
 unionizing. The Labor Code does not cover public sector,
 temporary, or domestic workers. Only a small proportion of
 Paraguay's workers were organized.
 
 
 734
 PARAGUAY
 Governmental permission to exercise the right to strike is
 limited by a complex legal process of fact-finding,
 arbitration, and adjudication that can involve delays of
 several years. No major strikes were declared legal by the
 Government in 1990. The law prohibits public sector workers
 from striking. Nevertheless there were many private-sector
 strikes in 1990, of which the longest and most significant was
 the 83-day walkout by construction workers on the Paraguayan
 side of the Yacyreta Binational Hydroelectric dam, Two
 Unified Workers Central (CUT) leaders, President Victor Baez
 and Deputy General Secretary Carlos Filizzola, were stopped by
 security forces on a highway on March 9 en route to meet with
 the striking Yacyreta workers. According to the two CUT
 leaders, the soldiers told them that they had "orders from
 above" not to permit them to pass. The trade unionists
 finally were able to reach the strike site on March 12. Later
 in the long walkout,- police again delayed Filizzola in
 reaching the strike site for a bargaining session with the
 companies immediately after the strikers had named him their
 negotiator. There were no reports of systematic government
 harassment or violence against strikers or union leaders.
 Unions are free to maintain contact with regional and
 international labor organizations.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 The union-breaking tactic of firing the leaders of nascent
 unions that was so popular with Paraguayan employers in 1989
 continued in 1990. The Stroessner-era Labor Code provided
 little protection to unions and union leaders, but a new Labor
 Code that simplified strike procedures and protected union
 organizers was presented to the Parliament on November 23,
 1990.
 At year's end, the Parliament still had not reformed the
 provision of the existing Labor Code that protects the job
 security of union leaders, failing for the second consecutive
 legislative session to decide on a draft bill submitted by CUT
 in July 1989. However, the legislature was considering a
 special session to deal with the proposed labor code
 revision. Meanwhile, fired union leaders may seek redress in
 the courts, but the labor courts are sometimes slow to act.
 In some cases where judges have ordered fired workers
 reinstated, the employers have simply disregarded the court
 order.
 The right to bargain collectively is recognized in the Labor
 Code, but most employers refused to enter into such bargaining
 because there are no legal sanctions or government pressures
 forcing them to do so.
 Under the law, there exist no areas, such as special economic
 zones, that are exempt from the provisions of the Labor Code.
 Paraguay has no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 Forced labor is prohibited by law and is not practiced.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 The office of the Director General for the Protection of
 Minors in the Ministry of Justice and Labor has the
 responsibility for enforcing Paraguay's child labor laws.
 
 
 735
 PARAGUAY
 Minors between 15 and 18 years of age may be employed only
 with parental authorization and may not be employed in
 dangerous or unhealthy conditions. Children between 12 and 15
 years of age may only be employed in a family enterprise, an
 apprenticeship, or in agriculture. The Labor Code prohibits
 work by children under 12. However, a local nongovernmental
 organization estimated that there were more than 25,000
 children, many younger than 12, working in the streets of
 Asuncion and its suburban communities with a population of
 about 1 million, selling newspapers, shining shoes, cleaning
 car windows, and so forth. In rural areas, it is not unusual
 for children as young as 10 to work beside their parents
 cutting sugar cane.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 The executive branch of the Government establishes a minimum
 wage, varying according to the region of the country, based on
 studies of the cost of living prepared by the National
 Economic Coordinating Committee. The minimum monthly wage in
 Asuncion (the highest) was approximately $200 in mid-1990.
 The minimum does not apply to all private sector employees; it
 does not cover domestic servants, for example. The minimum
 wage is barely sufficient for a worker and his family to
 maintain a minimally decent standard of living. Furthermore,
 it has been estimated that 50 to 70 percent of Paraguayan
 workers earn less than the decreed minimum.
 According to the Labor Code, maximum weekly hours are 48 for
 day work and 42 for night work, with 1 day of rest. The law
 provides for an annual bonus of 1 month's salary. Married
 women need their husbands' consent to enter into a labor
 contract, although labor contracts may not be denied to women
 who worked prior to marriage.
 The Labor Code also governs conditions of safety, hygiene, and
 comfort. In general, the Government did not effectively
 enforce the safety and hygiene provisions, partially due to
 the lack of inspectors.
 
 
