 PARAGUAY
 Paraguay, independent since 1811, has been ruled almost continuously by authori-
 tarian regimes. In early 1989 a new Government, the leaders of which had deposed
 dictator Alfredo Stroessner, committed itself to democracy, attempted to increase re-
 spect for human rights, and subsequently took important steps toward those goals.
 Paraguay is a constitutional republic with a powerful executive branch and a bi-
 cameral legislature. The President is the Head of Government and cannot succeed
 himself. The Colorado Party and the armed forces still dominate the system, but the
 passage of a new Constitution in June 1992 marked an important step toward insti-
 tuting civilian rule, judicial independence, and political accountability. The transi-
 tion to full democracy is scheduled to culminate with the election of a new president
 in 1993.
 Paraguay's armed forces consist of an army, navy, and air force and the President
 is the Commander-in-Chief. According to the U.S. Arms Control and Disarmament
 Agency, total military expenditures for 1989 were $61 million. There are no plans
 to reduce current expenditures in the near future. The police forces, under the over-
 all authority of the Ministry of Interior, hold the primary responsibility for main-
 taining internal security and public order. While law enforcement practices have im-
 provedsince the 1989 coup, the police continued to be responsible for human rights
 abuses in 1992.
 Paraguay has a market-based economy predominantly oriented toward exporting
 primary agricultural products. Efforts to begin privatization of state-managed busi-
 nesses got under way in 1992.
 Principal human rights problems included extrajudicial killings, police torture of
 suspects, beatings and mistreatment of prisoners, police corruption, detention of sus-
 pects without judicial orders, general weaknesses within the judiciary, firings of
 labor organizers, violent evictions and arbitrary detention of squatters, and military
 intrusions into the judicial and political systems. Serious accountability problems
 continued as the Government often failed to prosecute perpetrators of recent abuses
 and abuses from the Stroessner era. Yet when a major corruption scandal came to
 light which involved senior military officers, the Government cooperated with the
 civilian courts and their investigations.
 
 
 466
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were political killings in 1992,
 principally involving peasant activists. The degree of government involvement re-
 mains unclear.
 As in previous years the police failed to investigate satisfactorily the murders of
 peasant activists which may have been politically motivated. For example, on Sep-
 tember 6 the mutilated body of Benito Benitez, a peasant organization leader, was
 found near his home in Minga Pora, Alta Parana department. ASAGRAPA, the local
 agricultural association, denounced the brutality of the murder and demanded a full
 investigation of this and other recent murders of activists. The authorities have ar-
 rested no suspects in these cases. In an August incident Salvador Ozuna, a police-
 man in Pedro Juan Caballero, Amambay department, shot and killed Arsenio
 Alcides Gimenez, who was being questioned by authorities. Ozuna was taken into
 custody; at year's end he had yet to be charged.
 In September deputy police chief Julio Ponciano Riveros was found dead in his
 cell in Luque shortiy after he was arrested by his superior for having abandoned
 his post for a few days without permission. Accordingto the medical report, Riveros
 died from a cerebral hemorrhage as the result of a blow to the head. Three police
 officers who spoke to the press about the irregularities in Riveros' death were subse-
 quently arrested for disciplinary action. The case was investigated by judicial au-
 thorities, and the police chief, Mateo Estigarribia, was subpoenaed to testify before
 the investigating judge. At year's end the case was still under investigation.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reported cases of abductions by security forces.
 c. Torture and other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 Torture of criminal suspects is common in Paraguay, as is brutal and degrading
 treatment of convicted prisoners and other detainees. Police, military, and prison
 guards have all been implicated to some extent in the mistreatment of individuals
 in their custody; few are ever tried, convicted, and appropriately punished. Some,
 however, have been arrested and held for investigation and trial.
 There were credible reports of mistreatment of women and minors, and brutal at-
 tempts to force confessions out of detainees. The respected human rights group
 TEKOJOJA, a juvenile rights "up that often works with the Council for the De-
 fense of Minors, reported that children in police custody are particularly susceptible
 to abuse. Many children were physically punished while in police custody. None of
 the dozens of cases of torture of minors that were denounced before the courts re-
 sulted in a conviction.
 Prison conditions remained poor. Overcrowding and the mistreatment of prisoners
 were the most serious problems. In June an uprising by prisoners at the Tacumbu
 National Penitentiary drew attention to beatings there. In response to the uprising
 the Government ordered a number of protesting prisoners to the military prison at
 Lagarenza, a desert barracks reopene as a prison work camp, where they worked
 in brutal and health-threatening conditions. Many of these prisoners reported that
 before they were transferred to Lagarenza approximately 60 of them were beaten
 with whips and wires byprison guards. Reports of the beatings led to the eventual
 arrest of the Director of Penal Institutes and four guards. The Director was under
 house arrest while the judicial process and investigation continued.
 Two police officials in San Lorenzo were named in an April complaint for torture,
 death threats, robbery, and humiliation brought by individuals representing three
 minors who had been arrested. Mistreatment and beatings by police also occurred
 in the towns of Nemby and Caazapa. Mario Bernardino Enciso testified before Judge
 Cristobal Caceres Frutos about systematic beatings he had received while in the
 custody of police in Nemby. Enciso alleged that he was blindfolded, suffocated, and
 beaten on his stomach and the soles of his feet with a night stick.
 In February Higinio Acosta Gonzalez was taken from police custody in the town
 of General Morinigo, Caazapa department, and hospitalized with a bullet in his
 back. He showed evidence of having been beaten about the face, arms, and legs.
 Family members claimed that police had threatened to murder him if he revealed
 what had happened. According to the family, Acosta Gonzalez was offered a large
 sum of money if he would keep silent and go to Argentina. A judge ordered the ar-
 rest of the police sergeant responsible for the shooting. At year's end the case was
 still under judicial process.
 In March also in Caazapa, a 16-year-old girl accused police precinct chief Juan
 Gill Ruiz Diaz of physical and psychological mistreatment. While detained without
 a warrant, the policeman stripped her, threatened her with a knife, and interro-
 gated her about money she had allegedly stolen from her employer. She gave a
 forced confession to the police. She was held for 7 days before her father was able
 
 
 467
 to free her on the grounds that there was neither evidence against her nor an arrest
 order, and the detention was illegal because she was a minor.
 The Justice Ministry, the Supreme Court, and the Human Rights Committee of
 the House of Deputies continued to make inquires into torture and other abusive
 treatment but the Government was rarely able to enforce necessary discipline
 among the security forces. Authorities sentenced notorious human rights violators
 from the Stroessner regime, such as police investigations chief Pastor Coronel, police
 chief General Alcibiades Britaz Borges, Lucilo Benitez, and Camilo Almada Morel.
 Pastor Coronel, already sentenced to 25 years in prison on previous charges, is still
 under judicial process on an additional 15 counts of torture. In total, Paraguayan
 prosecutors are processing 20 separate cases of torture by Stroessner-era police and
 other officials. Amnesty International formally noted the progress made in the pros-
 ecution of these cases but cautioned that more needed to be done.
 There were credible reports that landowners, many of them Brazilians living near
 the border in Alta Parana department, armed their employees who aggressively re-
 moved squatters from the property of their employers without court orders. Some
 of the evictions were violent, although there were no reports of fatalities. Para-
 guayan police also sometimes used excessive force in the removal of land squatters.
 Investigations into abuses by landowners, particularly the vigilantism by Brazilian
 "colonists" in Paraguay, were notoriously slow, and seldom resulted in punishment
 of those committing the abusea.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The authorities often violated provisions
 of the 1992 Constitution which prohibit detention without written order by a com-
 petent authority and stipulate that any person arrested must be presented before
 a judge within 24 hours of his or her detention.
 The Paraguayan authorities hold nearly 90 percent of their estimated 3,000 pris-
 oners without arrest warrants, orders of detention, or convictions. Only 6 percent
 of the detainees at Tacumbu have been sentenced; detainees are routinely held
 pending investigations and judicial process. Throughout 1992 the authorities ar-
 rested and imprisoned many persons without legal process. There were many cases
 such as that of Mirtha Alonso de Cabanas, arrested on September 19 by an Asun-
 cion police precinct chief without judicial order. She was later transferred between
 precincts without formal notification of the charges against her, as required under
 the 1992 Constitution. She remains in custody and her case is pending.
 In August the Supreme Court ordered the release of 14 prisoners from Tacumbu
 Penitentary� for lack OfeanY legal zProerss against them.w Eight minors were released
 in Augut or lack of dtenin or      . One Paraguayan prison ofcia notedthat
 detainees sometimes request a direct transfer to the penitentiary rather than stay
 in the much worse conditions found in local police cells. Some detainees cite the
 greater fear of beating that motivates them to move from police custody to prison
 as soon as possible. Nevertheless, such transfers occurred too frequently without
 proper documentation.
 Mass arrests of peasant land occupiers still occurred, albeit less frequently than
 in previous years. At times the authorities ignored established procedure and made
 arrests without the issuance of warrants that specifically named those to be de-
 tained. While most were held for only a few hours, others were detained for longer
 p)eriOd. Squatters have illegally seized land, at least in one case at the urging of
 loa political leaders, and have refused to leave the property despite court orders
 to do s.
 Incidents of security forces dislodging peasant land occupiers decreasedappar-
 ently due to government efforts to distribute land to landless peasants. Peasant
 leader Marcelno Corazon Medina was arrested at the end of 1991, afer allegedly
 fighting with police. His lawyer chaed that Corazon was persecuted for supporting
 landless peasants' rights; he was stil in detention without sentencing at year's end.
 Forced exile is no Ionger used as a means of political control.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The judicial ran  is composed of a five-member
 Supreme Court headed by a President and including the Attorney General. There
 are four appellate tribunals: civil and commercial, criminal, labor, and juvenile. Sev-
 eral minor courts and justices of the peace fall within these four functional areas.
 There are public defenders for the transient and the indigent. Trials are conducted
 almost exclusively by presentation of written documents to a judge, who then ren-
 ders a decision. Since there is no trial by jury, the judge alone determines guilt or
 innocence and decides punishment. During the pretrial phase, the judge receives
 and may request investigative reports. In this phavthe judge is also tikely to make
 a personal inspection of the scene of the crime and of the available physical evi-
 dence. The accused often appears before the court only twice: To plead and to be
 sentenced. All verdicts are automatically reviewed by an appellate judge, and the
 
 
 468
 law provides for appeals to the Supreme Court. The military has its own judicial
 system for the prosecution of military offenses.
 With the passage of the new Constitution in June, the judiciary acquired greater
 structural and political independence from the executive branch. Judges will no
 longer be appointed by the executive. The Constitution created a council of mag-
 istrates to replace the old forms of political control of the judiciary, which Will take
 effect with the installation of a new government in 1993. Many of the current
 judges, holdovers from appointments made by former dictator Alfredo Stroessner,
 are alleged to make judicial decisions on the basis of bribery, intimidation, or var-
 ious political reasons.
 In May four high-ranking police officials were convicted for the torture and mur-
 der of Mario Schaerer Prono. With that notable exception, cases of torture and cor-
 ruption against Stroessner-era officials continued to move slowly.
 The courts, Parliament, and the executive branch responded to public outcries
 against corruption by pursuing .legal action against officials implicated in abuses of
 authority. In the case of a notorious car theft scandal, the executive branch cooper-
 ated with the judiciary to ensure that the colonel who accused high-ranking officers
 of legal improprieties was allowed to appear before civilian judges. Although mili-
 tary authorities charged the colonel with defaming superior officers, the President
 said he would act only in accordance with civil court decisions. Consequently, sev-
 eral high-ranking military officers were relieved of their duties and indicted by civil
 authorities. Former Army Commander General Humberto Garcete and other high-
 ranking officers were detained pending the resolution of judicial investigations and
 process.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Hom, or Correspondence.-While
 the Government and its security forces generally did not interfere in the private
 lives of citizens, there were exceptions. The Constitution protects private homes
 from police entry except to prevent a crime in progress or when the police possess
 a judicial warrant. There were complaints that at times the authorities ignored this
 protection, especially in the country's interior. The Government at times relied upon
 surveillance of individuals and monitoring of communications for political and secu-
 rity reasons. The     telephone com any admitted to having operated a wiretap
 operation without warrants that recored the onversations of hundreds of individ-
 uals, including members of the presidential houehol Criminal investigations are
 underway in this matter.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including
 a. Freedom = Speech and Press.-The 1992 Constitution protects freedom of ex-
 pression and the press. The Government made no effort to restrict freedom of speech
 and the Paraguayan press exercised the freedoms acquired in 1989 mre freely than
 at any time in the country's recent histoy. There were reports of anonymous death
 threats against reporters and vocal labor union activists during 1992, although the
 threats did little to discourage investigative reporting or labor activism As in the
 past, those threats were made againt persons examining allegations of official cor-
 ruption, the contraband trade, and ties to the former regime. Sthela Ruflielli, a
 reporter for the afternoon daily Ultima Hora in Caazapa department received death
 threats while investigating cattle rustling and correption by local officials. Although
 Ruffinelli reported the threats to the central government representative in Caazapa,
 dissatisfaction with the official response led the Paraguayan Reporters' Union to
 make a complaint to the Attorney General requesting action. Police authorities in-
 vestigated the complaint with no results.
 In March polie impeded press over of a meeting between municipal authori-
 ties in the town of Ciudad del Este and the management of Gallerias Americana
 S.A." The press was covering a month-old labor strike there when police prohibited
 press access to the meeting under orders of the Mayor.
 In September the press convincinly displayed its newfound power to pursue an
 investigation when it exposed alleged military and police involvement in a major car
 theft ring. .The press investigation  . .precipitated a special parliamentr t inquiry .that
 led to ictments of several high-ranking military officers. The Special Committee
 on Illegal Activities expanded its investigations to include other allegations of cor-
 ruption that led to the indictment of police chief Francisco Sanchez and police ad-
 ministrator Carlos Moinos.
 There were no restrictions on academic freedom in 1992.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The 1992 Constitution protects
 the right of association and peaceful assembly. In June 1990, Congress passed a law
 regulating emonstraions m  suncin. Te lw   mis te areas were and te
 hours when demonstrations may take place. It also requires notice to the Asuncion
 
 
 469
 police at least 24 hours before any rally in the downtown area and gives the police
 the option of banning the protest.
 Notification of police opposition to a rally has to be given in writing to the orga-
 nizers within 12 hours o receipt of the organizers' request. Under the law, a police
 ban is permitted only if a thrd party has already given notice of plans for a similar
 rally at the same place and time. In addition, the bill prohibits public meetings or
 demonstrations in front of the Presidential Palace and outside military or police bar-
 racks.
 In July, in the town of Limpio, police broke up a demonstration by using water
 cannons and tear gas. The demonstrators had gathered to hold a 5 minute sit-in
 at the Damien Pass Bridge to commemorate the deaths of passengers from a Limpio
 bus line. The local police chief claimed the dispersal action was necessary to main-
 tain public order.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for freedom of conscience for
 all persons and recognizes no official religion. The Government continued to respect
 that freedom in 1992. Roman Catholicism is the predominant religion in Paraguay,
 but all denominations are free to worship as they choose. Adherence to a particular
 creed confers no legal advantage or disadvantage, and foreign and local missionaries
 proselytize freely.
 d. Freedomof Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-Paraguayan citizens travel freely within the country with virtually no
 restrictions. There are no restrictions on foreign travel or emigration. There is no
 ban on travel to any country.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Following successful elections for municipal government and a constituent assem-
 bly in 1991, Paraguay made significant progress in its democratic transition in 1992
 with the promulgation of the new Constitution. The process is scheduled to cul-
 minate in 1993 with the election of a new president. Congress continued to assert
 itself by investigating corruption and forming a commission that aggressively pur-
 sued auto theft charges that involved high-level functionaries. Political debate rep-
 resenting a broader spectrum of opinions was commonplace. The new Constitution
 provides for substantial decentralization of authority.
 Weak organization and lack of financial resources continued to limit access by in-
 digenous peoples to the political and economic system. They relied mainly upon par-
 liamentary commissions topromote their particular interests and they were not for-
 eally represented in the Constituent Assembly. Nonetheless, Title V of the new
 Constitution guarantees indigenous pples' rights to participate in the economic,
 social, political, and cultural life of the nation. The Constitution also protects their
 property interests. These constitutional rights, however, have yet to be fully codified
 into law, and at year's end it remained to be seen how effectively they would be
 implemented.
 While there are no formal legal impediments, women face significant obstacles
 when they seek to participate in government and politics. The country's first female
 cabinet member, Minister of Public Health Dr. Cynthia Prieto, was appointed in No-
 vember 1989. On November 27 Encuentro Nacional presidential candidate Guil-
 lermo Caballero Vargas selected Maria Brusquetti as his vice presidential running
 mate for the 1993 presidential campaign. However, there are few women in senior
 leadership positions either in government or in the political parties.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Four major human rights groups operate in Paraguay: the Committee of Churches
 (an interdenominational group that monitors human rhts and provides legal as-
 sistance), PRODEMOS (a group that includes Catholic iishop Mario Melamo Me-
 dina among its leaders), TEKOJOJA, and the local chapter of the Association of
 Latin American Lawyers for the Defense of Human Rights. Two of Paraguay's lead-
 ing human rights advocates, Carmen Casco de Lar Castro and Francisco Jose de
 Vargas, continued to serve as members of Congress.
 In April the Office of the Director General of Human Rights, located in the Min-
 istry of Justice and Labor, sponsored seminars to promotehuman rights awareness
 in Paraguay. This government human rights office has access to congressional, exec-
 utive, and judicial authorities. The Government has yet to show, however, that it
 has the capacity to protect human rights by convicting and punishing those, particu-
 larly within the police, who commit abuses.
 
 
 470
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Language, or Social Status
 Paraguay's Constitution and laws prohibit discrimination in these areas. How-
 ever, the sigificant Korean and Chinese communities experience social and eco-
 nomic discrimination and are sometimes denied access to credit terms enjoyed by
 other Paraguayans. They are also sometimes discriminated against in the housing
 market and do not have equal access to private institutions and schools.
 Participation by women in the social and political system, although somewhat im-
 proved in 1992, is still limited in the male-dominated society of Paraguay. Women
 actively and openly participated in drafting the new Constitution in the Constituent
 Assembly. The Constitution supersedes aspects of Paraguay's Civil Code that dis-
 criminated against married women through such requirements as the husband's
 permission for employment, male ownership of a couple's property, and a husband's
 control over travel of his wife and children. The new Constitution also includes pro-
 tections for motherhood and guarantees of equality for women, but many of these
 new provisions regarding women have not yet been codified. How they will be imple-
 mented remains to be seen.
 Wife beating and exploitation of women in employment continued to occur in
 Paraguay. Most informed observers believe that wife beating occurs among a minor-
 ity of the population, but that it is underreported. Exploitatin of women, especially
 the prstitution of teenagers, was a serious concern for authorities. Police freqluently
 raided brothels in which minors were employed, yet authorities paid little attention
 to sexrelated job discrimination. Some women complained about sex-related condi-
 tions for pro motion in their jobs. There are no reports of women being denied equal
 access to education. Paraguay has instituted with U.N. assistance a human develop-
 ment program specifically targeted to assist peasant women.
 Paraguay has an unassimilated and neglected indigenous population estimated at
 75,000 to 100,000. There were initial efforts in 1992 to address the concerns of the
 incigenous people by the legislature and the Constituent Assembly. The Govern-
 ments nationalindigenous institute (INDI) has the authority to purchase land on
 behalf of indigenous communities and to expropriate private property under certain
 conditions to establish tribal homelands, bt the entty is. p1orly funded. The Gov-
 ernment actvey encourages curch groups to work wth indgenous populations in
 health and welfare, as wel as in reliious matters. The problems of the indigenous
 population, particularly those involving land claims, continued to receive f reqent
 media attention. The main problems facing the indigenous population are lak of
 education, malnourishment, and economic displacement resulting from development
 and modernization.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 The Right of Association.--For the first time in Paraguay's history, both private
 and public sector workers a now free to form and join unions without government
 interference. Provisions of the 1992 Constitution superseded the existing Labor
 Code, which did not permit public sector worker unions. The new Constitution es-
 tablished principles and protections for fundamental worker rights, including the
 right of association. It also contains an antidiscrimination clause, provisions for em-
 ployment tenure and severance pay for unjustified fdrngs, collective bargaining, and
 the right to strike. These constitutional previsions marked a significant break from
 legally protected antilabor practices in previous years, particularly practiced against
 workers in the public sector.
 Under the new Constitution the public sector, excluding the police and military,
 was most active in forming unions in 1992. Public employees, representing 6 percent
 of the total labor force, formed or were in process of forming unions in several areas,
 including the central bank, other state banks, the telephone utility, the social secu-
 rity administration, the civil air authority, the airport, and the Foreign Ministry,
 among others. There   was  no evidence of government interference in these
 unionizations.
 Labor Vice Minister Oscar Martinez Perez led an effort to investigate and fine
 employers who failed to mot minimum salary requirements and health and safety
 specifications. Congress failed to give final approval to a new labor code, however,
 primarily because of negative reactions by Paraguay's two main business associa-
 tions. Businessmen, and to some extent the Ministry of Commerce and Industry, op-
 posed some provisions of the code because they deemed them inflexible and a dis-
 incentive to investment.
 In principle, unions are independent of the Government and political parties, al-
 though the case of the Confederation of Paraguayan Workers (CPT) is noteworthy.
 A pro-Colorad Party faction within the CPT, the "27th of August" movement, suc-
 cessfully sought an injunction against CP i  president Julio Etcheverry, suspending
 the internal elections at the CPs May 1992 Congress. The movement seeks to
 
 
 471
 build stronger ties with the ruling Colorado Party; however, the ruling was based
 on a constitutional provision for direct elections within unions.
 Approximately 5 percent of Paraguayan workers are organized. That percentae
 may change as public employees take advantage of constitutional protections or
 public sector umons. Unions are free to maintain contact with regional and inter-
 national labor organizations.
 b. The Right To Organize and Bargain Collectively.-Collective bargaining is pro-
 tected by law, and has been successfully conducted in many cases. Collective con-
 tracts are still the exception rather than the norm in labor/management relations.
 While the Constitution prohibits antiunion discrimination, the firing and harass-
 ment of some union organizers in the private sector continued in 1992. Under
 present legislation fired union leaders can seek redress in the courts, but the labor
 courts have been slow to respond to complaints. As in previous years, in some cases
 where judges ordered fired workers reinstated, the employers disregarded the court
 order.
 There were 19 strikes by unions affiliated with the independent labor federation
 CUT alone, 12 of which were directly related to the firing o union oranizers, man-
 agement violations of a collective contract agreement, or management a effort to pre-
 vent workers from freely associating. Agreements with the transportation workers
 unions went unfulfilled by owners and management in 1992. The teacher associa-
 tions also protested throughout the year the failure of the Education Ministry to
 meet minimum wage standards. The failure to meet salary payments frequently
 precipitated labor problems, especially in the public health sector. Labor attributes
 the lack of action on complaints filed with the Labor Ministry to bottlenecks in the
 judicial system. There were also complaints of management creating parallel or "fac-
 tory" unions to compete with independently formed unions.
 Paraguay has no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-Forced labor is prohibited by law
 and is not practiced.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The Office of the Director General
 for the Protection of Minors in the Ministry of Justice and Labor is responsible for
 enforcing child labor laws. Minors between 15 and 18 years of age can be employed
 only with parental authorization and cannot be employed under dangerous or
 unhealthy conditions. Children between 12 and 15 years of age may be employed
 only in family enterprises, appenticeships, or in agriculture. Furthermore, the
 Labor Code prohibits work by children under 12 years of age. However, in practice
 many thousands of children, many younger than 12, work in the streets of Asuncion
 and its suburban communities selling newspapers, shining shoes, and cleaning car
 windows. In rural areas it is not unusual for children as young as 10 to work beside
 their parents in the field.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The Government has established a private sec-
 tor minimum wage, regionally adjusted according to cost of living indices, sufficient
 to maintain a minimally adequate standard of living. The minimum salary was ad-
 justed by 10 percent in July for the first time since December 1990, representing
 a loss of real purchasing pwer of 20.5 percent. Furthermore, it has been estimated
 that 50 to 70 percent of Pargayan workers earn less than the decreed minimum.
 The current Labor Code, since it was superseded by the 1992 Constitution, is no
 longer an accurate guideline for work conditions. However, according to that Code,
 maximum weekly hours are 48 for day work and 42 for night work with 1 ay of
 rest. The law provides for an annual bonus of one month's salary. The Labor Code
 also stipulates conditions of safety, hygiene, and comfort. In general, the Govern-
 ment did not effectively enforce the safety and hygiene provisions of the Labor Code,
 partially due to the lack of inspectors.
