 PARAGUAY
 Paraguay, independent since 1811, has been ruled almost
 continuously by authoritarian regimes. In early 1989, however,
 a new Government committed itself to democracy and respect for
 human rights and subsequently took important steps toward those
 goals. While the military and the Colorado Party remain the
 dominant forces in the political system of the country,
 elections for municipal authorities and constitutional
 convention delegates were recognized as free and fair by
 international observers.
 The police forces, under the overall authority of the Ministry
 of Interior, hold the primary responsibility for internal
 security and maintaining public okder. Credible charges of
 police brutality persisted throughout 1991, although less
 frequently than in previous years.
 Paraguay has a free market economy predominantly oriented
 towards the exportation of primary agricultural products. In
 1991, the Government continued to advocate economic reforms,
 including the privatization of some state-managed businesses.
 Principal human rights problems included police torture and
 other physical abuse of criminal suspects and prisoners,
 violent evictions and arbitrary detentions of squatters, police
 corruption, instances of violent assaults on journalists, the
 weakness of the judiciary, and restrictions on worker rights.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section I Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudiciil Killing
 There were a few possible cases of politically motivated murder
 in 1991. In February, in Caraguaty, three Colorado Party'
 members were killed while campaigning before crowds during
 mayoral races. On April 26, radio journalist Santiago
 Leguizamon was assassinated in the town of Pedro Juan Caballero.
 Leguizamon was very vocal in attacking corruption and narcotics
 trafficking, including activities linked to corrupt government
 officials. According to press reports, hired assassins from
 Brazil may have killed Leguizaman, but no arrests have been
 made in the case.
 Extrajudicial deaths of persons in police custody also were
 reported. In January in San Lorenzo, a policeman shot and
 killed Juan Desiderio Ortellado Cardozo, 14 years old, for
 trespassing. In April the mother of Ruben Dario Isasi claimed
 that witnesses saw police detain Isasi for the February rape
 and murder of a teenaged girl. Isasi's body was later pulled
 from the Paraguay River. In July in Caapucu, Carlos Niseforo
 Garcia was killed in a traffic accident, according to police.
 An autopsy later concluded that Garcia had been beaten to
 death. There were two cases of police conscripts who were
 apparently beaten to death by authorities under unclear
 circumstances. In July in the town of Ita Angu'a, Jorge Raul
 Martinez died from multiple blows, according to an autopsy.
 The local sheriff had claimed Martinez died from food
 poisoning. Witnesses accused the sheriff of murdering the
 conscript. In September, the deputy sheriff of San Pedro
 Department claimed that Jos6 Librado Peralta threw himself from
 a truck while in custody for an alleged robbery. An autopsy
 
 
 700
 PARAGUAY
 revealed that Peralta had been beaten to death. Peralta's
 family claimed that he was killed by the deputy sheriff.
 By mid-January 1992, Brazilian authorities had arrested three
 suspects allegedly responsible for the murder of Leguizamon.
 Paraguayan authorities were working with their Brazilian
 counterparts to investigate what may have been a planned
 assassination by narcotics traffickers, according to press
 reports.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no reported cases of disappearance by security
 forces.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment.
 There were credible reports of police brutality, including
 torture, in the treatment of criminal suspects in detention.
 There were disturbing reports of mistreatment of women and
 minors and attempts to force confessions out of detainees.
 Torture and other abusive treatment continued to be the subject
 of inquiries by the Justice Ministry, the Supreme Court, and
 the Human Rights Committee of the House of Deputies,
 demonstrating concern about the issue. Although the Government
 consistently condemned the practice of torture and abuse, it
 failed to investigate and prosecute the officials implicated in
 cases of police brutality.
 In January Lucila Alvarez accused police in the Asunci6n
 neighborhood of Trinidad of beating her in an attempt to force
 her to confess to various crimes. A police spokesman denied
 the charges and claimed that Alvarez's injuries were caused by
 her male companion. Alvarez also charged that one officer
 attempted to extort money in exchange for her release. In
 March the United Workers Central (CUT) denounced the violent
 detention of two union members by police. The complaint
 accused the Vallemi police of beating Victor Recalde and
 Felipe Jimenez to force their confessions for an alleged
 robbery.
 There were credible complaints of abuse of prisoners held in
 jails throughout Paraguay, particularly in Tacumbu and Buen
 Pastor Prisons. Clandestine detention centers were uncovered
 in some sheriff's offices, where witnesses claimed that police
 brutality was routine. In April Deputy Sheriff Jaime Roig was
 removed from office in Horquesta by the government
 representative there due to charges of torture. The press
 exp6sed abuses at the jail in Ciudad del Este, the country's
 second largest city. Some local authorities there were
 subsequently replaced. Overall, however, executive or judicial
 oversight of police and detention facilities was very
 inadequate.
 Throughout the year security forces dislodged peasant land
 occupiers. Peasants detained on judicial orders to protect
 private property were often held under nonspecific warrants,
 often without prompt judicial processing. While most were
 released from custody within a few hours, others were held for
 longer periods. Reports also surfaced of landowners taking
 justice into their own hands by arming their employees and
 aggressively removing squatters from their property without
 court orders. Some of the evictions were violent, accompanied
 
 
</pre>
<pre>
 701
 PARAGUAY
 by shots fired into the air, but there were no reports of
 fatalities. Some peasants are known to have suffered beatings
 during these evictions. Police also have been known to use
 tear gas against the squatters and to burn down their
 dwellings. Investigations into abuses by landowners are slow.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention" or Exile.
 The Constitution provides for a judicial determination of the
 legality of detention. It stipulates that any person arrested
 without a warrant must be presented formally before a judge
 within 24 hours of his detention and have charges filed against
 him within 48 hours. Authorities often violated these
 provisions in 1991.
 On January 30, security forces detained three members of the,
 pro-Stroessner faction of the Colorado Party. They attended a
 political rally for a Colorado Party candidate for mayor of
 Santani and were visiting the candidate in his home when they
 were taken into custody. They were released on February 1. In
 April three persons waiting for a bus were arrested arbitrarily
 by police in Asunci6n. They were freed eventually, but were
 witnesses to other arbitrary detentions. Some cases of
 arbitrary detention are not publicly revealed because of police
 intimidation.
 Mass arrests of peasant squatters occurred frequently without
 the issuance of arrest warrants that specifically named those
 to be detained. There were reports of cases of peasants held
 indiscriminately who were only released after publicity and
 lobbying by interested groups.
 Forced exile is no longer used as a means of political control.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Trials are conducted almost exclusively by presentation of
 written documents to a judge, who then renders a decision.
 Since there is no trial by jury, the judge alone determines
 guilt or innocence and decides punishment. During the pretrial
 phase, the judge receives and may request investigative
 reports. In this phase, the judge is also likely to make a
 personal inspection of the scene of the crime and of all
 physical evidence available. The accused often appears before
 the court only twice: to plead and to hear sentencing. All
 judgments are automatically reviewed by an appellate judge, and
 the law provides for appeals to the Supreme Court. Court
 proceedings in some cases are held in secrecy and any
 subsequent press reports are based only on the pubic comment of
 the judge or the attorneys.
 While nominally independent, the judiciary is subject to-
 influence by the Executive Branch through the appointment of
 judges and control over the judiciary's budget. The Supreme
 Court attempted to strengthen judicial independence in 1991 by
 removing or suspending 12 judges for various transgressions.
 The majority of lower court judges were appointed by the
 Stroessner regime which governed the country from 1955 to
 1989. There were allegations that some acted arbitrarily, due
 to bVribery or to political motives. Meanwhile, judicial
 prosecutions of cases of torture and official corruption dating
 from the Stroessner-era moved ahead only slowly if at all.
 While a number of well connected figures accused of corruption,
 mostly Stroessner-era senior officials, have been prosecuted ,
 and sentenced, other suspected perpetrators of major corruption
 
 
 702
 PARAGUAY
 remain at large. The belief among some that police and
 judicial institutions principally serve those with political,
 military, or economic power acts to discourage citizens from
 reporting abuses.
 The judiciary's inadequate budget and the cumbersome written
 trial process, combined with the lack of adequately trained
 personnel at all levels, limit the right of an accused to a
 fair and speedy trial. The local jails and prisons are filled
 with persons awaiting sentencing. More than 90 percent of the
 prison population has neither been tried nor sentenced. For
 example, according to human rights lawyers, of 1,420 inmates in
 Tacumbu prison, only 140 were serving court imposed sentences.
 At Emboscada Juvenile Correctional Facility, only 3 inmates out
 of 140 have actually received a prison sentence.
 Paraguay has no political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home or
 Correspondence
 While the Government and the security. forces generally do not
 interfere in the private lives of citizens, there have been
 exceptions. The Constitution protects private homes from
 police entry except under the terms of a judicial warrant or to
 prevent a crime, but this protection at times was ignored,
 especially in the interior of the country.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 In 1991 the Paraguayan press continued to exercise many
 freedoms acquired in 1989. However, several incidents occurred
 the net impact of which tended to discourage investigative
 reporting into certain sensitive areas. Virtually all of the
 incidents were related to press efforts to investigate and
 report on corruption, contraband, and ties to the former regime.
 An assault by soldiers on reporters from the newspaper
 ABC Color who were attempting to investigate a clandestine air
 strip in Ciudad del Este outraged the media. The murder of
 Santiago Leguizamon (see Section l.a.) further underscored
 press vulnerabilities to intimidation. A member of the Palace
 Guard fired shots at reporters who were photographing the
 renovation of Stroessner's former presidential palace, and the
 reporters were subsequently detained by military officials.
 Calls by military and political figures for a law to regulate
 the press were resoundingly rejected by most sectors. Many
 journalists felt that calls for a press law were intended to
 induce a less independent and energetic press. The sentencing
 of radio reporter Victor Benitez to 4 months in prison for
 broadcasting an allegedly slanderous and abusive political
 comment showed that the scope of public comment was subject to
 constraint in the courts. Benitez was, however, released 4
 days after his incarceration, after the the complaint was
 withdrawn.
 There were no restrictions on academic freedom in 1991.
 However, the universities were involved in consideration of
 measures to reform university regulations dating from the
 Stroessner-era.
 
 
 703
 PARAGUAY
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 In June 1990, Congress passed a law regulating demonstrations
 in Asunci6n. The law limits the areas where and the hours when
 demonstrations may take place. It also requires notice to the
 Asuncion police at least 24 hours before any rally in the
 downtown area and gives the police the option of banning the
 protest. Notification of police opposition to the rally has to
 be given in writing to the organizers within 12 hours of
 receipt of the organizers' request. Under the law, a police
 ban is permitted only if a third party already had given notice
 of plans for a similar rally at the same place and time. In
 addition, the bill prohibits public meetings or demonstrations
 in front cf the Presidential Palace and outside military or
 police barracks.
 In September students from the Hospital de Clinicas marched
 peacefully, but without a permit, in downtown Asunci6n to'
 protest increases in the military budget, among other issues.
 When the students failed to obey a police order for the crowd
 to disperse, the police used their batons to break up the
 demonstration. Police prevented a protest by peasants in March
 in the town of San Estanislao. Sixty peasants tried to protest
 the low price set for cotton and demand comprehensive land
 reform. Security forces surrounded the protesters, took their
 identification cards, and detained them for several hours.
 .c. Freedom of Religion
 The Constitution provides for freedom 6f conscience for all
 persons. The Government continued to respect that freedom in
 1991. Roman Catholicism is the predominant and official
 religionof Paraguay,. All religious denominations are free to
 worship as they choose and adherence to a particular creed
 confers no advantage or disadvantage. Foreign and local
 missionaries proselytized freely.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Paraguayan citizens travel freely within the country with
 virtually no restrictions. In 1991 Paraguay opened up travel
 to the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe. There are no
 restrictions on travel abroad or on emigration except for those
 a husband legally has over travel of his wife and children (see
 Section 5).
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 In 1991 Paraguay made significant progress in the transition to
 a democratic form of Government. The process is scheduled to
 culminate in 1993 with the election of a new president.
 Congress continued to assert itself, modifying legislative
 proposals of the executive and seeking detailed reports from
 executive branch ministries on their expenditures and execution
 of policy. Congress successfully overrode two presidential
 vetos in September, further demonstrating its growing
 independence from the executive. In May Paraguay successfully
 held the first free and independent municipal elections in its
 history. While the Colorado Party maintained its political
 majority, an independent, former union leader Carlos Filizzola,
 won the crucial Asunci6n mayoralty. On December 1, a
 Constituent Assembly was elected in a free and fair election.
 
 
 704
 PARAGUAY
 The Assembly will draft a new democratic constitution for
 Paraguay.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 Four major human rights groups operate in Paraguay: the
 Committee of Churches (an interdenominational group that
 monitors human rights and lends legal assistance), the
 Paraguayan Human Rights Commission (which publishes a periodic
 newsletter), Prodemos (a group that includes Roman Catholic
 Bishop Mario Melanio Medina among its leaders), and the local
 chapter of the Association of Latin American Lawyers for the
 Defense of Human'Rights. Two of Paraguay's leading human
 rights activists, Carmen Casco de Lara Castro of the Paraguayan
 Human Rights Commission and Francisco Jose de Vargas of the
 Committee of Churches, continued to serve as opposition members
 of Congress.
 In April the Government named its first Director General of
 Human Rights, Eric-Salum Pires, to supervise, coordinate, and
 promote human rights. Located in the Ministry of Justice and
 Labor, the Human Rights Office has access to congressional,
 executive, and judicial authorities. At year's end, it was
 still too early to judge what affect the Office will have in
 curtailing human rights abuses.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 Paraguay's Constitution and laws bar discrimination based on
 race, sex, religion, language, or social status, except for a
 restrictive civil code which still limits the rights of married
 women. There are-significant expatriate Korean and Chinese
 communities which experience de facto social and economic
 discrimination. Koreans and Chinese are sometimes denied
 access to credit terms that are enjoyed by non-Asian
 Paraguayans. They are often discriminated against in the
 housing market and do not have equal access to private
 institutions and schools.
 Participation by women in the social and political system is
 limited in Paraguay's male-dominated society. There are
 several nongovernmental women's organizations which focus
 primarily on encouraging civic education and greater
 participation in the democratic transition process. Paraguay
 is a signatory'to the U.N. Convention on the Political Rights
 of Women and has instituted, with the United Nations, a human
 development program specifically targeted to assist peasant
 women. Minister of Public Health Dr. Cynthia Prieto is
 Paraguay's first female cabinet minister. The four women
 elected to the Asunci6n city council and the few elected as
 mayors in the interior opened a new era for women's involvement
 in politics.
 Paraguay's civil code, reformed in 1988 by the Stroessner
 government, still discriminates against married women. For
 example, the code requires a woman to secure her husband's
 permission before she may be employed, gives a husband
 ownership of a couple's property, and allows a husband control
 over the ability of his wife and children to travel. Violence
 against women, such as wife beating, continued to be widespread
 in Paraguay. Such abuse is against the law, but the law has
 not been well enforced. A Department of the Family within the
 
 
 PARAGUAY
 Asunci6n police force was established in 1991 but lacked the
 necessary resources to be effective. Congress passed the
 country's first divorce bill in September.
 Paraguay has an unassimilated, and generally ignored and
 neglected, Indian population estimatedat between 75,000 and
 100,000. The Government's, National Indigenous Institute (INDI)
 has the authority to purchase land on behalf of Indian
 communities and to expropriate private property under certain
 conditions to establish tribal homelands, but the entity is not
 well-funded. The Government actively encourages church groups
 to work with indigenous populations in health and welfare as
 well as in religious matters. The problems of the indigenous
 population, particularly those involving land claims, continued
 to receive frequent media attention.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 Private sector workers are free to form and join unions without
 government interference. The existing Labor Code does not
 permit public sector, temporary, or domestic workers to
 organize. Public sector workers, with few exceptions, continue
 to experience strong resistance by management to their union
 activities. However, the Ministry of Justice and Labor,
 consistent with International Labor Organization (ILO)
 guidelines, has acted in favor of public employee unions.
 Protections for them were incorporated into the Government's
 proposed new labor code which was being considered by Congress
 at year's end. Less than 5 percent of Paraguayan workers are
 organized.
 Government permission to exercise the right to strike is
 limited by a complex legal process of fact-finding,
 arbitration, and adjudication that can involve delays of
 several years. In 1991 public sector strikes were prohibited.
 However, the Union of Electric Utility Workers (SITRANDE)
 achieved a landmark decision from the labor courts in favor of
 unionization. This was the first judicial ruling in favor of
 the unionization of public employees. Nevertheless, the"
 management of the Electric Utility Company (ANDE) refused to
 abide by the court's decision. SITRANDE went on strike in
 September seeking formal recognition from management. The
 strike ended when, unable to force management to recognize the
 union (see comment in Section 6.b.) and considering inevitable
 a judicial ruling that a public sector strike was illegal,
 SITRANDE obtained a promise from Congress that it would address
 the problem.
 The most serious challenge to union activity in 1991 was the
 arrest of United Workers Central (CUT) President Victor Baez
 Mosqueira for refusing to abide by a judge's order regarding
 the timing of the CUT's national congress. Gregorio Ojeda, of
 the CUT's affiliated Construction Workers Union (SINATRAC), had
 previously obtained a court injunction prohibiting the CUT from
 holding its national congress until the CUT Executive Committee
 permitted Ojeda to serve with his particular delegation. Baez
 Mosqueira put the matter before the CUT congressional delegates
 who unequivocally rejected the judge's injunction. The judge
 issued an arrest warrant against Baez Mosqueira and ordered him
 held for 20 days for contempt. Baez Mosqueira was freed after
 serving half of the sentence when an appeals court ruled that
 the judge's arrest order was inappropriate. Frequent and
 sporadic incidents of pressure, particularly against unions
 
 
 706
 PARAGUAY
 affiliated with the CUT and the National Workers' Coordination
 (CNT), continued throughout 1991.
 Unions fully exercise their freedom to associate with regional
 and international labor organizations.
 Although still nominally independent, the leadership of both
 the CUT and the CPT made efforts to involve their unions more
 directly in partisan politics. CUT was integral to the
 formation of the "Asunci6n for Everyone Movement" which won the
 May 26 Asunci6n municipal elections. With a goal of nominating
 delegates to the Constitutional Convention, CUT worked to
 create an independent political front. A sector of the CPT
 also sought to become more involved with national politics. In
 September a wing of the CPT led by Basilio Gonzalez Hermosillo
 formed the Colorado Worker Movement "27th of August," an
 organization directly associated with the Colorado Party.
 Paraguay was reinstated in February to eligibility for trade
 benefits under the U.S. Generalized System of Preferences
 (GSP). Paraguay had been denied trade preferences since 1987
 for noncompliance with the GSP program's international worker
 rights provisions. Before the decision to reinstate was
 reached, the.CUT expressed strong reservations about
 reinstating GSP privileges before the replacement of the
 existing archaic and biased Labor Code.
 In April Ramiro Barboza of the Catholic University, with the
 support of the CUT and a few parliamentary sponsors, submitted
 a draft of a new labor code to Congress. This draft would
 substantially broaden protections for workers, including the
 right of association and to strike by public employees. Soon
 afterwards, the Government submitted a new version of the draft
 labor code which it had originally presented to Congress the
 previous November. It is a clear improvement over the existing
 Code. At year's end, although the Chamber of Deputies had
 passed the revised code in November, the Senate had not yet
 voted on it. The right of association has significantly
 improved in one aspect; the Justice and Labor Ministry is no
 longer an obstacle for workers wanting to unionize.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 The right to bargain collectively is recognized in the Labor
 Code, but most employers refuse to enter into such bargaining
 because no legal sanctions or government pressures exist which
 oblige them either to recognize duly constituted unions or to
 bargain with them.
 The tactic of firing the leaders of nascent unions,
 traditionally used by Paraguayan employers, declined somewhat
 in 1991. However the firing and harassment of union organizers
 by the private sector continued. The Stroessner era Labor Code
 provides little protection to unions and union leaders. The
 new labor, code pending in the Senate at year's end would better
 protect union organizers and impose sanctions against employers
 who violate worker rights. Under present legislation, fired
 union leaders can seek redress in the courts, but the labor
 courts sometimes respond slowly to complaints. As in previous
 years, in some cases where judges ordered fired workers
 reinstated, the employers disregarded the court order. In the
 case of the reinstatement of FETRABAN workers fired from the
 Development Bank in early 1991, management made an effort to
 humiliate reinstated workers by rerouting all work away from
 them.
 
 
 PARAGUAY
 Having received various complaints regarding interference in
 the right to organize and to strike, failure to protect workers
 from antiunion discrimination, and police violence against
 agricultural workers, various ILO bodies in 1991 criticized
 Paraguayan labor law and practice for not protecting freedom of
 association, the right to organize, and collective bargaining.
 Paraguay has no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 Forced labor is prohibited by law, and is not practiced.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 The Office of the Director General for the Protection of Minors
 in the Ministry of Justice and Labor is responsible for
 enforcing Paraguay's child labor laws. Minors between 15 and
 18 years of age can be employed only with parental
 authorization and cannot be employed in dangerous or unhealthy
 conditions. Children between 12 and 15 years of age may be
 employed only in family enterprises, apprenticeships, or in
 agriculture. Furthermore, the Labor Code prohibits work by
 children under 12 years of age. However, in practice more than
 25,000 children, many younger than 12, work in the streets of
 Asunci6n and its suburban communities selling newspapers,
 shining shoes, and cleaning car windows. In rural areas, it is
 not unusual for children as young as 10 to work beside their
 parents cutting sugar cane.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 The Government has established a private sector minimum wage,
 regionally adjusted according to cost-of-living indices,
 sufficient to maintain a minimally adequate standard of
 living. The minimum does not apply to all private sedtor
 employees, domestic servants, for example. Furthermore, it is
 estimated that 60 to 80 percent of Paraguayan workers earn less
 than the decreed minimum.
 According to the Labor Code, maximum weekly hours are 48 for
 day work and 42 for night work, with 1 day of rest. The law
 provides for an annual bonus of 1 month's salary. A married
 women needs her husband's consent to enter into a labor
 contract, although labor contracts cannot be denied to women
 who worked prior to marriage.
 The Labor Code also governs conditions of safety, hygiene, and
 comfort. In general, the Government does not effectively
 enforce the safety and hygiene provisions of the Labor Code,
 partially due to a lack of inspectors'.
 
 
 708
