 PARAGUAY
 Paraguay traditionally has been governed by autocratic regimes,
 and its history has been marked by wars, insurrections, and
 coups. The country has been ruled under the state of siege
 provisions of the Constitution almost continuously since 1929.
 President Alfredo Stroessner, an army general, has governed
 Paraguay since 1954 under these provisions and there has been
 no effective challenge to his authority. His rule, based on
 the support of the military and exercised through the Colorado
 Party, has brought tranquility, stability, and economic growth
 to Paraguay, but at a considerable cost to political rights and
 individual liberties. Major violations of the integrity of the
 individual have decreased since the mid-1970's. However, there
 were increased detentions and no improvement in the areas of
 political rights and individual liberties in 1982.
 Nominally democratic elections for the presidency and the
 national legislature are held every five years but, in
 practice, political power is concentrated in the executive
 branch, the military, and the Colorado Party, with little
 effective opposition participation or influence permitted.
 Three opposition parties are recognized by the Government and
 allowed to present candidates for national and local office.
 On the basis of a formula which grants the winning party
 two-thirds of the seats, the two opposition parties that chose
 to participate in the 1978 elections shared the remaining
 one-third of the seats in the national legislature.
 Paraguay has enjoyed rapid economic growth in recent years,
 with a quadrupling of the per capita gross national product
 during the last decade to $1,342 in 1980. More recently, the
 economy has fallen victim to the current worldwide recession.
 While most elements of the population benefitted in absolute
 terms from the economic growth, income disparities have
 increased. This has been true particularly in the past year as
 the deteriorating world economic situation, in addition to the
 negative-regional and national economic developments, sharply
 curtailed Paraguay's economic expansion. Paraguay's stable
 government, conservative fiscal and monetary policies and
 laissez-faire approach to trade and investment have encouraged
 some private investment, but the absence of a formal government
 policy to spur private investment has contributed to the rapid
 expansion of state-owned enterprises. The Government continues
 its land distribution program which has benefitted perhaps one
 sixth of the nation's population.
 The human rights safeguards in the Paraguayan Constitution
 frequently are not fully upheld. The judiciary, while formally
 .independent, does not serve as an effective check on actions of
 the executive. Constitutional guarantees such as protection of
 the integrity of the. individual, the need for judicial
 warrants, freedom of assembly and association, the right of
 habeas corpus and a prompt and fair trial for the accused often
 are ignored by government officials. While the state of siege
 is legally in force only in the capital, security officials
 operate as though it existed throughout the country.
 Only members in good standing of the dominant Colorado Party
 can participate fully in the political process. Affiliation
 with the Colorado Party is often a prerequisite for government
 employment and significant participation in Paraguay's economic
 activity.
 Paraguay does not have an independent trade union movement.
 The existing labor federation is controlled by the Government.
 
 
 602
 Many confessional denominations conduct their activities freely
 but a few religious groups have difficulty in obtaining
 government acquiescence for their operations.
 In 1982, there was a marked increase in the number of
 detentions, for periods lasting from a few hours to several
 weeks, during which the detainees usually were held
 incommunicado and without charges. There were no killings for
 political motives and no disappearances are known to have
 occurred. The Government frequently prevents or harasses
 meetings organized by opposition political groups, whether or
 not they are recognized juridically as political parties. The
 Government also continues to deny passports to citizens
 identified as hostile to the regime, and it has refused to
 permit the return of Paraguayan dissidents now living in exile,
 while deporting others.
 Recognized opposition politicians are sometimes able to air
 their views through radio broadcasts but almost never appear on
 television. The unrecognized opposition has no access to the
 electronic media. The newspaper El Pueblo, the organ of the
 Febrerista Revolutionary Party, was permitted to resume
 publication in 1982 after a ban of almost two years. Freedom
 House, in its 1982 report for 1981, classified Paraguay as
 Partly Free.
 The number of political prisoners and the incidence of gross
 violations of individual and human rights have decreased
 sharply since the mid-1970's, when armed guerrilla groups
 attempted to gain a foothold in Paraguay's rural areas. In
 1977, it was estimated that some 600 persons had a possible
 claim to political prisoner status because they were being
 detained arbitrarily. The number of long-term detainees shrank
 to around 30 by 1980, and it has fluctuated since between 20
 and 70. These figures include cases which involved violations
 of civil or criminal law but where political factors would seem
 to have been involved. Amnesty International's 1982 report,
 covering 1981, states that there were 'some 25 political
 prisoners at the end of 1981."
 The situation in Paraguay continues to be characterized by the
 subordination of the judicial and legislative branches of
 government to the executive, and the frequent circumvention of
 the Constitution's civil and political liberties through
 invocation of its state of siege provision.
 1.     Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Killing
 No killing for political motives or killing by government or
 opposition political organizations for other motives occurred
 during 1982.
 b. Disappearance
 No case of disappearance is known to have occurred during 1982.
 c. Torture
 The Paraguayan Constitution specifically quarantees the
 protection of the physical integrity of the individual.
 However, allegations of the use of torture by police
 authorities to obtain information still surface occasionally.
 The number of allegations increased in 1982 primarily in
 connection with a case involving a group of alleged
 communists. Most of the group charged that they were under
 physical and mental duress when they signed confessions.
 Charges of torture are neither acknowledged nor refuted by the
 Government, and no known investigations or disciplinary actions
 have been taken against officials in cases of alleged torture.
 
 
 603
 d. Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment
 Physical punishments are not administered as sentences for
 crimes. The Paraguayan police are reliably reported to
 mistreat prisoners during the early stages of detention, but
 prominent political detainees seem less subject to such
 mistreatment. ConditLons:.are poor in policestations where
 most detainees first.are.held. In most cases, once formal
 ,charges are-presented to the courts, detainees are transferred
 to regular prison facilities, where conditions are generally
 better. There were no specific, new reports in 1982 of cruel,
 inhuman, or.degrading treatment during detention in regular
 prison facilities. Court officials visit regular prison
 facilities each year and interview detainees.
 e. Arbitrary Arrest and Imprisonment
 The Paraguayan Constitution has permitted the Government to
 impose a state of siege almost without interruption since
 1929. The state of siege effectively suspends habeas corpus
 and the right of legal counsel and permits the Government to
 detain suspects arbitrarily for indefinite periods of time.
 Although the state of siege was lifted except for the capital
 in 1978, the courts have ruled that prisoners may be moved to
 Asuncion and held there. Police authorities often act as
 though the state of siege were still in force throughout
 Paraguay. The state of siege provision in the Constitution is
 supplemented by Law 209, the elastic "anti-subversive' statute,
 .although defendants prosecuted under this law enjoy the rights
 to habeas corpus and legal counsel.
 There was a marked increase in 1982 in the number of persons
 detained arbitrarily. While some of these detentions lasted
 from only a few hours to several days, some 400 persons were
 held without charges for periods of up to six weeks during
 April and May of 1982 in connection with a murder investigation.
 As of December 29, 1982, there were 55 prisoners with plausible
 claims to political prisoner status. Included in this group
 were 36 of the 38 persons arrested in early 1982 for alleged
 communist activities. They were held for over three months
 before being charged formally with violations of Paraguay's
 anti-subversive Law 209 and submitted to regular judicial
 proceedings. Two of the 55 are members of the proscribed
 Communist Party who have been jailed, respectively, since 1979
 and 1980. Seventeen were detained without formal charges under
 the state of siege. Apart from these, non-governmental human
 rights observers consider that another twelve prisoners are
 being held for reasons which may be affected in part by
 political factors. Prisoner releases in 1982 included Eugenio
 Ocampos Llama, detained without charges since 1981, and
 journalist Ramon Santiago Moreno, detained without charges for
 four months.
 In its 1982 report for 1981, Amnesty International noted among
 its concerns in Paraguay: arbitrary arrest, detention without
 trial and torture.
 f. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Paraguayan legal proceedings are reported in the press and are
 in formal accord with the Paraguayan Constitution. The
 judiciary is subject to executive and military influence
 however, and fair trials generally are not possible in cases
 involving political figures. Although the accused enjoy legal
 counsel of their own choosing, all judges are members of the
 ruling Colorado Party. In a number of cases, including ten
 persons held since March 1980 in connection with an armed
 attack on a bus, prisoners are held for lengthy periods of time
 while the courts consider the allegations. In cases where
 political factors may be involved, but where civil or criminal
 law may have been violated, the accused can expect to spend
 many months in prison before a verdict is rendered. Civilian
 
 
 604
 defendants may appeal verdicts to higher courts.
 g. Invasion of the Home
 Under Paraguayan law, judicial warrants are necessary before
 security forces may enter private homes or businesses.
 However, under the state of siege, the police conduct searches,
 detain persons, and impound or expropriate personal property
 without judicial writ. Such actions were widespread in the
 aftermath of the Somoza assassination in 1980 and have
 continued intermittently ever since. Under the state of siege
 the Government also conducts warrantless house-to-house
 searches for "subversive elements" and impedes meetings of the
 officially unrecognized political opposition. Such meetings
 require police permits which are virtually impossible to obtain
 under the state of siege.
 2. Respect for Civil and Political Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Freedom of speech is circumscribed. The print media operate
 with considerable freedom although they continue to exercise
 self-censorship, and the Government sometimes provides press
 guidance. Despite government pressures, the press in Paraguay
 reports independent and opposition viewpoints. While general
 criticism of government policies is tolerated, criticism of the
 President, the military, and key civilian leaders is not.
 Foreign press reports critical of Paraguayan politics and
 policies sometimes are published in local papers, but there
 have been cases where foreign publications containing critical
 articles have been confiscated or the offending material
 removed. The organ of the opposition Febrerista Revolutionary
 Party, El Pueblo, received Government permission to publish in
 1982 after a hiatus of 21 months. However, the Government has
 not permitted the reopening of the periodical, La Republics,
 which was closed on December 30, 1981.
 Domestic and foreign books which are considered immoral or
 disrespectful of the authorities are censored. Dissidents
 complain that their foreign correspondence is opened prior to
 delivery or often not delivered. Radio and television are
 controlled by the Government or its supporters. Reporting is
 less open than in the press. Television comments are always
 laudatory of Government leaders and programs. Opposition
 parties are not allowed access to television to air their
 views.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Freedom of assembly is circumscribed. Opposition political
 parties, whether recognized by the Government or not,
 frequently are denied the right to hold public meetings.
 Government permission technically is not required for
 recognized opposition parties, but parties routinely inform the
 authorities in order to reduce the chances of police
 interference. A meeting of the recognized Radical Liberal
 Party was suspended by the government in July 1982. In May
 1982, the unrecognized Authentic Radical Liberal Party sought
 permission to hold its party convention in a private home but
 the Government prevented convention delegates from entering the
 house, thereby forcing the meeting to be held furtively in
 another location. On two other occasions, the police harassed
 small meetings of this party held in private homes.
 There is no independent trade union movement in Paraguay.
 Organized labor accounts for only about five percent of the
 work force. The Federation of Paraguayan Workers, which
 represents over ninety percent of organized labor, is the only
 legal national labor organization. It is controlled by the
 Government and dominated by the Colorado Party. A few unions
 with links to opposition political parties belong to the
 Federation, but union officials who differ from its general
 
 
 605
 attitude sometimes are harassed or fired by their employers
 with the tacit support of the Government. While a few
 individual unions have shown some bargaining power, strikes are
 not permitted, and collective bargaining efforts have been
 frustrated repeatedly by private firms despite legal
 guarantees. Paraguay's labor unions do not maintain formal
 ties with any international bodies, but Paraguay does
 participate in some of the activities of the International
 Labor Organization. Professional associations that are legally
 recognized by the Government are allowed to conduct normal
 activities. However, groups which are perceived to be
 independent of Colorado Party control have difficulty in
 securing recognition.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 The Paraguayan Constitution establishes Roman Catholicism as
 the official religion, but it also guarantees freedom of
 conscience for other denominations. Adherence to a particular
 creed confers neither advantage nor disadvantage within
 Paraguayan society, and conversion from one faith to another is
 permissible. Many denominations conduct their activities
 freely. However, legislation prohibits the granting of legal
 status to new religious groups and a few evangelical churches
 have difficulty in obtaining formal Government approval for
 their operations. The Jehovah's Witnesses, who lost their
 legal registration in 1979, continued to appeal that decision
 in the courts.
 d. Freedom of Movement within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 The Paraguayan Constitution provides for freedom of movement,
 and this usually is honored within Paraguay. There are no
 restrictions on residence in either urban or rural areas. Most
 citizens may enter and leave the country freely; however,
 officials frequently refuse to issue passports to political
 dissidents, former political prisoners, and persons who
 criticize the Government. Many political opponents of the
 Government, particularly the members of the dissident faction
 of the ruling Colorado Party, have been forced into exile over
 the years. Three Paraguayans, including a Vice President of
 the Authentic Liberal Radical Party, were expelled from the
 country in 1982. A group of seven exiles attempted to return
 to Paraguay in September 1982, but they were stopped at the
 airport and compelled to return to Argentina. Although some
 exiles have been permitted to return, they have done so only
 after undertaking not to participate in the political life of
 the country. Paraguay has followed a policy of welcoming
 immigrants, especially those with agricultural skills and
 providing asylum to foreign refugees. Many Brazilians,
 Japanese, Koreans, and Europeans have settled in Paraguay, as
 have a large number of various religious denominations.
 The Paraguayan Government's treatment of its unassimilated
 Indian population has improved. A new law has been adopted
 which proffers legal recognition to Indian communities and
 guarantees their right to own tribal lands. In January 1982,
 the Toba-Maskoy tribe was resettled on a viable site within
 their traditional domain after a year's displacement in an area
 which was not suited to their needs. Other Indian groups and
 .associations which concern themselves with Indian welfare and
 development are considering steps to take advantage of the
 provisions of Paraguay's new Indian communities law.
 e. Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 The President dominates the Paraguayan political system,
 governing through the Colorado Party, which administers public
 patronage, and through the military and police forces, which
 assure public security. Only members in good standing of the
 Colorado Party can participate fully in the political process.
 Even within the Colorado Party, policy initiatives and
 
 
 606
 decisions come predominantly from the party's top echelons.
 This does not encourage competition for party office at the
 local levels or within its professional and student
 associations. Individuals often join the Colorado Party to
 gain access to economic and social advantages such as
 enrollment at the national university, admission to government
 employment, and permission to bid on public contracts.
 General elections are held every five years, and the law
 requires all Paraguayans eighteen years of age and over to
 vote. The Colorado Party enjoys greater freedom to contest
 elections than does the opposition, since it controls the
 electoral machinery and the body responsible for investigating
 electoral fraud and malfeasance. Of the three
 legally-constituted opposition political parties, one
 voluntarily abstains from the electoral process, while the
 other two participate and are represented in the Parliament.
 Disunity, lack of funds, restricted access to the media,
 difficulties in obtaining permission to hold meetings, and
 government harassment are factors which prevent the opposition
 from competing effectively. The Colorados garnered 89.6% of
 the vote in 1978. Paraguay's electoral law limits the party
 receiving a plurality of the vote to two-thirds of the seats in
 the Parliament. The controlling Colorado majority and the
 vertical character of the party's organization assure that
 Government policy invariably is approved by the legislature.
 Some political groups do not enjoy juridical recognition from
 the Government and, therefore, cannot participate in. the
 political process. In any case, most of these groups reject
 participation under the current electoral law. The Christian
 Democratic Party continues to seek juridical recognition. The
 dissident Mopoco faction of the Colorado Party is in exile.
 The Communist Party is proscribed by law. Regardless of their
 legal status, however, all opposition political parties are
 subject to varying degrees of harassment by the authorities.
 The Paraguayan Constitution guarantees *the equality of civil
 and political rights" of women, while emphasizing the
 importance of marriage and the unity of the family. Women play
 a subordinate role in the political life of Paraguay. However,
 the executive and judicial branches of the Government have a
 few prominent female officials, and there are three women in
 the ninety-member Parliament. Several others, including a
 prominent human rights leader, enjoy independent political
 renown.
 3. Government Attitude Regarding International and Non-
 governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations of
 Human Rights
 The Paraguayan Government normally responds to inquiries from
 the United Nations Human Rights Commission (UNHRC) and the
 Inter-American Commission on Human Rights (IAHRC) but has yet
 to permit an on-site inspection by the IAHRC, despite repeated
 commitments dating back to 1977. In October 1982, the
 Paraguayan Human Rights Commission held a three-day congress in
 Asuncion which drew human rights representatives from several
 countries and organizations to consider the human rights
 situation in Paraguay.
 The 1982 session of the UNHRC voted to discontinue
 consideration of the human rights situation in Paraguay. The
 decision of the UNHRC was a reaffirmation of its decision taken
 the previous year to drop consideration of the Paraguayan
 case. The decision reflected the view that developments in
 Paraguay in the intervening year had not been such as to cause
 a renewal of examination by the UNHRC of the human rights
 situation in Paraguay. The Government of Paraguay cooperated
 fully with the UNHRC during the proceedings regarding its
 case. The Government defends its human rights performance and
 considers negative comments, from whatever source, as
 unwarranted interference in its internal affairs.
 
 
 607
 Among the local private organizations that attempt to protect
 individual liberties in Paraguay are the Paraguayan Human
 Rights Commission, the Union of Paraguayan Women, the
 Paraguayan chapter of the Association of Latin American Lawyers
 for the Defense of Human Rights, and the Inter-Paith Committee,
 composed of three church groups. The opposition political
 ,parties also express support for the development of democracy
 in Paraguay and involve themselves in humanitarian concerns.
 These organizations publicize alleged human rights violations
 in Paraguay with press releases to the local newspapers, and
 they are active in human rights matters and issues such as land
 tenure. Their efforts have secured the release of a number of
 detainees. Human rights activists in Paraguay have been
 subjected to police harassment and occasional mistreatment by
 the police, had their telephones disconnected, been denied
 passports, and had their private correspondence either
 confiscated or opened prior to delivery. However, the Human
 Rights Congress, held in October 1982, was conducted without
 significant harassment and widely publicized within Paraguay.
 4. Economic, Social, and Cultural Situation
 The socio-economic situation in Paraguay has been influenced
 principally by the country's geographic isolation, its rich
 agricultural land and plentiful water supplies in the eastern
 half of the country, and its small population. Paraguay's
 isolation has engendered self-reliance and contributed to the
 development of a distinctive Paraguayan way of dealing with
 economic and social problems which, while highly centralized at
 the national level, does leave economic development and social
 welfare initiatives to local entities. The country's isolation
 has also slowed the introduction of new technologies and
 customs which resulted in a relatively slower rate of
 socio-economic development. The presence of two much larger
 and economically powerful neighbors, Brazil and Argentina, also
 affected Paraguay's ability to develop export markets and
 production capacity. Paraguay remains dependent on
 agriculture, which in. 1981 constituted 30.8 percent of the
 gross domestic product.
 The country's population, 3.1 million in 1981, is small in
 relation to its land area, 157,047 sq. miles, about the size of
 California. The rate of population growth is 2.9 percent per
 year. While Paraguay's small population has impeded the
 development of large domestic markets for Paraguay's products,
 it has made possible, with relatively low social strain, the
 development of a reasonably effective government land
 redistribution program. According to the Institute of Rural
 Welfare, the program has settled more than 312,000 previously
 landless families in almost 600 new agricultural settlements
 covering a total area of six million hectares, an average of 20
 hectares per family. Critics believe these statistics are
 exaggerated, but most agree the program has had a major impact
 on the rural sector.
 Paraguay's isolation and its extreme dependence on agriculture
 were altered irrevocably during the last decade when it
 embarked on an ambitious hydroelectric development program on
 the Parana River at the southeast frontier with Brazil and
 Argentina. The Itaipu Dam project, a joint
 Paraguayan-Brazilian venture, will be the largest hydroelectric
 project in the world, with over 12,600 megawatts of capacity.
 Half of this energy will be available for Paraguay's use.
 Alternatively, Paraguay may sell its share to Brazil, earning
 $100 million or more per year. The two other hydroelectic
 projects, including the huge Yacyreta Dam planned with
 Argentina, are progressing slowly.
 The inflow of capital into Paraguay as a result of construction
 at Itaipu and the greatly expanded production of cash crops,
 particularly cotton and soybeans, has increased sharply the
 annual per capita income, from $260 in 1970 to $.1,342 in 1980.
 
 
 608
 Generally, this marked increase in economic activity has
 benefitted the majority of the population and is reflected in
 improved life expectancy and literacy.
 Nevertheless, there are indications that the growth in income
 has not been even. While employment has risen, the index of
 real wages has fallen from 100 in 1969 to 91.9 in 1981. A 1980
 survey conducted by the Paraguayan Ministry of Finance showed
 that 42 percent of all households in the Asuncion area had
 incomes of less than $3,540 per year or an annual per capita
 income of not more than $761 for an average family of 4.65
 persons. Of the households surveyed, only 17 percent had
 annual incomes in excess of $8,880 per year.
 Even though most of the population has benefitted from the
 rapid growth of the economy, there is growing concern about the
 distribution of income and wealth. While the Government
 continues to express support for developing a private
 industrial sector, the lack of one has contributed to a rapid
 expansion of state-owned enterprises. These are controlled by
 members of the Colorado Party, and employment, even at the
 lowest levels often depends upon party membership or official
 connections. Also, contracts for and employment in
 government-related projects, loans in the agricultural sector,
 and the ability to participate in the flourishing unregistered
 trade are largely dependent upon party membership and official
 approval. Close economic relationships between insiders and
 government officials have led to widespread allegations of
 favoritism and corruption.
 There is little religious or ethnic discrimination. A number
 of important religious and ethnic groups live harmoniously in
 all sectors of the society. The right to own property is
 guaranteed by the Constitution. There are very serious land
 titling problems, however, particularly in the rural sector,
 resulting from confusion over conflicting land claims as well
 as from efforts by unscrupulous operators to force small
 farmers off their land. Of the 312,000 families settled,
 160,000 lack definitive title to their land.
 The traditional social system limits the participation of
 women, especially those from lower income groups. An
 increasing number of women, nevertheless, are participating
 effectively in various professions, business, and the artistic
 life of the country. Women normally receive less remuneration
 than men for comparable work.
 The Government uses a laissez-faire approach to the provision
 of many services including health care and education.
 Government expenditures per capita on health are about $8 per
 year, one of the lowest in the hemisphere. Nevertheless, life
 expectancy in 1980 was reportedly 65 years, compared to 56
 years in 1960. Infant mortality also has fallen sharply from
 109 per 1,000 live births in 1962 to 47 in 1980. Other
 statistics on health and sanitation in Paraguay are not
 encouraging. In 1978, 31.7 percent of all reported deaths were
 children of four years and under. As recently as 1975, only 13
 percent of Paraguayans had access to safe water. There is a
 concentration of health professionals in Asuncion where 75
 percent of such personnel service about one-third of Paraguay's
 population.
 Government expenditures per capita on education averaged $25 in
 1981. Total school-age enrollment, as a percentage of the
 school-age population, was 56 percent in 1981 compared with 49
 percent in 1962. University and technical school enrollment
 has grown from a total of 9,000 in 1960 to 57,000 in 1981.
 Adult literacy is estimated at just over 80 percent.
 Nevertheless, there remains a fundamental problem: development
 of human resources has not kept up with overall economic
 growth. Teachers' salaries are low, particularly in rural
 areas, normally $80 to $100 per month. Educational achievement
 in rural areas is low, and.the average educational level is
 
 
 609
 equivalent to only three years in school.
 The year 1982 was a difficult one for the Paraguayan economy.
 Plunging world commodity prices dealt a severe blow to the
 rural sector, while large devaluations in Brazil and Argentina
 weakened Paraguayan competitiveness in regional markets,
 further crimping the country's exports. Imports fell
 drastically as a result of speculation against the Paraguayan
 currency and the concomitant surge in their prices. Capital
 inflows from the Itaipu project allowed only a small balance of
 payments surplus.
 
 
 610
 U.S.GVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OLIGATIONS ANO, LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.PISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF OOLLARS)
 LOUNTRY: PARAGUAY
 1930     1981     1982
 1.cCON. ASSIST.-TOTAL...         3.6      6.3     3.9
 LOANS ..............        0.0      0.0     0.0
 GRANTS ...............     3.6      6.3      3.9
 A.AID  ...     ........  ......  1.3     2.0     0.0
 LOANS .................   0.0      0.0     0.0
 GRANTS. ...............    1.3      2.0      0.0
 (SEC.SUPP.ASSIST.)...        0.0      0.0      0.0
 8.FOOD FOR PEACE .......        0.4      0.7     0.1
 LOANS .................    0.0      0.0     0.0
 GRANTS .................   0.4      0.7     0.1
 TITLE  I-TOTAL ..........       0.0      0.0     0.0
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS.....         0.0      0.0     0.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR .....        0.0      0.0     0.0
 TITLE  IT-TOTAL .........       0.4      0.7     0.1
 c.RELIEF.C.DEV & WFO,         0.4      0.7     0.1
 VOL.RELIEF A;ENCY.....         0.0      0.0     0.0
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST...         1.9      3..6     3.8
 LOANS .................    0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ..............     1.  9      3.6     3.8
 PEACE  CORPS ......       1.9      2.4     2.4
 NARCOTICS........         0.0      0.0     0.0
 OTHER ..............      0.0      1.2      1.4
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL...         0.0     0.0      0.0
 LOANS .................    0.0      0.0     0.0
 GRANTS ................    0.0      0.0     0.0
 A.MAP  GRANTS..........        0.0     0.0      0.0
 d.CRE0IT SALES-MS ....        0.0     0.0      0.0
 C.INTL MIL.EO.TRNG ....        0.0     0.0      0.0
 U.TRAN-EXLESS STOCK...         0.0     0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER  GRANTS ........       0.0     0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. S MIL...         3.6     6.3      3.9
 LOANS ..............        0.0     0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................    3.6      6.3     3.9
 OTHER US LOANS ..........        0.0     0.0     63.9
 EX-IM 3ANK LOANS.......         0.0     0.0     03.9
 ALL  OTHEk ..............       0.0      0.0     0.0
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1990     1981     1982     1946-82
 TOTAL. .......    76.6     S8.8    175.4   884.0
 IBRD              36.0     58.5    99.4    377.5
 IFC                0.0      1.2     10.4    17.0.
 IDA                0.0      0.0      0.0    49.8
 1D               39.4     V?.5     64.9    409.9
 AO                0.0      0.0      0.0     0.0
 AFOB               0.0      0.0      0.0     0.0
 UNOP               1.2      1.3      0.0     23.3
 OTHER-UN           O.U      0.0      0.7 .    6.5
 EEC                0.0      0.0      0.0     0.0(
 
 
 611
