PARAGUAY
The State Department report on human rights practices in Paraguay is overall accurate and thorough. It is correct in noting that President Andres Rodriguez's new government has ushered in many improvements in the human rights situation in Paraguay. The most significant problem areas facing the country concern worker rights, land reform, and the slow judicial process (including redressing past wrongs of the Stroessner government such as corruption and human rights abuses, as well as land disputes involving peasants).
While the State Department report correctly observes that two union workers were shot and killed by members of the armed forces, it oddly discusses the incident under the heading of "Worker Rights, The Right of Association." Although the various topics in the State Department report frequently overlap, thus making it somewhat difficult to strictly categorize events, the killing of the two workers should not be minimized or obscured under the "The Right to Association." In that incident, union workers at the Itaipu hydroelectric dam project at the Paraguayan-Brazilian border had been on strike for approximately two weeks. The government had declared the strike illegal. On December 12, the two workers, German Cardozo Gayoso and Hermenegildo Benitez, were killed and several others were wounded. Amnesty International reports that:
. . . the soldiers first formed a cordon and attempted to disperse the workers. In circumstances which remain unclear the soldiers then opened fire indiscriminately on the workers and proceeded to destroy the camp site established by the strikers at the entrance to the dam. One of the men killed in the incident had reportedly been shot twice in the back.
President Rodriguez called for an investigation of the incident.
While the number of improper detentions has decreased sharply since the overthrow of General Stroessner, violations still occur. The State Department report notes the example of an attorney who was held without bail. The attorney's name is Pedro Abilio Rolón; he was detained on September 18 without court order for alleged extortion of an official from the Income Tax Department. Abilio Rolón had filed several suits charging corruption by former officials in the Stroessner government; many believe that the government detained him in retaliation for his activities.
165
Paraguay
It is unclear to what extent government officials who participated in the human rights abuses and corruption of the Stroessner government will be prosecuted. In August, the Congress discussed forming a National Commission to Investigate Embezzlement of Government Assets. Par Press reports that certain members of Congress believe that "neither the executive nor the judicial branches 'have sufficient political will to reveal the truth with regard to corruption and human rights, given the large number of people implicated'." In November, a crowd of 10,000 people demonstrated in Asunción calling for the extradition of General Stroessner from Brazil for trial.
The State Department report correctly highlights the new freedom of expression permitted in Paraguay after the coup. ABC Color, Radio Nanduti, Radio Caritas, and El Pueblo were re-opened; other periodicals, such as Cambio Autentico and La Opinión, began publication. While some publications may be exercising a certain degree of self-censorship at this time, the current climate has significantly opened up political and economic debate, even in the media controlled by the government. Yet at the same time, the Committee to Protect Journalists reports that several journalists were assaulted and harassed. Héctor Guerin of ABC Color, for example, was
stopped by the military as he tried to cover the oustings of peasants from land they had occupied in Ciudad del Este. The soldiers took his camera and film, and reportedly took a tape belonging to a radio journalist. According to ABC Color, officials later apologized to Guerin and returned his equipment.
While the current government is more tolerant of the rights of peaceful assembly and association in contrast to the Stroessner government, there have been a number of incidents in which it has used inappropriate force to break up peaceful demonstrations by trade union members and landless peasants, as accurately described in the State Department report.
President Rodriguez has pledged to return Paraguay to democracy and that he will not run for re-election in 1993. The elections held on May 1, 1989 have been faulted because they were held so soon after the coup; opposition parties contended that after decades of political repression, the election date was too early to allow
166
Paraguay
them to organize in any meaningful way. Numerous other criticisms concerning the elections, particularly in the countryside, have also been raised. There have been allegations of tampering with voter registration lists during the years of corruption, irregularities in the distribution of ballots, multiple voting by individuals, the presence of Colorado soldiers and party officials at polling places, and lack of privacy at voting locations. While these irregularities must be condemned, they were less extensive than those under General Stroessner.
The State Department report, furthermore, correctly points out that the current system of electing senators and deputies should be reformed. According to Article 8 of Law No. 886, the Electoral Statute, the political party receiving a majority of the popular vote is assigned two-thirds of all the seats in that chamber. The remaining one-third of the seats are allocated proportionately among the minority parties based on the number of votes they receive in the general election. This system consequently ensures the domination by the majority party and distorts the concept of proportional representation.
The State Department also presents a comprehensive description of the problems experienced by workers in Paraguay. It should be added that according to the Central Unitaria de Trabajadores (CUT), as of October 1989, over 600 salaried workers had been dismissed since the February coup. Only 17 of those workers had been reinstated by court order. CUT contends that the purpose of the dismissals was to "repress the organization of workers, who exercising their legitimate rights were forming unions in their work places." In addition to the union leaders mentioned in the State Department report as having been detained by the government, Carlos Filizzila and Pedro Salcedo were also temporarily detained by the police after leaving the government palace "where they had gone to request a meeting on the subject of the massive firing of workers by some private companies in the last few days."
In the Introduction to the Country Reports, Assistant Secretary of State Richard Schifter outlines United States human rights policy and notes that it is in our national interest to promote democracy which in turn is "more conducive to stability and peace." In Paraguay, the need for land reform, if not addressed, may threaten the stability of the burgeoning democracy. The State Department report, however, mentions this significant problem only briefly in its overview of the situation in Paraguay. Several provisions of
167
Paraguay
Paraguay's Constitution (Articles 128 and 129) and statutes (Law 622 of 1960 and Laws 852 and 854 of 1963) address the importance of land reform and the rights of peasants who occupy land. In the past year, there have been numerous cases of evictions of campesinos from the land they occupied and of clashes between the police and campesinos. After setting up houses, planting crops on public land or vacant privately owned land, the landless peasants and homeless families are evicted. The police and military have been called in to help in the evictions or to break up protests by the squatters. While President Rodriguez has promised to deal with the land problem, little has been done. It has been reported that from February through June 1989, there were more than 20 land takeovers by peasants in rural areas and 25 in the Asunción area. The problem of land reform must be addressed or the growing unrest in the countryside may pose even greater problems in the future.
168
