 PARAGUAY
 
 Paraguay is a predominantly agricultural country the size
 of California with a population of three million. It has
 traditionally been governed by authoritarian regimes and
 has a history of wars, rebellions and coups. The country
 has been ruled under state of siege provisions of the Consti-
 tution since 1929. President Stroessner, an Army General,
 has governed Paraguay since 1954 under these provisions
 and has not permitted effective challenge to his authority.
 He governs primarily through the extensive political apparatus
 of the majority Colorado Party, and is actively supported
 by the Armed Forces and the Police.
 Respect for the integrity of the individual has improved
 significantly over the past two years, with a few notable
 exceptions, and the independent press has been allowed
 to operate with considerable freedom. However, the human
 rights safeguards provided for in Paraguay's Constitution
 have often not been honored in practice. There have been
 few effective checks by the judiciary or legislature.
 Opposition political elements are rarely able to participate
 effectively in the political process, and affiliation with
 the official party is often a prerequisite for significant
 participation in the nation's burgeoning economic activity.
 During the last tuo decades, there has been considerable
 economic growth and the poorer elements of the population
 have been among the prime beneficiaries. However, there
 has also been some uneven distribution of income. The
 Government's important land distribution program, which
 has given farms to over one-sixth of the nation's small
 farmers, is one significant step toward more equitable
 development.
 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom From:
 a. Torture
 Reports of torture have decreased considerably during the
 past two years. Three credible cases were reported during
 1979; in one the victim reportedly died. In the past,
 torture reportedly had been used to intimidate political
 opponents and to extract information and confessions.
 Methods used have included prolonged beatings and submersion
 of the head in water.
 b. Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment
 The Paraguayan police reportedly often mistreat prisoners
 during the early stages of detention. Such mistreatment
 is said to include blows with truncheon or fist, forced
 standing for long periods of time, withholding of food,
 lengthy isolation, verbal abuse and threats against both
 detainees and their families. Amnesty International has
 called for efforts to oblige police and military agencies
 to act according to law as, otherwise, "it will be impossible
 to break the longstanding practice of maltreatment, which
 in the case of ordinary criminal prisoners is endemic in
 (385)
 
 
 386
 Paraguay." There are some indications that the government
 has taken measures to resolve this problem.
 There have been no reports of cruel, inhuman or degrading
 treatment or punishment during subsequent detention in
 regular prison facilities, and conditions are generally
 adequate. Representatives of the International Committee
 of the Red Cross are normally allowed access to detainees.
 Serious investigators have concluded that, contrary to
 widely heard charges, the Paraguayan Government has not
 pursued a policy of genocide against unassimilated Indians.
 In fact it is taking steps to overcome past neglect and
 to promote and improve their status. There have also been
 charges that young children of peasant families are sometimes
 indentured to richer families where they may become subject
 to cruel or degrading treatment. Such abuses may occur,
 but are difficult to document.
 c. Arbitrary Arrest and Imprisonment
 There were about six hundred political prisoners in 1977.
 Almost all have since been released; three political prisoners
 were in custody as of December, 1979. Prisoners are usually
 held under the state of siege provisions of the Constitution,
 or under anti-subversive Law 209. Habeas corpus is not
 honored in these cases, and such prisoners can be held
 indefinitely. During 1979, there were also occasional
 short-term detentions, usually for 24-72 hours. The detainees
 were formally charged with criminal offenses, but the cases
 had strong political overtones. In two incidents of special
 concern, a prominent opposition politician was sent into
 internal exile in late 1979, and a leading journalist was
 detained and held incommunicado for an extended period.
 A prominent labor leader  as also arrested. All three
 were released by year's end. A peasant leader, who had
 formerly been a political prisoner, was rearrested in early
 1979 and charged with a variety of common crimes. There
 is also evidence that ten or more persons were being held
 during 1979 for indefinite periods subsequent to completion
 of criminal sentences. There have been no confirmed reports
 of disappearances during the year.
 d. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Paraguay has a well-developed body of constitutional law
 and penal codes. However, the structurally independent
 judiciary system is widely believed to be subordinate to
 executive/military influence, especially in "political"
 cases.   While legal proceedings are fully reported in
 the press, and continue to be formally in accord with Constitu-
 tional procedure, many charge that trials are often unfair.
 Charges are also often heard that there exists extensive
 corruption in the judiciary.
 e. Invasion of the Home
 The police are legally required to obtain judicial warrants
 before entering a home, but they are under no effective
 
 
 restraint in such matters, given the state of siege. There
 have been some instances in which police have conducted
 warrantless searches, arresting persons and impounding
 property.
 2. Governmental Policies Relating to the Fulfillment of
 Such Vital Needs as Food, Shelter, Health Care and
 Education
 The Paraguayan Government takes a largely laissez-faire
 approach to economic and social questions, and encourages
 private organizations to fulfill needs in these areas whenever
 possible. In recent years, however, it has sharply increased
 the level of government resources directed toward health
 care, education and increased food production. These resources
 have been directed toward assisting lower income groups,
 especially small farmers. Virtually all property is privately
 owned, and Paraguay's homesteading and colonization programs
 benefit major s~ctors of the rural poor.
 Paraguay has been experiencing an economic boom. Both
 gross national product and per capita income have more
 than doubled in five years. Central government budgeting
 for agricultural, health, education, public works, and
 development agency operations has grown even more rapidly.
 Available data indicate that the poorer elements of the
 population have benefited in a major way, and that their
 incomes have been increasing at a rapid.rate. Improvements
 in workers' housing have also been noteworthy. Nevertheless,
 income distribution continues to be a major problem and
 perhaps 15-20% of all households remain largely outside
 the money economy. Important potential sources of revenue
 often escape taxation. There have also been charges of
 serious corruption.
 3. Respect for Civil and Political Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech, Press, Religion and Assembly
 Freedom of the press has increased over the past .two years,
 and formal censorship does not exist. However, in 1979
 the Paraguayan Government sespended publication of two
 daily newspapers for 30 days and the President of the Journalists
 Association was detained from October to December. The
 printed media (including those newspapers which were temporarily
 closed) regularly report opposition views and criticize
 government policies and officials, except for the President
 and key military leaders. Radio and television are controlled
 by the Government or its supporters, and their reporting
 appears less open. Opposition parties have been denied
 access to the electronic media to air their views.
 Religious freedom is guaranteed by the Constitution. The
 major religious organizations, including the Catholic Church,
 Mennonite Brethren, Protestant churches, and numerous missionaries,
 conduct religious activities freely. However, the Watchtower
 Society (Jehovah's Witnesses) and one other Protestant
 group were subjected to some harassment and discrimination
 during 1979. The Government cancelled the legal registration
 of the Watchtower Society and forbade use of its established
 meeting houses for religious meetings.
 
 
 388
 Freedom of association and assembly continue to be subject
 to limitations. Officials sometimes deny permission for
 meetings, especially outside the city of Asuncion.
 b. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel and Immigration
 The Constitution provides for freedom to travel and, within
 Paraguay, this freedom is normally honored. Most citizens
 may enter and leave the country freely. However, officials
 have often refused to issue travel documents and passports
 to political opponents, former political prisoners or persons
 who criticize the Government. Emigration is normally allowed.
 c. Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 The Paraguayan Government is authoritarian. Only official
 Colorado Party members in good standing can fully participate
 in the political process. Individuals are under pressure
 to join the official Colorado Party to gain access to economic
 and social advantages which are subject to government influence,
 such as admission to the National University, access to
 government employment, and the right to bid on public contracts.
 The Government often appears to identify legitimate dissent
 with subversion and seeks to justify subsequent harassment
 of political opponents and critics on the basis of national
 security.
 General elections are held every five years. Some political
 parties are not allowed to participate. Other opposition
 parties are recognized and participate, at least formally,
 in elections, and have representation in Congress.
 Officials have denied permission for some opposition parties
 to hold meetings, refused them legal recognition, and discriminated
 against those who associate with them.
 The traditional social system, rather than government policies,
 limits the participation of women, especially those from
 lower income groups, in the social, economic and political
 life of the country. However, their participation in society
 is growing, and women now play leading roles in professional
 fields including finance, education, law, agriculture and
 commerce. The executive and judiciary have few prominent,
 women officials. There are three women in Congress and
 several others are politica]lly prominent.
 The Confederation of Paraguayan Workers (CPT) represents
 over 90 percent of organized labor. It is the only labor
 organization recognized by the Government, and is dominated
 by the Colorado Party. A few unions controlled by opposition
 parties belong to the CPT. Independent observers have
 reported that attempts to form a Christian Workers Organization
 have been obstructed continuously by the Government.
 The CPT has been moving over the past two years toward
 a relatively more independent stance and has become more
 active in defending workers' rights to organize, bargain
 collectively and lobby. However, such efforts remain circumscribed
 by the CPT's subordination to the Colorado Party, and thereby
 to the Government.  In recent years unions have rarely
 attempted to exercise the right to strike.
 
 
 389
 4.  .Government Attitude and Record Regarding International
 and Non-Governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The Government states that it regards international and
 non-governmental investigation of human rights violations
 as intervention in the nation's internal affairs. However,
 it answers requests for information from international
 organizations concerning alleged violations and allows
 visits by some human rights organizations.
 The UN Human Rights Commission is considering the situation
 of human rights in Paraguay under its confidential 1503
 procedures.
 The Paraguayan Commission on Human Rights and its President
 were charged in February for illegal incorporation and
 illegal international affiliation. The International League
 for Human Rights strongly condemned "... the harassment
 of its affiliated organization." The ILHR subsequently
 visited Paraguay in October of 1979. Both the ILHR and
 the Inter-American Human Rights Commission (IAHRC) have
 issued reports on Paraguay which conclude that human rights
 violations often occur. These reports have recommended
 that the Paraguayan government lift the state of siege,
 restore habeas corpus, release remaining political detainees,
 guarantee that lawyers and judges can work in safety, and
 take measures to punish officials guilty of human rights
 abuses. At its 1979 General Assembly, the OAS passed a
 resolution noting that "the Government qf Paraguay has
 not complied with the recommendation made by the General
 Assembly at its last session" and urged that the Government
 "demonstrate its willingness to cooperate with the IAHRC
 by setting a date in the near future for its visit to that
 country." The resolution also "requests the Government
 to lift the state of siege throughout the country, and
 permit all exiles to return."
 The Paraguayan Government has not yet scheduled an on-site
 review of the human rights situation in Paraguay by the
 IAHRC, despite repeated promises over the last two years
 to do so. Paraguay has signed, but not yet ratified, the
 American Convention on Human Rights.
 
 
 390
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: PARAGUAY
 1977     1978     1979
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL ...        3.2      3.5      9.4
 LOANS..............      0.0        0.0      5.0
 GRANTS .............        3.2      3.5      4.4
 A.AID ..................        1.7      1.8      7.1
 LOANS .............        0.0      0.0      5.0
 GRANTSo.............        1.7      1.8      2.1
 (SEC.SUPP.ASSIST.).. 0.0              0.0      0.0
 B.FOOD FOR PEACE...            0.2      0.3      0.3
 LOANS..............       0.0        0.0     00
 GRANTS..............        0.2      0.3      0.3
 TITLE I-TOTAL.........          0.0      0.0      0.0
 REPAY. IN $-LOANS.....         0.0      0.0     00
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR..          0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE I-TOTAL  ....           0.2      0.3      0.3
 E.RELIEF.EC.DEV & wFP.         0.2      0.3      0.3
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY.....         0.0      0.0      0.Q
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST.           1.3      1.4      2.0
 LOANS..............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS.............         1.3      1.4      2.0
 CONTR.  TO  IFI ,,,,      0.0      0.0      0.0
 PEACE CORPS......         0.8      1.1      1.0
 OTHER............         0.5      0.3      1.0
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL ..         0.7      0.6      0.0
 LOANS ..............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS..............        0.7      0.6      0.0
 A.HAP GRANTS.........          0.3      8.0      0.0
 B.CREDIT SALES-FS..,          0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.INTL MILEDTRNG..           0.4      0.6      0.0
 D.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK ..         0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS .....          0.0      0.0      0.8
 III.TOTAL ECON. & MIL .          3.9      4.1      9.4
 LOANS..............        0.0      0.0      5.0
 GRANTS.............         3.9      4.1      4.4
 OTHER US LOANS ........          0.0      0.0      4.6
 EX-IM BANK LOANS ......         0.0      0.0      4.6
 ALL OTHER. .............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES-COMMITMENTS
 1977     1978     1979     1946-79
 TOTAL.........    56.7    104.7     97.2    558.7
 IBRO              40.0     39.0     64.0    193.4
 IFC                0.0      0.0      0.0      5.4
 IDA                4.0      0.0      0.0     45.5
 IDB               11.6     64.2     31.2    287.9
 AOB                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 AFDB               0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 UNDP               o.7      1.4      1.4     20.6
 OTHER-UN           0.4      0.1      0.6      5.9
 EEC                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 
 
