 PARAGUAY
 Paraguay is a constitutional republic with a strong executive branch and an in-
 creasingly important bicameral legislature. The President is the head of government
 and cannot succeed himself. In 1993 Juan Carlos Wasmosy became the country's
 first freely elected civilian president. (Authoritarian regimes had ruled the country
 until 1989, when dictator Alfredo Stroessner was overthrown by General Andres
 Rodriguez, who was elected president later that year.) There are three major politi-
 cal parties and a number of smaller ones. The opposition's power has increased as
 a result of the changes brought about by the 1992 Constitution and the subsequent
 election of a civilian president and an opposition-controlled congress. President
 Wasmosy has worked to consolidate the nation's democratic transition. In April
 1996 he resisted an attempted coup by then-army commander General Lino Oviedo.
 Subsequently, however, Oviedo won the Colorado Party p residential primary and be-
 came a potential contender in the May 1998 presidential elections. The Constitution
 provides for an independent judiciary, and the Supreme Court continued its process
 of reform.
 The military no longer plays an overt political role, but rumors of coup-plotting
 persisted during the year. The national police force, under the overall authority of
 the Ministry of the Interior, has responsibility for maintaining internal security and
 public order. The civilian authorities maintain effective control of the security forces.
 The police committed some human rights abuses.
 Paraguay has a market economy with a large informal sector. The formal economy
 is oriented towards services, with less than half of the $8 billion gross domestic
 product resulting from agriculture and industry. Over 40 percent of the population
 is engaged in agricultural activity. Wealth continues to be concentrated, with both
 urban and rural areas supporting a large subsistence sector. Agricultural commod-
 ities (soybeans, cotton, lumber, and cattle) were the most important export items.
 The economy grew approximately 2 percent in 1997, a growth rate roughly equal
 to 1996. Annual per capita income is approximately $1,600.
 The Government's human rights record improved somewhat, but serious problems
 remain in certain areas. Principal human rights problems included allegations of
 extrajudicial killings, torture and mistreatment of criminal suspects and prisoners,
 poor prison conditions, arbitrary arrest, detention of suspects without judicial or-
 ders, lengthy pretrial detention, general weaknesses within the judiciary, infringe-
 ments on citizens' privacy, and firings of labor organizers. Discrimination against
 women, the disabled, and indigenous people and violence against women and abuse
 of children are also problems. The Government continued its efforts to convict and
 punish those who committed human rights abuses during the Stroessner era.
 
 
 615
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no reports of politically
 motivated killings in 1997. However, there were allegations that members of the
 National Police committed extrajudicial killings. One incident involved the July
 murder of two Peruvian citizens, allegedly by a group of police officers. The police,
 who were purportedly providing protection for the Peruvians (who were involved in
 illicit activities), allegedly killed the Peruvians when they failed to make a weelly
 payment of $250. Local newspapers later reported that the police did not pursue in-
 ternal investigations, transferred agents suspected of being involved rather than
 prosecuting them, and pressured the Attorney General's office to drop its investiga-
 tion. The National Police denied any involvement in the killings. At year's end, po-
 lice records indicated that there still had been no internal investigation of the mat-
 ter and no one was charged in the criminal investigation.
 Police were also involved in the shooting death ol a student, Gustavo Daniel Gon-
 zalez Delgado. Human rights monitors claim that Gonzalez was shot three times,
 after police opened lire on his car, following a traffic incident between Gonzalez's
 car and a police vehicle. Gnzalez's parents declined to bring charges against the
 police. Police sources indicated that an internal investigation was under way, but
 that there was little interest in pursuing it diligently.
 There were numerous allegations of mistreatment of military recruits by non-
 commissioned and commissioned officers, and at least two conscripts died in unclear
 circumstances. Both deaths were officially attributed to meningitis, but families of
 both youths claimed that the bodies showed evidence of beating and torture.
 Although a court sentenced police officer Teofilo Sanabria to jail for the November
 1996 fatal shooting of Colorado Party activist Raul Bittar during a fracas between
 Colorado and Liberal Party members, he was released from prison after 3 months.
 An appellate court ruled that the shooting had been accidental.
 There were no developments in the investigations into the 1995 killing of peasant
 protester Pedro Jimenez or the 1994 killings of peasant leaders Sebastian Larrosa
 and Esteban Balbuena.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution prohibits torture, as well as cruel, inhuman or degrading punish-
 ment or treatment; however, torture (primarily beatings) and brutal and degrading
 treatment of convicted prisoners and other detainees continued. A human rights
 group, the Committee of Churches, reported several cases of torture and other abu-
 sive treatment of persons, including women and children, designed to extract confes-
 sions, unish escape attempts, or intimidate detainees.
 The United Nations Committee on Torture criticized Paraguay in May for contin-
 ued mistreatment and torture of prisoners and detainees by police. After President
 Wasmosy publicly stated that he would make inquiries into the matter, the then-
 chief of police (who later resigned following continuing allegations of corruption) ad-
 mitted that torture and mistreatment of prisoners existed but asserted that it was
 "sporadic" and "  no rmally done in our institution."
 The Attorney General's office and the Committee of Churches compiled examples
 of numerous incidents of police abuse and extrajudicial killings. Mistreatment of
 conscripts was also a problem; several died under unclear circumstances (see Sec-
 tion l.a.).
 On May 8, the authorities arrested retired General Ramon Duarte Vega, former
 Stroessner-era police chief, and charged him with crimes against humanity for the
 torture of Captain Napoleon Ortigaza and Hilario Ortella in 1963.
 Credible reports continued that landowners, many of them Brazilians living near
 the border in the Alto Parana, Canindeyu, and Amambay departments, forcibly re-
 moved squatters from their property. Some of the evictions reportedly were violent.
 The authorities undertook no effective action in response to these reports. In at
 least one case, a peasant was killed, but police refused to act, stating that the care-
 taker thought that the victim was stealing sheep.
 Prison conditions are extremely poor. Overcrowding and unsanitary living condi-
 tions were the most serious problems affecting all prisoners. Mistreatment of pris-
 oners is also a serious problem. Tacumbu prison, the largest in Asuncion, was built
 to hold 800 inmates but currently houses over 1,400. Other regional prisons gen-
 erally hold about three times more inmates than originally planned. Security is an-
 other problem; for example, there are only 30 guards to supervise over 600 inmates
 in the Alto Parana prison. The Congressional Commission for Human Rights also
 criticized the poor nutritional standards in the prisons. Prisons generally serve one
 meal a day and prisoners seldom get vegetables, fruit, or a meat protein source, un-
 
 
 616
 less they have individual means to purchase them. At the prison in Encarnacion
 there is one latrine for 280 detainees. Prisons have separate accommodations for
 well-to-do prisoners, ensuring that those with sufficient means endure far fewer in-
 conveniences than other prisoners.
 The Government permits independent monitoring of prison conditions by inter-
 ested human rights organizations.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-Arbitrary arrest and detention are prob-
 lems. The Constitution prohibits detention without an arrest warrant signed by a
 judge and stipulates that any person arrested must appear before a judge wit in
 48 hours to make a statement. The police can arrest persons without a warrant if
 they catch them in the act of committing a crime, but must bring them before a
 judge within 24 hours. According to human rights activists, however, the authorities
 often violated these provisions.
 More than 95 percent of the country's 3,717 prisoners are being held pending
 trial, many for months or years after their arrest. Of the 600 inmates in Alto
 Parana prison, for example, only 18 have been sentenced. While the law encourages
 speedy trials, the Constitution permits detention without trial until the accused
 completes the minimum sentence for the alleged crime, which often occurs in prac-
 tice. A bail system exists for most crimes, and judges have discretion over it. Judges
 frequently set relatively high bail, and many accused persons are unable to post
 bond. In 1996 the Supreme Court, the Public Ministry, and a judicial working group
 took steps to reduce the large number of pretrial detainees but achieved only modest
 results. The Supreme Court and many criminal court judges also make quarterly
 visits to the prisons to identify and release improperly held individuals.
 The Constitution expressly prohibits employing exile as a punishment.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The Constitution provides for an independent judi-
 ciary. Although relatively inefficient, the judiciary is independent in practice.
 The nine-member Supreme Court appoints lower court judges and magistrates,
 based upon recommendations by the Ma gstrate's Council. There are five types of
 appellate tribunals: Civil and commercial, criminal, labor, administrative disputes,
 and juvenile. Several minor courts and justices of the peace fall within these five
 functional areas. The judicial system remains relatively inefficient, due to outdated
 penal and criminal procedure codes, insufficient resources, and delays as new judi-
 cial officials learn their tasks. The military has its own judicial system.
 The 1992 Constitution stipulates that all defendants have the right to an attor-
 ney, at public expense ff' necessary, but this right often is not respected in practice.
 Many destitute suspects receive little legal assistance, and few have access to an
 attorney sufficiently in advance of the trial to prepare a defense. In Asuncion for
 example, there are only 13 public defenders available to assist the indigent. More-
 over, the public defenders lack the resources to perform their jobs adequately.
 Trials are conducted almost exclusively by presentation of written documents to
 a judge who then renders a decision. A Public Ministry official is responsible in most
 cases for bringing charges against accused persons. Defendants and the Public Min-
 istry can present written testimony of witnesses as well as evidence. All interested
 parties have access to all documents reviewed by the judge, and defendants can
 rebut witnesses. Defendants enjoy a presumption of innocence. The judge alone de-
 termines guilt or innocence and decides punishment. During the pretrial phase, the
 judge receives and may request investigative reports. In this phase, the judge is also
 ikly to make a personal inspection of the scene of the crime and of the available
 physical evidence. The accused often appears before the court only twice: to plead
 and to be sentenced. An appellate judge automatically reviews all verdicts, and the
 law provides for appeals to the Supreme Court.
 A separate documentation center and repository holds the government archives
 discovered in December 1992, which document various human rights abuses and im-
 plicate many former government officials of the Stroessner regime. In 1996 an ap-
 pellate court affirmed the convictions for human rights abuses of five Stroessner-
 era officials (former police investigations director Pastor Coronel and police officers
 Lucio Benitez Santacruz, Agustin Bellotto Vouga, Camilo Almada Morel, and Juan
 Aniceto Martinez). In July the courts also found Pastor Coronel and his colleagues
 guilty of the attempted murder, by torture, of Miguel Angel Sler, leader of the Par-
 agayan Communist Party in the 1970's (Angel Soler's body was never found). The
 authorities also brought additional cases against former police chief Ramon Duarte
 Vera (see Section 1.c.). In one case, human rights activist Dr. Joel Filartiga has ac-
 cused Duarte Vera of personally torturing him after his arrests in 1957 and 1966.
 These and other cases were still underway at year's end.
 There were no reports of political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-While
 the Government and its security forces generally did not interfere in the private
 
 
 617
 lives of citizens, human rights activists claim that local officials and police officers
 abuse their authority by entering homes or businesses without warrants and
 harassing private citizens. The Constitution provides that police may not enter pri-
 vate homes except to prevent a crime in progress or when the police possess a judi-
 cial warrant. There were allegations that the Government occasionally spied on indi-
 viduals and monitored communications for political and security reasons. There also
 were credible allegations that some government agencies required or pressured their
 employees to join or campaign on behalf of the ruling Colorado Party.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of expres-
 sion and the press, and the Government respects these rights in practice. The public
 and the press exercised these riehts freely.
 The print and electronic med  are indepndently owned. The media commonly
 criticized the Government and freely discussed opposition viewpoints. Based on in-
 formation and a tape recording made by an informant, police arrested a former
 mayor of Ciudad del Este for contracting the murder of a journalist in that city. The
 Paraguayan Union of Journalists demanded from authorities greater protection for
 two ournalists who received death threats while investigating drug trafficking in
 the city of Pedro Juan Caballero. The journalists union also asked that the authori-
 ties reinvigorate their investigation into the 1991 murder of journalist and radio
 station owner Santiago Leguizamon in Pedro Juan Caballero.
 The Government does not restrict academic freedom.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution provides for
 the right of all citizens to peaceful assembly, and the Government generally respects
 this right in practice. The Government passed amendments to a law regulating dem-
 onstrations in Asuncion that further restricted areas where demonstrations ma
 take place, but expanded, slightly, the hours in which they may be held. Union
 groups were the most vocal opponents of the modifications. The law requires that
 organizers notifyr the Asuncion police 24 hours before any rally in the downtown
 area. The police may ban a protest but must provide written notification of such a
 ban within 12 hours of receipt of the organizers' request. The law permits a police
 ban only if a third party has already given notice of plans for a similar rally at the
 same place andtime. In addition, the law prohibits public meetings or demonstra-
 tions in front of the presidential palace and outside military or police barracks. The
 law does not apply to relgious processions.
 Political and social demonstrations and rallies occurred without major incidents.
 Government and peasant organization leaders were able to negotiate a peaceflul con-
 clusion to a Mac 15--16 peasant procession, where violence had been forecast. The
 authorities allowed the peasants to march to the presidential palace and provided
 financial assistance to help them return to their homes.
 The Constitution provides for the right of all citizens to free association, and the
 Government respects this right in practice.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for freedom of conscience for
 all persons and recognizes no official religion; the Government respects this freedom
 mn practice. Roman  athoicism is the predominant religion, but all denominations
 are free to worship as they choose. Adherence to a particular creed confers no legal
 advantage or disadvantage, and foreign and local missionaries proselytize freely. All
 religious groups must be registered with the Ministry of Education and Worship,
 but the Government imposes no controls on these groups
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.all citizens may travel freely within the country with virtually no re-
 strictions, and there are no restrictions on foreign travel or emigration.
 The Government cooperates with the office of the United Nations High Commis-
 sioner for Refugees and other humanitarian organizations in assisting refugees.
 There are no established provisions to grant asylum or refugee status; the Immigra-
 tion Department determines each request on a case-by-case basis in consultation
 with the Ministries of Foreign Relations and the Interior and the Committee of
 Churches (a nongovernmental organization-NGO) that investigates claims to refu-
 gee status). The issue of the provision of first asylum has never arisen. There were
 no reports of the forced return of persona to countries where they feared persecu-
 tion.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens have the right and ability to change their overni ent through demo-
 cratic means. Multiple parties and candidates contest the nations leadership posi-
 tions. Four parties are represented in the Congress. The Constitution and the Elec-
 
 
 618
 toral Code mandate general elections every 5 years, voting by secret ballot, and uni-
 versal suffrage. The executive and legislative branches govern the country; opposi-
 tion political parties control the Congress. Debate is free and frank. The Congress
 often rejects important government proposals and overrides presidential vetoes.
 The Government survived a test in April 1996, when then-army commander Gen-
 eral Lino Oviedo defied a presidential order to resign and attempted to remove
 President Wasmosy. Strong public reaction and prompt international condemnation
 convinced him to back down. After retiring from the military, Oviedo entered poli-
 tics. Although the Supreme Electoral Tribunal declared Oviedo the winner of the
 Colorado Party presidential primary, the party had not registered him as its official
 candidate by year's end. Oviedo was subjected to 30 days' detention for violating
 military discipline, and to a further indefinite detention, pursuant to a military
 court order, as a "moral author or suspected accomplice" in the April 1996 coup at-
 tempt. Primary elections held in September for all political parties were generally
 well run, although some factions contested the results in the Colorado P arty pri-
 maries.
 Vestiges remain, however, of the Stroessner-era merging of the State, the armed
 forces, and the Colorado Party. The press has reported the use of state resources,
 particularly vehicles, to support party political rallies. There were also credible re-
 p orts of government officials requiring public employees to attend Colorado Party
 functions and contribute funds to the party.
 There are no legal impediments to women seeking to participate in government
 and politics. In 1993 voters elected 5 women to Congress (3 of 45 senators, 1 of
 whom died in October 1996, and 2 of 80 national deputies), and there is 1 woman,
 the Secretary for Women's Affairs, in the Cabinet. The new Electoral Code requires
 that, in their internal primaries, 20 percent of each party's candidates for elective
 office be women. Women are well-represented in the judicial system as judges and
 prosecutors.
 Members of indigenous groups are entitled to vote, and the percentage of indige-
 nous people who exercised this right has grown dramatically in recent years. Never-
 theless, the inhabitants of some indigenous communities report being threatened
 and inhibited from fully exercising their political rights.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Several human rights groups operate, including the Committee of Churches (an
 interdenominational group that monitors human rights and provides legal assist-
 ance), Prodemos (a group linked to the Catholic Church), Tekojoja (a group dedi-
 cated to protection of children's rights), SERPAJ (a group that defends conscientious
 objectors), and the local chapter of the Association of Latin American Lawyers for
 the Defense of Human Rights. The Government did not restrict the activities of any
 human rights group.
 The Director General of Human Rights, located in the Ministry of Justice and
 Labor, chairs the National Commission on Human Rights, which made little
 progress in its work to prepared a national plan on human rights. The commission
 also sponsors seminars to promote human rights awareness. The director general's
 office has access to congressional, executive, and judicial authorities. It does not
 have subpoena or prosecutorial powers, but may forward information concerning
 human rights abuses to the Attorney General for action. It also serves as a clearing-
 house for information on human rights and has trained thousands of educators in
 human rights law.
 The Attorney General has a special adviser on human rights who has been ex-
 tremely active in pursuing justice against human rights abusers from the Stroessner
 regime. Although the position has little real authority, the adviser is an ardent
 spokesman for the human rights community and the rights of the disenfranchised
 and uses his position to identify and publicize human rights abuses by the Govern-
 ment.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 Although the Constitution and other laws prohibit discrimination, certain groups
 faced significant discrimination in practice.
 Women.-Spousal abuse is common. Thousands of women are treated annually for
 injuries sustained in violent domestic situations. According to women's rights activ-
 ists, official complaints are rarely filed, or when filed are soon withdrawn due to
 spousal reconciliation or family pressure. The Secretariat of Women's Affairs chairs
 a national committee, made up of other government agencies and NGO's, which has
 developed a national plan to prevent and punish violence against women. Pursuant
 
 
 to the plan, an office of care and orientation receives reports on violence against
 women and coordinates responses with the National Police, primary health care
 units, the Attorney General's office, and NGO's. The Secretariat also conducts train-
 incourses for the police, health care workers, prosecutors, and others.
 against women has been targeted as a key area of concern by several
 NGO's and the Women's Secretariat. According to information from the Center for
 Studies and Documentation, there were 116 case of rape and attempted raped be-
 tween March 1992 and May 1993 (latest data available). Under the Criminal Code,
 a rapist may be exonerated of the crime, if he agrees to marry the victim and the
 victim accepts. Women's rights and advocacy groups succeeded in widening the de-
 bate about violence against women. In 1987 the 25th of November Women s Collec-
 tive opened a shelter for battered and abused women, where they can seek medical
 and legal assistance.,
 The law prohibits trafficking and sexual exploitation of women, but the authori-
 ties do not enforce it effectively. Exploitation of women, especially teenage pros-
 titutes, remains a serious problem. Law enforcement officials regularly stage raids
 on houses of prostitution, and there were cases of arrests and closures of brothels
 where minors were involved in prostitution.
 The Secretary for Women's Affairs continued to sponsor programs intended to en-
 able women to have free and equal access to employment, social security, housing,
 ownership of land, and business opportunities. However, sex-related job discrimina-
 tion continues to be common and widely tolerated. Claiming that a majority of
 women in the workplace face sexual harassment, several unions and NGO's spon-
 sored an anti-sexual harassment campaign. The campaign was prompted in part by
 the plight of two women who sued their employer for sexual harassment, lost their
 suit, and were then held criminally liable for defamation and injury.
 Several groups work to improve conditions for women. One is Women for Democ-
 racy, which is active in civic and electoral education. Other groups include
 Sumando, an NGO promoting educational reform policy and voter participation in
 elections; SEFEM, which highlights such issues as women and public policy, women
 and social policy, participation of women in local development, and women in the
 Americas; and the Women's November 25th Collective, which sponsors a home for
 battered women and helps coordinate legal assistance. These groups are effective
 advocates for change.
 - Children.-The Constitution protects certain children's rights, and stipulates that
 parents and the State should care for, feed, educate, and support children. Boys and
 girls are entitled to equal treatment in education and health care. Elementary
 school education is compulsory.
 Abuse of children is a problem. Although no census has been taken, experts in
 the Public Ministry report that approximately 26,000 children work in urban areas
 as street vendors or as prostitutes. The majority of these children suffer from mal-
 nutrition, lack df access to education, and disease. The employers of some young
 girls working as domestic servants or nannies deny them access to education and
 mistreat them. Employers sometimes falsely charge those who seek to leave domes-
 tic jobs with robbery and turn them over to the police. According to the Attorney
 General's office, there are approximately 200 complaints per month regarding mis-
 treatment and sexual abuse of minors. The Government has taken effective steps
 to combat the problem of baby trafficking and in 1995 enacted a moratorium on
 international adoptions.
 President Wasmosy and the armed forces Chief of Staff have ordered all officers
 responsible for recruiting to ensure that all conscripts meet the Constitutionally
 mandated minimum age of 17 years for military service. There were several re-
 ported violations, including allegations of military recruiters forcing underage re-
 cruits to join units. The military took no significant disciplinary action against those
 responsible for underage recruits. Human rights groups and some military person-
 nel allege that poor families knowingly send underage children to the armed forces
 for the economic benefits.
 People With Disabilities.-The Constitution provides for equal opportunity for peo-
 ple with disabilities and mandates that the State provide them with health care,
 education, recreation, and professional training. It further requires that the State
 formulate a policy for the treatment, rehabilitation, and integration into society of
 people with disabilities. However, the Congress has never enacted legislation to es-
 tablish such programs. Many people with disabilities face significant discrimination
 in employment; others are unatle to seek employment because of a lack of accessible
 public transportation. The law does not mandate accessibility for the disabled, and
 the vast majority of the nation's buildings, both public and private, are inaccessible
 to people with disabilities.
 
 
 620
 Indigenous People.-The Constitution provides indigenous people with the right to
 participate in the economic, social, political, and cultural life of the nation. Never-
 theless, the indigenous population, estimated at 75,000 to 100,000, is unassimilated
 and neglected. Weak organization and lack of financial resources limit access by in-
 digenous people to the political and economic system. Indigenous  pups relie pri-
 marily upon parliamentary commissions to promote their particular interests. The
 Constitution also protects the property interests of indigenous people, but these
 rights still are not codified fully. The Constitution provides that Public Ministry offi-
 cials may represent indigenous people in matters involving the protection of life and
 property.
 The Government's National Indigenous Institute (INDI) has the authority to pur-
 chase land on behalf of indigenous communities and to expropriate private property
 under certain conditions to establish tribal homelands. There have been significant
 allegations of wrongdoing within INDI, however, and in November a Congressional
 Human Rights Committee requested an accounting of INDI's land purchases and
 transfers. Many indigenous people find it difficult to travel to the capital to solicit
 land titles or process the required documentation associated with land ownership.
 The main problems facing the indigenous population are lack of education, mal-
 nutrition, lack of medical care, and economic displacement resulting from other
 groups' development and modernization. Scarce resources and limited government
 attention resulted in little progress in dealing with these problems.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The Constitution allows both private and public sec-
 tor workers (with the exception of the armed forces and the police) to form and join
 unions without government interference. The Constitution contains several provi-
 sions that protect fundamental worker rights, including an antidiscrimoination
 clause, provisions for employment tenure, severance pay for unjustified firings, col-
 lective bargaining, and the right to strike. Approximately 10 percent (150,000) of
 workers are organized.
 In general, unions are independent of the Government and political parties. One
 of the nation's three labor centrals, the Confederation of P a    an Workers
 (CPT), was traditionally aligned closely with the ruling Colorado P arty, but these
 ties appear to be loosenng.
 All unions must be registered with the Ministry of Justice and Labor. The reg-
 istration process is cumbersome and can take several months. Employers who wish
 to oppose the formation of a union can further delay union recognition by filing a
 writ opposing it. However, virtually all unions that request recognition eventually
 receive it. In 1996 the Government recognized a total of 1,318 unions, including bth
 private and public sector organizations. The Constitution provides for the right to
 strike, bans binding arbitration, an  phi  reributan   t     tikers and lead-
 ers carrying out routine union business, a prohibition often violated by employers.
 Voluntary arbitration decisions are enforceable by the courts, but this meianism
 still is employed rarely. High-level Labor Ministry officials are available to mediate
 disputes.
 e International Labor Organization (ILO) Committee of Experts has noted defi-
 ciencies in the application of certain conventions ratified by the Government. These
 include conventions dealing with minimum-wage fixing machinery, abolition of
 forced labor, minimum age of employment, freedom of association, equal remunera-
 tion, and employment policy.
 Unions are free to form and join federations or confederations and affiliate with
 and participate in international labor bodies.
 b. pthe Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The law provides for ollec-
 tive bargaining, and 44 collective contracts were ratified in 1996. The number of ne-
 gotiated collective con s   nt inued to grow; however, they were still the excep-
 tion rather than the norm in labor-management relations and typically reaffirmed
 minimum standards established by law. Wen wages are not set in free negotiations
 between unions and employers, they are made a condition of individual offers of em-
 sltkethe Constitution prohibits antiunion discrimination, the firing and harass-
 ment of some union organizers and leaders in the private secor continued. Fired
 union leaders can seek redress in the courts, but the labor tribunals have been slow
 to respond to complaints and typically favored business in disputes. The courts are
 not required to order the reinstatement of workers fired for union activities. As in
 previous years, in some cases where judges ordered reinstatement of discharged
 workers, the employers disregarded the court order with impunity. There are a
 number of cases in which trade union leaders, fired as long as 5 years ago, have
 not yet received a decision from the courts.
 
 
 There were more than 50 strikes by unions affiliated with the Unitary Workers
 Central (CUT) alone. The vast majority of these were directly related to the firing
 of union officials (about 15 cases according to CUT leadership), to management vio-
 lations of a collective contract, to management efforts to prevent the free association
 of workers, or to demands for benefits such as payment of the minimum wage or
 contribution to the social security system. The failure to meet salary ayments also
 frequently precipitated labor disputes. Principal problems included bottlenecks in
 the judicial system and the inability or unwillingness of the Government to enforce
 labor laws. There were also complaints that management created parallel or "fac-
 tory" unions to compete with independently formed unions. There were several cases
 of workers who chose not to protest because of fear of reprisal or anticipation of gov-
 ernment inaction.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The law prohibits forced labor, in-
 cluding that performed by children (see Section 6.d.). However, cases of abuse of na-
 tional service obligations occurred. There were several reports of conscripts forced
 to work as servants or construction workers for military officers in their residences
 or privately owned businesses. A part from abusing national service obligations, the
 authorities appear to enforce the law effectively.
 d. Status of Child Labor Practices and Minimum Age for Employment.-The Di-
 rector General for the Protection of Minors in the Ministry of Justice and Labor is
 responsible for enforcing child labor laws. The law prohibits forced or bonded labor
 by children, and is enforced effectively. Minors between 15 and 18 years of age may
 be employed only with parental authorization and cannot be employed in dangerous
 yonditions. Children between 12 and 15 years of age may be employed
 only in family enterprises, apprenticeships, or in agriculture. The Labor Code pro-
 hibits work by children under 12 years of age, and all children are required to at-
 tend elementary school. In practice, however, many thousands of children, many of
 them younger than 12 years of age, may be found in urban areas engaged in infor-
 mal employment such as selling newspapers and sundries, shining shoes, and clean-
 ing car windows. In rural areas, it is not unusual for children as young as 10 years
 of age to work beside their parents in the field. Local human rights groups do not
 regard families harvesting the crop together as an abuse of child labor.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The executive, through the Ministry of Justice
 and Labor, has established a private sector minimum wage sufficient to maintain
 a minimally adequate standard of living. The minimum salary is adjusted whenever
 annual inflation exceeds 10 percent and was approximately $240 (528,076
 guaranies) per month at year's end. The Ministry is unable to enforce the minimum
 wage, however, and most analysts agree that from 50 to 70 percent of workers earn
 less than the decreed minimum.
 The Labor Code allows for a standard legal workweek of 48 hours (42 hours for
 night work), with 1 day of rest. The law also provides for an annual bonus of 1
 month's salary and a minimum of 6 vacation days a year. The law requires overtime
 payment for hours in excess of the standard, but there are no prohibitions on exces-
 sive compulsory overtime. Many employers violate these provisions. Workers in the
 transport sector routinely stage strikes to demand that their employers comply with
 the labor code's provisions on working hours, overtime, and minimum wage pay-
 ments.
 The Labor Code also stipulates conditions of safety, hygiene, and comfort. The
 Ministry of Justice and Labor and the Ministry of Health dd not effectively enforce
 these provisions, due in part to a lack of inspectors and other resources. The Min-
 istry sponsored the reconvening of a tripartite group of government, labor, and em-
 ployers, in an effort to update the labor inspection manual, which was severely out-
 dated. In addition to updating the labor manual, the program was initiated with the
 goal of expanding transparency in the labor inspection process.
 Workers have the right to remove themselves from situations that endanger
 health or safety without jeopardy to their continued employment, but may not do
 so until such conditions are formally recognized by the Ministries of Justice and
 Labor and Health. Although workers who file complaints about such conditions are
 protected by law, many employers reportedly took disciplinary action against them.
