 PARAGUAY
 Paraguay has had authoritarian regimes throughout its history,
 which has been marked by wars, insurrections and coups. Since
 1954, President Alfredo Stroessner has governed Paraguay
 ruling through the Colorado Party, the military and police
 forces, and the government bureaucracy, all of which he
 dominates. He was elected in 1983 to a seventh term in a
 controlled election process in which government figures show
 he received over 90 percent of the popular vote.
 Elections are held every five years for the presidency and the
 national legislature. However, the opposition's ability to
 conduct an effective campaign is severely restricted by the
 Government, and in practice there is no effective challenge to
 President Stroessner's authority. Some opposition parties are
 not legally recognized and all, regardless of their status,
 are subject to varying degrees of harassment by government
 authorities. The Government controls the electoral apparatus
 and limits opposition access to the media. There have also
 been allegations of vote count irregularities.
 The situation in Paraguay continues to be characterized by the
 subordination of the legislative and judicial branches of
 Government to the executive and by the domination of the
 nation's political life by the ruling Colorado Party. The
 legislative branch, in which President Stroessner's Colorado
 Party has a two-thirds majority, is almost completely
 responsive to his views on all important matters. The
 judiciary, while independent in theory, is usually not able to
 serve as an effective check on the power of the executive.
 There continue to be violations of civil and political
 liberties, though the number of serious incidents has declined
 significantly since the mid-1970s. As has been the case
 almost without interruption since 1929, the state of siege
 provision of the Constitution remains in force. Under it, the
 President may order the detention of any individual without
 trial for an indefinite period. The police forces arrest and
 hold persons arbitrarily without due process of law.
 Sometimes they cite the state of siege power or Paraguay's
 'anti-subversive' statute, Law 209; or, as was the case in
 most of the detentions which occurred in 1984, they simply
 give no rationale. Constitutional guarantees, such as
 protection of the integrity of the individual, the need for
 judicial warrants, freedom of assembly and association, the
 right of habeas corpus, and the requirement for a prompt and
 impartial trial, can be ignored by government officials.
 There are serious restrictions on the ability of the press to
 report and to express opinions freely, as illustrated by the
 Government's closure in 1984 of Paraguay's leading newspaper,
 "ABC Color.   Trade union activities are also restricted, and
 strikes are not permitted.
 Paraguay's turbulent political history, combined with its
 geographic isolation, small population and traditionally
 agrarian economy, produced a relatively slow rate of
 socio-economic growth until a decade ago. President
 Stroessner's rule has brought much-needed political stability
 and economic development, but at considerable cost to
 political rights and individual liberties.
 After a period of rapid economic growth in the late 1970s and
 early 1980s, Paraguay entered a steep recession from which it
 
 
 638
 PARAGUAY
 has now begun to recover. After two years of decline,
 economic growth reached 4 to 5 percent in 1984. The balance
 of payments remains in a deficit position and substantial
 payment delays on international obligations still pose
 problems.
 The most serious infringement of human rights during 1984
 occurred when the Government closed the independent newspaper
 "ABC Color" on March 22, a particularly serious blow to the
 nation's political life. The newspaper remains closed, and
 the Government shows no sign of permitting it to reopen.
 In 1984 some 41 arbitrary detentions came to public notice in
 which individuals were held without being charged or tried,
 usually as a form of extralegal punishment or as a warning
 because of their political activities. This figure represents
 the continuation of a sharp decline since the mid-1970s when
 the number of such cases was in the hundreds. All of the
 individuals thus detained during 1984 were subsequently
 released, 29 within a day or so. The other 12 were held for
 periods of up to a month. A number of prominent political
 exiles took advantage in 1984 of the Government's offer of the
 previous year allowing them to return; however, the Government
 has engaged in various forms of harassment against many of
 those who did return. At the the end of 1984 there were six
 persons who could be considered political prisoners, or whose
 trials appeared to be compromised by irregularities. This
 represents a significant reduction from the previous year.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1   Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom From:
 a. Political Killing
 There were no reported cases in 1984 of killings for political
 motives by the Government, political parties or other entities.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no reports during 1984 of any persons having
 disappeared under circumstances which suggested politically
 motivated abduction or terrorism.
 Local human rights groups list ten persons who died in an
 incident in 1980 involving the armed seizure of a bus in
 Caaguazu Province as having disappeared. The victims'
 families maintain that, since the bodies were never returned
 to them and certificates of death were never provided, the ten
 "disappeared.*
 Local human rights groups also continue to charge that the
 Paraguayan security forces were involved in the disappearances
 of some 24 individuals between 1970 and 1977. Some cases
 involved persons detained in Paraguay; others are said to have
 been detained by Argentine security forces and subsequently
 turned over to the Paraguayan authorities. It has not been
 possible to verify these claims.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 There were reports of mistreatment or violence committed by
 the police against suspects or prisoners in 1984. A new
 
 
 639
 PARAGUAY
 allegation of systematic torture stemmed from a case in June
 1983 in which a medical student was briefly detained following
 a student meeting and subsequently expelled to Argentina. In
 a letter to an Asuncion newspaper in 1984, the student claimed
 that during his detention he had been interrogated, whipped,
 and subjected to a treatment known as the 'pileta," in which
 the victim's head is held under water until suffocation begins.
 Several widely publicized reports in 1984 described police
 violence against suspected criminals or prisoners. In one
 case, two police conscripts beat a suspect with billy clubs in
 order to subdue him; there are allegations that the victim was
 beaten further at the local police station. The following
 morning he was dead upon arrival at a hospital. The policemen
 accused of the Deating were immediately arrested and legal
 proceedings instituted against them. In another case, several
 youtns were reportedly beaten by a police officer who accused
 them of having stolen his car. The charges against the
 officer in question, who was the chief of security at the
 parliament building and who was said to have used his office
 there for his interrogation of the suspects, were subsequently
 dismissed.
 These reports of police violence were atypical in that the
 press gave them heavy coverage. Nonetheless, physical
 mistreatment of suspects and prisoners by the police, either
 to obtain information or as a form of punishment, is believed
 widespread. The so-called "investigations police' are widely
 known for such actions. One of their prisoners, for example,
 told of being kept naked and without bedding for nearly a
 week. For at least one three-day period he and his cellmates
 were given no food. On another occasion the prisoners were
 forced to stand braced against the wall with their hands above
 their heads for hours at a time; on several occasions guards
 beat the palms of his hands and soles of his feet.
 In most cases, once formally arraigned, detainees go to
 regular prison faciltities, where conditions are generally
 better than in the police stations. Prisons are austere,
 especially the maximum security facilities administered
 directly by the Interior Ministry and the Asuncion police,
 which are used in more sensitive cases. For example, one man
 spent four years without trial in a room barely wide enough
 for a cot. Court and Justice Ministry officials visit the
 regular prison facilities several times each year to examine
 conditions and interview prisoners'. They do not regularly
 visit the maximum security facilities, although
 representatives of the International Committee of the Red
 Cross are permitted access.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Detentions are used as a form of warning or punishment -for
 those who criticize the Government or whose political beliefs
 or activities are deemed to be threatening. Sometimes
 individuals are picked up by the police, detained in local
 police stations, where they are often held incommunicado, and
 released after a few days, frequently without formal charges
 having been.,brought. Other detentions may be weeks in length.
 Such detentions have sometimes been justified under the state
 of siege provision of the Constitution, which provides that
 persons may be detained without trial, and that public
 meetings and demonstrations may be banned in the event of war,
 
 
 640
 PARAGUAY
 foreign invasion, internal disturbance, or the serious threat
 of any of these conditions. Implementing legislation called
 for by the Constitution has never been passed. Despite
 constitutional requirements that the state of siege be imposed
 only for limited periods, in practice it has been in effect
 almost continuously since 1929. Technically, the state of
 siege was lifted outside the capital in 1978. In practice,
 backed by a court ruling that prisoners may be moved to
 Asuncion and held there, Paraguayan authorities act as if the
 state of siege were still in force throughout the country.
 In the absence of implementing legislation, the Government and
 courts take the position that state of siege restrictions
 supersede the safeguards on human rights contained elsewhere
 in the Constitution and legal code. Several prominent legal
 scholars and the opposition political parties contest this
 interpretation.
 In some cases of arbitrary detention the Government has
 invoked Law 209, the "anti-subversive" statute, a loosely
 worded law which provides for imprisonment of persons who
 'foment hatred,' defame members of the Government, commit a
 variety of other acts, or are members of the Comaunist Party.
 In the cases of arbitrary detention which occurred in 1984,
 the Government did not cite either this law or the state of
 siege provision of the Constitution to justify its actions.
 In most cases, it gave no explanation at all.
 The arrest in August of five labor organizers is
 illustrative. Picked up on August 18, 1984 in the town of
 Villa Hayes by members of the Paraguayan army, the five had
 planned to meet with construction workers at the
 government-controlled steel mill under contruction there.
 They were detained by the army until September 4, during most
 of which time they were held incommunicado; they were not
 informed of the reasons for their detention and their
 detention was not brought to the attention of a judge. All of
 these actions violate specific provisions of the Constitution.
 During 1984, there were 41 known instances of arbitrary
 detention. All of these individuals were subsequently
 released. There are, in addition, at least two persons still
 being held from previous years who have never been formally
 charged or brought to trial.
 Among noteworthy, positive steps in 1984, several individuals
 detained arbitrarily for extensive periods of time were either
 released or brought to trial. Escolastico Ovando, who had
 been held since 1977 after completing a 15-year sentence for
 alleged complicity in a murder case, was released on May 21,
 1984. Cantalicio Orue, held without trial since 1974, was
 released on January 10, 1984. Rafael Mella Torre, a Chilean
 citizen accused of having participated in the murder of former
 Nicaraguan President Anastasio Somoza in 1980, was finally
 brought to trial in July 1984 after over four years'
 incarceration; his trial is now in progress. In late December
 the Supreme Court ruled on the cases of six individuals who
 have been held since 1980 for their part in the armed
 hijacking of a bus to publicize a land tenure problem. The
 Court rejected the Government Prosecutor's appeal to increase
 their sentence and all six regained their liberty in early
 January 1985.
 Over the years many political opponents of the Government have
 either been forced, or have voluntarily gone, into exile. In
 
 
 641
 PARAGUAY
 December 1983, the Interior Minister stated that with the
 exception of two prominent opposition figures -- Domingo Laino
 and Luis Resck -- all exiles would be permitted to return to
 Paraguay. As a result, a number of political figures, many of
 whom had been in exile for many years, have returned to
 Paraguay since early 1984. Prominent among them were
 officials of the Colorado Popular Movement (MOPOCO), a
 dissident faction of the ruling Colorado Party whose leaders
 had been expelled from Paraguay in 1960. Many of those who
 returned have been subjected to various forms of harassment
 and temporary detention by the Government. There has been no
 change in the Government's position concerning the possible
 return of Drs. Laino and Resck.
 In 1984 there was one reported case of a Paraguayan being sent
 into exile -- Alfonso Silva Quintana, who was released from
 imprisonment in March 1984 after serving a ten year sentence
 for violation of the 'anti-subversive' statute, Law 209.
 Silva was expelled from Paraguay, and has since gone to join
 his wife, who was released from prison two years earlier and
 also expelled from the country.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Paraguay, like most other Latin American countries, does not
 have trial by jury. Trials are conducted almost exclusively
 by presentation of written documents to a judge, who then
 renders a decision. All judgments are automatically reviewed
 by an appellate-level judge, and appeals to the Supreme Court
 are possible. Part of the trial process is open to the public
 and trials are routinely reported in the press.
 Numerous safeguards set forth in the Constitution and the
 penal code in theory protect the rights of the individual
 during the trial process. However, the judiciary has
 traditionally been subject to extensive influence by the
 executive branch of the Government and by the military. This,
 together with the corruption in the judicial system, continues
 to compromise the ability of an accused person to receive a
 fair, speedy trial.
 Over the past year, a number of changes have nonetheless been
 made which many observers credit with having improved the
 quality and speed of the judicial process. Widespread changes
 in the personnel of the judiciary system, particulary judges
 and their clerks, are said to have reduced the amount of
 corruption. One judge was suspended after having dropped
 charges against a Bolivian accused of having smuggled cocaine
 into the country. Several politically sensitive trials
 involving alleged violations of Law 209 which had dragged on
 for some time were concluded. However, it is widely
 acknowledged that the courts still are not independent of the
 influence of the executive branch in politically sensitive
 cases.
 One example of the continuing problems within the judicial
 system is provided by the case of Gerardo Meza, who had been
 held without trial since 1980 under the state of siege
 provision of the Constitution. Some time in 1984, legal
 proceedings were apparently begun against Meza for complicity
 in a murder for which his two sons had already'been
 convicted. However, according to local observers Meza has
 been held since 1980 in the maximum security facilities of the
 Interior Ministry, where he can be visited only by his family
 
 
 642
 PARAGUAY
 and by representatives of the Red Cross. As a result, he had
 no contact with legal counsel, and was apparently not aware
 that his trial was in progress until he learned, in August
 1984, that he had been convicted and sentenced to nine years
 imprisonment.
 As of December 31, there were an estimated six persons
 --already tried and sentenced or whose trials were underway--
 wno could De considered political prisoners, or whose trials
 appeared to be seriously compromised by irregularities. This
 represents a significant reduction from the previous year,
 primarily the result of two long-standing cases having been
 completed. There are an additional two individuals whose
 cases involved criminal offenses but which local human rights
 observers believe were affected in part by political factors.
 This too represents a considerable improvement over the
 previous year.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Government and security forces do not intervene as a matter of
 course in the daily life of the average citizen. The
 Constitution provides that, except to prevent the commission
 of a crime, private homes may not be entered without a
 judicial warrant. Nonetheless, some private citizens complain
 of their right to privacy being abused by the security
 authorities. Leaders of the Colorado Popular Movement, who
 were permitted to return from exile in early 1984 complain
 that they are followed by the police wherever they go, night
 and day. They also complain that their telephones are tapped,
 their private correspondence monitored, and their ability to
 move about restricted. The police have reportedly told them
 that they may not meet in groups of more than three, and it is
 claimed that those whom leaders of the group contact are later
 questioned. Other opposition figures and critics of the
 Government have similarly complained about interference with
 their mail, particularly foreign correspondence, and of having
 their telephones tapped. Although the Paraguayan police, in a
 statement in October 1984, denied the charges made against
 them by the members of the Colorado Popular Movement, and said
 that'no such harassment by them had taken place, it is
 nonetheless widely believed that the charges made by this
 opposition organization are true. Finally, there continue to
 be cases in which foreign newspapers and magazines containing
 articles critical of the Paraguayan Government are confiscated
 at. the port of entry.
 Section 2   Respect for Civil Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 The closure of Paraguay's largest newspaper,"ABC Color', in
 March 1984 was the most serious violation of freedom of the
 press in many years. Despite broad guarantees in the
 Consitution of freedom of speech and the press, in practice
 there are limits to the amount and kinds of criticism which
 the Government will tolerate. Such things as direct criticism
 of the President, the military, and key civilian leaders, are
 usually avoided by the major newspapers as are sensitive
 topics such as defense matters and corruption. It is widely
 believed that 'ABC Color's" continual pressure against these
 limits was the reason for its closure.
 
 
 643
 PARAGUAY
 Up until the time of its closing, 'ABC Color* was by far the
 most independent and outspoken of the Paraguayan newspapers.
 During its 16-year life, the paper had become Paraguay's
 leading daily in terms of circulation and reporting. Its
 editorials often criticized government policies and it
 reported extensively on some of the more sensitive domestic
 topics, such as human rights violations, problems of
 corruption, and the inner workings of the Government and the
 ruling Colorado Party. On March 16, the newspaper's owner was
 detained by the police, ostensibly because of his refusal to
 identify the author of an article which contained critical
 remarks by an opposition figure. While the owner was in
 prison, the Government, on March 22, closed the newspaper for
 an 'indefinite period.*
 The Government, in announcing its action, stated that 'ABC
 Color" had systematically violated the Constitution, subverted
 public order, and threatened the peace and stability of the
 nation by printing seditious editorials and allowing itself to
 be used as a mouthpiece of 'irregular political groups lacking
 legal status.' The owner of the newspaper appealed the
 Government's action in a suit brought before the Paraguayan
 Supreme Court. That body upheld the Government's action,
 ruling that the Interior Minister, in whose name the closure
 of the newspaper was taken, acted within his powers and in the
 public interest. The determination of the Government to keep
 'ABC Color' closed was demonstrated on November 29 when the
 police, armed with a search warrant, entered the 'ABC Color"
 warehouse and confiscated 1200 copies of a pamphlet recounting
 the Government's harassment of the paper and analyzing the
 Supreme Court decision.
 The Government's action in the 'ABC Color' case was widely
 criticized by persons of virtually all political persuasions,
 though public criticism was rare. One of the remaining major
 newspapers criticized the action in measured terms.
 Privately, virtually all objective observers agreed that the
 Government's accusations against the newspaper were unfounded
 and that the action violated the nation's constitutional
 guarantees.
 Despite the closure of 'ABC Color', a measure of press freedom
 does still exist. Of particular note was the reappearance of
 the weekly newspaper of the Febrerista Revolutionary Party,
 one of the recognized opposition parties. This newspaper has
 published strong criticism of the Government and its policies,
 subjects that other newspapers shy away from. The Catholic
 Church publishes a newspaper, 'Sendero,' which reopened after
 the 'ABC Color' closure and now appears twice a month. It too
 has printed articles criticizing government policies and
 actions and touching on subjects which the Government
 considers sensitive. It is generally believed that the
 Government permits these two newspapers considerable latitude
 because of their small circulation and less frequent
 appearance.
 The remaining daily newspapers have been noticeably more
 subdued in their reporting of sensitive issues since the
 closure of 'ABC Color'. They have been joined by a new daily
 paper, founded by a businessman with close ties to the
 Government. This new journal, which has been extremely
 cautious arid supportive of the Government in its editorial
 pblicy, is viewed as an attempt by the Government and its
 supporters to move into the vacuum left by 'ABC Color', which,
 
 
 644
 PARAGUAY
 until its closure, was the most widely read and influential
 paper in the country.
 Paraguay's two television stations are both privately owned.
 Their news programs are carefully self-censored and closely
 monitored by the Government. They virtually always carry
 commentary laudatory of the Government; reporting on the
 activities of opposition parties is virtually non-existent.
 Two of Asuncion's radio stations, Radio Caritas, which is
 affiliated with the Catholic Church, and Radio Nanduti, which
 is privately owned, have been notable for their willingness to
 broadcast more sensitive items of local news. Radio Nanduti
 in particular has specialized in carrying interviews with
 politicians of all parties, including those which are not
 legally recognized, sometimes on sensitive issues. As a
 result, the station was shut down for 30 days in July 1983.
 Since then the station's owner, Humberto Rubin, has received
 occasional warnings from Paraguayan authorities. For example,
 Rubin has reportedly been warned about giving too much
 coverage to the closure of 'ABC Color'. On November 6, 1984
 Government authorities informed Mr. Rubin that he would no
 longer be permitted to work as an announcer on his station,
 apparently on the grounds that he does not have a valid
 license. This too is widely viewed as another form of
 pressure against the station.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Despite constitutional guarantees concerning the rights of
 peaceful assembly and association for legal ends, these rights
 are often violated in practice. Under the state of siege
 which is in effect in the capital, it is technically necessary
 to obtain permission for any assembly of more than a certain
 number of persons, for whatever purpose. Generally, however,
 activities of organizations which are non-political in nature
 are unhindered and this restriction is enforced only in the
 case of gatherings sponsored by opposition political parties
 or other organizations critical of the Government. For
 example, a proposal in March by a group of opposition parties
 to invite like-minded parties from other South American
 countries to participate in a public conference in Asuncion
 had to be dropped when government authorities made clear that
 they would not permit such a gathering.
 On the other hand, there were occasions when the Government
 did permit public meetings in which even those political
 parties which are not legally recognized were allowed to
 participate. For example, in February a group of opposition
 parties was permitted to hold a rally in one of Asuncion's
 parks. The rally featured speeches by a variety of opposition
 figures, including many from parties and organizations not
 legally recognized.
 Similarly, while the police normally do not permit public
 demonstrations, even peaceful ones, that criticize the
 Government or its policies, occasionally such events do take
 place. In January, for example, a small group of persons
 demonstrated in front of the Ministry of Interior calling for
 the capture and extradition of Dr. Josef Mengele, the Nazi war
 criminal who is believed by some to be hiding in Paraguay.
 (The Paraguayan Government denies this.) The group of
 demonstrators was led by Mrs. Beate Klarsfeld, an anti-Nazi
 activist who was visiting Paraguay.
 
 
 645
 PARAGUAY
 The right to free association is particularly curtailed in the
 case of the Paraguayan labor force. Paraguayan workers are
 not permitted to organize freely, as demonstrated most
 recently by the August detention for 15 days without charge of
 five union officials seeking to organize construction workers
 at the state-owned steel mill now under construction. Strikes
 are not permitted by the Government, and efforts at collective
 bargaining by the few independent labor unions which are
 permitted to exist are sometimes frustrated, with the tacit
 backing of the Government.
 Most of the labor unions in Paraguay are members of the
 Federation of Paraguayan Workers which claims to represent
 over 90 percent of organized labor. The Federation is
 carefully controlled by the Government and is not able to
 defend effectively the interests of the Paraguayan work
 force. The leadership of the Federation, and of most of its
 member unions, is not freely elected by the membership, but
 rather is chosen on the basis of acceptability to the
 Government. Union officials who differ with the Federation's
 policies are often harassed or fired by their employers with
 the tacit support of the Government.
 There are a number of independent unions in Paraguay, some of
 them organized at the company level. Some have been strong
 enough to bargain with management, despite efforts by private
 firms - sometimes supported by the Government - to resist
 their efforts. Some of the independent unions have been
 granted legal recognition by the Government, but others have
 not, making it difficult or impossible for them to bargain
 effectively. The Government is less likely to recognize
 groups which it perceives to be more independent of its
 control. For example, the Union of Professional Journalists
 has never been granted legal recognition, despite its claims
 to have satisfied all the legal requirements. The president
 of this union is a well-known journalist who in the past has
 been highly critical of the Government and who has been held
 without charges by the police three times for extended
 periods, most recently in 1983.
 The activities of the independent unions are carefully
 monitored by the security forces and the Ministry of Labor.
 Their leaders are often summoned by officials of the police or
 the Ministry of Labor for questioning about their activities
 and, on occasion, to be warned away from those activities of
 which the Government disapproves. Sometimes more direct
 threats are used. On one occasion, an independent union's
 leaders were called by the police and told that if they did
 not immediately terminate a demonstration which was being
 conducted within their union office, all of them would be
 arrested on the spot and their headquarters closed down. The
 demonstration was called off.
 The Federation of Paraguayan Workers does not maintain ties
 with any of the public or private international labor
 organizations. It was expelled from the International
 Confederation of Free Trade Unions (ICFTU) several years ago.
 The ICFTU delegation which visited Paraguay in late 1983 was
 highly critical of the labor situation in the country,
 complaining that the Government was systematically violating
 the rights of the Paraguayan working class.
 Some of the independent labor unions in Paraguay do maintain
 
 
 646
 PARAGUAY
 ties with international labor organizations, and the ICFTU,
 in criticizing the Paraguayan Government, has called for
 greater international support for the independent unions in
 Paraguay.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Tne Constitution establishes Roman Catholicism as the official
 state religion, but it also guarantees freedom of conscience
 for other denominations. With very few exceptions, this
 freedom is respected. Adherence to a particular creed confers
 no advantages within Paraguayan society and conversion from
 one faith to another is permissible. Many denominations
 conduct their activities freely, and missionaries are, for the
 most part, permitted to enter the country and proselytize.
 However, Paraguayan law prohibits the granting of legal status
 to new religious groups and a few evangelical churches have
 been unable to obtain government approval for their
 operations. The Jehovah's Witnesses, for example, lost its
 legal registration in 1979. The church filed an appeal with
 the Paraguayan Supreme Court, but no action has ever been
 taken on it.
 d. Freedom of Movement within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration and Repatriation
 The Constitution provides for freedom of movement, which is
 usually not restricted within the country. Most citizens may
 enter and leave the country freely. However, members of one
 of the unrecognized political groups have complained that they
 have been told by the police that they must report any
 intention to leave the country 48 hours in advance. In
 addition, there continue to be complaints by opposition
 figures and human rights activists about difficulties in
 obtaining passports. Nontheless, there appeared to be fewer
 incidents of such restrictions on travel in 1984, and a number
 of prominent critics of the Government reported that they were
 able to obtain passports during the course of the year,
 although after considerable delays.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 President Stroessner dominates the Paraguayan political
 system. He rules through the Colorado Party, which
 administers public patronage, through the military and police
 forces, which maintain public order and guarantee the security
 of the regime, and through the governmental bureaucracy. The
 legislative branch, consisting of a Senate and a Chamber of
 Deputies, is almost completely responsive to the desires of
 the President on all important matters. The Colorado Party's
 two-thirds majority in both houses gives it complete control
 of the legislature. There have been very few occasions under
 President Stroessner's rule when the legislative branch has
 rejected Government proposals or policy. However, there have
 been some cases when Colorado party legislators have been able
 to delay, or even alter, legislative proposals submitted by
 the executive branch. The legislative branch also provides a
 forum for representatives of the legally-recognized opposition
 parties to express their views and criticize the Government.
 They have no real power, however, to affect the workings of
 the legislature.
 General elections are held every five years for the presidency
 
 
 647
 PARAGUAY
 and the two houses of the legislature, most recently in 1983.
 The law requires that all Paraguayans 18 years of age or more
 vote. Two of the three legally recognized opposition parties
 participate in the electoral process; the third declines to do
 so on the grounds that the Government's control over the
 political process makes such participation meaningless. In
 1983, the control of the electoral machinery by the dominant
 Colorado Party resulted in a seriously flawed election.
 The domination of the nation's political life by the Colorado
 Party stems in considerable measure from its ability to
 dispense patronage and to take advantage of every opportunity
 offered by the machinery of government to maintain its
 predominance. Access to positions in the Government, as well
 as in the officer ranks of the military and the police, is in
 practice limited to members of the party. Individuals often
 join the party for economic and social advantages such as
 enrollment in the national university or permission to bid on
 public contracts. At the local level, police and government
 officials use their considerable powers and influence to
 support the Colofado Party.
 In addition to the three legally recognized opposition parties
 there also exist political parties which do not enjoy
 juridical recognition from the Government, and therefore
 cannot participate in the political process. In any case,
 most such groups reject participation under the current
 electoral system. Since they are not legally recognized,
 these parties have more serious problems in attempting to
 proselytize and otherwise carry on normal political
 activities. For example, -in June the unrecognized Authentic
 Radical Liberal Party sought permission to hold a convention
 in Asuncion for the election of new officers. Permission was
 not granted, and as a result the party was forced to hold a
 series of meetings in private residences as a substitute for a
 convention. The Christian Democratic Party has for many years
 sought legal status, insisting that it has already complied
 with the requirements of the electoral law. Nonetheless, this
 permission has not been granted. Regardless of their legal
 status, however, all opposition parties are subject to
 harassment by the authorities.
 Section 4 Government Attitude Regarding International and
 Non-governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The Government describes negative comments about its human
 rights performance from outside sources as unwarranted
 interference in Paraguay's internal affairs. Nonetheless, the
 Government has normally responded to inquiries from
 organizations such as the United Nations Human Rights
 Commission and the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights.
 The UN Human Rights Commission continues to consider the human
 rights situation in Paraguay in confidential proceedings under
 resolution 1503. In addition, in 1984 the Commission adopted
 a resolution concerning the impact of the state of siege in
 Paraguay. The Paraguayan Government has generally cooperated
 with the Commission.
 During 1984 a number of representatives of private human
 rights organizations, as well as private individuals concerned
 with human rights problems, visited Paraguay. For example,
 the Inter-American Press Society sent a delegation to Paraguay
 in June to inquire into the closure of the Newspaper "ABC
 
 40-387 o - 85 - 42
 
 
 648
 PARAGUAY
 Color" and to seek its re-opening. Members of the group met
 with a wide range of figures, within and outside the
 Government, and three of them met with President Stroessner.
 The same month, a group representing Americas Watch and the
 New York Bar Association, visited Paraguay to investigate the
 human rignts situation. This group also met with a wide range
 of human rights activists and was allowed to visit two
 prisoners whom local human rights organizations believe are
 being held for essentially political reasons. The visit by
 the Americas Watch group took place only after a previous
 effort to visit Paraguay in April was aborted. At that time,
 the members of the group were detained briefly by the police
 following a dispute at the airport with authorities who
 insisted on examining and making copies of documents they were
 carrying. The group therefor decided to abandon the visit and
 left on the next available aircraft. Paraguayan officials
 subsequently invited representatives of the two organizations
 to return. The incident underlines the Paraguayan Government
 ambivalence towards such visits.
 While for the most part willing to allow visits by human
 rights activists, the Government rejects any suggestion that
 serious human rights problems exist in Paraguay. The official
 newspaper of the ruling Colorado Party routinely dismisses the
 finuings of organizations such as Amnesty International, which
 has for many years expressed concern over the situation in
 Paraguay. In its 1984 report, for example, Amnesty's major
 concerns related to cases of *arbitrary arrest, torture, the
 forcible expulsion of political detainees and the use of state
 of siege legislation to detain political opponents for
 prolonged periods without trial.' The Paraguayan Government
 has never accepted the validity of such charges, and insists
 that such problems do not exist.
 A number of local private organizations continued to be active
 during 1984 in trying to protect individual liberties. These
 include the Inter-Faith Committee, which is supported by three
 different church groups, the Paraguayan Human Rights
 Commission, the Paraguayan chapter of the Association of Latin
 American Lawyers for the Defense of Human Rights, and the
 Union of Paraguayan Women. The opposition political parties
 and certain of the media also have sought to publicize human
 rights problems and to express support for a more open and
 democratic society. These human rights groups make known
 cases involving alleged human rights violations and provide
 legal assistance to individuals. Their efforts have also
 helped to keep human rights abuses under international
 scrutiny and to secure the release of a number of detainees.
 As with foreign organizations which allege the existence of
 human rights problems, the Government is critical of local
 human rights organizations. Some local human rights activists
 complain of government harassment, which they attribute to
 their public criticism of human rights abuses.
 ECONOMIC, SOCIAL AND CULTURAL SITUATION
 Paraguay's population, estimated to be 3.6 million in 1984 and
 growing at a rate of 2.7 percent per year, is small in
 relation to its land area -- 157,047 square miles, about the
 size of California.- Agriculture (including forestry and
 ranching) is the most important economic activity, accounting
 for nearly one-third of gross domestic product, one-half of
 employment and over 95 percent of exports. Probably because
 of the relative abundance of good land, urban poverty and
 
 
 649
 PARAGUAY
 landlessness are not as apparent in Paraguay as in many other
 developing countries. Aproximately 65 percent of the total
 population lives in rural areas.
 In the mid-1970s, Paraguay commenced a period of unprecedented
 economic expansion stimulated by the opening up of the
 country's isolated interior for agricultural and ranching
 development and by the construction of hydroelectric dams,
 especially the massive Paraguayan-Brazilian Itaipu project, to
 harness the waters of the Parana River. Although statistics
 issued in 1978 show that 19 percent of the population falls
 below the absolute poverty level in urban areas, as does 50
 percent in rural areas, the relative economic prosperity from
 the mid-1970s to early 1980s pushed Paraguay into the
 middle-income developing-country category with a per capita
 gross national product of $1,606 in 1982.
 A steep economic recession during 1982-83 and currency
 devaluation since have reduced per capita income considerably,
 but in 1984 Paraguay was recovering from the recession with a
 growth rate of four to five percent, which should be similar
 in 1985. Open unemployment grew in 1984 as a result of the
 recession, especially in urban areas where it was estimated at
 15 percent.
 The Government professes support for a private enterprise
 economic system but public sector growth in recent years has
 outpaced the private sector and increasingly has infringed
 upon areas previously left to private initiative. In some
 cases, state monopolies already are economic burdens, and
 controversial public works or public sector industrial
 projects threaten to become additional ones. As the public
 sector has grown, reports of official abuse of public trust
 through graft and corruption have increased. Public sector
 employment and frequently contracts for government-related
 projects, usually depend on official connections or membership
 in the ruling party.
 Even though nearly one quarter of the central government
 budget is devoted to health and education, funds available for
 social programs are low relative to needs. Life expectancy at
 birth was 66 years in 1984 and infant mortality was 44.7 per
 thousand live births, down from 109 in 1962. As early as
 1977, the population as a whole was judged to have a daily
 caloric intake 22 percent greater than the minimum daily
 requirement. In the agrarian-based Paraguayan economy,
 adequacy of food is seldom a problem, although an imbalanced
 diet sometimes leads to problems of malnutrition among the
 poor. Government and private agencies attempt to address the
 latter problem through stronger home extension services.
 Adult literacy is estimated at just over 80 percent (1972).
 Primary school enrollment was 560,621 in 1983. Statistics
 show that approximately 40 percent of the students enrolled
 completed six years of basic education. Some 60 percent of
 the primary graduates pass on to secondary education, but only
 14 percent of the students entering secondary education
 eventually reach the sixth and final year. One of the
 recognized challenges facing the educational authorities is to
 increase school enrollments in the higher grades, especially
 in rural areas. Efforts are also being aimed at improving
 teaching standards and relating the content of education to
 the requirement of the country.
 
 
 650
 PARAGUAY
 Paraguay has an unassimilated Indian population estimated at
 45,000. The Government's National Indigenous Institute can
 purchase land on behalf of the Indians and expropriate private
 property to establish tribal homelands. Implementation of
 this program has been slow and thus far its promise has not
 been realized, but during 1984 the Institute did purchase land
 on behalf of a group of Indians for the first time. The
 problems of the Indian population continue to receive wide
 publicity in the Paraguayan media. The most prominent issue
 during 1984 was a dispute between some 300 families of the
 Maskoy tribe and a large company which, according to the
 tribe, expelled them from their traditional lands. A number
 of organizations, including the Institute and the Government's
 land reform agency, the National Indigenous Institute for
 Rural Welfare, are involved in efforts to resettle the Maskoy
 tribe.
 The Constitution guarantees 'the equality of civil and
 political rights' of women, while emphasizing the importance
 of marriage and the unity of the family. Women play a
 subordinate role in the political life of Paraguay. The
 executive and judicial branches of Government have a few
 prominent female officials, and there are three women in the
 90-member Parliament. Several others, including a prominent
 human rights leader, enjoy independent political renown.
 While the traditional social system limits the participation
 of women, particularly those from lower income groups, an
 increasing number are participating effectively in business,
 the professions, and the artistic world. However, women
 usually receive less remuneration than men for comparable
 work. There are two organizations concerned with women's
 rights: the Paraguayan League of Women's Rights, a wing of
 the ruling Colorado Party, and the Union of Paraguayan Women,
 an organization founded in 1982 by a former opposition member
 of the Parliament.
 
 
 651
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: PARAGUAY
 1982     1983     1984
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL...        3.9      3.2      2.7
 LOANS ..............        0.0     0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............        3.9     3.2      2.7
 A.AID  .................        0.0     0.0      0.2
 LOANS ..............      0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ............. 0.0           0.0      0.2
 (SEC.SUPP.ASSIST.) ...       0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.FOOO FOR PEACE .......        0.1     0.0      0.0
 LOANS ..............        0.0     0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............        0.1     0.0      0.0
 TITLE I-TOTAL ..........        0.0     0.0      0.0
 REPAY. IN $-LOANS .....        0.0     0.0      0.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR .....        0.0     0.0      0.0
 TITLE IT-TOTAL .........        0.1     0.0      0.0
 E.RELIEF.EC.DEV & WFP.         0.1     0.0      0.0
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY .....        0.0     0.0      0.0
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST...         3.8     3.2      2.!
 LOANS ..............      0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............        3.8     3.2      2.5
 PEACE CORPS ......        2.4     2.5      2.1
 NARCOTICS ........        0.0     0.0      0.0
 OTHER ............        1.4     0.7      0.4
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL...        0.0      0.1      0.1
 LOANS ..............        0.0     0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............        0.0     0.1      0.1
 A.MAP GRANTS ..........        0.0     0.0      0.0
 B.CREOIT FINANCING ....        0.0     0.0      0.0
 C.INTL ML.E.TRNG ....        0.0     0.1      0.1
 D.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK...         0.0     0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS ........        0.0     0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. & NIL...        3.9      3.3      2.8
 LOANS ..............        0.0     0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............        3.9      3.3     2.8
 OTHER US LOANS ..........       63.9      1.1     0.0
 EX-IM BANK LOANS .......       63.9     0.0      0.0
 ALL OTHER ..............        0.0      1.1     0.0
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1982     1983     1984    1946-84
 TOTAL ........   176.4    114.7     44.4   1047.7
 IBRO              99.4     40.0    30.0    457.6
 IFC               10.4      0.0     0.3     17.2
 IDA                0.0      0.0     0.0     45.5
 ZoB               64.9     72.9     14.1   494.8
 ADS                0.0      0.0     0.0      0.0
 AFOB               0.0      0.0     0.0      0.0
 UNOP               1.0      1.8     0.0     26.1
 OTHER-UN           0.7      0.0     0.0      6.5
 EEC                0.0      0.0     0.0      0.0
 
 
 652
