 PARAGUAY
 Paraguay has been independent since 1811, but until 1989 was ruled almost con-
 tinuously by authoritarian regimes. On August 15, Juan Carlos Wasmosy, Para-
 guay's first freely elected civilan President, completed his initial year of a 5-year
 term. Wasmosy pledged to consolidate the nation's democratic transition, which
 began following the February 1989 overthrow of dictator General Alfredo
 Stroessner. Paraguay is a constitutional republic with a strong executive branch and
 an increasingly important bicameral legislature. The President is the Head of Gov-
 ernment and cannot succeed himself. The Colorado Party and the armed forces con-
 tinue to exercise substantial influence, although the opposition's power has in-
 creased as a result of a combination of the changes brought about by the June 1992
 Constitution and the subsequent election of a civilian President and an opposition-
 controlled Congress.
 The national police force, under the overall authority of the Ministry of the Inte-
 rior, has responsibility for maintaining internal security and public order. Police
 abuses of human rights, including extrajudicial killings, continued in 1994. In con-
 trast to previous years, however, the Government did convict and sentence three po-
 lce officers for killing civilians. Members of the armed forces continued to insert
 themselves into the political process, including using their influence over the courts
 to ensure decisions that validate their political activities. While some military offi-
 cials accused of human rights abuses during 1994 were suspended and investigated,
 none were arrested, sentenced, or convicted.
 Paraguay has a market economy based on the export of primary agricultural prod-
 ucts. A substantial percentage of the work force is employed in the informal econ-
 omy, which may account for 40 to 60 percent of the gross domestic product. Efforts
 to privatize state-owned enterprises continued in 1994. Real economic growth was
 expected to be about 3.6 percent.
 Principal human rights problems included extrajudicial killings, torture and mis-
 treatment of criminal suspects and prisoners, police and military corruption, deten-
 tion of suspects without judicial orders, general weaknesses within te fjudiciary,
 firings of labor organizers, and military intrusions into the judicial and political sys-
 tems. The Government began efforts to convict and punish those committing human
 rights abuses during the Stroessner era, and the courts sentenced persons in several
 such cases in 1994.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were at least two extrajudicial
 killings involving security force officials including the shooting of peasant leader Se-
 bastian Larrosa (reportedly by local police official Augusto Palacios) and the killing
 by naval official Walter Arce, apparently while inebriated, of Leonardo Molinas.
 Both cases remained under investigation at year's end.
 In April Elena Cubas killed peasant leader Esteban Balbuena in Colonia 7 de
 Agosto, Itapua. Balbuena was one of the most visible organizers and participants
 in local rural worker organizations and in demonstrations against the Government's
 agrarian policy. Although police officials originally dismissed the killing as a "crime
 of passion," when Cubas was arrested, she originally told police that she followed
 the instructions of unnamed officials. She later recanted, and the case remained
 under investigation at year's end.
 During the year at least two other peasant leaders were also killed. In August
 several unidentified attackers fought with and killed German Ayala, a peasant lead-
 er in Itapua and a witness in the Balbuena case. In April three unknown persons
 killed Hilario Sanabria, a peasant leader in Caaguazu, while he was returning home
 from a soccer game. Their associates asserted that antipeasant vigilante groups
 were responsible. There was no indication that the Government investigated these
 claims.
 In a departure from prior ractice, the Government began to convict and punish
 police officials who committed serious human rights abuses. In April police official
 Aurelio Enciso was sentenced to 6 years of prison for the 1991 killing of Juan
 
 
 475
 Desiderio Ortellado Cardozo, a 14-year-old suspected of trespassing. In September
 police official Marciano Ramon Lopez Pintos was sentenced to 19 years in prison for
 the 1989 murders of Gregorio Bernal and Pablo Gonzalez. Also in September police
 official Cirilio Paniagua was sentenced to 8 years in prison for the 1990 killing of
 Fermina Martinez Velazquez.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reported cases of abductions by security forces.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 Torture and brutal and degrading treatment of convicted prisoners and other de-
 tainees continued. Police, military, and prison guards were implicated in the mis-
 treatment of individuals in their custody. Although the authorities arrested some
 and held them for investigation and trial, they actually tried, convicted, or appro-
 priately punished very few. There were credible reports of mistreatment of women
 and minors and of brutal attempts to force confessions out of detainees.
 A respected human rights group Tekoja, reported that children in police custody
 were particularly susceptible to physi  punishment, with torture and abuse occur-
 ring against juveniles at a higher rate than against adult detainees. The human
 rights group accused the police in several cases of torturing minors by placing plas-
 tic bags over their heads, knocking out their teeth, using a hammer to beat their
 backs, or scalding their hands and feet to force a confession. Many minors reported
 being denied food drink, or access to bathrooms for up to 3 days. Both Tekojoja and
 another well-known human rights group, the Committee of Churches, filed charges
 against several officials for the abuse of minors in their custody. None of the many
 persons charged in court of torturing minors were convicted during the year.
 Prison conditions remained poor. Overcrowding and mistreatment of prisoners
 were the most serious problems. Conditions were particularly poor in the Panchito
 Lopez youth prison. An independent investigation of the prison revealed that the in-
 stitution was unsanitary, unsafe, and extremely overcrowded; although originally
 built as a single family home, the institution houses between 130 and 150 detainees.
 The Tacumbu men's prison is similarly overcrowded. The human rights committee
 of the Brazilian Attorneys' Association released a statement declaring that the Para-
 guayan prisons in Alto Parana and Canindeyu were "inhuman." The Government
 permits independent monitoring of prison conditions by interested nongovernmental
 organizations (NGO's).
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The Constitution prohibits detention
 without an arrest warrant signed by a judge and stipulates that any person arrested
 must be presented before a judge within 48 hours to make a statement. The police
 can arrest persons without a warrant if they catch them in the act of committing
 a crime, but must present them before a *udge within 24 hours. However, the au-
 thorities often violated these provisions. More than 90 percent of an estimated 3,000
 prisoners are held without arrest warrants, orders of detention, or convictions.
 ourts have passed sentence on only 6 percent of the detainees at Tacumbu prison,
 only 2.5 percent of the detainees at the Buen Pastor women's prison, and virtually
 none of the detainees at the Panchito Lopez juvenile prison. Although a bail system
 exists for most crimes, juveniles cannot post bond. Furthermore, judges frequently
 set bail very high, and many accused are unable to post bond.
 Throughout the year the authorities arrested and imprisoned individuals without
 following the constitutional legal process. There were a number of cases similar to
 that of Lucia Galeano Rivas, who remained imprisoned 4 months without cause.
 Galeano Rivas was first imprisoned on the basis of an order signed by a justice of
 the peace who did not have the legal authority to issue such a warrant and which
 did not specify the grounds for her arrest. Almost 3 months later, she appeared be-
 fore a criminal court judge who could find no cause for her imprisonment and re-
 leased her. In many other cases, police officials took persons into custody by without
 a valid judicial order and did not present them before a judge for several days.
 The Supreme Court, the Public Ministry, and a judicial working group took steps
 to reduce the large number of detainees held without being sentence or without
 cause. During the year, they reduced the number of criminal cases pending more
 than 1 year by over 20 percent. The Supreme Court and many criminal court judges
 also made quarterly visits to the prisons to identify and release improperly held in-
 dividuals. In August the authorities released Isabelino Villalba after he served 20
 years in prison without being sentenced.
 The Constitution does not expressly prohibit forced exile but states that all citi-
 zens have the right to reside in their country.
 Credible reports continued that landowners, many of them Brazilians living near
 the border in the Alto Parana, Canindeyu and Amambay departments, armed their
 employees to remove squatters from their property without court orders. Some of
 the evictions reportedly were violent and there were unsubstantiated reports of fa-
 talities. However, the authorities undertook no investigation into these incidents.
 
 
 476
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The judicial branch is comprised of a five-member
 Supreme Court headed by a president. There are four appellate tribunals: civil and
 commercial, criminal, labor, and juvenile. Several minor courts and justices of the
 peace fall within these four functional areas. Although the 1992 Constitution stipu-
 lates that all defendants have the right to an attorney at public expense, if nec-
 essary, there are only five public defenders available to the transient and the indi-
 gent. Many destitute suspects receive little legal assistance, and few have access to
 an attorney sufficiently m advance of the trial to prepare a defense. The State is
 represented by a Public Ministry official, who is responsible for bringing charges
 against accused persons.
 Trials are conducted almost exclusively by presentation of written documents to
 a judge, who then renders a decision. Defendants and the State can present written
 testimony of witnesses and evidence. All interested parties have access to all docu-
 ments reviewed by the judge, and defendants can rebut witnesses. Defendants enjoy
 a presumption of innocence. The judge alone determines guilt or innocence and de-
 cides punishment. During the pretrial phase, the judge receives and may request
 investigative reports. In this phase, the judge is also likely to make a persona in-
 spection of the scene of the crime and of the available physical evidence. The ac-
 cused often appears before the court only twice: to plead and to be sentenced. An
 appellate judge automatically reviews all verdicts, and the law provides for appeals
 to the Supreme Court. The military has its own judicial system.
 Although the 1992 Constitution prescribes that judges be selected by a combina-
 tion of an independent Magistrate's Council, the Congress, and the executive, that
 body was not constituted until late October. Accordingly, many of the judges active
 during 1994 were holdover appointments made ly former dictator Alfredo
 Stroessner serving in an interim capacity beyond their established 5-year term. Sev-
 eral of them were alleged to make judicial decisions on the basis of bribery intimi-
 dation, political motives, and friendship with senior military officers and olorado
 Party officials. In March the President ordered the transfer or retirement of over
 70 judges, and he made several judicial appointments by fiat.
 Following the December 1992 discovery of government archives documenting var-
 ious human rights abuses and implicating many former government officials of the
 Stroessner regime, in 1994 the courts convicted several Stroessner-era officials for
 human rights abuses and imposed sentences of up to 25 years. The Committee of
 Churches, one of the nation's most prominent human rights groups, had over 16
 cases against alleged Stroessner-era human rights abusers pending at year's end.
 There are no political prisoners, and the Government does not punish political ac-
 tivity.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-While
 the Government and its security forces generally did not interfere in the private
 lives of citizens, there were exceptions. The Constitution provides that police may
 not enter private homes except to prevent a crime in progress or when the police
 possess a judicial warrant. There were credible reports that at times the authorities
 igored this legal guarantee, particularly in the country's interior. There were also
 allegations that the Government occasionally spied on individuals and monitored
 communications for political and security reasons.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Pres.-The Constitution provides for freedom of expres-
 sion and the press. The public and the press exercised these rights more freely than
 at any time in the nation's recent history. Opposition viewpoints were freely dis-
 cussed, and criticism of the Government was ubiquitous in the media. On June 9,
 President Wasmosy signed the Declaration of Chapultepec pledging to support free-
 dom of the press. Nonetheless, there were some restrictions on expression. Former
 presidential candidate Ricardo Canese was found guilty of criminal slander and sen-
 tenced to 4 months in prison and a $7,000 fine for accusing President Wasmosy of
 providing kickbacks to the family of former dictator Alfredo Stroessner during the
 construction of the Itaipu dam. Canese appealed his conviction, and the case re-
 mained under review at year's end.
 Government forces also occasionally inhibited reporting. During the May 2 general
 strike police officials threatened seven reporters and told them to stop filming a
 clash between police and workers in Ciudad del Este. Gunfire that same lay gravely
 injured journalist Carlos Mariano Godoy while he was reporting on striking workers
 in the town of Tacuara, San Pedro. Police officials beat several photographers when
 they attempted to photograph a clash between police and striking workers at an oil
 plant in Itaugua on August 17. The Vice Minister of the Interior met with the pho-
 tographers and promised to investigate police behavior. At year's end, however, the
 authorities had taken no action against these police officials. In April military offi-
 
 
 477
 cials confiscated reporter Ismael Villalba's camera and held him for over an hour,
 after he tried to photograph a Congressman meeting with a soldier. The investiga-
 tion into the May 1993 e ection day attack on independent television Channel 13
 continued at year's end with no suspects having been arrested.
 Some reporters were threatened and   ysically attacked during 1994, although in-
 vestigative reporting continued. As in the past, threats were made against persons
 examining allegations of official corruption, the contraband trade, and ties to the
 Stroessner regime.
 There were no restrictions on academic freedom.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Assocation.-The Constitution establishes
 the right of association and peaceful assembly for all citizens, but the security forces
 occasionally impeded protest demonstrations. A law regulating demonstrations in
 Asuncion limits the areas where and the hours when they may take place and re-
 quires that organizers notify the Asuncion police 24 hours before any rally in the
 downtown area. The police may ban a protest but must provide written notification
 of such a ban within 12 hours of receipt of the organizers' request. Under the law,
 a police ban is permitted only if a third party has already given notice of plans for
 a similar rally at the same place and time. In addition, the law prohibits public
 meetings or demonstrations in front of the presidential palace and outside military
 or police barracks.
 Most of the various political and social demonstrations and rallies occurred with-
 out incident. Some rallies, however, ended in violent clashes with the police. During
 the May 2 general strike, violent incidents occurred in Tacuara, San Pedro; Fer-
 nando de la Mora, Central department; and in Ciudad del Este, Alto Parana. The
 Government also attempted to inhibit a March 15 peasant rally to protest agrarian
 policy. Government forces established roadblocks at key road junctions leading to
 Asuncion and caused hours-long delays while police officials carried out time con-
 suming and uncommon reviews of vehicle registrations and driver's licenses of per-
 sons transporting peasants to the rally. The police also detained many bus pas-
 sengers traveling to Asuncion.
 c. Freedom ofReligion.-The Constitution provides for freedom of conscience for
 all persons and recognizes no official religion. The Government continued to respect
 this freedom in 1994. Roman Catholicism is the predominant religion, but all de-
 nominations are free to worship as they choose. Adherence to aparticular creed con-
 fers no legal advantage or disadvantage, and foreign and local missionaries pros-
 elytize freely. All reigious groups mustbe registered with the Ministry of Education
 and Worship, but no controls are imposed on these groups by the Government.
 d. Freedom ofMouement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-All citizens travel freely within the country with virtually no restric-
 tions. There are no restrictions on foreign travel or emigration. There are no estab-
 lished provisions to grant asylum or refugee status; the Immigration Department
 determines each request on a case-by-case basis in consultation with the Ministries
 of Foreign Relations and the Interior. There were no reports of refugees forced to
 return to countries in which they feared persecution.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens have the right and ability to change their government through demo-
 cratic means. Multiple parties and candidates contest the nation's leadership posi-
 tions. Three parties elected candidates to the Congress, and nine candidates ran for
 the Presidency in 1993. The Constitution and the Electoral Code mandate general
 elections every 5 years, voting by secret ballot, and universal suffrage. The executive
 and legislative branches govern the country; opposition political parties control the
 Congress. Debate is free, and the Congress routinely rejects important government
 proposals.
 Vestiges remain of the Stroessner-era mering of the State and the ruling Colo-
 rado Party. Throughout the year the press documented the use of state resources,
 particularly vehicles to support party political rallies. There were also credible re-
 ports of party officials requiring public employees to attend party functions. In addi-
 tion the military continued to wield significant political power.
 Members of indigenous groups are entitled to vote, and the percentage of indige-
 nous people who exercised this privilege grew dramatically in recent years. Nonethe-
 less, the inhabitants of many indigenous communities were threatened or inhibited
 from fully exercising their politicalrights. Some were threatened with death or with
 losing access to cooperatives and stores unless they supported certain party officials
 or practices.
 While there are no formal legal impediments, women often face significant obsta-
 cles when they seek to participate in government and politics. Participation by
 
 
 478
 women in the political system, although improved in 1994, was still limited in the
 male-dominated society of Paraguay. Few women serve in the Congress (3 of 45 Sen-
 ators and 2 of 80 National Deputies), or the executive branch. During the year, the
 President named two women to ambassadorial posts, and one woman, the Secretary
 for Women's Affairs, serves in the Cabinet.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Several human rights groups operate in Paraguay, including the Committee of
 Churches (an interdenominational group that monitors human rights and provides
 legal assistance), Prodemos (a group linked to the Catholic church), Tekojoja (a
 group dedicated to protection of children's rights), and the local chapter of the Asso-
 ciation of Latin American Lawyers for the Defense of Human Rights. The Govern-
 ment did not restrict the activities of any human rights groups in 1994.
 The office of the Director General of Human Rights, located in the Ministry of
 Justice and Labor, continued to sponsor seminars to promote human rights aware-
 ness. This office has access to congressional, executive, and judicial authorities. It
 does not have subpoena or prosecutorial powers but may forward information con-
 cerning human rights abuses to the office of the Attorney General for action. It also
 serves as a clearing house for information on human rights and trained thousands
 of educators in human rights law in 1994.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 Although the Constitution and other laws prohibit discrimination, certain groups
 faced significant discrimination in practice.
 Women.-Exploitation of women, especially teenaged prostitutes, remained a seri-
 ous problem. The municipal health department of Asuncion reported that 58 percent
 of the prostitutes in the capital are minors under 18 years of age. Police frequently
 raidedbrothels in which minors were employed. In contrast to the impunity granted
 brothel owners in the past, in October the police arrested several brothel owners,
 including one former police commissioner. However, the courts had sentenced none
 of the accused by years end.
 The Government only recently began pressing domestic violence charges against
 individuals. To date, however, the courts have not yet convicted any perpetrators
 of violence against women.
 The office of the Secretary for Women's Affairs continued to sponsor programs to
 enable women to have free and equal access to employment, social security, housing,
 ownership of land, and business opportunities. However, authorities paid insuffi-
 cient attention to sex-related job discrimination. Some women complained that job
 promotions were conditioned upon their granting sexual favors.
 Children.-The Constitution protects certain children's ri hts, including a stipula-
 tion that parents and the State care for, feed, educate, andsupport children. None-
 theless, approximately 26,000 children work in urban areas as street vendors, shin-
 big shoes, or as prostitutes. The majority of these children suffer from malnutrition,
 lack of access to education, and disease. The employers of some young girls working
 as domestic servants or nannies deny them access to education and mistreat them.
 Employers sometimes charge those who seek to leave domestic jobs with robbery
 and turn them over to the police.
 The armed forces Chief of Staff ordered all officers responsible for recruiting to
 ensure that all conscripts met the constitutionally mandated minimum age of 17 for
 military service. Many officers violated this order with impunity, however, and the
 military took no disciplinary action against them.
 Indigenous People.-Paraguay has an unassimilated and neglected indigenous
 population estimated at 75,000 to 100,000. Weak organization and lack of financial
 resources continued to limit access by indigenous peoples to the political and eco-
 nomic system. Indigenous groups relied primarily upon parliamentary commissions
 to promote their particular interests, notwithstanding the fact that the Constitution
 provides indigenous people the right to participate in the economic, social, political,
 and cultural life of the nation. The Constitution also contains protection for their
 property interests, but these constitutional rights are still not fully codified.
 The Governments National Indigenous Institute has the authority to purchase
 land on behalf of indigenous communities and to expropriate private property under
 certain conditions to establish tribal homelands, but the entity continued to be poor-
 ly funded. In addition, many indigenous people find it difficult to travel to the cap-
 ital to solicit land titles or process the required documentation associated with land
 ownership. The main problems facing the indigenous population were lack of edu-
 cation, malnutrition, lack of medical attention, and economic displacement resulting
 
 
 from development and modernization. Despite frequent media attention, little
 progress was made in 1994 in dealing with these problems.
 NationallRaciallEthnic Minorities.-The Korean and Chinese communities expe-
 rience social and economic discrimination and are sometimes denied access to credit
 terms enjoyed by other Paraguayans. They are also sometimes discriminated
 against in the housing market and do not have equal access to private institutions
 and schools. Although discrimination on the basis of national, racial, or ethnic back-
 ground is unconstitutional, the only redress is through the civil courts. Because of
 the costs, standard length of a civil case (approximately 3 to 4 years), and a lack
 of public confidence in those courts by those discriminated against, most never seek
 redress in court. During the year there were no court judgments in civil cases
 brought on grounds of ethnic or racial discrimination.
 People With Disabilities.-The 1992 Constitution guarantees equal opportunity to
 people with disabilities and mandates that the State provide them with health care,
 education, recreation, and professional training. It further requires that the State
 formulate a policy for the prevention, treatment, rehabilitation, and integration into
 society of people with disabilities. Legislation establishing these programs, however,
 has not yet been enacted. Many people with disabilities face significant discrimina-
 tion in employment; others are unable to seek employment because of a lack of ac-
 cessible public transportation. Other than the constitutional provisions establishing
 equal opportunity, accessibility for the disabled has not been mandated through law;
 the vast majority of the nation's buildings, both public and private, are inaccessible
 to people with disabilities.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The Constitution allows both private and public sec-
 tor workers (with the exception of the armed forces and the police) to form and join
 unions without government interference. The Constitution contains several provi-
 sions which protect fundamental workers' rights, including an antidiscrimination
 clause, provisions for employment tenure, severance pay for unjustified firings, col-
 lective bargaining, and the right to strike. Approximately 9 percent of workers are
 organized.
 In general unions are independent of the Government and political parties. How-
 ever one of the nation's three labor centrals, the Confederation of Paraguayan Work-
 ers (CPT), has traditionally been closely aligned with the ruling Colorado Party. The
 Government does not require the CPT to comply with union election requirements
 to the same extent that it requires compliance from the other labor centrals. Gov-
 ernment officials were also accused of encouraging some of the recently organized
 public sector unions to affiliate with the CPT.
 All unions must be registered with the Ministry of Justice and Labor. The reg-
 istration process is cumbersome and can take several months. Furthermore, employ-
 ers who wish to oppose the formation of a union can further delay union recognition
 by filing a writ with the Government opposing it. Virtually all unions that request
 recognition eventually receive it, however. The Constitution protects the right to
 strike and bans binding arbitration. Furthermore, high-level officials from the Min-
 istry of Justice and Labor have made themselves available to mediate labor con-
 flicts. The Constitution protects strikers and leaders against retribution, and several
 strikes occurred in 1994. Despite these provisions, employers dismissed many strik-
 ers and labor leaders for attempting to form unions, ocarrying out routine union
 business, or for carrying out strikes. The International Labor Organization (ILO) is
 currently considering two pending claims against the Government for alleged viola-
 tions of international labor standards.
 Unions are free to form and join federations or confederations and affiliate with
 and participate in international labor bodies.
 b.  The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The law provides for collec-
 tive bargaining, and collective contracts were successfully concluded in many cases.
 The number of successfully negotiated collective contracts continued to grow in
 1994; however, collective contracts were still the exception rather than the norm in
 labor-management relations and typically reaffirmed minimum standards estab-
 lished by law. When wages are not set in free negotiations between unions and em-
 ployers, they are made a condition of individual employment offered to employees.
 While the Constitution prohibits antiunion discrimination, the firing and harass-
 ment of some union organizers and leaders in the private sector continued. Fired
 union leaders can seek redress in the courts, but the labor courts have been slow
 to respond to complaints and typically favor business in disputes. The courts are not
 required to order the reinstatement of workers fired for union activities. As in pre-
 vious years, in some cases where judges ordered reinstatement of discharged work-
 ers, the employers disregarded the court order with impunity. There are a number
 
 
 of cases in which trade union leaders, fired within the last 6 years, have not yet
 received a decision from the courts.
 There were over 20 strikes by unions affiliated with the independent labor central
 CUT alone, the vast majority of which were directly related to the firing of union
 organizers, to management violations of a collective contract, to management efforts
 to prevent workers from freely associating, or to benefit demands such as payment
 of the minimum wage or contribution to the social security system. The failure to
 meet salary payments frequently precipitated labor problems. Principal problems in-
 cluded bottlenecks in the judicial system and an inability of the Government to en-
 force labor laws. There were also complaints of management creating parallel or
 "factory" unions to compete with independently formed unions. There were several
 cases of workers not receiving the legally established minimum wage or overtime
 pay who choose not to protest because of fear of reprisal or anticipation of govern-
 ment inaction.
 Paraguay has no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced-or Compulsory Labor.-The law prohibits forced labor.
 However, substantiated cases of abuse of national service obligations occurred dur-
 ing 1994. There were several documented cases of draftees forced to serve as labor-
 ers for military officers in their residences or privately owned businesses. Other
 than the abuse of national service obligations, the authorities appear to effectively
 enforce the law. Domestics, children, and foreign workers are not forced to remain
 in situations amounting to coerced or bonded labor.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The office of the Director General
 for the Protection of Minors in the Ministry of Justice and Labor is responsible for
 enforcing child labor laws. Minors between 15 to 18 years of age may bie employed
 only with parental authorization and cannot be employed under dangerous or
 unhealthy conditions. Children between 12 and 15 years of age may be employed
 only in family enterprises, apprenticeships, or in agriculture. The Labor Code pro-
 hibits work by children under 12 years of age, and all children are required to at-
 tend elementary school. In practice, however, many thousands of children, man~y
 younger than 12, work in urban areas engaged in informal employment such as sel-
 ing newspapers and sundries, shining shoes, and cleaning car windows. In rural
 areas, it is not unusual for children as young as 10 to work beside their parents
 in the field.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The executive, through the Ministry of Justice
 and Labor has established a private sector minimum wage sufficient to maintain
 a minimally adequate standard of living. The minimum salary was adjusted by 10
 percent in June to $200 (379,000 guarani) a month in response to a loss in real pur-
 chasing power of between 30 to 40 percent since 1989. The Ministry is unable, how-
 ever, to enforce the minimum wage, and most analysts agree that from 50 to 70 per-
 cent of workers earn less than the decreed minimum.
 The Labor Code allows for a standard legal workweek of 48 hours, 42 hours for
 night work, with 1 day of rest. The law also provides for an annual bonus of 1
 month's salary and a minimum of 6 vacation days a year. The law requires overtime
 payment for hours in excess of the standard, but there are no prohibitions on exces-
 sive compulsory overtime. Many employers, however, violate these provisions. Work-
 ers in the transportation sector struck in March to demand that their work day be
 limited to 8 hours and that they be paid the minimum wage.
 The Labor Code also stipulates conditions of safety, hygiene, and comfort. How-
 ever, the Ministry of Justice and Labor did not effectively enforce the Code's safety
 and hygiene provisions, partially due to the lack of inspectors. This led the labor
 movement to sponsor inspector training programs designed to ensure that violations
 were registered with the Ministry. Workers do not have the right to remove them-
 selves from situations which endanger health or safety without jeopardy to their
 continued employment. Although workers who file complaints about such conditions
 are protected by law, many employers took disciplinary action against protesting
 employees with impunity.

