 PARAGUAY
 Paraguay has had authoritarian regimes throughout its history.
 Since 1954, President Alfredo Stroessner has governed Paraguay
 through the Colorado Party, the military and police forces, and
 the government bureaucracy, all of which he dominates. He was
 elected in 1983 to a seventh term in a controlled election
 process. The situation in Paraguay continues to be
 characterized by the subordination of the legislative and
 judicial branches of government to the executive, and by the
 domination of the nation's political life by the ruling
 Colorado Party.
 Elections are held every 5 years for the presidency, the
 national legislature, and for municipal councils. However,
 the opposition's ability to conduct an effective campaign is
 severely restricted by the Government, and in practice no
 effective challenge to President Stroessner's authority is
 allowed. Since 1963, when it was first permitted to run
 candidates, the opposition has registered a majority or
 plurality only once, in 1963, in one of the smaller
 municipalities.
 After a period of rapid economic growth in the late 1970's and
 early 1980's, Paraguay entered a steep recession. Following
 2 years of decline, an agriculture-led economic recovery
 commenced in 1984. It was short-lived and, because of economic
 mismanagement, a period of drought, and low export prices, the
 economy again declined in 1986. The balance of payments
 remains in deficit, and substantial delays on servicing
 international obligations pose problems. On September 22, the
 Government announced a new economic program which includes
 badly needed exchange rate adjustment. By year's end, however,
 it had missed its self-imposed 60-day deadline for
 implementation of many of the proposed measures.
 Violations of civil and political liberties continue, although
 the number of serious incidents has declined significantly
 since the mid-1970's. The state of siege provision of the
 Constitution, in effect almost without interruption since 1929,
 provides for detention of individuals without trial for an
 indefinite period of time. The police forces regularly arrest
 and hold persons arbitrarily, citing variously the state of
 siege authority, Paraguay's "antisubversive" statute, or, as
 was the case in most of the detentions which occurred in 1986,
 offering no rationale. Constitutional guarantees, such as
 protection of the integrity of the individual, the requirement
 for judicial warrants, freedom of assembly and association, the
 right to a judicial determination of the legality of arrest,
 and the provision for a prompt and impartial trial, are often
 ignored by government officials. Although there is no formal
 system of prior censorship, there are limitations on what the
 media are free to report and comment upon. A form of instant
 censorship of one radio station has been practiced by selective
 jamming of its broadcasts. Trade unionism is also restricted.
 An independent newspaper remains "indefinitely suspended" since
 1984 by government order. The privacy of postal, telephonic,
 and telegraphic communication is not always respected.
 During 1986, the use of police to suppress public rallies
 increased dramatically. The number of persons held for both
 short and prolonged periods for political activities increased.
 Nonetheless, the Government was more responsive in
 international human rights forums to questions concerning its
 human rights practices. During the course of the year,
 Paraguay received visits by representatives of the United
 
 
 599
 PARAGUAY
 Nations Human Rights Commission (UNHRC), Americas Watch,
 Amnesty International, and the Washington Office on Latin
 America (WOLA). A few prominent political exiles returned to
 Paraguay. In at least one human rights related case, police
 officials were convicted of homicide and sent to prison.
 Other cases of abuse of authority, including charges against a
 military officer, remain pending. Subtle forms of repression,
 such as short periods of arbitrary detention without charges
 and efforts to intimidate the media through threats and
 closings, increased slightly. More serious human rights
 violations such as torture
 declined.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 There were no confirmed instances of such killings, although
 human rights activists expressed concern about the unsolved
 murder of a politically active university student.
 b. Disappearance
 There have been no reported cases in recent years.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 As in past years, there were credible charges that police
 authorities had tortured and physicially abused prisoners,
 which led in some cases to official disciplinary actions; in
 other cases officials denied the charges. Two police
 officials accused of killing a detained suspect in 1985 were
 sent to prison in 1986. There were other reports of such
 mistreatment or violence in 1986. In January a domestic
 employee alleged torture and attempted rape by police
 authorities in Asuncion, the national capital, while she was
 detained on suspicion of robbery. A similar case occurred
 2 months later. In April a robbery suspect alleged he was
 choked and beaten by police. There were three separate
 incidents of suspects or prisoners being shot and killed by
 police, one involving three suspected car thieves in May.
 Family members filed charges against the police in all three
 cases. An army officer reportedly severely injured a suspected
 cattle rustler while extracting a confession; there is no
 record of any legal action being taken in the case. In June
 three police were accused of having shot and killed a suspect
 in a rural area; they were charged in September. In July two
 peasants were killed by an army officer during an attempt to
 evict a large group of squatters; charges have been filed.
 Police were accused of having beaten a merchant in Asuncion in
 August; charges have been filed and the accused officer has
 been confined at a military detention facility.
 These reports of police violence were atypical in that they
 all appeared in the press. Physical mistreatment of suspects
 and prisoners by the police is believed to occur frequently,
 especially in the rural areas, but does not usually enter the
 public domain because the victim does not try to publicize the
 case. The so-called "investigations police" are reputed to
 engage regularly in such practices.
 
 
 600
 PARAGUAY
 In most cases, detainees, once formally arraigned, go to
 regular prison facilities, where conditions are generally
 better than in police stations. Prisons are austere,
 especially the maximum security facilities administered
 directly by the Ministry of the Interior and the Asuncion
 police. Court and Justice Ministry officials visit prisons
 several times each year to examine conditions and interview
 prisoners. They do not regularly visit the maximum security
 facilities. Representatives of the International Committee of
 the Red Cross are permitted to visit persons held on security
 charges.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Detentions are used as a form of warning or punishment for
 those who criticize the Government or whose political beliefs
 or activities are deemed to be threatening to the regime.
 Sometimes police pick up individuals, hold them incommunicado,
 and release them after a few days, usually without the
 authorities ever bringing charges. Other detentions may last
 for weeks. The authorities have justified such detentions
 under the State of Siege. It provides that persons may be
 detained incommunicado without trial, and that public meetings
 and demonstrations may be banned in the event of war, foreign
 invasion, internal disturbance, or the serious threat of any
 of these conditions.
 The Supreme Court continues to disqualify itself from hearing
 writs of habeas corpus filed during the State of Siege.
 Despite constitutional requirements that the State of Siege be
 imposed only for limited periods, it is renewed every 90 days;
 in practice it has been in effect almost continuously since
 1929. The State of Siege was lifted outside the Asuncion area
 in 1978. However, backed by a court ruling that prisoners may
 be moved to Asuncion and held there, the authorities proceed
 as if the State of Siege were still in force throughout the
 country. Implementing legislation for the State of Siege,
 called for by the Constitution, has never been enacted. In
 its absence, the Government and courts have determined that
 State of Siege restrictions supersede the safeguards of
 fundamental rights contained elsewhere in the Constitution and
 the legal code. Several prominent legal scholars and the
 opposition political parties contest this interpretation.
 The media reported that over 200 persons were arbitrarily
 detained for political activities in 1986, a figure more than
 double that of 1985. The Government occasionally cited law
 209, the "antisubversive" statute, which provides for
 imprisonment of persons who "foment hatred," defame members of
 the Government, commit a variety of other acts, or are members
 of the Communist Party. Most individuals detained for
 political activity were released after varying periods of
 custody. There are exceptions. Opposition political leader
 Miguel Angel Saguier has been detained on sedition charges
 under law 209 since September 13, 1986. Dr. Carlos Filizzola
 and nurse Elsa Mereles, who was beaten by police at the time
 of her arrest, were released in December after being held for
 several weeks without charges, also under law 209; both are
 leaders of the medical workers association. Alejandro Stumpfs,
 another opposition leader, was released in December after
 3 months of incommunicado and solitary detention under the
 State of Siege.
 Over half the cases of arbitrary detention during 1986 resulted
 from unauthorized meetings of the Authentic Radical Liberal
 
 
 601
 PARAGUAY
 Party (PLRA). Forty-eight members of that party were arrested
 in May during a rally. Most of them were released the same
 day, but 5 were brought to Asuncion where they were held
 without charge for 2 days. In November police forcibly broke
 up another PLRA meeting and arrested 62 people; 35 were not
 released until the following day. Using the lack of a permit
 to prevent meetings is a tactic also applied to dissident
 members of the ruling Colorado party and to labor and peasant
 organizers. One member of an opposition faction of the
 Colorado party reportedly was expelled from the country on
 May 1. Another Colorado functionary took refuge in the
 Argentine Embassy, claiming political persecution for
 anti-Stroessner statements he had made. The Government said
 there were no charges against him, and that he was free to
 leave the country. He was escorted by Argentine embassy
 officials to Argentina. At year's end, this person remains in
 self-exile while two of his brothers, one a military officer
 and the other a policeman, are detained without charges in
 apparent reprisal.
 Forced labor is not permitted.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 In Paraguay, trials are. conducted almost exclusively by
 presentation of written documents to a judge, who then renders
 a decision, All judgments are automatically reviewed by an
 appellate judge, and appeals to the Supreme Court are possible.
 Part of the trial process is open to the public and proceedings
 are reported in the press.
 In theory, numerous safeguards set forth in the Constitution
 and the penal code protect the rights of the individual during
 the trial process. However, the judiciary has traditionally
 been subject to influence by the executive branch. Its members
 are appointed by the President for a 5-year term. Together
 with budgetary and other administrative shortcomings in the
 judicial system, executive interference can limit the right of
 an accused person to a fair, speedy trial. Most detainees are
 eventually released, not for having served their sentences but
 rather because they were detained prior to trial for the length
 of time required by law had they been tried, convicted, and
 sentenced.
 Over the past 3 years, however, efforts have been made to
 improve the image of the judiciary, including the dismissal of
 corrupt judges and court staff. One judge, suspended in 1985
 for accepting a bribe in a narcotics case, was found guilty in
 1986 by the Supreme Court and removed from the bench.
 Nevertheless, because of the widespread perception that
 judicial protection depends on political, military, or economic
 power, there is fear of confronting political or police
 authority.
 Three persons considered political prisoners by some human
 rights organizations continue to be incarcerated. They are
 held on criminal charges.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Government and security forces do not actively intervene as a
 matter of course in the daily life of most citizens. The
 Constitution stipulates that, except to prevent a crime,
 private homes may not be entered without a judicial warrant.
 
 
 602
 PARAGUAY
 Although that provision has been increasingly respected in
 recent years, some private citizens complain that their right
 to privacy is being abused by security authorities. Leaders
 of an opposition faction of the Colorado Party who returned
 from exile in 1983 are under round-the-clock surveillance.
 They complain that their telephones are tapped, their private
 correspondence monitored, and their ability to move about
 restricted. Opposition figures, critics of the Government, and
 others have similarly complained about telephone tapping and
 interference with their mail and telegraphic communications,
 particularly foreign correspondence. The Government has denied
 these charges, but has taken no steps to investigate the
 accusations. While some publications critical of the
 Government circulate freely in the country, foreign newspapers,
 magazines, books, or other publications containing material
 critical of the Government are confiscated at the port of
 entry.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 The Government has "indefinitely suspended" publication of the
 independent newspaper ABC Color since March 1984. It has also
 permitted a form of indirect censorship by tolerating the
 jamming of broadcasts of the country's popular and independent
 Radio Nanduti. By year's end the station was unable to
 broadcast anything but music and faced financial collapse.
 Despite broad constitutional guarantees of freedom of speech
 and the press, in practice there are limits to the amount and
 kinds of criticism the Government will tolerate. The media
 exercise a form of self-censorship, avoiding criticism of the
 President, the military, and key civilian leaders. The media
 also avoid sensitive topics such as-national security matters
 and corruption. Similarly, the media, especially television,
 usually give little attention to the views of the political
 opposition. The agency which licenses radio stations has
 instructed that medium in writing not to air interviews with
 any politicians representing the "unrecognized" opposition.
 Only a few stations, such as Radio Nanduti and Radio Caritas,
 have defied this order. It is widely believed that ABC Color's
 suspension and the jamming of Radio Nanduti resulted from
 their continual pressure against these limits.
 The Government's action against ABC Color was appealed to the
 Supreme Court, which ruled that the Minister of Interior had
 acted within his powers and in the public interest.  Since
 then, the Government has considered the case closed. The
 jamming of Radio Nanduti also was taken to court, which
 requested a technical investigation by the National
 Telecommunications Administration. That agency replied that
 it did not have the equipment necessary to find the source of
 the jamming. No further action has been taken. On January 14,
 1987, the station's owner announced that he was voluntarily
 suspending operations for 90 days because the jamming had
 caused his revenues to decline markedly.
 The Government does allow a limited measure of press freedom.
 The Febrerista Revolutionary Party, one of the recognized
 opposition parties, publishes a weekly newspaper, El Pueblo,
 which regularly criticizes the Government and its policies in
 harsher terms than can be found in the daily press. The
 Catholic Church publishes a biweekly newspaper, Sendero, which
 prints articles sharply critical of government policies and
 actions, and touches on subjects considered sensitive by the
 
 
 603
 PARAGUAY
 Government. The Catholic Church station, Radio Caritas, has
 tended to be nearly as outspoken as Radio Nanduti. As a
 result, a Spanish priest who directed the station was barred
 from returning to Paraguay during the year. Nuestro Tiempo, a
 monthly magazine supported by a Catholic Church official and
 largely staffed by former ABC Color employees, continued to be
 harassed by the Government. This magazine periodically prints
 its editions outside of Paraguay and runs the risk of seizure
 upon bringing them into the country. The formerly exiled
 faction of the Colorado party publishes a monthly newsletter,
 Patria Libre, which strongly criticizes the Government. The
 Government claims that it permits these periodical newspapers
 considerable latitude because their political bias is clearly
 established. These publications have less impact because of
 their small circulation. The ruling party publishes a daily
 paper, Patria, and operates a nationally broadcast radio
 commentary, Voice of the Colorado Party, which attack the
 political opposition.
 The daily papers and some radio stations cover some activities
 of the political opposition, both recognized and unrecognized,
 as well as reports of abuse of authority. However, their
 coverage is not marked by the aggressive investigatory
 journalism which had characterized ABC Color.
 Paraguay's two television stations are both privately owned by
 persons close to the regime. Their news programs are carefully
 self-censored and closely monitored, and nonconformist
 personnel are rarely tolerated for long. Their commentary
 lauds the Government, and their reporting on the activities of
 opposition parties or sensitive political issues is minimal.
 Radio Caritas and Radio Nanduti have been notable for their
 willingness to broadcast controversial items of local news.
 Radio Nanduti, in particular, has specialized in carrying
 interviews with politicians of all parties, including those
 not legally recognized, sometimes on sensitive issues. In
 November, Radio Nanduti was jammed while attempting to
 broadcast an interview with a visiting representative of the
 U.S. Congress. Besides the jamming of this station, a member
 of its staff was ordered suspended by the Government for
 3 months; in April it was attacked by a mob and sustained
 extensive damage; in May its transmitter was broken into,
 parts were stolen, and it was temporarily knocked out of
 operation. In December a clandestine radio transmitter with a
 powerful signal began broadcasting on Radio Nanduti's assigned
 frequency. On December 21, security forces arrested Oscar
 Acosta, a Radio Nanduti reporter, on unspecified charges, but
 judicial authorities ordered him released on January 13, 1987,
 for lack of evidence. Radio Nanduti has operated "illegally"
 in the sense that the Government has refused to accept payment
 for renewal of the station's license for several years.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Despite constitutional guarantees concerning the rights of
 peaceful assembly and association, these rights are often
 violated in practice. The authorities insist on permits for
 political meetings, then deny them to political parties that
 are not officially recognized. Under the State of Siege,
 police permission is required for any assembly of more than
 five unrelated persons. This requirement is not applied to
 organizations which are nonpolitical in nature. It is strictly
 enforced only in the case of gatherings sponsored by opposition
 political parties or other organizations critical of the
 
 
 604
 PARAGUAY
 Government. For example, in 1986 the youth movement of the
 unrecognized Christian Democratic Party was forced to suspend
 elections because attempts to obtain permission for a meeting
 were unsuccessful. The provision is used at times to bar
 labor union meetings.
 Police repression of political meetings and protest
 demonstrations increased steadily during the year. The usual
 weapons used by the police to break up these gatherings were
 either heavily weighted nightsticks, but it was reported they
 also used cattle prods and chains. In January suspected
 nonuniformed police attacked members of an opposition faction
 of the Colorado Party as uniformed police stood by. Two PLRA
 rallies, neither sanctioned by the authorities, were violently
 dispersed. Two further meetings of the same party were
 similarly broken up in April with several arrests. Also in
 April, police several times forcibly dispersed protests by
 medical workers and student groups from the medical, law, and
 other schools in Asuncion. During this period, a vigilante
 group of Colorado Party toughs reemerged in Asuncion to
 intimidate and assault protesting medical workers, with the
 apparent cooperation of police authorities. Massive use of
 police repression occurred on May 1 in response to an attempted
 demonstration organized by the Independent Workers Movement.
 Hundreds of demonstrators were brutally clubbed and several
 arrested. Later in the month, there were four further
 instances of forceful police action in Asuncion to disperse
 crowds, mostly composed of people leaving church services held
 in support of jailed protesters. Late in the year,
 demonstrations supporting hospital workers' calls for increased
 wages and better working conditions were disrupted repeatedly
 in Asuncion and several arrests were made. Although the
 detained leaders of the work action, Dr. Carlos Filizzola and
 Nurse Elsa Mereles, were later released, eyewitnesses reported
 that Nurse Mereles was severely beaten when arrested on
 December 5.
 Most labor unions in Paraguay are members of the Paraguayan
 Workers Confederation (CPT), which claims to represent over
 97 percent of organized labor. The confederation is allied
 with the Government and does not act as an independent voice
 for the Paraguayan worker. For example, during the last
 2 years, the work force has experienced a loss of real
 purchasing power, but the CPT has touted periodic salary
 adjustments as demonstrating the Government's beneficence.
 Union officials know they would risk losing their positions if
 they antagonize the Government. Workers not sponsored by the
 CPT encounter difficulties in organizing. For example,
 independent union organizers at a dam construction site were
 jailed in 1985; at the same site in 1986, police tried to
 prevent an organizing meeting. In December several workers
 involved in independent labor activities at this project were
 jailed on criminal charges.
 It is virtually impossible to call a legal strike because
 Paraguayan law requires a complex process of fact finding,
 arbitration and adjudication before a strike would be legal.
 There were no legal strikes during 1986.
 A number of independent unions do exist in Paraguay, several
 organized at the company level. Some have been strong enough
 to bargain with management, despite efforts by private firms--
 sometimes supported by the Government--to resist their efforts.
 
 
 605
 PARAGUAY
 Some of'these independent unions have been granted legal
 recognition by the Government, but others have not, making it
 difficult or impossible for them to bargain effectively. In
 other cases, rival slates of officers friendly to the
 Government have emerged and been recognized. The pattern
 indicates strong government reluctance to recognize groups
 which it perceives to be independent of its control. The
 activities of independent unions are carefully monitored by
 the security forces and the Ministry of Labor.
 International labor organizations do not maintain ties with
 the CPT. The International Confederation of Free Trade Unions
 (ICFTU) broke with the CPT several years ago and complained
 that the Government was systematically violating the rights of
 workers. Independent unions banded together in 1984 in the
 Movement of Independent Workers of Paraguay (MIT-P). The ICFTU
 and the Christian-Democratic Latin American Workers Central
 have recognized the MIT-P.
 As a result of international expressions of concern, the
 Paraguayan Government committed itself in 1986 to cease
 sending police to union meetings, to recognize all unions
 which complied with the requirements of the labor code, and to
 assure that union elections are held in accordance with union
 statutes. However, it failed to comply with both the spirit
 and letter of its assurances, exemplified by the repression of
 new union-organizing efforts and a wave of labor-related
 arrests in late 1986.
 In June 1985, Paraguay requested a direct contact mission from
 the International Labor Organization (ILO) to treat the issue
 of the application of Conventions 87 (freedom of association)
 and 98 (right to organize and collective bargaining). The
 areas of ILO concern deal with the lack of guarantees in
 Paraguayan law for such rights as collective bargaining,
 strikes in public sector enterprises, and protection from
 dismissal without indemnification or previous notice. The
 acceptance by the Government of the need for a direct contact
 mission, which visited in September 1985, reversed its previous
 position of completely disregarding ILO expressions of concern.
 The annual ILO report noted the Government's position on the
 cases under review and recommended to the Government more
 careful future observance of ILO conventions.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 The Constitution establishes Roman Catholicism as the official
 state religion, but it also guarantees freedom of conscience
 for other denominations. With very few exceptions, this
 freedom is respected. Adherence to a particular creed confers
 no advantages or disadvantages within Paraguayan society, and
 conversion from one faith or sect to another is socially
 acceptable.
 Many denominations conduct their activities freely and foreign
 missionaries are, for the most part, permitted to enter the
 country and proselytize. However, current law prohibits the
 granting of legal status to any new religious groups, and a
 few evangelical churches have been unable to obtain government
 approval of their operations. The Jehovah's Witnesses lost
 legal registration in 1979. The church filed an appeal with
 the Supreme Court, but no action has been taken. Under orders
 of the Ministry of Education, Jehovah's Witness children have
 been expelled from school because of their refusal to salute
 the national flag or sing the national anthem. Lower courts
 
 
 606
 PARAGUAY
 found in favor of the children, but the cases were overturned
 on appeal. In 1986 the Supreme Court ruled that the church
 members had not yet exhausted administrative remedies and
 declined to rule on the case.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 The Constitution provides for freedom of movement, which is
 usually not restricted within the country. Most citizens may
 enter or leave the country freely. However, one opposition
 politician on a domestic flight was denied permission for
 political reasons to deplane at a rural airport.
 Over the years, many political opponents of the Government
 have either been forced or have gone voluntarily into exile.
 In 1983 the Interior Minister stated that with the exception
 of two prominent opposition figures--Domingo Laino and Luis
 Resck--all exiles would be permitted to return. As a result,
 a number of political figures, many in exile for over 20 years,
 returned. However, leaders of an exiled faction of the
 Colorado party who returned are restricted.in their movements,
 both within the country and on entering or leaving it.
 Domingo Laino, who tried to return from exile in June, was
 forcibly prevented from deplaning and was beaten by civilian-
 clad police, as were other passengers accompanying him. Luis
 Resck, however, was permitted to return during the year and
 has encountered no restrictions on his activities. A prominent
 leader of the exile faction of the CPT also returned during the
 year. A number of the returnees have been subjected to various
 forms of harassment, temporary detention, and internal exile by
 the Government. The Government has equivocated regarding the
 return from exile of Augusto Roa Bastos, a leftist novelist.
 One exile, labeled a Communist by the Government, returned
 temporarily to Paraguay after 40 years in exile and encountered
 no problems other than organized heckling and criticism in the
 government-controlled media.
 Members of one unrecognized political party have complained
 about a police requirement that they report 48 hours in advance
 any plan to depart the country. Opposition figures and human
 rights activists occasionally encounter difficulties in
 obtaining passports.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 President Stroessner dominates the Paraguayan political system.
 He exercises political control through the Colorado Party,
 which administers public patronage, and security control
 through the military and police forces, which maintain public
 order. The legislative branch, consisting of a Senate and a
 Chamber of Deputies, is responsive to the desires of the
 President on all important matters. The party receiving a
 plurality in the elections is automatically awarded two-thirds
 of the congressional seats, with the remaining one-third going
 to the opposition. The Colorado Party's statutory two-thirds
 majority in both houses gives it complete control of the
 legislature. There has been no recent occasion when the
 legislative branch has rejected any significant government
 proposal or policy. In 1986 three members of the ruling party
 who voted against a Japanese loan for an airport construction
 project were faced with an effort to dismiss them from the
 
 
 607
 PARAGUAY
 Congress. The opposition in the legislature is currently
 divided between two parties. Their presence allows them to
 express their views and criticize the Government, but they
 have no real power.
 General elections take place every 5 years for the presidency
 and the legislature and were last held in 1983. Municipal
 elections, held in 1985, also occur every 5 years. Voting is
 mandatory for all Paraguayans 18 to 60 years of age. However,
 sanctions for not voting usually are not applied except for
 public service employees. Besides the two opposition parties
 which participate in elections, there is another which,
 although legally recognized, does not currently present
 candidates; its position is that the Government's control over
 the political process makes such participation meaningless.
 The absence of some opposition political parties, the system
 of indirect selection of candidates, and the control of the
 electoral machinery by the Colorado Party constitute a
 seriously flawed election process. Secret ballot provisions
 frequently are not respected, votes are counted in many cases
 without the presence of opposition poll watchers, and in some
 jurisdictions the Colorado Party has ended up with more votes
 than the number of registered voters. Since the Stroessner
 regime began permitting the opposition to participate in
 elections in 1963, the opposition has won only one municipal
 election contest. Access to employment in the Government,
 including the teaching staffs of the public schools and
 national university, most public hospitals, many state
 enterprises, and the judiciary, as well as the officer ranks
 of the security services, is limited in practice to members of
 the Colorado Party. Therefore, individuals often join it for
 economic and social advantages. At the local level, police
 and other government officials use their considerable authority
 to support the party. Even within the Colorado Party, which
 has been conducting periodic elections in its base
 organizational units, there have been several recent instances
 of coercion, purges, and questionable voting practices in an
 apparent effort to defeat reformist elements within the party.
 In addition to the three legally recognized opposition parties,
 there are also three unrecognized political parties which
 cannot legally participate in the electoral process. These
 are the Christian Democratic Party, the Authentic Radical
 Liberal Party, and a faction of the Colorado Party calling
 itself the Popular Colorado Movement. They form an opposition
 coalition, the National Accord, with the Febrerista Party,
 which does enjoy legal recognition. One of the coalition's
 primary tenets is nonparticipation in elections until the
 process has been opened up. The Government's position is that
 unrecognized parties do not have the legal right to meet or
 stage public rallies, although these parties occasionally have
 managed to hold meetings under the cover of permits obtained
 by the recognized Febrerista Party. Even if one of these
 unrecognized parties wished to seek inscription of the 10,000
 registered voters required for recognition, there is no
 procedure for public meetings to facilitate that objective.
 The Episcopal Conference of the Paraguayan Catholic Church
 initiated a national dialogue among political and social
 sectors to faciliate a peaceful transition to a more open,
 democratic system. However, the Government has refused to
 participate.
 
 
 608
 PARAGUAY
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The Government describes negative comments about its human
 rights performance from outside sources as unwarranted
 interference in Paraguay's internal affairs. Nonetheless, the
 Government has answered charges and defended its record in the
 UNHRC. In 1986 the Government received an observer from the
 UNHRC, as well as representatives of Amnesty International,
 Americas Watch, and WOLA. The Government has not acceded to a
 long-standing request from the Inter-American Human Rights
 Commission that it be invited to visit Paraguay.
 A number of local private organizations continued their efforts
 during 1986 to protect individual liberties. These included
 the Committee of Churches, which is supported by foreign church
 groups; the Paraguayan Human Rights Commission; the Paraguayan
 Chapter of the Association of Latin American Lawyers for the
 Defense of Human Rights; and a new organization known as
 Prodemos, which includes a Roman Catholic bishop in its
 leadership. Opposition political parties and media also have
 sought to publicize human rights problems and to express
 support for a more open and democratic society. In addition
 to publicizing cases of violations, these groups have provided
 legal assistance to defendants in a variety of civil and
 criminal cases. Their efforts have also helped to keep human
 rights abuses under international scrutiny and to secure the
 release of a number of detainees. Government spokesmen are
 often critical of the work of both foreign and local human
 rights organizations. Some local human rights activists
 complain of government harassment and interference with their
 mail.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 Paraguay is a relatively fluid society and there is no
 legislated discrimination against citizens on the basis of
 social status or race. Paraguay's estimated 72,000
 unassimilated Indians, however, probably do not benefit
 equally from social services available to those in the
 mainstream of Paraguayan society.
 The problems of the Indian population continue to receive wide
 publicity in the Paraguayan media. Most Paraguayans are
 partially of Indian descent and do not practice discrimination
 on the basis of race.
 The Constitution guarantees "the equality of civil and
 political rights" of women, but women play a minor role in the
 political life of Paraguay. The executive and judicial
 branches of government have only a few prominent female
 officials; there are 2 women in the 90-member Congress. While
 the traditional social system limits the participation of
 women, they have long been economically active, particularly
 those from lower income groups. Increasing numbers are
 participating in business, the professions, and the artistic
 world. However, women usually receive less remuneration than
 men for comparable work. Three organizations are concerned
 with women's rights: an auxiliary of the Colorado party; the
 Union of Paraguayan Women, an organization founded in 1982 by
 a former opposition member of the Congress; and, the Paraguayan
 
 
 609
 PARAGUAY
 Center for Women's Studies, a new organization of professional
 women.
 Guarani, the major indigenous language, shares equal legal
 status with Spanish as an official language and is taught in
 schools. Some Paraguayans speak only Guarani.
 Anti-Semitism surfaced in Asuncion in the form of anonymous
 handbills, graffiti, and defacement of property identified as
 Jewish-owned during 1986. The Government reacted belatedly by
 arresting individuals who appear to have been responsible.
 They are charged with disturbing the public order under
 law 209, which normally is applied to political offenses.
 CONDITIONS OF LABOR
 The Paraguayan labor code contains minimum guarantees of worker
 rights and benefits. Public sector, temporary, and domestic
 workers are not covered under this law. According.to the code,
 maximum hours are set at 8 hours per day or 7 hours for night
 work, with 1 day of rest per week. A minimum wage is
 established, depending on the type of work and the region, and
 is based on the cost of living. The law provides for an annual
 bonus equal to I month's salary. Minors between 15 and 18
 years of age may be employed only with parental authorization
 and cannot be employed in dangerous or unhealthy conditions.
 These same standards apply to youths between 12 and 15 years
 of age, with the additional restriction that work be at a
 family enterprise, an apprenticeship, or an agricultural
 endeavor.
 Married women require their husband's consent to enter a labor
 contract; however, labor contracts may not be denied to women
 who wor-ked prior to marriage. Paid maternity leave of 12
 weeks, 6 prior to and 6 after birth, is required. Day care
 centers for children under 2 years of age are mandatory for
 enterprises employing more than 50 women. Severance pay is
 specified, and compensation is provided for in case of
 unjustified dismissal. The labor code also governs conditions
 of safety, hygiene, and comfort. The absence of a strong
 independent trade union movement and the slowness of the labor
 law system to correct abuses result in the frequent failure to
 apply the protections of the labor code.
 
 
 610
 U.S.OV RSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COJNTRY: PARAGUAY
 1984     1985     1986
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL..          2.?      3.5      3.1
 LOANS ..............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................   2.7       3.5      3.1
 A.AIO ...... .............      0.2      1.0      1.1
 LOANS ..............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................ .    0. 2     1.0      1.1
 (SEC.SUPPASSIST)..         0.0       0.0      0.0
 B.FOOO FOR PEACE ........        0.0      0.0     00
 LOANS ..............        0.3       0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............. 0.0             0.0      0.0
 TITLE  I-TOTAL ..........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS .....         0.0      0.0      0.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR.....         0.0       0.0      0.0
 TITLE  II-TOTAL .........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.RELIEF. EC.OEV I WFP,        0.0       0.0      0.0
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY....           0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST...          2.5      2.5      2.0
 LOANS ................     0.0       0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .......... ....       2.5      2.5      2.0
 PEACE  CORPS ........     2.1       1.9      1.8
 NARCOTICS .........       0.0       0.0      0.0
 OTHER ..............      0.4       0.6      0.2
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL..           0.1      0.1      0.1
 LOANS ..............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................     0.1       0.1      0.1
 A.MAP  GRANTS ..........       0.0       0.0      0.0
 3.CREDIT FINANCING ....         0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.INTL  MIL.ED.TRNG ....        0.1      0.1      0.1
 O.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK ...        .0.0      0.0      0.0
 z.OTHER  3RANTS ........       0.3       0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. & MIL...          2.8      3.6      3.2
 LOANS ..............        0.0       0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ..............        2.8      3.6      3.2
 OTHER  US  LOANS ..........       0.0      0.0      0.0
 EX-IM  BANK  LOANS .......       0.0      0.0      0.0
 ALL  OTHER .............. 0.      0      0.0      0.0
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1984     1985     1986     1946-86
 TOTAL .........   45.4     40.3       0.0   1090.4
 IBRD              30.0      0.0       0.0    457.6
 IFC                0.3      0.8       0.0     18.0
 IO0                0.0      0.0       0.0     45.5
 IOB               14.1     37.5       0.0    533.8
 AD                0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 AFOB               0.0      0.0      .0.0      0.0
 UNDP               1.0       1.0      0.0     28.0
 OTHER-UN           ).0      1.0'      0.0      7.5
 EE,                0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 
 
 611
