 PARAGUAY
 Paraguay has traditionally been governed by autocratic regimes
 throughout its history which has been marked by wars,
 insurrections, and coups. President Alfredo Stroessner, an
 army general, has governed Paraguay since 1954, ruling through
 the Colorado Party, the military and police forces, and the
 government bureaucracy, all of which he dominates. He was
 re-elected in 1983 in a controlled election process in which
 Government figures show he receivedover 90 percent of the
 popular vote. As has been the case almost without interruption
 since 1929, the state of siege provision of the Constitution
 remains in force and is freely used by President Stroessner's
 Government to intimidate opponents of his regime. In practice,
 there is no effective challenge to his authority, and the
 situation in Paraguay continues to be characterized by the
 subordination of the judicial and legislative branches of
 government to the executive and the frequent violation of civil
 and political liberties. Although his rule has brought
 stability and economic growth to Paraguay, it has been at a
 considerable cost to political rights and individual liberties.
 Elections are held every five years, most recently in 1983, for
 the presidency and the national legislature. However, the
 opposition's ability to conduct an effective campaign is
 severely restricted by the Government. Some opposition parties
 are not legally recognized and all, regardless of their status,
 are subject to varying degrees of harassment by government
 authorities. The results of the 1983 elections were never in
 doubt, in part because of the Government's control of the
 electoral apparatus and limitations imposed on the opposition
 such as only limited access to the media. There were also
 allegations of vote count irregularities. At the same time,
 the opposition suffered from a lack of organization and funds
 and, according to most observers, the Colorado Party enjoys
 substantial support. Nonetheless, the unchecked domination of
 the electoral process by the Colorado Party resulted in a
 seriously flawed election. Only members of the dominant
 Colorado Party can participate fully in the political process,
 and affiliation with the party is often a prerequisite for
 government employment and significant participation in
 Paraguay's economic activity. The legislative branch, in which
 President Stroessner's Colorado Party has a two-thirds
 majority, is almost completely responsive to his views on all
 important matters. The judiciary, while independent in theory,
 also does not challenge the power of the executive branch or
 serve as an effective check on its actions.
 The police forces, using both the state of siege power under
 the Constitution and Paraguay's "anti-subversive" statute,
 frequently arrest and hold persons arbitrarily without due
 process of law. Constitutional guarantees, such as protection
 of the integrity of the individual, the need for judicial
 warrants, freedom of assembly and association, the right of
 habeas corpus, and the requirement for a prompt and speedy
 trial are often ignored by government officials. Fair trials
 generally are not possible in cases involving political
 factors, and trials of political prisoners have often been
 extensively delayed.
 
 
 660
 For the past two years, Paraguay's economic performance has
 been adversely affected by external economic recession and
 Paraguay's own slowness in implementing adequate fiscal,
 foreign exchange, and investment policies to promote economic
 adjustment. Heavy rains and severe flooding caused additional
 problems in 1983, especially in the agriculture sector. Gross
 domestic product is estimated to have declined by more than 5
 percent in 1983, the second consecutive year of negative
 economic growth. The balance of payments was in a substantial
 deficit position in 1982 and is expected to be in 1983, and
 unemployment was rising. The downturn has affected economic
 gains mtde during the mid-1970's, when most of the population
 benefited from Paraguay's economic growth, albeit unevenly.
 Paraguay's reasonably effective land distribution program has
 continued, although with inadequate financing.
 Paraguay has a weak trade union movement controlled by the
 Government, which disallows strikes and collective bargaining.
 There is a large degree of religious freedom though a few
 evangelical groups have been unable to obtain Government
 permits for their activities. While the Government considers
 most outside comments on its human rights performance to be
 interference in its internal affairs, in 1983 it allowed a
 number of visits by private human rights organizations.
 In 1983, thee were 42 cases of arbitrary detention, a
 significant decline from the more than 400 the previous year.
 However, most of the 400 detained in 1982 were held only
 briefly in connection with a murder case. The 42 cases of
 arbitrary detention in 1983 are consistent with the trend in
 recent years and represent a sharp decline since the mid-1970's
 when the number of such cases were in the hundreds. The most
 widely publicized case in 1983 was the detention in May and
 June of 30 3ersons linked to a local research organization --
 the Banco Paraguayo de Datos -- for violation of the
 "anti-subvzxsive" statute. Seven individuals, including four
 who turned themselves in in October, remain in custody, the
 remainder having been released after spending up to several
 months in custody. There were also a few widely reported cases
 of torture and inhumane treatment at the hands of the police
 gorces. In one case 10 police officers were charged in
 connection with the death of a car theft suspect; legal
 proceedings have not yet been completed. While the media
 frequently criticized Government actions and policies, there
 were several serious cases of infringements on the freedom of
 the press, including harassment of the nation's leading
 independent newspaper and the detention of its owner and two of
 its leading columnists. A popular local radio station, noted
 for its spontaneous interviews with the local citizenry, was
 closed for 30 days, and its owner was temporarily prohibited
 from working as an announcer on the station. It is estimated
 that at the end of 1983 there were about 33 persons in
 Paraguayan prisons who could be considered political prisoners,
 approximately the same number as at the end of 1982. During
 the course of 1983, one person was detained under the state of
 siege provision of the constitution. He was held for 76 days
 and then released. An additional eight persons were being held
 for reasons which local human rights observers believed were
 affected in part by political factors.
 
 
 661
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section I Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom froms
 a. Unlawful or Arbitrary Deprivation of Life
 There were no reported cases in 1983 of killings for political
 motives, by the Government, political parties, or other
 entities. The death of an alleged car thief while in police
 custody is discussed in section Ic below.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no reports during 1983 of any persons having
 disappeared under circumstances which suggested politically-
 motivated abduction or terrorism.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 In 1983 there were credible reports that a few people arrested
 in connection with the Banco Paraguayo de Datos case were
 tortured by the police. According to accounts from several
 different sources, one person was beaten, while two others were
 subjected as well to a treatment known as the "pileta", in
 which the victim's head is held under water until suffocation
 begins.
 The chief of police of the city of Asuncion responded publicly
 to the charges that the Banco Paraguayo de Datos prisoners had
 been tortured in an open letter published in the local
 newspapers on September 14, 1983. He categorically denied that
 his personnel had tortured prisoners and specifically rejected
 the allegations made against the police in this case. The
 chief of police in turn accused the lawyers representing the
 defendants in this case of having fabricated the charges of
 torture on instructions from the Communist Party.
 Apart from allegations of torture, the Paraguayan police are
 reliably reported to mistreat some prisoners during the early
 stages of detention, though prominent political detainees seem
 less subject to such mistreatment. In one widely reported case
 in August 1983, four men suspected of being car thieves were
 picked up by police in the city of Puerto Presidente
 Stroessner. The body of one of these men was returned the next
 day to his family, showing signs of severe beating. One of his
 companions -- who was hospitalized -- told the press that the
 group had been beaten by police with billy clubs,
 systematically kicked, then hung by their feet and beaten
 again. The case received wide publicity and 10,police
 officials were arrested in connection with the death. Judicial
 proceedings against them are in progress.
 In most cases, once formal charges are presented to the courts,
 detainees are transferred to regular prison facilities, where
 conditions are generally better. In 1983 there were no reports
 of cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment or punishment during
 detention in regular prison facilities. Court and executive
 branch officials visit regular prison facilities each year to
 examine conditions and interview prisoners.
 
 
 662
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 The state of siege provision of the Constitution provides that
 persons may be detained and public meetings and demonstrations
 banned in the event of war, foreign invasion, or internal
 disturbance, or the serious threat of any of these conditions.
 It further provides that the state of siege may be imposed only
 for a limited time. In practice, Paraguay has been ruled
 almost continuously since 1929 under the state of siege
 provisions. Although the state of siege was lifted outside the
 capital in 1978, the courts have ruled that prisoners may be
 moved to Asuncion and held there, and the police authorities
 often act as if the state of siege were still in force
 throughout Paraguay.
 The Paraguayan Constitution provides that a law shall be passed
 regulating the application of the state of siege provision.
 This has never taken place. In the absence of such
 legislation, the Government has taken the position that the
 imposition of a state of siege supersedes the safeguards on
 human rights contained elsewhere in the Constitution and legal
 code. This position was reaffirmed by the Paraguayan Supreme
 Court in a decision on October 12, 1983, in the case of a writ
 of habeas corpus on behalf of a prominent journalist. --
 Alcibiades Gonzales Delvalle -- who was detained under the
 state of siege provision of the Constitution. The Court ruled
 in favor of the Government's position that it did not have to
 produce the individual in court nor set forth the reasons for
 his detention. The Court took the position that the imposition
 of the state of siege is purely within the province of the
 executive branch. However, this interpretation is contested by
 several distinguished legal scholars and the opposition.
 The state of siege provision of the Constitution is
 supplemented by the "anti-subversive" statute. It provides for
 imprisonment of persons who "foment hatred", defame members of
 the Government, commit a variety of other acts, or are members
 of a Communist Party. There is general agreement that persons
 detained under this statute are entitled to the various
 protections under the Constitution, but many are routinely
 denied these protections. For example, 30 persons were
 detained by the investigations police in May and June 1983,
 (and four more in October) in a widespread investigation
 centering on allegations that the Banco Paraguayo de Datos, a
 local economic and political research organization and data
 bank, was the center of a conspiracy against the Government.
 These persons were detained under the "anti-subversive"
 statute. Some of those detained were reportedly held
 incommunicado for several days, were not informed of the
 reasons for their detention within 24 hours, and did not have
 their detention brought to the attention of a judge within 48
 hours, as required by the Constitution. Many of these
 detainees were held for periods of up to two months before
 being brought, before a judge to make a formal statement
 concerning their guilt or innocence. All but three were
 ultimately released, some after brief detention by the police.
 Others spent up to four months in jail before a judge ordered
 their release after determining that there was insufficient
 cause for their trials. An additional'four persons who were
 
 
 663
 sought by the police in this case, turned themselves in on
 October 24 and were subsequently imprisoned.
 In 1983, 42 persons were detained arbitrarily for varying
 periods of time. As of December 31, most of these had been
 released but a total of five persons, all whom were arrested in
 previous years, remained in detention for political reasons
 without a trial. A particularly noteworthy case of arbitrary
 detention is that of Guillermo Escolastico Ovando who completed
 a 15-year prison term in 1977 but who has been kept in prison
 since then under the state of siege provision. Ovando embarked
 on a hunger strike to protest his imprisonment from
 mid-November to January 4, 1984.
 Over the years, many political opponents of the Government,
 particularly the members of a dissident faction of the ruling
 Colorado Party, have either been forced into exile by the
 Government or voluntarily gone into exile. In 1983, there was
 only one known case of expulsion of a citizen from Paraguay for
 apparent political motives, that of a medical intern -- a
 naturalized citizen of Paraguay born in Argentina -- who was
 arrested in July, apparently in connection with a public
 meeting criticizing the Government's roundup of suspects in the
 Banco Paraguayo de Datos case. He was subsequently expelled to
 Argentina on the grounds that his naturalization documents were
 not in order. The Government has stated that, with a few
 exceptions, it would allow exiles to return quietly on an
 individual basis, if they requested permission to do so. In
 March, Domingo Laino, vice president of the opposition
 Authentic Radical Liberal Party, attempted to return to
 Paraguay in an apparent test of the Government's stated policy
 but was turned back at the Asuncion airport. In a newspaper
 interview on December 15, the Minister of Interior stated that
 with the exception of Laino and Luis Resck, a Christian
 Democratic Party leader, all exiles would be permitted to
 return provided the conditions noted above were met. In late
 December, leading representatives of the Popular Colorado
 movement (MOPOCO) were allowed to return to Paraguay after
 almost 25 years of exile.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Paraguay, like most other Latin American countries, does not
 have trial by jury. Trials are conducted almost exclusively by
 presentation of written documents to a judge, who then renders
 a decision. Appeals are possible to an appelate court, as well
 as to the Supreme Court. Parts of the trial process are open
 to the public and are routinely reported in the press. There
 are numerous safeguards set forth in the Constitution and the
 penal code protecting the rights of the individual during the
 trial process. The judiciary has traditionally been subject to
 extensive influence by the executive branch of the Government
 and by the military. Observers believe that corruption in the
 judicial system seriously compromises the ability of an accused
 person to receive a fair, speedy trial.
 In August 1983, a new president of Paraguay's Supreme Court was
 sworn in. He immediately launched a series of administrative
 reforms and changes in personnel in the judiciary system which
 have been widely praised and which many hope will significally
 
 30-231 0 - 84 - 43
 
 
 664
 reduce the problem of corruption within the system. At the
 same time, many observers believe it most unlikely that the
 courts will become independent of the executive branch in
 politically sensitive cases.
 At the end of 1983, there were 28 persons being held as
 political prisoners, including those whose trial was in
 progress or who had been convicted. The trial process often
 drags on for lengthy periods in political cases. For example,
 20 of these individuals were arrested in early 1982, accused of
 being members of a pro-Chinese faction of the outlawed
 Paraguayan Communist Party. Their trial is still in progress.
 In addition to the 28 there are eight persons being held for
 reasons which local human rights observers consider are
 affected in part by political factors. Six of these are part
 of a group arrested in 1980 in connection with the armed
 hijacking of a bus in Caaguazu province. They have been
 incarcerated since 1980, and their trial continues.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Government and security forces do not intervene as a matter of
 course in the daily life of the average citizen. Moreover, the
 Paraguayan Constitution provides that, except to prevent the
 perpetration of a crime, private homes may not be entered
 except with a judicial warrant. Nonetheless, there continued
 to be cases in which the police entered and searched homes
 without such warrants. In connection with the Banco Paraguayo
 de Datos case in May 1983, a family member of one of those
 sought by the police complained that the police had entered a
 private home without a warrant, searched the premises, and
 expropriated many of the personal belongings of the person
 being sought. The printing company which printed materials for
 several of those detained in the Banco Paraguayo de Datos case
 was closed down and its proprietor detained. There also
 continue to be complaints by opponents of the Government that
 their mail is examined or not delivered, particularly foreign
 correspondence. Foreign newspapers containing articles
 critical of the Paraguayan Government are on occasion
 confiscated at the point of entry.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 The media frequently criticize Government actions and policies,
 discuss sensitive political issues, and report on activities of
 the opposition parties. Howevever, the Government does not
 tolerate direct criticism of the President, the military, and
 key civilian leaders. In addition, the media exercise
 self-censorship with regard to such sensitive topics as
 governmental corruption or military and defense matters. Press
 guidance is sometimes provided by the Government. The
 Government has also taken actions against those who criticize
 it too frequently, even if they do not necessarily overstep the
 usual bounds.
 During 1983, this mixed pattern of tolerating a certain amount
 of criticism, while occasionally taking actions against those
 
 
 665
 who are considered too outspoken, was clearly evident. With
 the exception of the ruling party's newspaper, all of the
 privately-owned Asuncion newspapers criticized the Government
 at one time or another. Several printed all or parts of the
 Department's 1982 Report on Paraguay. A number of radio
 stations also covered opposition political activities.
 Television stations, which are privately-owned but closely
 controlled by the Government, virtually always carry commentary
 laudatory of the Government. Opposition parties are not
 allowed access to television.
 Prompted by what it apparently considered to be excesses by
 some of the media during the year, the Government took a
 variety of actions against them. In April and May the police
 prevented or delayed delivery of Paraguay's leading daily, ABC
 Color, to a number of cities outside of the capital; on one
 occasion police cordoned off the newspaper building. In July,
 the publisher of ABC Color was jailed for 11 days after his
 newspaper printed a document relating to a case before the
 courts involving alleged defamation of members of the
 judiciary. But no action was taken against a second newspaper
 which printed the same document. More recently, ABC Color's
 publisher has accused the Government of preventing the
 newspaper from obtaining newsprint at the favorable official
 rate for foreign exchange, while providing such foreign
 exchange to the ruling party's newspaper for its purchase of
 newsprint. One of ABC Color's leading columnists, detained in
 September by the police under the state of siege provision of
 the Constitution, remained incarcerated for 76 days before he
 was released. No explanation has been given for this action,
 but the columnist, Alcibiades Gonzalez Delvalle, had been one
 of the most persistent critics of the Government and had been
 detained twice before. He is also the Secretary General of the
 journalists union which the Government has not legally
 recognized. In late December, another ABC Color columnist was
 detained for four days without charge.
 In April, the owner of Radio Nanduti, Humberto Rubin, was
 denied permission to publish a weekly magazine, and in July his
 station was closed down for 30 days. The Government
 broadcasting authorities subsequently banned the use of live,
 open-microphone broadcast interviews and telephone call-in
 shows, which had been a prominent feature of his station, and
 forced the cancellation of certain of the station's programs.
 In September, Mr. Rubin was denied permission to continue as an
 announcer on his station or to be interviewed by the station on
 the grounds that he lacked an announcer's license. This ban
 lasted until November, when the Government allowed Mr. Rubin to
 resume work as announcer. There are reports that the
 Government held up or refused to issue licenses to several
 other announcers. On several occasions, Mr. Rubin was also
 held incommunicado in a police station for several hours
 without explanation.
 The opposition parties have experienced difficulties in
 publishing party newspapers which appear only sporadically.
 This is due to a lack of funds and of persons willing and able
 to edit the newspapers, as well as fears of government
 reprisals against those responsible for editing and publishing
 them.
 
 
 666
 In another incident, the Government telegraph office reportedly
 refused to send messages by a local stringer for the Reuters
 news service because the reports were considered too critical
 of the Government.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Despite constitutional guarantees concerning the rights of
 peaceful assembly and association for legal ends, these rights
 are in practice frequently violated. Under the state of siege
 provision, which is in effect in the capital, it is technically
 necessary to obtain permission for any assembly of more than a
 certain number of persons, for whatever purpose. Normally,
 however, this restriction is only enforced in the case of
 gatherings sponsored by opposition political parties or other
 organizations critical of the government. In practice, there
 are generally few restrictions on the activities of
 organizations which are non-political in nature. Opposition
 political parties are sometimes denied the right to hold public
 meetings. Outside of the capital, government permission is not
 required for public meetings of the recognized opposition
 parties, but the authorities are routinely informed in order to
 reduce the chance of police interference. Nevertheless, it is
 not unusual for the police to delay or prohibit meetings of not
 only the unrecognized opposition parties but also the
 opposition parties that are legally recognized. Outdoor
 demonstrations on any significant scale by opposition parties
 or groups critical of the government are normally not
 permitted. For example, on August 7, 1983, a mass was held in
 Asuncion's cathedral organized by various human rights groups
 to express solidarity with a number of political detainees who
 were on a hunger strike. Following the service a group
 carrying placards demonstrated peacefully outside the cathedral
 for about 20 minutes before the police arrived and ordered them
 to disband. None of the protestora was arrested.
 There is no independent nationwide trade union movement in
 Paraguay. Organized labor accounts for only about 5 percent of
 the work force. The Federation of Paraguayan Workers, which
 claims to represent over 90 percent of organized labor, is the
 only legal national labor organization. It is controlled by
 the Government and the ruling Colorado Party. The Federation
 does not effectively represent the interest of the Paraguayan
 working force. Strikes are not permitted and collective
 bargaining efforts are routinely frustrated; the Federation has
 done nothing effective to gain recognition for these two
 fundamental rights. Union officials who differ with the
 Federation's policies are harassed or fired by their employers
 with the tacit support of the Government.
 There are a number of independent unions, some of them
 organized on the company level. A few of them have been strong
 enough to bargain, despite efforts by private firms with the
 tacit support of the Government to resist their efforts. While
 some of the individual unions and professional associations
 have been granted legal recognition, others have not, which
 makes it difficult for them to bargain with employers. The
 Government is less likely to recognize groups which it
 perceives to be more independent of control.
 
 
 667
 The Federation of Paraguayan Workers does not maintain ties
 with any of the public or private international labor
 organizations, and Paraguay is not a member of the
 International Labor Organization. Some of the independent
 unions do, however, maintain such ties. The National Workers
 Confederation, for example, which is not legally sanctioned and
 unable to carry out any significant unionizing activities, is
 an affiliate of the Latin American Confederation of Workers.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 The Paraguayan Constitution establishes Roman Catholicism as
 the official state religion, but it also guarantees freedom of
 conscience for other denominations. Adherence to a particular
 creed confers no advantages within Paraguayan society, and
 conversion from one faith to another is permissible. Many
 denominations conduct their activities freely, and missionaries
 are for the most part permitted to enter the country and to
 proselytize. However, Paraguayan legislation prohibits the
 granting of legal status to new religious groups, and a few
 evangelical churches have been unable to obtain Government
 approval for their operations. The Jehovah's Witnesses lost
 their legal registration in-1979 and continue to appeal that
 decision in the courts.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel,
 Emigration, and Repatriation
 The Paraguayan Constitution provides for freedom of movement,
 which is usually not restricted within Paraguay. There are no
 restrictions on residence in either urban or rural areas. Most
 citizens may enter and leave the country freely. However,
 officials sometimes refuse to issue passports to political
 .dissidents, former political prisoners, and persons who
 criticize the Government. There were several cases of this
 type in 1983, including a refusal to issue a passport to a
 prominent local human rights activist. Another human rights
 figure complained of being delayed at the airport upon her
 return from abroad, saying that she and her luggage were
 extensively searched and some documents and letters she was
 carrying confiscated or destroyed. There was one prominent
 case in 1983 involving freedom of movement, that of a
 university student, Gustavo Codas Friedman, who sought asylum
 in the Venezuelan Embassy following the Government's crackdown
 on the Banco Paraguayo de Datos. The Venezuelan Embassy sought
 safe passage for Codas out of the country, a request which the
 Paraguayan Government still had under consideration when Codas
 surreptitiously fled the country.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to
 Change Their Government
 President Stroessner dominates the Paraguayan political
 system. He rules through the Colorado Party, which administers
 public patronage, through the military and police forces, which
 assure public security, and through the governmental
 bureaucracy. The legislative branch, consisting of a Senate
 and a Chamber of Deputies, is almost completely responsive to
 the views of the President on all important matters. The
 Colorado Party has a two-thirds majority in both houses, and
 
 
 668
 there have been very few occasions under Stroessner's rule when
 the Congress has rejected government proposals or policy.
 However, there have been some cases when Colorado Party
 legislators have been able to delay or even alter legislative
 proposals submitted by the executive branch. The legislative
 branch also provides a forum for representatives of the legal
 opposition parties to express their views and criticize the
 government.
 General elections are held every five years for the presidency
 and the two houses of the legislature. The law requires that
 all Paraguayans 18 years of age or more vote. The last
 elections were held on February 6, 1983, and resulted in a
 reported voter turnout of almost 93 percent of eligible voters,
 with the ruling Colorado Party receiving over 90 percent of the
 votes cast in a controlled process. Two of the three legally
 recognized opposition parties participated in the elections,
 but they suffered from poor organization and a lack of funds.
 The legal opposition was not allowed access to Paraguay's two
 television stations but was permitted to buy limited time on
 radio stations located outside Asuncion. Requests by the
 opposition parties to hold rallies and meetings during the
 election period were generally approved. The election itself
 took place in a calm and orderly manner, with no visible
 harassment of opposition voters. Both opposition parties
 complained, however, that there were widespread electoral
 irregularities. There were, for example, a number of precincts
 where the number of votes cast exceeded the number of
 registered voters. The electoral law places responsibility on
 the individual political parties for assuring that their votes
 are faithfully tallied and recorded, a task beyond the
 opposition parties' capabilities. In practice, therefore, the
 Colorado Party completely controls the electoral machinery as
 well as the body responsible for investigating electoral fraud
 and malfeasance. Therefore, the unchecked domination of the
 electoral process of the Colorado Party resulted in a seriously
 flawed election. In its 1983 report, the Inter-American Human
 Rights Commission stated that the elections were held "in an
 atmosphere which restricted the freedom of the people .... .
 The Colorado Party dominates the political life of the
 country. Access to positions in the Government, as well as to
 the officer ranks of the military and the police, is in
 practice limited to members of the party.   Individuals often
 join the party Zor economic and social advantages such as
 enrollment in the National University or permission to bid on
 public contracts. Within the party, initiatives and decisions
 come predominantly from the top echelons,'which does not
 encourage competition for party office at the local levels or
 in its professional and student associations.
 Some political parties do not enjoy juridical recognition from
 the Government and, therefore, cannot participate in the
 political process. In any case, most of these groups reject
 participation under current electoral law. For example, the
 Authentic Radical Liberal Party, not legally recognized, called
 on its followers not to vote in the February elections. The
 Christian Democrat Party continues to seek legal recognition,
 while the Communist Party is proscribed by law. Regardless of
 their legal status, however, all opposition parties are subject
 to harassment by the authorities.
 
 
 669
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Non-governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The Government considers negative comments about its human
 rights performance from outside sources to be unwarranted
 interference in its internal affairs. Nonetheless, the
 Government has normally responded to inquiries from
 organizations such as the United Nations Human Rights
 Commission (UNHRC) and the Inter-American Commission on Human
 Rights (IAHRC). It has not, however, permitted an on-site
 inspection by the IAHRC, despite assurances dating back to 1977
 that it would do so. The Commission in its annual report for
 1983 pointed to alleged cases of arbitrary detention, exile,
 and actions against the freedom of the press, and criticized
 the atmosphere surrounding the national elections held in
 February. The UNHRC is reviewing Paraguay's human rights
 situation under its confidential 1503 proceedings. The
 Paraguayan Government has cooperated with the Commission during
 the proceedings regarding its case.
 There were a number of visits to Paraguay by private human
 rights organizations in 1983, including a fact-finding visit in
 November by a delegation from the International Confederation
 of Free Trade Unions and a visit in August by Lord David
 Avebury, a member of the British Parliamentary Commission on
 Human Rights. Lord Avebury, in a press conference in Asuncion
 prior to his departure, which was widely discussed in the local
 press, severely criticized the Paraguayan Government's human
 rights record. Amnesty International, in its 1983 report,
 expressed concern about human rights abuses in 1982, including
 arbitrary arrests, the use of state of siege constitutional
 provision to detain political opponents without trial for long
 periods, and the forcible expulsion of detainees. Freedom
 House in 1983 rated Paraguay as "partly free."
 A number of local private organizations continued to be active
 in attempting to protect individual liberties during 1983.
 These include the Paraguayan Human Rights Commission, the
 Inter-Faith Committee, composed of three church groups, the
 Union of Paraguayan Women, and the Paraguayan chapter of the
 Association of Latin American Lawyers for the Defense of Human
 Rights. The opposition parties and certain members of the
 media also express support for the protection of human rights
 and the evolution of a more open and democratic society. The
 human rights groups publicize cases involving alleged human
 rights violations and provide legal assistance to detainees and
 political prisoners. Their efforts have kept human rights
 abuses before international attention and secured the release
 of a number of detainees. However, human rights activists in
 Paraguay continue to be harassed, and some have been accused in
 the ruling Colorado Party newspaper of being communists. In
 1983 some human rights activists were refused passports, and
 complained of having their mail opened or confiscated.
 ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND CULTURAL SITUATION
 Paraguay in 1983 had a population of 3.5 million which grew at
 a rate of 2.7 percent. Agriculture is the most important
 economic activity in Paraguay, contributing about 31 percent of
 
 
 670
 gross domestic product, over 95 percent of the country's total
 exports, and nearly half of the employment. Approximately 65
 percent of the population lives in rural areas, mostly engaging
 in subsistence agriculture.
 Public sector growth has outpaced overall economic growth, and
 reports of graft and corruption have increased. For many
 Paraguayans, the expansion of the public sector has narrowed
 the scope of their own job opportunities since public sector
 employment and contracts for government-related projects depend
 on official connections or membership in the ruling party.
 The estimated percentage of the population below the absolute
 poverty level as of 1977 was 50 percent, all in the rural
 sector.
 Life expectancy in 1980 was reportedly just over 65 years, and
 the infant mortality rate fell to 45.7 per 1,000 live births in
 1983. In 1977, the population as a whole was judged to have a
 daily caloric intake of 119.4 percent of the average daily
 requirement. Adequacy of food is not a problem although an
 imbalanced diet sometimes leads to problems of malnutrition
 among the poor. About 75 percent of the health professionals
 live in Asuncion, which includes only about one third of
 Paraguay's population.
 Adult literacy is estimated at just over 80 percent. Primary
 school enrollment at 539,889 in 1982 amounted to nearly 79
 percent of the primary school age population. Over one-third
 of students complete six years of basic education. From 1972
 to 1982 the number of primary schools was increased by 36.8
 percent and secondary schools by 39.8 percent.
 After experiencing the Latin American region's most rapid
 economic growth for several years beginning in the mid-1970's,
 Paraguay's economic performance in 1981 began to be affected by
 external economic recession and its own failure to make
 adequate economic adjustments. Severe flooding caused
 additional problems in 1983. Gross domestic product declined
 two percent in 1982 and by an additional five percent or more
 during 1983. Unemployment is estimated to have risen to 13
 percent in 1983.
 Paraguay has an unassimilated Indian population which the
 Government's National Indigenous Institute estimates at around
 45,000. The 1981 Statute on Indigenous Communities enabled the
 Institute to purchase land on behalf of the Indians and to
 expropriate private property to establish tribal homelands.
 However, the optimism generated by the passage of this
 legislation has faded as a result of the Institute's failure
 thus far to implement its provisions. The problems of
 Paraguay's indigenous population have been widely publicized in
 the Paraguayan media.
 The Paraguayan Constitution guarantees "the equality of civil
 and political rights" of women, while emphasizing the
 importance of marriage and the unity of the family. Women play
 a subordinate role in the political life of Paraguay, although
 the executive and judicial branches of government have a few
 prominent female officials, and there are three women in the
 
 
 671
 90-member parliament. Several others, including a prominent
 human rights leader, enjoy independent political renown. While
 the traditional social system limits the participation of
 women, particularly from lower income groups, an increasing
 number are participating effectively in business, the
 professions, and the artistic world. However, women usually
 receive less renumeration than men for comparable work. There
 are two organizations concerned with women's rights, one, the
 Paraguayan League of Women's Rights, a wing of the ruling
 Colorado Party, and the second, the Union of Paraguayan Women,
 an organization founded in 1982 by a former opposition member
 of the parliament.
 
 
 672
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS. - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: PARAGUAY
 1081     1982    1983
 .......................... o....................... .........
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL.-.        6.3      3.9      3.2
 LOANS ........ .......     0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................    6.3     3.9      3.2
 A.AID  .. .....................  2.0   0.0      0.0
 LOANS ................    0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ..............       2.0     0.0      0.0
 (SEC.SUPP.ASSIST.)...        0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.FOOD FOR PEACE ......        0.7      0.1      0.0
 LOANS ................    0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................    0.7     0.1      0.0
 Thu                            9_T�TAL:::9 0:,   0,0
 REPAY. IN $-LOAkS .....       0.0      0.0      0.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR .....       0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE  I -TOTAL .........     0.7      0.1      0.0
 E.RELIEF.EC.DEV & WFP.        0.7      0.1      0.0
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY .....       0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.OTHERECON. ASSIST...        3.6      3.8      3.2
 LO lS ................    0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................    3.6     3.8      3.2
 PEACE CORPS ......        2.4     2.4      2.5
 NARCOTICS ........        0.0     0.0      0.0
 OTHER ......... ....     1.2      1.4     0.7
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL...        0.0      0.0      0.1
 LOANS ...............      0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ...............    0.0     0.0      0.1
 A.MAP  GRANTS ..........      0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.CREDIT FINANCING ....       0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.INTL MIL.ED.TRNG ....       0.0      0.0      0.1
 D.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK...        0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER  GRANTS ........      0.0      0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. & MIL...        6.3      3.9      3.3
 LOANS ......... .....   ...  0.0    0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................   6.3      3.9      3.3
 OTHER  US  LOANS ..........     0.0     63.9      1.1
 EX-IM BANK LOANS .......       0.0     63.9      0.0
 ALL  OTHER ................   0.0      0.0      1.1
 .........................................................
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1981     1982     1983    194 -83
 TOTAL ........    88.8    176.4   112.9   100319
 IBRD              58.8    99.4     40.0    427.6
 IFC                1.2     10.4     0.0     17.0
 IDA                0.0     0.0      0.0     45.5
 1DB               27.5    64.9     72.9    48310
 AD8                0.0     0.0      0.0      0.0
 AFDB               0.0     0.0      0.0      0.0
 UNDP               1.3      1.0     0.0     2413
 OTHER-UN           0.0     0.7      0.0      6.5
 EEC                0.0     0.0      0.0      0.0
 
 
