 PARAGUAY
 Paraguay is a predominantly agricultural country with
 a population of three million. It has traditionally
 been governed by authoritarian regimes and has a history
 of wars, rebellions and coups. The country has been
 ruled under state of siege provisions of the constitution
 since 1929. President Alfredo Stroessner, an Army general,
 has governed Paraguay since 1954 under these provisions
 and there has been no effective challenge to his authority.
 He is actively supported by the extensive political apparatus
 of the majority Colorado Party, the Armed Forces and
 the Police.
 Violations of respect for the integrity of the individual
 have decreased but credible reports of cruel treatment
 and punishment were received in 1980 and the political
 and civil rights guarantees provided for in Paraguay's
 constitution continue to be violated. Opposition political
 elements are not able to participate effectively in the
 political process, and affiliation with the Colorado
 Party is often a prerequisite for significant participation
 in the nation's burgeoning economic activity. The judiciary,
 while formally independent, does not constitute an effective
 check to executive branch actions.
 During the last two decades, there has been rapid economic
 growth and the poorer elements of the population have
 been among the prime beneficiaries. In addition, the
 government's land distribution program has given farms
 to over one-sixth of the nation's small farmers.
 1.   Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Torture
 Article 5 of the constitution guarantees the physical
 integrity of the individual. Nevertheless there are
 recurring reports of torture. The most credible cases
 in 1980 involved two Argentine nationals and a member
 of the Paraguayan Communist Party, who were reportedly
 tortured during the early stages of detention to obtain
 information.
 b. Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment
 The Paraguayan police are reliably reported to mistreat
 prisoners during the early stages of detention. Such
 mistreatment is said to include beatings, forced standing
 for long periods of time, withholding of food, lengthy
 isolation, verbal abuse and threats against detainees
 and their families. The Paraguayan security forces and
 armed political groups allegedly used harsh methods in
 a search for the perpetrators of a bus hijacking in March
 1980 in eastern Paraguay in which two government officials
 were wounded. During a manhunt near Caaguazu following
 the incident, up to 200 people were detained for varying
 lengths of time, and allegedly were subjected to verbal
 threats, beatings and physical abuse. Human rights groups
 have received charges that persons engaged in the manhunt
 summarily executed at least three persons in the aftermath
 of the incident.
 Conditions in police stations are poor but in most cases
 detainees are transferred fairly quickly to the national
 penitentiary where conditions are generally better.
 
 
 510
 There have been no reports of cruel, inhuman, or degrading
 treatient or punishment during subsequent detention in
 regular prison facilities. Representatives of the Interna-
 tional Committee of the Red Cross are normally allowed
 access to detainees. No known disciplinary actions have
 been taken against officials accused of cases of torture,
 cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.
 c. Disappearances
 During 1980 no case of disappearance is known to have
 occurred.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest and Imprisonment
 There were about 600 political prisoners in 1977. Almost
 all have since been released. Releases in 1980 included
 a prisoner who had been held for 16 years without charges
 and a peasant leader who had been rearrested in early
 1979, after having previously spent eight years in jail,
 and charged with a variety of political and common crimes.
 The latter departed Paraguay soon after his release.
 Four political prisoners were in custody as of October
 1980, including three members of the illegal Communist
 Party. Political prisoners are usually held under the
 state of siege provisions of the constitution or anti-
 subversion law no. 209. Perhaps 10-15 other persons
 are being held arbitrarily under circumstances which,
 in some cases, suggest political motivation. In September-
 November 1980 eight campesinos were held without charge
 and then released. A recent publication of the International
 Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) notes that its regional
 delegate in mid-1980 visited various places of detention
 and met seven persons held for political reasons. Habeas
 corpus is not honored in these cases and such prisoners -
 can be held indefinitely. During 1980, there were also
 a number of short-term detentions, for what were essential-
 ly political reasons, although criminal charges were
 sometimes filed. One case involved a prominent opposition
 politician who was rearrested under the state of siege
 provisions in October, held incommunicado, and released
 several weeks later. In another case earlier in the
 year, two leading journalists were detained for 28 and
 67 days respectively. Two political opposition members
 were forcibly exiled to the interior for two months,
 before being released.
 Several hundred people were detained arbitrarily in the
 aftermath of the assassination in Paraguay of former
 Nicaraguan President Anastasio Somoza. These people,
 many of whom were foreigners, were held from a few hours
 to several days but a few may still have been in custody
 at year's end. Many of the foreigners were summarily
 expelled from Paraguay without legal proceedings.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Paraguay has a well-developed body of laws and penal -
 codes. While legal proceedings are reported in the press,
 and are formally in accord with the constitution, the
 judiciary is subject to executive and military influence
 and there are also charges of extensive judicial corruption.
 Fair trials in political cases generally are not possible.
 A report issued in 1980 entitled Mbarete the liiher
 Law of Paraquay, under the auspices of the Interna onal
 LgU     - human Rights, concluded that there were no
 due process safeguards in political cases. The report
 
 
 511
 came to the following conclusions regarding the procedures
 for trying political prisoners under anti-subversive
 Law 209: "First, the prosecutions did egregious harm
 to legal and constitutional rights; second, as administered
 by the Paraguayan judiciary, fair trials were not achieved;
 third, dominated by superior executive power and extra-
 official influence, the judges acted lawlessly and without
 judicial integrity." The same report also alleged the
 existence of an "unwritten code based on a hierarchy
 of power given the name in the Guarani language of Mbarete.
 Mbarete is the higher law, superior to any and all norms
 postulated by the legal system."
 The 1980 annual report of the Inter-American Human Rights
 Commission recognized a "relative improvement in the
 general human rights situation" in Paraguay. At the
 same time it pointed out that "essential rights such*
 as life, personal freedom, physical safety, religious
 freedom, freedom of association, the right to a fair
 trial, the right to expression of thought and information,
 and the right of residence and travel, are frequently
 obstructed by measures proceeding directly or indirectly
 from actions taken by government agencies."
 f. Invasion of the Home
 Under the law, judicial warrants are necessary before
 the security forces can enter private homes. ,However,
 citing the state of siege provisions of the constitution,
 the police.have conducted searches, detained persons,
 and impounded or expropriated personal property without
 judicial warrant. Such actions were widespread in the
 aftermath of the Somoza assassination.
 2.   Government Policies Relating to the Fulfillment
 of Such Vital Needs as Food, Shelter, Health Care
 and Education
 The government of Paraguay, in seeking to improve living
 conditions, takes a largely laissez-faire approach to
 economic and social questions, and relies on private
 organizations to fulfill needs in these areas whenever
 possible. Government policies have contributed to the
 achievement by Paraguay of a high sustained level of
 economic growth for the past three years. An estimated
 18.8 percent of central government expenditures went
 to public health, education and housing, an increase
 over recent years. Despite increased spending, education
 and health services, especially in rural areas, remain
 inadequate.
 Government fiscal policy is conservative, and this has
 contributed to relative price stability in Paraguay.
 However, an unparalleled influx of foreign capital has
 intensified expansionary pressures within the economy.
 Inflation in 1980 is estimated at 20 percent. Due to
 rising income levels and improved tax administration,
 central government revenue is expanding rapidly but important
 potential sources of revenue continue to escape taxation.
 Until the past decade, Paraguay was virtually isolated
 economically; 90 percent of its trade was directly with
 Argentina and almost 100 percent of its imports came
 through Argentina. The economic growth of Brazil along
 its frontier with Paraguay, the growth of commercial
 agriculture, and the beginning of the exploitation of
 the hydroelectric potential of the Parana River, have
 all effected enormous changes in the Paraguayan economy
 
 
 512
 and society. There has been a general and significant
 xncrease in living standards, a considerable growth in
 the middle class, rising wages, and a greater participa-
 tion in the commercial sector by foreigners. Electricity
 generation, telephone service and water supply, all govern-
 ment utilities, have kept pace with the burgeoning private
 sector, but as noted, some sectors such as education
 and health care have lagged in some areas.
 The National University is poorly equipped and has been
 criticized as being dominated by the Colorado Party.
 The independent Catholic University is striving to improve
 its facilities. Teachers' pay in public primary schools
 is extremely low, about one-half of the minimum wage
 in the private sector. Most families with adequate means
 prefer to send their children to private schools. According
 to the government, the literacy rate is about 80 percent,
 and about 90 percent of children between 7 and 14 years
 of age go to school. The functional literacy rate is
 probably lower.
 Basic economic statistics show the GNP per capita for
 1980 as   $ 1,500 (estimated). The minimum wage is $6.25
 per day. Unemployment is almost nonexistent. There
 are no statistics about underemployment. Population
 growth rate is about 3.1 percent per year; population
 distribution is about 40 percent urban and 60 percent
 rural; life expectancy is 62 years; and the infant (less
 than 1 year) mortality rate is about 75 per thousand.
 There are about 1,700 doctors, 3,000 hospitals beds,
 1,500 trained technicians and 300 nurses in the country
 serving a total population of 3,000,000 people.
 Income distribution remains a concern. There are no
 official data but a small group of insiders appears to
 be profiting inordinately from the current boom. However,
 real wages may have increased slightly in 1980. There
 is little abject poverty or misery, and government homestead-
 ing and colonization programs have benefited major sectors
 of the rural poor. While poorer Paraguayans are sharing
 in the exceptional growth that the country is experiencing,
 perhaps 15 to 20 percent of all households remain largely
 outside the money economy. The Paraguayan government
 has taken steps to overcome past neglect of unassimilated
 Indians and to promote and improve their status, but
 full integration into the economy and political life
 of Paraguay has not been achieved.
 Paraguay is underpopulated. The government has a policy
 of land distribution which provides land to those who
 want to work it. However, clear titles to land and security
 of land rights are often difficult to obtain.
 The great majority of Paraguayans live between marginal
 and middle income levels. Economic opportunities are
 enhanced if one is a member of the governing party, but
 most of the business community has prospered regardless
 of political affiliation.
 3. Respect for Civil and Political Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech, Press, Religion and Assembly
 The media exercises self-censorship and the government,
 in 1980, continued to issue press guidance to the directors
 and senior editorial staff of the leading newspapers.
 Two journalists were detained for 28 and 67 days respective-
 ly during 1980, and El Pueblo, the organ of the opposition
 
 
 513
 "Febrerista" Party, was closed in October 1980 and has
 not reopened. Despite government pressures, the press
 in Paraguay reports independent and opposition viewpoints
 and criticism of the government is generally tolerated
 - except for criticism of the President, key military
 and some civilian government leaders. Radio and television
 are controlled by the government or its supporters, and
 reporting is less open than in the press. Opposition
 parties are.not allowed access to electronic media to
 air their views.
 Freedom of assembly continues to be subject to limitations.
 Opposition political parties, whether recognized by the
 government or not, are frequently denied the right to
 hold public meetings. Security forces, particularly
 outside of the capital, have allegedly intimidated opposition
 politicians to prevent even private meetings in homes.
 There is no truly independent labor movement in Paraguay.
 The Federation of Parguayan Workers (CPT) represents
 over 90 percent of organized labor. The CPT is the only
 recognized labor organization; it is.controlled by the
 government, and is dominated by the Colorado Party.
 A few unions associated with the opposition parties belong
 to the CPT.
 The CPT has been moving in recent years toward a more
 independent stance. Individual unions have shown some
 bargaining power, particularly in the banking sector,
 and where.foreign firms are concerned. Strikes have
 not been permitted, however, and collective bargaining
 efforts have often been frustrated by private firms despite
 legal guarantees.
 The Paraguayan constitution guarantees religious freedom
 for existing religious groups, and their activities are
 conducted freely. Recent legislation has prohibited
 the conferring of legal status on any new religious groups.
 The Jehovah's Witnesses', who lost their legal registration
 in 1979, cannot use their established meeting houses
 for religious purposes.
 b. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel,    Emigration and Repatriation
 The constitution provides for freedom to travel and,
 within Paraguay, this freedom is normally honored. Most
 citizens may enter and leave the country freely. However,
 officials have often refused to issue travel docduments
 to political opponents, former political prisoners, or
 persons who criticize the government. Emigration is
 normally allowed and Paraguay has a policy of providing
 asylum to foreign refugees. Many political opponents
 of the government, particularly a dissident section of
 the Colorado Party, have been forced into exile over
 the years. Although some have been allowed to return,
 they can do so only by undertaking not to participate
 in the political life of the country. Paraguay has followed
 a policy of welcoming immigrants. Europeans, Japanese,
 Brazilians, Koreans as well as large numbers of members
 of fundamentalist religious sects have settled in Paraguay.
 c. Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 The Paraguayan government is authoritarian. Only members
 of the dominant Colorado Party in good standing can fully
 participate in the political process. Individuals are
 under pressure to join the Colorado Party to'gain access
 
 
 514
 to economic and social advantages which are subject to
 government influence, such as admission to the National
 University, access to government employment, and the
 right to bid on public contracts. The government often
 appears to identify legitimate dissent with subversion
 and seeks to justify subsequent harassment of political
 opponents and critics on the basis of national security.
 General elections are held every five years and the law
 requires all Paraguayans 18 years and over to vote.
 Some political groups are not allowed to participate
 and one recognized party refuses to do so. Two opposition
 parties are recognized and do participate, at least formally,
 in elections, and have representation in congress. The
 Communist Party is banned by law.
 Equal rights for women are guaranteed by the Paraguayan
 constitution. The traditional social system limits the
 participation of women, especially those from lower income
 groups. Women have traditionally played an inferior
 role in Paraguayan political life, and the executive
 and judiciary have few prominent women officials. There
 are three women in the     90-member congress, and several
 others are politically prominent. An increasing number
 of women are participating effectively in various professions,
 business and the artistic life of the country. Women
 normally receive less remuneration than men for comparable
 work.
 4.   Government Attitude and Record Regarding International
 and Non-governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The Paraguayan government responds to inquiries from
 international human rights bodies including the United
 Nations Human Rights Commission (UNHRC) and the Inter-
 American Human Rights Commission (IAHRC). The UNHRC
 is considering the situation of human rights in Paraguay
 under its confidential 1503 procedures.  Despite repeated
 commitments over the past three years, the government
 has not yet scheduled an on-site visit in ParagVay by
 the IAHRC. The IAHRC annual report recommended that
 the government of Paraguay set an early date for an on-
 site observation. The government has allowed visits
 by non-governmental human rights organizations.
 A critical report by the International League for Human
 Rights was published in 1980 following its visit to Paraguay
 the previous year. Among its recommendations were the
 restoration of habeas corpus and the lifting of the state
 of siege. There have been no other visits by international
 groups concerned with human rights during 1980. Paraguay
 has signed, but not ratified, the American Convention
 on Human Rights.
 The Paraguayan Human Rights Commission and the Inter-
 Faith Committee composed of three church groups are both
 active in the human rights area in Paraguay. Both organiza-
 tions have been subject to governmental criticism and
 harassment.
 
 
 515
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: PARAGUAY
 1978     1979     1980
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL ..         3.5     10.3      3.6
 LOANS.........             0.0      5.0      0.0
 GRANTS ...........          3.5      5.3      3.6
 A.AID .................         1.8      7.1      1.3
 LOANS, ........           0.0      5.0      0.0
 GRANTS    S ..........     1.8      2.1      1.3
 (SEC.SUPPASSIST.).          0.0     0.0      0.0
 B.FOOD FOR PEACEE....           0.3      0.3      0.4
 LOANS............o         0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS..............        0.3      0.3      0.4
 TITLE I-TOTAL.........          0.0      0.0      0.0
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS.....         0.0      0.0      0.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR..,.          0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE II-TOTAL......           0.3      0.3      0.4
 E.RELIEF.EC.DEV & WFP.         0.3      0.3      0.4
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY .o.          0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST ..         1.4      2.9      1.9
 LOANS ..........            0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS............         1.4      2.9      1.9
 CONTR. TO IFI!.o.         0.0      0.0      0.0
 PEACE CORPS....           1.1      1.9      1.9
 OTHER ............        0.3      1.0      0.0
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL...         0.6      0.0      00
 LOANS...............        0.0      0.0      00
 GRANTS.............         0.6      0.0      0.0
 A.MAP GRANTS..........         0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.CREDIT SALES-FMS..           0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.INTL MILEOTRNG....         0.6      0.0      0.0
 D.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK...         0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS ......          0.0      0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. L IL,..         4.1     10.3      3.6
 LOANS...........            0.0      5.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............        .1      5.3      3.6
 OTHER US LOANS-------0.0                  0.0      0.0
 EX-IM BANK LOANS.......         0.0      0.0      0.0
 ALL OTHER..............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1978     1979     1980     1946-80
 TOTAL.... o*...  104.7     97.2     76.6    629.1
 IBRD              39.0     64.0     36.0    229.3
 IFC                0.0      0.0      0.0      5.4
 IDA                0.0      0.0      0.0     45.5
 IDB               64.2     31.2     39.4    321.1
 ADB                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 AFOB               0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 UNDP               1.4      1.4      1.2     22.0
 OTHER-UN           0.1      0.6      0.0      5.8
 EEC                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 
 
 516
