PARAGUAY
Since Alfredo Stroessner's government was overthrown in 1989 by General Andrés Rodríguez, Paraguay has continued its progress toward democracy. Overall, the State Department accurately records the problems experienced as well as achievements made in Paraguay during 1991. The most troubling realms remain the more deeply rooted institutional problems which have not changed significantly since the State Department's 1990 report. Continuing corruption, torture and abuse of detainees and prisoners, lack of an independent judiciary, failure to redress past human rights abuses, attacks on journalists and land reform all require serious attention if Paraguay is to achieve stable and long-term democracy and create a rights-respecting society.
The report addresses extrajudicial killings and torture, including incidents of deaths and brutality in police custody, in a straightforward and detailed manner. It mentions in passing the discovery of clandestine detention centers in various locations. In June, for example, a delegation of judges and lawyers confirmed the existence of an unauthorized jail in Ciudad del Este located within the Alto Parana Department's government compound. Its inmates included children between the ages of 11 and 15. Some of the prisoners claimed they had been tortured by the police and received offers to be released if they paid varying amounts of money. The report accurately distinguishes between consistent government condemnation of such practices and the failure to investigate or prosecute those responsible.
Clashes between peasants and landowners, evictions and mass detentions of peasants occupying lands continued in 1991, as noted in the report. The government must address land reform issues, which are vital to the country's long-term stability, as discussed in our critique last year.
Freedom of speech and the press have improved significantly since the Stroessner era. Several members of the press investigating corruption nonetheless have been subject to retaliation. As noted in the report, Santiago Leguizamon of Radio Nanduti was assassinated on April 26 by unknown individuals. He had received numerous death threats for
265
Paraguay
almost a year. Leguizamon had been researching cases of corruption before his death.
An unknown individual shot at Héctor Guerín, a journalist with ABC Color, on March 11 while he was trying to photograph a landing strip in Ciudad del Este for an investigation on corruption. The landing strip was allegedly used to transport contraband. On April 16, a group attacked Mr. Guerín and two other journalists, Alejandro Frétés and Fermín Jara, while they were photographing individuals trying to steal ballot boxes in Ciudad del Este.
The report's discussion of governmental attitudes regarding investigations of human rights violations should have noted that in mid-March, Pedro Dario Portillo and Rodolfo Manuel Aseretto received anonymous death threats. They are both attorneys with the human rights organization. Comité de Iglesias para Ayudas de Emergencia (CIPAE) and were investigating Stroessner era violations, including pending cases involving former government officials. Many of their cases were approaching theplenario, or sentencing, stage at the time of the threats. They believe the threats were related to these legal proceedings.
In addition, at about 3:00 a.m. on March 10, unidentified gunmen fired on Francisco de Vargas' residence. De Vargas is a deputy for the Authentic Liberal Radical Party {Partido Liberal Radical Auténtico, PLRA) and the vice-president of the Human Rights Commission of the Congressional Chamber of Deputies. The report merely notes that Mr. de Vargas is a leading human rights activist who "continued to serve" as an opposition member in Congress.
The report also fails to mention that President Rodriguez ordered the arrest and detention of Martin Chiola and Bader Rachid Lichi, leaders of the militant faction of the ruling Colorado party. They were released the next day. The president has also forbidden them from participating in politics until at least 1993. President Rodriguez noted that this prohibition does not apply to members of the faction but was limited to its leaders.
266
Paraguay
The observance of the right to peaceful assembly remains problematic in Paraguay; the State Department correctly notes two examples in which the police forbade peaceful marches from continuing. It cites, for example, the peaceful peasant march organized by the Paraguayan Peasant Movement (MCP) in the town of San Estanilao in March. The police would not permit the protesters to enter the town, confiscated their identification cards and delayed the protesters for several hours. The peasants were calling for land reform and protesting the government's set price of cotton. The report also mentions the September demonstration by medical students during which Asunción police fired blanks and clubbed some protesters.
The report does not, however, mention the government's interference with a peaceful demonstration in Villeta in October. There, the police repressed a demonstration held in the early morning hours in support of striking National Cement Industry workers when the protesters refused to disperse. Police forces began beating demonstrators and throwing tear gas canisters. Several protesters were injured, including a six-month-old baby.
In November, the National Workers Federation attempted to march to Congress in Asunción in support of passage of a labor law. Police stopped the protesters on the basis that they had not requested permission to walk on the protest route. Despite requests from members of Congress to permit the union leaders to proceed, the police shot a water cannon at the congressmen and demonstrators. Police also threw tear gas at the demonstrators. The police forces then beat the protesters as well as journalists who were covering the incident. Asunción's recently-elected Mayor Carlos Filizzola was among those hit by the water cannon. The demonstration eventually ended when some deputies promised they would mediate the conflict. This incident is not mentioned in the report.
While the report correctly notes several steps toward the establishment of democracy, 1991 was also marked by some setbacks. Paraguay should be praised for holding its first popular municipal elections on May 26. Other positive steps included the election of a
267
Paraguay
Constituent Assembly to draft a new constitution. In December, Paraguayans elected delegates for a constitutional convention, although voter turnout was low. The convention convened in January 1992 and is scheduled to present a new constitution in six months. President Rodriguez has reiterated that he will step down in 1993.
The municipal elections, however, were characterized by several irregularities that were not covered in the State Department report. The President called a special session of Congress to extend the deadline for registration of candidates apparently due to pressure from the ruling Colorado party. The opposition party, PLRA, objected to this special session and consequently boycotted it. In addition, a short time before the election, the government suspended elections in at least 30 towns in the interior regions of the country, allegedly due to logistical problems such as the unavailability of voter lists. It should be noted that this election had originally been scheduled for October 1990 but was postponed to May 1991 because of government complaints of problems with voter lists. The government was also criticized for having taken a long time to release the election results. The Colorado party won approximately 70% of the vote, while opposition party leader Carlos Filizzola prevailed in Asunción.
The report does not discuss Congress' passage in December of a potentially troubling law. This legislation would ensure the autonomy of the armed forces and mandate no restrictions on political activities by the military while in active service. It appears to reverse at least one part of the election reform law passed in 1990 which forbade members of the military on active duty from participating in political parties. The legislation also provides that the legislature cannot pass any law affecting the armed forces unless the law is authored by the executive: It furthermore permits the President to delegate his powers as commander-in-chief to a serving general. The military thus can be completely insulated from Congress.
While President Rodriguez signed an agreement with the United Nations Centre for Human Rights to promote human rights education in Paraguay, he has not demonstrated a commitment to redress past
268
Paraguay
violations. For example, Paraguay's ambassador to Bolivia is retired General Ramón Duarte Vera, the police chief during General Stroessner's reign. General Vera is accused of personal responsibility for the torture, "disappearances" and deaths of Stroessner opponents during the 1950s and 1960s. Despite the Senate's unanimous demand that General Vera be removed from the post. President Rodriguez refuses to do so. The report fails to discuss these issues.
In addition, cases against those accused of human rights violations under Stroessner continue to move at a painfully slow rate, if at all, as noted in the report. A majority of judges sitting on the bench are still Stroessner appointees. The government must contribute more resources and attention to the overburdened judiciary.
The State Department fails to mention that during 1991 Paraguay finally responded to United Nations' inquiries concerning the December 1989 incident at the Itaipu Dam in which the military opened fire on a group of strikers. Two workers were killed and many were wounded. Paraguay's response, however, took over a year to be made and reported, only that pretrial proceedings had been initiated and that the prosecutor had been instructed to expedite the proceedings.
Discrimination against women, minorities and indigenous populations continues in Paraguay, as described in the report. While the labor situation improved in 1991, the United States' reinstatement of Paraguay in the Generalized System of Preferences trade program appears to have been premature given the existence of the serious, continuing worker rights violations which are accurately discussed in the State Department report.
269
