 PARAGUAY
 Paraguay, independent since 1811, seldom has had a democratic
 government. President Alfredo Stroessner has ruled since
 1954, dominating the military, police, bureaucracy, and ruling
 Colorado Party. His firm control over the nation was
 reinforced once again in the general election in February
 1988, when he won another 5-year term, and his Colorado Party
 again obtained two-thirds of the seats in both houses of the
 legislature. President Stroessner also is Commander in Chief
 of the armed forces and the ranking active-duty army general.
 The legislative and judicial branches of government clearly
 are subordinate to the power of the executive. There are
 three legally recognized opposition parties, two of which have
 participated in recent elections. The third has boycotted
 recent elections, calling the balloting a farce. There also
 are several nonrecognized political parties which constitute
 most of the meaningful political opposition to President
 Stroessner's Government. During the campaign, the Government
 severely restricted the nonparticipating opposition's ability
 to organize public and private meetings. By law, the
 participating opposition parties share proportionately a third
 of the legislative and municipal council seats, no matter how
 small the total vote they receive.
 Internal security is largely the responsibility of the
 police. The military is seldom called upon to help control
 the civilian population. The police, under the authority of
 the Ministry of Interior, play the major role in human rights
 practices. One of their most important responsibilities is to
 keep tight control of all opposition to Stroessner's rule,
 including limiting public expression of discontent. Police
 regularly break up rallies and meetings and make arrests,
 often brutally. Abuse of criminal detainees at the hands of
 the police is common. Political detainees occasionally
 complain of mistreatment but rarely of torture.
 Paraguay is predominantly an agricultural country.
 Construction of the massive Itaipu hydroelectric project with
 Brazil from 1976-81 greatly apcelerated economic development.
 Work with Argentina on the Yacyreta dam could further spur the
 economy. In 1988 the economy continued to recover from the
 recession of 1986, caused by the adverse effects of a severe
 drought on the agricultural sector. Paraguay's double-digit
 inflation rate continued to be a cause for concern.
 The Government continued to repress human rights and to do so
 unpredictably. Not only did authorities violate at will
 constitutional and legal provisions protecting persons and
 groups, but they did so inconsistently. Such extralegal
 arbitrariness made it difficult for those opposing the
 Government to know the boundries within which they were
 allowed to operate. The only guaranteed safe course was to
 refrain from any criticism of the Government.
 Since the pro-Stroessner Militant faction seized control of
 the Colorado Party from the politically more flexible
 Traditionalists at the August 1987 party convention, there has
 been an increase in the number of significant violations of
 civil and political rights. Arbitrary short-term detentions
 of opposition figures, including Traditionalist Colorado Party
 members, have increased substantially. In 1987 and early 1988,
 detentions largely were related to the February election.
 Government officials continued to ignore constitutional
 provisions for protection of the integrity of the individual,
 
 
 669
 PARAGUAY
 the requirement for judicial warrants, freedom of assembly and
 association, the right to a judicial determination of the
 legality of detention, and the provision for a prompt and
 impartial trial. Opposition rallies were broken up and
 demonstrators beaten by police or Colorado Party supporters.
 These practices continued despite the fact that the decades-
 long state of siege, allowed to lapse in 1987, was not
 reimposed. Following the May visit of Pope John Paul II, the
 Government launched a vocal campaign against the Paraguayan
 Catholic Church, accusing it of advocating liberation
 theology. The same restrictive environment imposed on the
 press in 1987 continued without a letup, with none of the
 major publications or radio stations closed in 1987 allowed to
 reopen in 1988. Press freedom was curtailed further by the
 Government's closing of a small periodic journal of political
 and literary opinion. In the final quarter of 1988, the
 Government engaged in a crackdown against opposition
 politicians and the Church which may have been related to
 President Stroessner's prolonged absence due to health
 problems.
 There was improvement in some areas. No political murders,
 disappearances, or long-term detentions were reported. In
 general, however, the poor human rights situation in Paraguay
 in 1988 mirrored that of 1987. In fact, the Inter-American
 Commission on Human Rights, in its. 1987-88 annual report,
 stated that nothing has occurred that would alter the
 conclusions of its Special Report on Paraguay for 1987, a
 report that noted excessive concentration of executive
 authority, serious abuses of personal freedom and liberty, and
 restrictions on the full exercise of trade union rights.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 There were no reported cases of politically motivated deaths.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no reported cases of politically motivated
 disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 There was one alleged case of torture of a political prisoner
 by the Government in 1988, the first in several years.
 Gustavo Zimmerlis Alcaraz, a youth leader of the Popular
 Colorado Movement (MOPOCO), was arrested on January 26 and
 accused of distributing Marxist literature in front of a
 government building in Asuncion. He stated that he was forced
 under torture to sign a confession admitting subversive
 activities by being beaten with fists, having a plastic bag
 placed over his head, and being threatened with submersion in
 a tub of water. Zimmerlis was released after 2 months, with
 no formal charges having been made against him. His detention
 was protested by most opposition political and local human
 rights groups.
 Several other opposition figures also claimed to have been
 mistreated while in custody or during the arrest process,
 
 
 670
 PARAGUAY
 including members of political parties, trade unions, and
 rural organizations. In February three Authentic Radical
 Liberal Party (PLRA) members claimed they were detained by
 police when they attempted to enter the home of party leader
 Domingo Laino for a meeting and press conference and were
 subsequently beaten with clubs, wooden sticks, and the butt of
 a handgun. In May police beat a member of the Federation of
 Bank Workers while he was in detention; he was one of a group
 of persons arrested while leaving a church where they had
 fasted in a demand for economic, political, and social
 change. Also in May, rural leaders Corsino and Nicanor
 Coronel, father and son, claimed they were beaten by police
 while being detained for 13 days during the Pope's visit.
 Police abuse in criminal cases appeared to be common. In one
 example, the press reported torture by police of suspected
 narcotics traffickers in the city of Pedro Juan Caballero.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 The Constitution provides for a judicial determination of the
 legality of detention and stipulates that any person arrested
 without a warrant must be presented formally before a judge
 within 24 hours of his detention and have charges filed
 against him within 48 hours. Authorities continued to ignore
 these provisions routinely in 1988 in both political and
 criminal cases, as they have done in the past. The case of
 medical intern Hector Lacognata and folksinger Ricardo Flecha
 is illustrative. The two were arrested in January at a rally
 at Asuncion's Hospital de Clinicas. The Supreme Court sent
 two writs of habeas corpus to the police. The police,
 according to press reports, ignored the court. No charges
 ever were filed against the two, but they were held
 incommunicado for 6 days.
 Incommunicado detention was common for political prisoners;
 more than one-third of the political detainees were held
 incommunicado, according to available information. A
 Paraguayan journalist was detained and held incommunicado on
 November 17 as he disembarked from his flight from the United
 States. He was held for 4 days without charges before being
 released unharmed. A Paraguayan writer, arrested on the same
 day, was held 13 days incommunicado before he was released
 with no charges having been filed against him.
 Paraguay's drug police have been detaining and holding
 suspected drug traffickers without charge beyond the 48-hour
 period. Paraguayan lawyers for those suspects have been
 seeking their release through a judicial determination of the
 legality of the detention, generally without success.
 In mid-September, five former members of the Popular Democratic
 Movement were arrested and held incommunicado for 1 month under
 the provisions of Law 209 (defense of public peace, i.e.,
 national security) before being released without charges
 filed. On October 22, the Secretary General and candidate for
 the party presidency of the Christian Democratic Party, Luis
 Andrada Nogues, was arrested and held for 2 days without
 explanation. Authentic Radical Liberal Party President
 Domingo Laino was detained and held for several days on three
 different occasions in October.
 Other prominent Paraguayans held under arbitrary detention in
 1988 were human rights attorney Eduardo Morales, held for 3
 months, part of that time incommunicado, on a charge of
 
 
 671
 PARAGUAY
 sedition. He was released on bail after staging a hunger
 strike. Authentic Radical Liberal Party (PLRA) leaders
 Domingo Laino and Miguel Abdon "Tito" Saguier, rural leaders
 Carmelino Torales, Corsino and Nicanor Coronel, and Hospital
 de Clinicas union leader Carlos Filizzola, none of whom were
 charged, were arrested in 1988. The private Paraguayan News
 Agency (PARPRESS) has reported many other detentions, based
 upon reports it received from a local human rights group,
 PRODEMOS.
 Over time, the relationship between the International Committee
 of the Red Cross (ICRC) and the Paraguayan Government has
 evolved to the point that ICRC delegates are now allowed to
 visit privately, after obtaining permission from the Ministries
 of Justice and Interior, virtually any prisoner in whom they
 express interest. Local judges, including the five Supreme
 Court justices, also routinely visit local prisons to meet
 with and investigate the condition of prisoners.
 Arbitrary, short-term detention was used primarily against the
 political opposition, including dissident Colorado party
 members. According to public sources, in the first 10 months
 of 1988 roughly 276 opposition political activists were
 detained arbitrarily and held at least overnight. An unknown
 but significant number of others were detained for several
 hours but were not incarcerated overnight. The number of
 arrests during the first 10 months of 1988 was 23 more than
 the number arrested in all of 1987 and 86 more than the total
 for all of 1986. Approximately 100 of the 276 were held less
 than 48 hours, 118 were held more than 48 hours but less than
 a week, and 41 were held longer than 7 days.
 The state of siege ordinance, which was allowed to lapse in
 1987 after being in effect almost continuously since 1929, was
 not reimposed in 1988. According to one leading human rights
 activist, however, repression was greater after the state of
 siege lapsed than it was during the last few years that it was
 in effect.
 In a case that received international attention, one of Latin
 America's best-known prisoners, former army captain Modesto
 Napoleon Ortigoza, chose to flee the country in June after
 months of government harassment following his release from
 prison. Ortigoza was released from prison in December 1987
 after completing a 25-year sentence for allegedly killing a
 military cadet during an aborted coup plot. Following his
 release, Ortigoza was ordered to a small town for 30 days and
 then, when he was finally allowed to return to his mother's
 home in Asuncion, was placed under house arrest. Eventually,
 with the help of an opposition leader, he escaped to the
 residence of the Colombian Ambassador, who offered him asylum
 and accompanied him on a drive to safety in Argentina in June.
 Two other Paraguayans sought asylum in foreign embassies in
 1988. PLRA leaders Hermes Rafael Saguier, who had helped
 Ortigoza escape to the Colombian Embassy, and his brother
 Miguel Abdon Saguier both abandoned their asylum voluntarily
 without leaving the country, and neither subsequently was
 detained.
 The Government continued to use exile as a means of political
 control. Members of the illegal Paraguayan Communist Party
 remained in exile. A member of the party attempted to return
 in January, but was detained at the border and expelled a
 month later. In October the Government arrested and expelled
 
 
 672
 PARAGUAY
 four former priests, all foreigners, accusing them of
 possessing and distributing subversive literature.
 In another type of arbitrary punishment, Mario Mancuello, the
 father of a person who disappeared in 1976, for the 12th year
 had to report to a police station daily by 7 a.m. to sign a
 notebook.
 With regard to forced or compulsory labor, see Section 6.c.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 In general accordance with the civil law tradition, trials are
 conducted almost exclusively by presentation of written
 documents to a judge, who then renders a decision. The accused
 often appears before the court only twice--to plead and to
 hear sentencing. All judgments are automatically reviewed by
 an appellate judge, and appeals to the Supreme Court are
 possible. Part of both civil and criminal proceedings are
 open to the public and often are reported in the press.
 However, court proceedings in cases of a sensitive political
 nature are held in secrecy, and subsequent press reports are
 based only on the attorneys' or judges' comments.
 The Constitution and the penal code provide numerous safeguards
 to protect the rights of individuals. However, the judiciary
 is subordinate to the executive branch, which exercises its
 influence through the presidential appointment of judges,
 control over the judiciary's budget, and through Colorado
 Party discipline. Supreme Court justices are appointed to
 serve for the 5-year term of the President. Executive
 interference, administrative shortcomings, and the lack of
 adequate financial support for the judicial system limit the
 right of an accused to a fair and speedy trial. Many accused
 serve in detention the normal time prescribed as a penalty for
 the crime of which they are accused and are released without
 ever having their trial proceedings completed. The widespread
 perception that judicial protection depends on political,
 military, or economic power engenders sufficient fear to
 prevent most citizens from confronting political or police
 authority.
 Rafael Mella Latorre, a Chilean sentenced in 1980 to 6 years
 in prison as an accomplice in the murder of Anastasio Somoza,
 remained imprisoned after completing his sentence. He is
 awaiting the outcome of his trial for involvement in a prison
 riot, even though he already had served more time in jail
 after the disturbance than the penalty for that offense
 required.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 While government and security forces generally do not
 interfere in the private lives of citizens, there are notable
 exceptions. Although private homes are protected
 constitutionally from police entry except under the terms of a
 judicial warrant or to prevent a crime, this protection is
 ignored in practice. In April police, without a judicial
 order, broke into the house of two brothers belonging to the
 PLRA, seriously injuring both.
 Security forces routinely intercept and open private mail and
 monitor private telephone conversations. According to
 Paraguayan Human Rights Commission head Carmen de Lara Castro,
 
 
 673
 PARAGUAY
 the Government regularly opened the organization's incoming
 and outgoing mail. Also, the Commission encountered
 difficulties in mailing a bimonthly newsletter it published
 for an international audience. Opposition leader Domingo
 Laino's home telephone service was restored in September after
 being out for 8 months. The line was cut a few days before
 the February election.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Despite broad constitutional assurances of freedom of speech
 and press, in practice the Government tolerates only limited
 amounts end kinds of criticism. For example, direct criticism
 of the President, members of his family, or the military by
 the print and broadcast media can result in reprisal. In
 April the Attorney General charged opposition leader Miguel
 Abdon "Tito" Saguier with sedition for his statement to a
 reporter during a visit to Washington that he thought the
 Government of Paraguay protected narcotics traffickers.
 Freedom of speech and press suffered a further setback when
 the Government again shut down La Republica, an opposition
 periodic journal of political and literary opinion.
 Otherwise, press freedom remained as it was at the close of
 1987, with the Government refusing to allow the Revolutionary
 Febrerista Party's El Pueblo (Paraguay's only opposition
 newspaper when it was shut down in 1987), the independent
 paper ABC Color or radio station Nanduti to reopen. (A
 government permit is required to publish a newspaper.)
 According to a press account, three local journalists from the
 French Press Agency (two Paraguayans and an Argentine) were
 physically mistreated, arrested, and their cameras and
 recording equipment seized in January at an opposition-
 sponsored forum on free elections. Two visiting West German
 journalists were detained October 27 by Paraguayan authorities
 and later expelled without explanation.
 Other independent media outlets received strongly worded
 warnings and thinly veiled threats, either printed in the
 Colorado Party's daily newspaper, or broadcast in its daily
 national radio program. Journalists exercise a cautious
 self-censorship as a result of indirect threats and fears of
 reprisals, although editors of the more independent media,
 such as Radio Caritas, Radio Primero de Marzo, and the
 newspaper Ultima Hora, said they rarely received direct
 government orders against printing or broadcasting certain
 stories. One of the strongest unstated prohibitions for the
 local media is discussion of the President's health. In
 September the lack of information in the media at a time when
 Stroessner was hospitalized for an operation fueled rumors
 that he had died.
 Paraguay has two universities. The larger is the public
 National University, funded and operated by the Government.
 The smaller is the private Catholic University. Although
 under Paraguayan law the National University is autonomous, in
 reality faculty positions are reserved for Colorado Party
 members, and even dissident Colorado students complained about
 the lack of differing perspectives taught in the classroom.
 The Catholic University is noted for its greater academic
 freedom. Party membership was not a criterion for admission
 to the National University, and student groups representing
 opposition parties and dissident Colorado factions openly
 
 
 674
 PARAGUAY
 participated in free, student government elections in May and
 June, winning most of them. The Paraguayan University Student
 Federation, an independent umbrella group of student
 organizations, defeated the government-controlled University
 Federation of Paraguay for the affiliation of most of the new
 student governments. At the teaching hospital of the National
 University, students and professors joined doctors in striking
 to protest the renaming of Dr. Arnulfo Molina as chief of the
 second surgery ward over Dr. Jacques Balansa, winner of a
 competitive selection process. The country's Supreme Court
 later ruled in favor of Balansa, and the university's regents,
 after delaying, voted to install him.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 The rights of peaceful assembly and association, though
 provided for by the Constitution, are violated regularly in
 practice. Despite the expiration of state of siege provisions
 which required a permit for any public gathering in excess of
 five persons, the police routinely insisted on prior
 authorization for any meeting involving the political
 opposition, labor, or students. This provision was not
 enforced for members in good standing of the Colorado Party
 and the two participating opposition parties, or in cases
 involving nonpolitical groups.
 In January 200 opposition figures (including the presidents of
 two political parties), journalists, and human rights activists
 were arrested as they attempted to attend a panel discussion
 on free elections sponsored by the political opposition's
 National Coordinating Council for Free Elections in the
 interior city of Coronel Oviedo. In February, when the
 organizers again tried to hold the event in the interior town
 of Potrero Guazu, police and Colorado Party supporters
 violently disrupted the forum, beating opposition participants
 and vandalizing the Catholic church where the event took place.
 Police continued to prevent Radio Nanduti, which the Government
 closed in 1987, from holding public forums in the station's
 auditorium.
 In June police blocked the entrance to the hall in Asuncion
 where youth of Paraguay's Revolutionary Febrerista Party were
 to host a regional meeting of Latin American political youth
 groups. The Government previously had prohibited the meeting.
 Six persons were arrested.
 In July police twice prevented FETRABAN, a legally recognized
 union of bank workers, from holding its annual assembly to
 elect new officers. The police said advance notice was
 required because, it contended, FETRABAN was a political
 organization rather than a trade union. FETRABAN then
 obtained a court ruling in its favor, and held its assembly
 without interference in early August.
 In September police wearing civilian clothes invaded a private
 home in Caacupe to break up a meeting of the Authentic Radical
 Liberal Party, beating four party leaders, including chairman
 Domingo Laino. The police did not make any arrests. In
 October police in downtown Asuncion violently broke up an
 unauthorized peaceful march by women protesting the molesting
 of teen-age girls by gangs of youth at an outdoor celebration
 a week earlier. Also in October police blocked the entrance
 to a theater, preventing the Christian Democratic Party of
 Paraguay, which has not been officially recognized, from
 holding its annual convention.
 
 
 675
 PARAGUAY
 Paraguayan police violently dispersed an October 26 march by
 seminarians, nuns, and priests to protest the expulsion of
 four former priests accused of subversion. On November 23,
 police and military authorities in Concepcion prevented a
 Church-sponsored march to protest derogatory public statements
 by a Colorado Party official about the Bishop of Concepcion.
 In mid-October, a senior police official notified the president
 of the PLRA that all political activity by the PLRA was
 forbidden. On October 18, police disrupted a PLRA ceremony
 commemorating the founding of the Liberal Party, arresting
 three party activists. Government authorities also prohibited
 a march planned for December 10 to celebrate the 40th
 anniversary of the signing of the Universal Declaration of
 Human Rights. Police blocked streets and chased the 300 or so
 individuals who tried to convene for this march, clubbing many
 of them. Police arrested 107 persons; many were detained for
 several hours and some for more than a week. A number of
 prominent opposition figures were among those arrested,
 including Domingo Laino and Miguel Saguier.
 For a discussion of freedom of association as it applies to
 labor unions, see Section 6.a.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Roman Catholicism is the predominant and official religion in
 Paraguay, but the Constitution provides freedom of conscience
 for other denominations. That freedom is respected in
 practice. Adherence to a particular creed confers no automatic
 advantage, and conversion from one faith to another is
 permitted. Foreign and local missionaries proselytize openly.
 After the visit of Pope John Paul II in May, the Government
 launched a highly critical media campaign against the
 Paraguayan Catholic Church for allegedly espousing liberation
 theology. In July a Spanish Jesuit priest was arrested,
 detained, and expelled after participating in a National
 University panel discussion on his theology. Afterward, the
 Government allowed a church-sponsored silent protest march
 against the expulsion; thousands participated peacefully
 before the event ended in violent clashes with police.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 In general, Paraguayan citizens travel freely within the
 country with virtually no restrictions, but there are periodic
 and random roadblocks established in rural areas to verify
 possession of national and voter registration cards and the
 current payment of registration fees. Citizens who do not
 oppose the Government can enter and leave the country without
 restriction. However, the Government continued to restrict
 the travel of a number of citizens active in the political
 opposition or labor movements. In 1988 at least four
 Paraguayan citizens--Radio Nanduti owner Humberto Rubin, rural
 leader Corazon Medina, and Hospital de Clinicas union leaders
 Elsa Mereles and Carlos Filizzola--were denied travel
 documents, preventing them from enjoying their constitutional
 freedom to travel abroad.
 
 
 676
 PARAGUAY
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 President Stroessner dominates the Paraguayan political
 scene. He exercises political control over the executive,
 legislative, and judicial branches through the Colorado Party,
 which administers public patronage, and through the military
 and police forces, which maintain public order. The ruling
 party's two-thirds majority in the Senate and Chamber of
 Deputies gives the Colorados complete control of the
 legislature. The legislative branch never has rejected any
 significant presidential proposal nor adopted any significant
 legislative proposal by the opposition. By statute, one-third
 of the seats in the legislature are held by the opposition,
 divided proportionately between the two opposition parties
 that participated in the national election. Their legislative
 presence vastly exceeded the combined 10 percent of the vote
 they are credited with receiving in recent elections. They
 express their views and criticize the Government, but have no
 real power.
 General elections, held every 5 years for the presidency and
 legislature, took place in February. According to official
 figures, President Stroessner won nearly 90 percent of the
 vote against candidates of two participating opposition
 parties, the Radical Liberal Party (PLR) and the Liberal Party
 (PL). The third legal opposition party, the Revolutionary
 Febrerista Party (PRF), as usual, chose not to take part,
 claiming that government control over the political process
 would make such participation meaningless. The three
 nonrecognized opposition parties, which are the PRF's partners
 in the National Accord, also did not seek to participate.
 Colorado Party totals for the legislative election were only
 slightly lower than the presidential figure, continuing the
 party's two-thirds majority in both houses.
 Municipal elections, also held nationwide every 5 years, will
 be held next in 1990. The law requires that all Paraguayans
 between 18 and 60 years of age vote. Sanctions for not voting
 rarely are applied except against public service employees.
 Control of the electoral machinery by the dominant Colorado
 Party and the absence of participation by most opposition
 parties significantly diminished the importance of the February
 election. Provisions for secret balloting frequently were
 violated. Vote counting at some polls was done without the
 presence of an impartial or opposition poll watcher; individual
 parties had the responsibility to provide poll watchers.
 Colorado Party membership is essential for employment in the
 Government, including, with few exceptions, the judiciary, the
 teaching and administrative staffs of public schools, the
 National University, state enterprises such as public
 utilities, and the security services.
 Although the Constitution provides for equality of political
 rights for women, in practice women play only a minor role in
 Paraguay's political life, and the executive and judicial
 branches of government have few prominent female officials.
 There are four women currently serving in the Paraguayan
 legislature, two in the Chamber of Deputies and two in the
 Senate.
 
 
 677
 PARAGUAY
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 In general, the Government continued to react negatively to
 any foreign comments about its human rights record, describing
 such comments as unwarranted interference in Paraguayan
 internal affairs. The Government for years has cooperated
 with the U.N. Human Rights Commission, and in 1988 facilitated
 two visits from U.N. Rapporteur Rivas Posadas. However, in
 July the Government barred the visit of a special U.N. human
 rights envoy who sought to look into the status of Paraguayan
 court cases involving the custody of several children
 allegedly taken from their parents during the Argentine "dirty
 war" and brought to Paraguay by their adoptive Argentine
 parents. Paraguay again in 1988 refused to allow the
 Inter-American Human Rights Commission to visit, arguing that
 the U.N. and O.A.S. should coordinate their efforts.
 Local organizations remain active in the investigation and
 defense of human rights in Paraguay. Four major human rights
 groups operate in Paraguay: The Comite de Iglesias (supported
 by foreign churches), the Paraguayan Human Rights Commission
 (which publishes a periodic newsletter), PRODEMOS (a group
 that includes Roman Catholic Bishop Mario Melanio Medina among
 its leaders), and the local chapter of the Association of
 Latin American Lawyers for the Defense of Human Rights. The
 Catholic Church also is an active advocate of human rights.
 The Church's weekly newspaper, Sendero, includes reports on
 alleged human rights violations as a major part of its
 editorial format. These groups not only assist in providing
 legal defense for victims of human rights abuse, but also aid
 in informing the international community about conditions in
 Paraguay.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 The common unifying elementb in Paraguayan culture are its
 Roman Catholicism and its Guarani-language roots. There is no
 clear evidence of discrimination based on race, religion, or
 language. In fact, in political and military circles, fluency
 in the indigenous Guarani language and ties to peasant or
 rural origins are considered advantageous.
 While the traditional social system limits the participation
 of women, they long have been active in the economy,
 particularly those from lower income groups, and they
 increasingly participate in business, the professions, and the
 artistic world. Women usually receive less remuneration than
 men for comparable work. There are two organizations concerned
 with women's rights--an auxiliary organization of the Colorado
 Party, and the Union of Paraguayan Women (UMPA), an
 organization founded in 1982 by a former opposition national
 deputy. Women for Democracy, formed in 1987, includes
 professional and politically active women from a broad
 political spectrum, but none who are involved in or supporting
 the Government.
 Paraguay has an unassimilated Indian population estimated at
 between 75,000 to 100,000. The Government's National
 Indigenous Institute has the authority to purchase land on
 behalf of the Indians and expropriate private property under
 certain conditions to establish tribal homelands. The
 Government actively encourages church groups to work with
 
 
 678
 PARAGUAY
 indigenous populations in health and welfare, as well as in
 religious matters. The problems of the indigenous population,
 particularly those involving land claims, continued to receive
 frequent coverage in the media.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 Paraguay has been without beneficiary status in the U.S.
 Generalized System of Preferences (GSP) program since 1987,
 when it was found not to be in compliance with the GSP
 statutory requirements regarding internationally recognized
 worker rights. Paraguay was removed from the program after a
 review of allegations that Paraguayan workers were being
 denied freedom of association, and that their leaders were
 being harassed.
 Only a small proportion of Paraguay's workers are organized.
 The government-linked Confederation of Paraguayan Workers
 (CPT) represents the overwhelming majority of those workers
 who are organized as well as those labor unions which enjoy
 legal recognition, but it is not independent, and makes only
 pro forma efforts to defend workers' interests. According to
 some trade unionists, most of the CPT unions are "paper"
 unions, created and funded by the Government to maintain
 control of labor. The Inter-Syndical Workers' Movement (MIT)
 was formed in 1985 as an independent alternative to the
 government-controlled CPT. MIT has only eight member unions,
 far fewer than the CPT.
 The right to strike, while recognized under Paraguayan law, is
 very difficult to exercise due to the complex legal process of
 fact finding, arbitration, and adjudication required before a
 strike can be considered legal. However, at least four times
 in 1988 workers at Asuncion's Hospital de Clinicas, the
 teaching hospital of the National University Medical School,
 walked off the job for short periods as a form of political
 protest. Although the workers at the hospital did not follow
 the required legal steps before going on strike, the
 Government did not prosecute them.
 Many public sector workers are forbidden to unionize. The
 Government awarded legal status in 1988 to one of the founding
 members of MIT, the Paraguayan Journalists, Association, 9
 years after the union was formed. Meanwhile, the Ministry of
 Labor continued to deny recognition to a new MIT union which
 attempted to be the first to organize a savings and loan
 association. The Government continued to harass leaders of
 MIT unions, some of whom were arrested.
 In recent years, there have been several complaints presented
 to the International Labor Organization (ILO) against Paraguay
 by the International Confederation of Free Trade Unions (ICFTU)
 and other international trade union organizations. These
 complaints involve dismissals and harassment of trade
 unionists; violent repression of peaceful trade union
 demonstrations; surveillance and raiding of trade union
 premises by police; and arrest, detention, and ill-treatment
 of trade union leaders.
 In November the ILO Committee on Freedom of Association
 examined the outstanding issues involved in these complaints
 for which the Committee had not yet issued final conclusions.
 The Committee requested the Paraguayan Government to provide
 
 
 679
 PARAGUAY
 the ILO with responses to those allegations the Government had
 not answered earlier, as well as follow-up information. It
 also requested the Government to amend the public service law
 so as to include specific legislative provisions on the right
 of'public employees to organize, and to introduce effective
 machinery for the settlement of collective disputes in the
 public service. With regard to the ban on strikes by doctors
 and nurses employed in a public hospital, it requested the
 Government to introduce appropriate conciliation and
 arbitration procedures.
 The Government permits labor unions to maintain contact with
 regional and international labor organizations. MIT is
 associated with the Coordinadora de Centrales Sindicales del
 Cono Sur, a regional trade union body, and receives program
 assistance from the American Institute of Free Labor
 Development (AIFLD), the Latin American arm of the AFL-CIO.
 The CPT-member union at the Paraguayan Cotton Company (CAPSA)
 became affiliated in 1988 with the International Union of Food
 and Allied Workers Association (IUF), based in Geneva.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 The right to bargain collectively is recognized in the labor
 code, but the Government does little to enforce the provision,
 and it is not practiced generally. Some employers agree to
 collective bargaining, but there are no legal sanctions or
 government pressures forcing them to do so. The labor laws
 permit a union to represent all of the employees of a company
 in collective bargaining even if less than half of the
 employees are members of the union.
 Under the law, there exist no areas, such as special economic
 zones, exempt from the provisions of the labor code. But, in
 practice, the rights of labor are more strongly exercised in
 the capital city, Asuncion, than in other cities or the rural
 areas, because the vast majority of the country's unionized
 jobs are located there. The city of Presidente Stroessner, on
 the Brazilian border, has a special duty-free status, but no
 exemption from labor laws.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 Forced labor is prohibited by law, and is not practiced.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 Minors between 15 and 18 years of age can be employed only
 with parental authorization and cannot be employed in
 dangerous or unhealthy conditions. Children between 12 and 15
 years of age may only be employed in a family enterprise, an
 apprenticeship, or in agriculture. These labor laws are
 generally enforced.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 The Paraguayan labor code provides minimum guarantees of
 worker rights and benefits. Public sector, temporary, and
 domestic workers are not covered under this law. According to
 the code, maximum hours are 8 per day or 7 for night work,
 with 1 day of rest per week. The labor authority establishes
 a minimum wage depending on the type of work and the region,
 based on studies of the cost of living prepared by the National
 Economic Coordinating Committee. The minimum wage for private
 sector employees in Asuncion was $125 per month, nearly double
 
 
 680
 PARAGUAY
 the amount set for public sector workers. However, most
 workers in both the public and private sectors earn wages below
 the minimum. The law provides for a 1-month annual bonus.
 Married women need their husbands' consent to enter a labor
 contract, although labor contracts cannot be denied to women
 who worked prior to marriage. Paid maternity leave of 6 weeks
 prior to and after birth is required. Day care centers for
 children under 2 years of age are mandatory for enterprises
 employing more than 50 women. Severance pay is specified and
 compensation provided in cases of unjustified dismissal.
 The labor code also governs conditions of safety, hygiene, and
 comfort. The absence of a strong independent trade union
 movement, and the slowness and relative expense of the labor
 law system, results in the frequent failure to provide the
 protections established by the labor code.
 
 
 681
