 PARAGUAY
 
 Paraguay is a predominantly agricultural country the
 size of California with a population of 2.9 million.
 It has a history of wars, rebellions and coups which
 stretches back a century and a half. Constitutional
 guarantees have been suspended under a state of siege
 for the last 49 years, with the single exception of a
 six month period in 1947. Since 1954, General Stroessner
 has ruled the country under state of siege provisions.
 His regime maintains its control through the Colorado
 Party with strong support from the armed forces and
 police. This has not permitted open or effective
 challenge to its authority.
 In 1978, the incidence of violations of the integrity
 of the person declined significantly. Virtually
 all political prisoners were released: from
 approximately 180 in January, to five by year's
 end. Judicial processing of detainees also improved,
 reports of torture declined sharplyr and an easing
 of constraints on the press occurred. However,
 far-reaching constraints on the exercise of civil
 and political liberties remained in place, the security
 apparatus continued unchanged and abuses of individual
 detainees occurred. Neither full political debate
 nor full freedom of organization by political
 opposition has been permitted. Paraguay has also
 failed to agree to a date for a requested visit
 by the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights
 (IACHR).
 In the last fifteen years, there has been significant
 economic growth.   The benefits of this growth have
 often been unevenly distributed, especially income
 derived from important hydroelectric projects, greatly
 increased agricultural exports and smuggling. The
 Government's important land distribution program,
 which has given farms to over one-sixth of the nation's
 small farmers, is one significant step toward develop-
 ment with equity.
 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 
 (316)
 
 
 317
 a. Torture
 Reports of police torture have decreased sharply.
 According to the best available information, only
 two cases occured in 1978, although two additional
 unconfirmed reports were received. Methods used
 included severe beatings and submersion in a tub of
 water used to extract information and confessions.
 b. Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 Prisoners interviewed following detention charge
 that the Paraguayan police routinely use blows with
 truncheon or fist, enforced standing for long periods
 of tine, withholding of food, lengthy isolation, verbal
 abuse and threats against both detainees and their
 families. Most detainees are held from 24 to 48
 hours. Threats or abuse are often employed during
 this period, either to force political conformity
 or to extort money.
 There have been accusations that the Ache Indians
 have been the victims of murder, enslavement,
 insufficient medical attention, destruction of cultural
 traditions, and inhumane working conditions. The
 Inter-Anerican Human Rights Commission adopted a
 resolution in lay 1977 calling attention to reports
 of serious abuses and requesting the Government
 of Paraguay to take measures to protect this tribe's
 rights. In March 1978 the United Nations Human
 Rights Commission also recommended intercession
 by the Secretary General.
 There is no recent evidence to support such charges
 of a pattern of government sanctioned abuse of the
 Ache or other Indian groups. Responding to inter-
 national expressions of concern, the Government has
 taken several steps to improve the status of Indians.
 Most notably, additional land has been promised or
 allotted to Indian groups, including the Ache, the
 National Institute for Indigenous Affairs has been
 strengthened, and legal status has been accorded the
 National Association of Indian Groups. The latter is
 an Indian-run association established to promote the
 rights of Indians.
 
 
 318
 c. Arbitrary Arrest or Imprisonment
 The number of persons incarcerated without charges
 dropped sharply in 1978. There were approximately
 180 such prisoners at the end of January 1978. At
 one point sixteen of these prisoners went on an
 extended hunger strike. During the year, 175 were
 released, including all of the hunger strikers,
 reducing the total still held to five. The police
 continue to make occasional arbitrary arrests. In
 July, an opposition leader, Domingo Laino, was arrested
 and held for one month upon his return from the
 U.S. Habeas corpus is suspended and right to counsel
 is regularly denied under the state of siege. Last
 May the state of siege was lifted except in Asuncion.
 However, the courts have ruled that prisoners can
 be moved to the capital and held there.
 d. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Since late 1977, those accused of political crimes have
 been brought to trial far more expeditiously than in
 the past. Formerly, political prisoners were often
 held for indefinite periods of time without trial.
 Five such prisoners are still under detention, two
 having been in custody without trial for more than 14
 years. However, legal proceedings in both political and
 non-political cases are now fully reported in the press
 and are usually in formal accord with Constitutional
 principles, although executive influence is excessive
 and often appears paramount.
 e. Invasion of the Home
 In at least two instances during 1978 the police
 reportedly entered homes, arrested political opponents
 and impounded their property, usually on the pretext
 of removing it as evidence. State of siege provisions
 suspend the legal requirement for a judicial order
 to carry out such searches.
 2. Governmental Policies Relating to the Fulfillment
 of Such Vital Needs as Food, Shelter, Health Care
 and Education.
 
 
 319
 
 Within the framework of its general laissez-faire
 approach to economic and social questions, the
 Government encourages efforts to fulfill basic human
 needs through organizations such as the ruling
 Colorado Party, missionary organizations and the
 Catholic Church. The Government is also increasing
 efforts to reduce poverty, disease and ignorance
 and is pursuing policies which favor low income
 groups, especially small farmers. Paraguay's
 homesteading and colonization programs continue
 to benefit major portions of the rural poor.
 However, income distribution continues to be a
 major problem with almost one fifth of-all house-
 holds remaining largely outside the money economy.
 Regressive taxes still have a negative impact on
 income distribution.
 Paraguay's long stagnant domestic economy has grown
 rapidly since 1972 due to sharp increases in non-
 traditional agricultural exports such as cotton, soy
 beans and forest products. Even more important has
 been an influx of foreign capital related to construction
 of the giant Itaipu hydroelectric project which
 Brazil and Paraguay are building as a joint venture.
 This rapid and unprecedented growth is believed to
 have led to some increased corruption. There have
 been charges of graft on official contracts, land
 fraud, and false imprisonment of competitors for
 personal gain. The Colorado Party also uses the
 nation's economic and educational institutions for
 Party objectives. Paraguayans must join the Party
 to gain access to some of those economic and social
 advantages which are subject to Government influence.
 3. Respect for Civil and Political Liberties, Includ-
 ing:
 a. Freedom of Thought, Speech, Press, Religion
 and Assembly
 Freedom of expression, assembly and association continue
 to be curtailed. Serious abuses of political rights
 occur, partly because some Government officials and
 supporters tend to consider any opposition subversive.
 Colorado Party members receive privileged treatment.
 
 
 Members of other parties are denied access to economic
 and social benefits under Governnent control, and
 often find themselves subjected to official harassment.
 Freedom of the press has increased in the past year.
 The opposition parties' press has reemerged and
 now criticizes the Government. Other independent
 newspapers are also now able to report criticism
 of the Government, including alleged human rights
 violations. However, restrictions on radio and
 television, although loosened slightly in 1978,
 continue, thus limiting the access to information
 for the majority of the population, especially those
 with limited educations and those in rural areas.
 Criticism of the President and military is still
 not tolerated, and threats of closure of opposition
 newspapers were reported during 1978 when strong
 criticism of the Government was published.
 The Paraguayan Workers' Confederation (CPT),
 representing over ninety percent of organized
 labor, is the only recognized labor organization
 and is under the control of the Colorado Party.
 Unions controlled by opposition parties do,
 however, belong to the Confederation. When several
 opposition union leaders were arrested in December
 1977, active pressure from CPT leaders, inter-
 national labor organizations and the public
 achieved their release. The CPT has recently moved
 toward a more independent stance and has applied
 for readmission to the International Confederation
 of Free Trade Unions.
 Paraguay traditionally has tolerated a high degree
 of religious freedom and all denominations continued
 to worship freely in 1978. In early 1979, however,
 the Government acted suddenly to withdraw legal
 status from the Jehovah's Witnesses, an abrupt change
 of course in its religious policy that is causing
 widespread concern. The Government has long been
 suspicious of the social action programs of some
 religious organizations and has consequently subjected
 their organizers to harassment and has sometimes
 officially disapproved their social action programs,
 irrespective of the strength of the sponsoring religion.
 
 
 321
 The Government, relying on state of siege provisions,
 has severely curtailed freedom of assembly for political
 groups it considers uncooperative, especially unrecognized
 opposition parties. In July 1978, University authorities
 cancelled a human rights conference when it became known
 that Colorado Party elements planned to break up the
 meeting. In December, the private, non-partisan Paraguayan
 Human Rights Committee held a successful human rights
 congress. The three political parties which form an
 opposition united front also held an anti-Government
 meeting in September without official interference.
 However, the police summoned party leaders for inter-
 rogation, and threatened expulsion if they became too
 active.
 In November 1978, three leaders of an exiled faction of
 the Popular Colorado Party tried to enter Paraguay openly.
 They were expelled to Argentina along with a fourth who
 had arrived in Paraguay earlier.
 b. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel and Emigration.
 The Constitution provides for freedom to travel within
 the country. However, valid identification documents
 are sometimes required at checkpoints in the interior.
 With respect to foreign travel and emigration, police
 officials have on many occasions refused to issue
 identification documents and passports to former
 political prisoners or to persons known to oppose
 the Government. These actions are used to harass
 opposition elements, to limit their ability to con-
 municate with colleagues abroad and to extort money
 from ordinary citizens.
 c. Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 Only official Colorado Party members are free to
 participate fully in the political process, including
 employment by the Government, and then only if they
 comply fully with Party policies. The Government-
 controlled Central Election Commission denied a
 request by the Christian Democrats for recognition,
 while recognizing minority elements of the Radical
 Liberal and Liberal Parties as eligible to participate
 in the 1978 general election.
 
 
 322
 This action effectively barred participation by the
 Christian Democrats and a majority of the latter two
 traditional parties. The small officially-recognized
 Febrerista Party chose not to participate. The February
 1978 reelection of President Stroessner also appears
 to have been marred by fraud.
 The Communist Party is prohibited by law and alleged
 Party members or sympathizers have been a principal
 target of the internal security apparatus.
 According to the International League for Human
 Rights, the Government is unwilling to distinguish
 between legitimate democratic opposition and
 subversion. Past actions of the Government lend
 some credibility to this charge. Effective political
 opposition to the Government tends to be seen as
 subversion and has often be met by repression or
 severe harassment.
 As in most Latin American countries, a tendency to
 discriminate against women in education and employ-
 rent has been traditional, but there are significant
 signs of change in Paraguay. Over 40 percent of the
 students at the National University are women and
 a number of women play leading roles in such fields
 as finance, Law, Architecture and Trade. Several
 are prominent in politics, but women do not hold
 high positions in the Government or the Colorado
 Party.
 4. Government Attitude and Record Regarding Inter-
 national and Non-governmental Investigation of
 Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 In principle the Government considers international
 and non-governmental investigation of alleged human
 rights violations as intervention in Paraguay's
 internal affairs. However,it has cooperated with
 such groups on several occasions in the past. As
 noted, the Paraguayan Government in 1977 publicly
 agreed to permit a visit by the IACHR to investigate
 alleged abuses. The Government reiterated the pledge
 
 
 in June 1978 at the OAS General Assembly, which
 passed a resolution calling on Paraguay to receive
 the Commission. However, the Government has failed
 to set a date for the visit.
 The International League for Human Rights has sent
 two groups to Paraguay in the past four years and
 representatives of the International Red Cross make
 periodic visits to verify the conditions under
 which political prisoners are held. The Paraguayan
 Government now answers requests for information from
 international institutions on alleged human rights
 violations. In the past, it refused to do so.
 In June 1978 the OAS General Assembly considered
 a special IACHR report on Paraguay which concluded
 that human rights violations were a regular occurrence.
 Among its recommendations were: the lifting of the
 state of siege or passage of legislation to protect
 basic human rights; the restoration of habeas corpus;
 the release or judicial processing of all illegally
 held detainees; assurances that lawyers and judges
 would be able to work in safety; and measures to
 ensure that officials guilty of abuses would be
 punished.
 Paraguay has signed, but not ratified, the American
 Convention on Human Rights.
 
 
