 PARAGUAY
 Paraguay, independent since 1811, has been ruled almost continuously by authori-
 tarian regimes. In May Juan Carlos Wasmosy became the nation's first freely elect-
 
 
 522
 ed civilian President. Wasmosy took office in August, vowing to consolidate the na-
 tion's democratic transition, which began following the February 1989 overthrow of
 General Alfredo Stroessner. Paraguay is a constitutional republic with a strong ex-
 ecutive branch and an increasingly important bicameral legislature. The President
 is the head of government and cannot succeed himself. The Colorado Party and the
 armed forces hold substantial influence, but the combination of the changes brought
 about by the June 1992 Constitution and the election of an opposition-controlled
 Congress in May 1993 has improved political accountability.
 The National Police Force, under the overall authority of the Ministry of the Inte-
 rior, is responsible for maintaining internal security and public order. The police
 continued to commit human rights abuses in 1993. Paraguay's armed forces consist
 of an army, navy, and air force. The President is the commander in chief. Certain
 elements within the armed forces act with little political oversight and insert them-
 selves into the political process in contravention of the Constitution, through intimi-
 dation, corruption, and influence wielding. The presence of the first civilian com-
 mander in chief, and his nomination of a civilian Defense Minister, may lessen to
 some degree the traditional autonomy of the armed forces. Some military officials
 were accused of human rights abuses during 1993.
 Paraguay has a market economy based on the export of primary agricultural prod-
 ucts. A substantial percentage of the work force is employed in the informal econ-
 omy, which may account for 40 to 60 percent of the gross domestic product. Efforts
 to begin privatization of state-owned enterrises continued.
 Principal human rights abuses included extrajudicial killings, torture and mis-
 treatment of criminal suspects and prisoners, police corruption, detention of sus-
 pects without judicial orders, general weaknesses within the judiciary, firings of
 labor organizers, and military interference into the judicial and political systems.
 Although President Wasmosy has stressed his commitment to enhance respect for
 human rights, serious accountability problems continued as the Government often
 failed to prosecute perpetrators of recent abuses or investigate cases of abuse from
 the Stroessner era.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no reports of political
 killings in 1993.
 There were extrajudicial killings involving criminal suspects detained by security
 force officials. As in the past, there was little serious effort to investigate and pros-
 ecute these incidents. At least seven extrajudicial killings are known to have oc-
 curred during the year. On the eve of the May 9 general elections, a drunken army
 captain allegedly shot and killed Victor Perez Franco, a 20-year-old wearing a I-
 shirt supporting an opposition political party. Following the incident, the officer and
 two noncommissioned officers were arrested and taken into military custody. The
 case remained under investigation at year's end.
 On August 30, police officer Angel Ayala allegedly shot and killed Cristobal
 Gamarra, a 37-year-old bricklayer in the city of Fernando de Ia Mora. Gamarra had
 been drinking and behaving boisterously near Ayala's house. Ayala, accused of
 shooting Gamarra after the latter refused to leave the area, turned himself into po-
 lice authorities shortly afterwards. The case remained under investigation at year's
 end. In late May, a minor, Americo Villalba, escaped from prison during a riot
 mounted in reaction to alleged mistreatment by police officials. Villalba had pre-
 viously accused a police official of torture and mistreatment. During Villalba's es-
 cape attempt, this same officer allegedly shot him at close range. Villalba died 8
 hours later without receiving any medical treatment. The official was not punished.
 In December 1992 and January 1993, extensive government archiveswere discov-
 ered that documented extrajudicial killings and otherhuman rights abuses and im-
 plicated many former officials of the Stroessner regime (see Section i.e.). Four
 Stroessner-era police officials convicted in 1992 of the torture and murder of Mario
 Schacrer Prono appealed their sentences; none of them served time in prison, but
 all remain under arrest.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reported cases of abductions by security forces.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 Torture and brutal and degrading treatment of convicted prisoners and other de-
 tainees continued. Police, military, and prison guards were implicated to some ex-
 tent in the mistreatment of individuals in their custody; although some officials
 have been arrested and held for investigation, few were tried, convicted, or appro-
 priately punished. There were credible reports of mistreatment of women and mi-
 nors and of brutal attempts to force confessions out of detainees.
 
 
 523
 A respected human rights group, Tekojoja, reported that children in police custody
 were particularly susceptible to physical punishment, with torture and abuse occur-
 ring against juveniles at a higher rate than against adult detainees. The human
 rights group accused the police in several cases of torturing minors by placing plas-
 tic bags over their heads, knocking out their teeth, using a hammer to beat their
 backs, or scalding their hands and feet to force a confession. Many minors reported
 being denied food, drink, or access to toilets for up to 3 days. None of the many
 cases involving the torture of minors that were brought before the courts resulted
 in a conviction of the perpetrators.
 During a surprise visit to the Encarnacion regional penitentiaryin August, the
 Congressional Committee on Human Rights discovered that several prisoners had
 been tortured by police officers. The Congressmen acquired sworn statements impli-
 cating Chief of Investigations Juan de la Cruz Paredes and three other police offi-
 cials. The police officials were transferred to Asuncion and were under investigation
 at ear's end.
 9rison conditions remained poor. Overcrowding and mistreatment of prisoners
 were the most serious problems. Conditions were particularly poor in the Panchito
 Lopez youth prison. The Government substantially improved formerly abysmal con-
 ditions in the Buen Pastor prison, the nation's largest women's prison, by creating
 a separate section for minor girls.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The authorities often violated provisions
 of the Constitution prohibiting detention without written order and stipulating that
 any person arrested must be presented before a judge within 48 hours of detention.
 Nearly 90 percent of an estimated 3,000 prisoners are held without arrest warrants,
 orders of detention, or convictions. Only 6 percent of the detainees at Tacumbu pris-
 on have been sentenced; virtually none of the detainees at the Panchito Lopez juve-
 nile prison have been sentenced.
 Throughout the year the authorities arrested and imprisoned individuals without
 legal process. There were a number of cases similar to that of Tomas Leiva who was
 arrested by police officials without a judicial order on September 13. Following his
 illegal arrest he was taken to a plice station and beaten in an effort to get him
 to confess to having stolen cattle, although there was little evidence implicating him
 in this crime. The authorities did not present Leiva before a judge, and he was un-
 able to communicate with family members for several days. He was released from
 custody 2 weeks later, following intervention by a local human rights group, and
 never charged with a crime.
 In September the Supreme Court ordered the release of over 20 prisoners from
 the Tacumbu Penitentiary for lack of any legal process against them. The court also
 released several minors during the same month for lack of detention orders.
 Credible reports continued that landowners, many of them Brazilians living near
 the border in the Alto Parana department, armed their employees who removed
 squatters from the property of their employers without court orders. Some of the
 evictions were violent, although there were no reports of fatalities. No measures
 were taken to punish those committing abuses.
 Forced exile is no longer used as a means of political control.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The judicial branch is comprised of a five-member
 Supreme Court headed by a president. There are four appellate tribunals: civil and
 commercial, criminal, labor, and juvenile. Several minor courts and justices of the
 peace fall within these four functional areas. There are only five public defenders
 available to the transient and the indigent; accordingly, many destitute suspects re-
 ceive little or no legal assistance. Trials are conducted almost exclusively by presen-
 tation of written documents to a judge, who then renders a decision. Since there is
 no trial by jury, the judge alone determines guilt or innocence and decides punish-
 ment.
 During the pretrial phase, the judge receives and may request investigative re-
 ports. In this phase, the judge is also likely to make a personal inspection of the
 scene of the crime and of the available physical evidence. The accused often appears
 before the court only twice: to plead and to be sentenced. All verdicts are automati-
 cally reviewed by an appellate judge, and the law provides for appeals to the Su-
 prme Court. The military has its own judicial system.
 Although the 1992 Constitution prescribes that judges be selected by a combina-
 tion of an independent entity, the  ongess, and the executive, many of the judges
 active during 1993 were holdover appointments made by former dictator Alfredo
 Stroessner. Several of them were alleged to make judicial decisions on the basis of
 bribery, intimidation, political motives, and friendship with senior military officers.
 Notwithstanding the December 1992 discovery of government archives document-
 ing various human rights abuses and implicating many former government officials
 of the Stroessner regime, no Stroessner-era officials were convicted of human rights
 
 
 524
 abuses in 1993. A judicial working group continued the task of reviewing and cata-
 loging the documents for eventuar use in court. The Committee of Churches, one of
 the nation's most prominent human rights groups, had over 23 cases against
 Stroessner-era human rights abusers pending at year's end.
 In January Colonel Luis Catalino Gonzalez 'Rojas Was sentenced by a military tri-
 bunal to over 3 months of confinement for "breach of military discipline." This al-
 leged breach was linked to his implication of several high ranking military officials
 in a stolen car operation. Most observers viewed his sentence to be punishment for
 his high-profile stand against military corruption rather than a response to the al-
 leged breach of discipline.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home or Correspondence.-While
 the Government and its security forces generally did not interfere in the private
 lives of citizens, there were exceptions. The Constitution provides that police may
 not enter private homes except to prevent a crime in progress or when the police
 possess a judicial warrant. There were complaints that at times the authorities ig-
 nored this legal guarantee, particularly in the country's interior. The Government
 at times also spied on individuals and tapped phones for political and security rea-
 sons. In October the press denounced the discovery of a political telephone tapping
 operation carried out in the offices of the state-owned telephone company in the de-
 partment of Guaira. Criminal investigations relating to a 1992 discovery of an offi-
 cially sanctioned wiretap operation ceased without any judicial action.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of expres-
 sion and the press. The press exercised these rights more freely than at any time
 in the nation's recent history. Opposition viewpoints were freely discussed and criti-
 cism of the Government was ubiquitous in the media. However, two media groups
 linked to particular candidates practiced self-censorship in reporting on the 1993
 electoral campaign.
 During the early morning hours of May 9, election day, the Channel 13 television
 station was the site of an unsuccessful attack in which assailants fired automatic
 weapons and launched grenades. At year's end, the attack was still under investiga-
 tion by the authorities. The owners of Channel 13, who also own a newspaper and
 radio station, alleged that the Government had singled out their media consortium
 for a tax audit in response to its particularly strong opposition to the then-incum-
 bent President.
 Some reporters were threatened and physically attacked during 1993, although in-
 vestigative reporting continued. As in the past, threats were made against persons
 examining allegations of official corruption, the contraband trade, ties to the
 Stroessner regime, and electoral irregularities. In October journalist Emilio Ortiz re-
 ported on corruption in the state-owned telephone company in Alto Parana. This led
 to the dismissal of the company's local director, Mauro Corvalan. Ortiz subsequently
 was beaten by three men claiming to be acting on Corvalan's behalf. On April 20,
 two journalists covering a political gathering in Ciudad del Este were beatenby pro-
 Colorado Party supporters working as security guards at the site where the event
 was taking place. The two reporters were taking pictures of state-owned vehicles
 being utilized by Colorado Party supporters in an apparent violation of the nation's
 electoral law.
 There were no restrictions on academic freedom in 1993.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution establishes
 the right of association and peaceful assembly for all citizens. A law regulating dem-
 onstrations in Asuncion limits the areas where and the hours when they may take
 place and requires that the olice be notified 24 hours before any rally in the down-
 town area. The police may ban a protest but must provide written notification of
 such a ban within 12 hours of receipt of the organizers' request. Under the law, a
 police ban is permitted only if a third party has already given notice of plans for
 a similar rally at the same place and time. In addition, the law prohibits public
 meetings or demonstrations in front of the presidential palace and outside military
 or police barracks.
 All of the various political parties held demonstrations and rallies during the elec-
 toral season without incident. Many social groups, including labor organizations,
 held rallies without incident throughout the year.
 An October rall to protest congressional consideration of military privileges
 blocked access to Parliament, and a few members of Congress were struck by the
 participants in the demonstration. The Congressmen pressed criminal charges
 against demonstration leaders, and the cases remained under investigation at year's
 end. Media and congressional criticism of the police centered on the failure of the
 police to protect the Conressmen.
 
 
 525
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for freedom of conscience for
 all persons and recognizes no official religion. The Government continued to respect
 that freedom in 1993. Roman Catholicism is the predominant religion, but all de-
 nominations are free to worship as they choose. Adherence to a particular creed con-
 fers no legal advantage or disadvantage, and foreign and local missionaries pros-
 elytize freely.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-Ali Paraguayan citizens may travel freely within the country with vir-
 tually no restrictions. There are no restrictions on foreign travel or emigration, al-
 though the Government closed the nation's border during the May 9 general elec-
 tions pursuant to a judicial order, an action that was criticized by foreign election
 observers. There are no established provisions to grant asylum or refugee status; the
 Director of Immigration determines each request on a case-by-case basis. There
 were no reports of refugees forced to return to countries in which they feared perse-
 cution.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Paraguayan citizens exercised the right peacefully to change their government in
 the May 1993 elections. Juan Carlos Wasmosy became the nation's first freely elect-
 ed civilian President; a majority opposition Congress was also elected. Several par-
 ties contested the major leadership positions in the elections, although only three
 parties elected officials to national office. The new opposition-dominated Congress
 quickly demonstrated its independence by rescinding legislation passed by the pre-
 vious Congress which had the support of the President-elect. General elections are
 to be held every 5 years. The Constitution and the Electoral Code mandate that vot-
 ing be by secret ballot.
 Although the elections were generally conducted in a peaceful and orderly man-
 ner, aspects of the nation's authoritarian tradition were evident during the primary
 and general elections. International observers criticized the violation of the constitu-
 tional prohibition against the military's participation in partisan politics, citing in
 particular the activities of Army General Lino Oviedo after the December 27, 1992,
 Colorado Party primary elections, as well as before and during the May 1993 gen-
 eral elections.
 Some Paraguayans living outside the country were denied the right to vote by a
 judicial decision to clcse the nation's border on election day. Many international ob-
 servers witnessed intimidation of voters by Colorado Party members and other iso-
 lated irregularities and violations of the Electoral Code. Unlawful activities included
 the election day preda-vn attack on independent television Channel 13 and the de-
 liberate cutting of telephone lines providing electoral data to an independent consor-
 tium of nongovernmental organizations conducting a parallel vote count. During the
 election campaign, many state employees were pressured to pay dues to the ruling
 Colorado Party and attend its political rallies. Many state employees were also
 threatened with dismissal if they did not support the Government's preferred can-
 didate, and several were dismissed for supporting other candidates. Virtually all
 independent observers of the general elections concluded that the irregularities were
 neither systematic nor extensive enough to alter the final results. There were, how-
 ever, credible allegations of misreporting of vote totals in the Colorado Party pri-
 mary.
 Paraguay has an unassimilated and neglected indigenous population estimated at
 75,000 to 100,000. Members of indigenous groups, as Paraguayan citizens, are enti-
 tled to vote, and the percentage of indigenous people who exercised this privilege
 in 1993 roughly doubled from years past. Nonetheless, the inhabitants of many in-
 digenous communities were threatened or inhibited from fully exercising their politi-
 cal rights. Some were threatened with death or with losing access to cooperatives
 and stores unless they voted for a certain candidate. For example, indigenous people
 in the town of Laguna Negra were told by one candidate that he would execute
 them should they not support his candidacy.
 While there are no formal legal impediments, women often face significant obsta-
 cles when they seek to participate in government and politics. Participation by
 women in the political system, although somewhat improved in 1993, was still lim-
 ited in the male-dominated society of Paraguay. All major parties ran women as
 candidates in the 1993 general elections, although few women (four senators and
 two national deputies) were elected to national office.
 
 
 526
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Several human rights groups operate in Paraguay, including the Committee of
 Churches (an interdenominational group that monitors human rights and provides
 legal assistance), Prodemos, Tekojoja (a group dedicated to protection of children's
 rights), and the local chapter of the Association of Latin American Lawyers for the
 Defense of Human Rights. The Government did not restrict the activities of any
 human rights group in 1993.
 Former President Rodriguez met with representatives of local and international
 human rights groups during the year. In his inaugural address, President Wasmosy
 told the nation that respect for human rights would be a hallmark of his adminis-
 tration. The Chamber of Deputies elected as its president one of Paraguay's leading
 human rights advocates, Francisco Jose "Pancho de Vargas.
 The Office of the Director General of Human Rights, located in the Ministry of
 Justice and Labor, continued to sponsor seminars to promote human rights aware-
 ness. This office has access to congressional, executive, and judicial authorities. It
 does not have subpoena or prosecution powers but may forward information con-
 cerning human rights abuses to the office of the Attorney General for action. It also
 serves as a clearinghouse for information on human rights and trained thousands
 of educators in human rights law in 1993. In January the Government accepted the
 jurisdiction of the Inter-American Court of Human Rights. The Government has yet
 to show, however,the determination to try and punish those, particularly within the
 police, who commit abuses.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 Although the Constitution and other laws prohibit discrimination, certain groups
 faced significant discrimination in practice.
 Women.-Wife beating and exploitation of women in employment continued to
 occur. Most informed observers believe that wife beating occurs among a substantial
 minority of the population and that it is underreported. Exploitation of women, es-
 pecially the prostitution of teenagers, remained a serious problem. Police frequently
 raided brothels in which minors were employed but never arrested the owners or
 operators. The minor's court judge would usually attempt to persuade the minor not
 to return to prostitution, but no action would be taken against Lhe owners. Authori-
 ties also paid insufficient attention to sex-related job discrimination. Some women
 complained that job promotions were conditioned on their granting sexual favors.
 On the average, 16 cases of rape were reported to the Ministry of Health each
 month, although all women's groups believe that the incidence of rape is much high-
 er. It is becoming easier for women to initiate complaints against their husbands
 for domestic violence, although no perpetrators of domestic violence have been found
 guilty by a court to date. The Congress passed a law creating the office of Secretary
 or Women, a cabinet-level position intended to initiate programs to enable women
 to have free and equal access to employment, social security, housing, ownership of
 land, and business opportunities. The Secretary for Women is also responsible for
 programs to address violence against women.
 Children.-The Constitution mandates that at least 20 percent of the total na-
 tional b-,dget be ailocated to education. Forty-six percent of all educational spending
 was earmarked for elementary education, while 22 percent of the Ministry o"
 Health's budget was devoted to children's services. The Constitution protects certain
 children's rights and requires that parents and the State care for, feed, educate, and
 support children. Nonetheless, approximately 26,000 children work in urban areas
 as street vendors, shoe shiners, or prostitutes. The majority of these children suffer
 from malnutrition, lack of access to education, and disease. Some young girls, em-
 ployed as domestic servants or nannies, are denied access to education and are mis-
 treated by their employers. Some who seek to leave domestic jobs are charged with
 robbing their employers and turned over to the police.
 Some minors were forced into obligatory military service prior to the constitu-
 tionally established minimum age of 17. In one case, Cesar Meaurio. 15, was re-
 moved from a bus and taken to a nearby military training base because he could
 not present any documents establishing his age. On August 28, Santiago Ignacio
 Machado, 15, was taken by military authorities while fishing with his parents in
 Puente Remanso. Military authorities subsequently refused to provide the family
 with information concerning Machado's whereabouts. The Chamber of Deputies
 Committee on Human Rights filed a formal legal request on September 10 that the
 minor be released.
 Indigenous People.-Weak organization and lack of financial resources continued
 to limit access by indigenous peoples to the political and economic system. Indige-
 
 
 527
 nous groups relied primarily upon parliamentary commissions to promote their par-
 ticular interests, notwithstanding the fact that the Constitution guarantees indige-
 nous peoples' rights to participate in the economic, social, political, and cultural life
 of the nation. The Constitution also contains protection for their property interests.
 These constitutional rights, however, have still not been fully codified.
 The Government's National Indigenous Institute (INDI) has the authority to pur-
 chase land on behalf of indigenous communities and to expropriate private property
 under certain conditions to establish tribal homelands, but the entity continued to
 be poorly funded. In addition, many indigenous people find it difficult to travel to
 the capital to solicit land titles or process the required paperwork associated with
 land ownership. The problems of    indenous population, particularly those in-
 volving land claims, continued to receive frequent media attention. The main prob-
 lems facing the indigenous population are lack of education, malnutrition, lack of
 medical attention, and economic displacement resulting from development and mod-
 ernization. In the community of Ca'aguay Pora in the Department of Canindeyu, for
 example, 80 local children did not have access to a school.
 National/Racial/Ethnic Minorities.-The Korean and Chinese communities expe-
 rienc social and economic discrimination and are sometimes denied access to credit
 terms enjoyed by other Paraguayans. They are also sometimes discriminated
 against in the housing market and do not have equal access to private institutions
 and schools.
 People with Disabil   itution guarantees equal opportunity to peo-
 ple with disabilities and mandates that the State provide the disabled with health
 care, education, recreation, and professional training. It further requires that the
 State formulate a policy for the treatment, rehabilitation, and integration into soci-
 ety of people with disabilities. Legislation establishing such programs, however, has
 never been enacted. Many people with disabilities face significant discrimination in
 employment;others are unable to seek employment because of a lack of accessible
 public transportation. Other than the constitutional provisions establishing equal
 opportunity, accessibiity for the disabled has not been mandated by law; the vast
 majorit oathe nationos buildings, both public and private, are inaccessible to people
 with disabilities.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The Constitution allows both private and public sec-
 tor workers (with the exception of the armed forces and the police) to form and join
 unions without government interference. The Constitution contains several provi-
 sions that protect fundamental workers rights, including an antidiscrimination
 clause, provisions for employment tenure, severance pay for unjustified firings, col-
 lective bargaining, and the right to strike. A new Labor Code meeting International
 Labor Organization (e) standards was enacted in October to implement these con-
 stitutional provisions.
 In general, unions are independent of the Government and political parties. How-
 ever, one of the nation's three labor centrals, the Confederation of Paraguayan
 Workers (CPT), is closely aligned with the ruling Colorado Party. The Government
 did not require the CPT to comply with a union election dcree to the same extent
 that it required compliance from the other labor centrals. Government officials were
 also accused of encouraging some of the recently organized public sector unions to
 affiliate with the CPT.
 Although the Constitution protects the right to strike and bans binding arbitra-
 tion, the Government's Permanent Council or Conciliation and Arbitration contin-
 ued to function. One of the Wasmosy administration's first actions was to forward
 legislation to the Congress to abolish the body. Strikers and their leaders are pro-
 tected by the Constitution against retribution, and several strikes occurred in 1993.
 However, the Ministry of Justice and Labor took few steps to enforce these laws
 until after the Wasmosy administration took office. Many strikers and labor leaders
 were dismissed for either attempting to form unions or for carrying out routine
 union business.
 Approximately 7 percent of Paragayan workers are organized. Unions are free
 to form and join federations or coe erat ions  n affiliate with and participate in
 international labor bodies. The IW  is currently considering 13 pendingclaims
 against the Government for alleged violations of international labor standards.
 b. The Right to Organize a Bargain Coliectively.-Collective bargaining is pro-
 tected by law, and collective contracts have been successfully concluded in many
 cases. The number of successfully negotiated collective contracts continued to grow
 in 1993; however, collective contracts are still the exception rather than the norm
 in labr-management relations and typically reaffirm minimal standards established
 
 
 528
 by law. When wages are not set in free negotiations between unions and employers,
 they are made a condition of individual employment offered to employees.
 Under former Minister of Justice and Labor Oscar Paciello, the Government took
 actions to discourage the realization of several collective contracts in 1993. One col-
 lective contract, signed between the president of the state-owned electric company
 and the president of the electric company workers' union, was not recognized by
 Minister Paciello and declared void. Following the Minister's departure from office,
 however, the courts ordered that the contract be implemented. On March 18, the
 executive issued Decree 16769, which suspended all trade union leaders in their
 functions pending new direct labor organization elections. Although the Supreme
 Court found the decree to be unconstitutional on September 23, many business lead-
 ers, with the support of the former Minister, refused to negotiate with labor leaders
 unless their organizations had complied with the decree.
 Minister of Justice and Labor Juan Manuel Morales took office on August 15 vow-
 ing to improve relations between the Government, labor, and management. Orga-
 nized labor viewed positively many of his early efforts, including presentation of
 draft legislation to disband the Permanent Council on Conciliation and Arbitration
 and his early and frequent consultations with labor leaders.
 While the Constitution prohibits antiunion discrimination, the firing and harass-
 ment of some union organizers and leaders in the private sector continued. Fired
 union leaders may seek redress in the courts, but the labor courts have been slow
 to respond to complaints and typically favor business in disputes. The courts are not
 required to order the reinstatement of workers fired for union activities. As in pre-
 vious years, in some cases where judges ordered fired workers reinstated, the em-
 ployers disregarded the court order with impunity. There were a number of cases
 of trade union leaders fired 2 or 3 years ago who had not yet received a decision
 from the courts.
 There were 20 strikes by unions affiliated with the independent labor central CUT
 alone, 16 of which were directly related to the firing of union organizers, manage-
 ment violations of a collective contract, management efforts to prevent workers from
 freely associating, or demands for the payment of the minimum wage, contribution
 to the social security system, or other benefits established by law. The failure to
 meet salary payments frequently precipitated labor problems, especially in the pub-
 lic health sector. Principal problems included an unresponsive Ministry of Justice
 and Labor under the leadership of Minister Paciello and bottlenecks in the judicial
 system. There were also complaints of management creating parallel or "factory"
 unions to compete with independently formed unions. There were several cases of
 workers not receiving the legally established minimum wage or overtime pay who
 choose not to complain because of fear of reprisal or anticipation of government in-
 action.
 Paraguay has no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-Forced labor is prohibited by law.
 However, substantiated cases of abuse of national service obligations occurred dur-
 ing 1993. There were several documented cases of draftees forced to serve as labor-
 ers for military officers in their residences or privately owned businesses. In April
 a local newspaper published interviews and photographs of military draftees forced
 to carry out a remodeling project at the private residence of Colonel Cirilo
 Velazquez.
 Forced labor is not significant in any export industries.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The Office of the Director General
 for the Protection of Minors in the Ministry of Justice and Labor is responsible for
 enforcing child labor laws. Minors between 15 to 18 years of age may be employed
 only with parental authorization and may not be employed under dangerous or
 unhealthy conditions. Children between 12 and 15 years of age may be employed
 only in family enterprises, apprenticeships, or in agriculture. The Labor Code pro-
 hibits work by children under 12 years of age, and all children are required to at-
 tend elementary school. In practice, however, many thousands of children, many
 younger than 12, work in urban areas engaged in informal employment such as sell-
 ing newspapers and sundries shining shoes, and cleaning car windows. In rural
 areas, it is not unusual for children as young as 10 to work beside their parents
 in the field. Other than Paraguay's traditional agricultural exports, there are no ex-
 port industries in which child labor is significant.
 c. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The executive, through the Ministry of Justice
 and Labor, has established a private sector minimum wage, regionally adjusted ac-
 cording to cost of living indices, sufficient to maintain a minimally adequate stand-
 ard of living. The minimum salary was adjusted by 10 percent in April (to $159 a
 month) in response to a loss in real purchasing power of about 42 percent since
 
 
 1989. Most analysts agree that between 60 to 70 percent of workers earn less than
 the decreed minimum.
 The Labor Code allows for a standard legal workweek of 48 hours,42 hours for
 night work, with 1 day of rest. The law also provides for an annual bonus of 1
 month's salary and a minimum of 6 vacation days a year. The Labor Code also stip-
 ulates conditions of safety, hygiene, and comfort. In general, the Government did
 not effectively enforce the safety and h giene provisions of the Labor Code, partially
 due to the lack of inspectors. This led the labor movement to initiate inspector train-
 ing programs designed to ensure that violations were registered with the Ministry
 of~ustice and Labor.
