 PARAGUAY
 Paraguay has had authoritarian regimes throughout its history.
 Since 1954, President Alfredo Stroessner has governed Paraguay,
 ruling through the Colorado Party, the military and police
 forces, and the government bureaucracy, all of which he
 dominates. He was elected in 1983 to a seventh term in a
 controlled election process. The situation in Paraguay
 continues to be characterized by the subordination of the
 legislative and judicial branches of government to the
 executive and by the domination of the nation's political life
 by the ruling Colorado Party.
 Elections are held every five years for the presidency, the
 national legislature, and for municipal councils. However, the
 opposition's ability to conduct an effective campaign is
 severely restricted by the Government, and in practice there is
 no effective challenge to President Stroessner's authority. In
 the 1985 municipal elections, the opposition did not win a
 majority or plurality in any of the country's 190
 municipalities.
 After a period of rapid economic growth in the late 1970's and
 early 1980's, Paraguay entered a steep recession. Following
 two years of decline, an agriculture-led economic recovery
 commenced in 1984. Economic policies and international prices
 from Paraguay's exports, however, have not evolved in a manner
 expected to sustain recovery. The balance of payments remains
 in a deficit position, and substantial delays on servicing
 international obligations still pose problems.
 There continue to be violations of civil and political
 liberties, though the number of serious incidents has declined
 significantly since the mid-1970's. As has been the case
 almost without interruption since 1929, the State of Siege
 provision of the Constitution remains in force. Under it, the
 President may order the detention of any individual without
 trial for an indefinite period. The police forces regularly
 arrest and hold persons arbitrarily without due process of law,
 sometimes citing the State of Siege power and sometimes
 Paraguay's "anti-subversive" statute or, as was -the case in
 most of the detentions which occurred in 1985, they simply give
 no rationale. Constitutional guarantees, such as protection of
 the integrity of the individual, the requirement for judicial
 warrants, freedom of assembly and association, the right of
 habeas corpus, and the provision for a prompt and impartial
 trial, can be ignored by government officials. Although there
 is no formal system of prior censorship, there are serious
 unwritten limitations on what the media are free to report and
 comment upon. Trade union activities are also restricted and,
 in practice, strikes are not permitted under the State of Siege.
 During 1985 the subtle forms of repression such as short
 periods of arbitrary detention without charges, and efforts to
 intimidate the media through threats and closings, increased
 slightly while gross violations such as torture or imprisonment
 of political opponents declined. Some investigations of
 torture charges were initiated. The six political prisoners
 held at the end of 1984 were all released by the end of 1985.
 The Paraguayan Government became more responsive in
 international human rights forums to answer and clarify charges
 against it, and it requested a direct contact mission from the
 International Labor Organization (ILO) with a view to improving
 its compliance with international standards.
 
 
 651
 PARAGUAY
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 There were no reported cases in 1985 of killings for political
 motives by the Government, political parties or other entities.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no reported disappearance cases in 1985, nor have
 there been any such reports since 1980.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 In this year as in past years, there have been credible charges
 of torture and physical abuse by police authorities against
 prisoners, which have led in some cases to disciplinary actions
 and in others to denial of the charges. There were nine
 reports of such mistreatment or violence in 1985. In February,
 a police commissioner and two police conscripts were charged
 with the death of a prisoner. They claimed the prisoner
 committed suicide by hanging himself, but he was found .to have
 died from a blow to the head. In April, a factional political
 dispute led to the jailing of five ruling Colorado Party
 members. They charged police officials with having tortured
 them and the officers were dismissed and charged. In June, in
 Ypacarai, Benedicto Lopez was detained and held for 14 days.
 during which period he claimed to have been severely beaten.
 He died ten days after his release, from pneumonia according to
 local authorities.
 Also in June, a domestic employee who was interrogated about a
 robbery asserted that she had been tortured by electric shock;
 the police denied the charge. Two other cases were also
 reported in June where robbery suspects alleged torture. In
 July, in Concepcion, a prisoner was killed, supposedly while
 escaping. An investigation resulted in two police officers and
 two conscripts being charged. Also in July, a navy conscript
 died in police custody, allegedly from the accidental discharge
 of his gun. However, his body showed signs of torture. His
 father's efforts to obtain an investigation have had no
 apparent effect.
 These reports of police violence were atypical in that they
 appeared in the press. Physical mistreatment of suspects and
 prisoners by the police is believed to occur frequently. The
 so-called "investigations police" are widely known for such
 actions.
 In most cases, once formally arraigned, detainees go to regular
 prison facilities, where conditions are generally better than
 in police stations. Prisons are austere, especially the
 maximum security facilities used in more sensitive cases, which
 are administered directly by the Ministry of the Interior and
 the Asuncion police. Court and Justice Ministry officials
 visit the regional prison facilities several times each year to
 examine conditions and interview prisoners. They do not
 regularly visit the maximum security facilities, although
 representatives of the International Committee of the Red Cross
 are permitted access.
 
 
 PARAGUAY
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention and Exile
 Detentions are used as a form of warning or punishment for
 those who criticize the Government or whose political beliefs
 or activities are deemed to be threatening. Sometimes
 individuals are picked up by the police, detained in local
 police stations where they are often held incommunicado and
 released after a few days, usually without formal charges
 having been brought. Other detentions may last for weeks.
 Some such detentions have been justified by the authorities
 under the State of Siege provision of the Constitution, which
 provides that persons may be detained without trial, and that
 public meetings and demonstrations may be banned, in the event
 of war, foreign invasion, internal disturbance, or the serious
 threat of any of these conditions. Despite constitutional
 requirements that the State of Siege be imposed only for
 limited periods, in practice it has been in effect almost
 continuously since 1929. Technically, the State of Siege was
 lifted outside Asuncion in 1978. In practice, backed by a
 court ruling that prisoners may be moved to Asuncion and held
 there, Paraguayan authorities proceed as if the State of Siege
 were still in force throughout the country.
 Implementing legislation called for by the Constitution has
 never been passed. In the absence of implementing legislation,
 the Government and Courts take the position that State of Siege
 restrictions supersede the safeguards on human rights contained
 elsewhere in the Constitution and legal code. Several
 prominent legal scholars and the opposition political parties
 contest this interpretation.
 Seventy-two persons were reported publicly to have been
 arbitrarily detained for political activities in 1985. In
 these cases the Government occasionally cited Law 209, the
 "Anti-Subversive" Statute, a loosely worded law which provides
 for imprisonment of persons who "foment hatred," defame members
 of the Government, commit a variety of other acts, or are
 members of the Communist Party. All 72 individuals were
 released after varying periods of custody.
 The detention of two politicians who attended a meeting of
 their non-recognized opposition party in Itacurubi in April is
 illustrative. They were detained for seven days without being
 informed of the reasons for their detention, and their
 detention was not brought to the attention of a judge, actions
 which violate specific provisions of the Constitution.
 In January, fourteen members of the non-recognized Authentic
 Radical Liberal Party were arrested for holding a meeting on
 private property. Twenty-two members of that party were
 detained in similar circumstances in May. A member of the
 recognized opposition Febrerista Party was detained without
 charges for forty-three days at mid-year.
 Arbitrary detention has also been used against political exiles
 who have returned. Over the years many political opponents of
 the Government have either been forced or have gone voluntarily
 into exile. In December. 1983, the Interior Minister stated
 that with the exception of two prominent opposition
 figures--Domingo Laino and Luis Resck--all exiles would be
 permitted to return to Paraguay. As a result, a number of
 political.figures, many of whom had been in exile for over
 twenty years, returned. Prominent among the returnees were
 
 
 653
 PARAGUAY
 officials of the Colorado Popular Movement (MOPOCO), a
 dissident faction of the ruling Colorado Party whose leaders
 were expelled from Paraguay in 1960. A number of the returnees
 have been subjected to various forms of harassment, temporary
 detention, and internal exile by the Government. Four MOPOCO
 members were detained for over a month each between September
 and October--all without charges. The Government has not
 changed its ban on the return of Drs. Laino and Resck or Agosto
 Roa Bastos, who was added to this list in 1984. In December
 Roque Ruiz Diaz, one of the six political prisoners released
 during the year, was sent into exile in Argentina.
 In June, Dr. Heriberto Alegre, a respected lawyer, was released
 after nine months detention without a trial. His arrest
 reportedly resulted from suspicions that he encouraged landless
 campesinos to seize land. However, Dr. Alegre was defending
 the campesinos after the seizure had taken place.
 The number of arbitrary detentions in 1985 represents a
 continuation of the decline in such cases since the mid-1970's
 when they were counted in the hundreds.
 The Paraguayan Labor Code does not permit the practice of
 forced labor.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Paraguay, like most other Latin American countries, does not
 have trial by jury. Trials are conducted almost exclusively by
 presentation of written documents to a judge, who then renders
 a decision. All judgments are automatically reviewed by an
 appellate-level judge, and appeals to the Supreme Court are
 possible. Part of the trial process is open to the public and
 trials are routinely reported in the press.
 In theory numerous safeguards set forth in the Constitution and
 the Penal Code protect the rights of the individual during the
 trial process. However, the judiciary has traditionally been
 subject to extensive influence by the executive branch of the
 government and by the military. This, together with budgetary
 and other institutional failings in the judicial system,
 continues to compromise the ability of an accused person to
 receive a fair, speedy trial.
 Nonetheless, over the past two years a number of changes have
 been made which many observers credit with having improved the
 quality and speed of the judicial process. Widespread changes
 in the personnel of the judiciary system, particularly judges
 and their clerks, are said to have reduced the amount of
 corruption. One judge was suspended during 1985 after having
 been charged with taking a bribe to keep a person out of a
 narcotics case. However, it is widely acknowledged that the
 courts still are not independent of the influence of the
 executive branch in politically sensitive cases.
 Six persons condidered political prisoners in last year's
 report had been released by the end of 1985. There were no new
 political prisoners added during the year. Two individuals
 whose cases, while involving criminal offenses, appear to have
 been affected in part by political factors continue to be
 encarcerated.
 
 
 654
 PARAGUAY
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home or
 Correspondence
 Government and security forces do not intervene as a matter of
 course in the daily life of most citizens. The Constitution
 provides that, except to prevent the commission of a crime,
 private homes may not be entered without a judicial warrant.
 Nonetheless, some private citizens complain that their right to
 privacy is being abused by the security authorities. Leaders
 of the Colorado Popular Movement (MOPOCO) claim that they are
 followed by the police wherever they go, day and night. They
 also complain that their telephones are tapped, their private
 correspondence monitored, and their ability to move about
 restricted. The police have reportedly told them that they may
 not meet in groups of more than three, and it is claimed that
 those whom leaders of the group contact are later questioned.
 Other opposition figures and critics of the Government have
 similarly complained about interference with their mail,
 particularly foreign correspondence, and telephone tapping.
 Although the police in October 1984 denied the charges made
 against them by members of the Colorado Popular Movement, it is
 widely believed that the charges in fact are true. Finally,
 although publications critical of the Government circulate
 freely in the country, there continue to be cases in which
 foreign newspapers, magazines, or books containing material
 critical of the Government are confiscated at the port of entry.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 The closure of Paraguay's most independent and popular
 newspaper, "ABC Color," in March 1984 was the most serious
 violation of freedom of the press in many years. Despite broad
 guarantees in the Constitution of freedom of speech and the
 press, in practice there are limits to the amount and kinds of
 criticism which the Government will tolerate. Such things as
 direct criticism of the President, the military, and key
 civilian leaders, are usually avoided by the major newspapers,
 as well as sensitive topics such as defense matters and
 corruption, human rights, Colorado Party policy and certain
 government policies such as foreign exchange rates, the State
 of Siege and public sector investment. It is widely believed
 that "ABC Color's" continual pressure against these limits was
 the reason for its closure.
 The Government's decision to shut down "ABC Color" was appealed
 to the Supreme Court which ruled that the Minister of Interior
 had acted within his powers and in the public interest. Since
 then the Government has considered the case closed.
 A certain measure of press freedom does still exist. The
 Febrerista Revolutionary Party, one of the recognized
 opposition parties, publishes a weekly newspaper, "El Pueblo,"
 which has printed strong criticism of the Government and its
 policies, subjects that daily newspapers shy away from. The
 Catholic Church publishes a newspaper, "Sendero," which
 reopened after "ABC Color" was closed and now appears twice a
 month. It too has printed articles criticizing government
 policies and actions and touches on subjects which the
 Government considers sensitive. A new monthly opinion
 magazine, "Nuestro Tiempo" appeared in July. It is backed by a
 Roman Catholic Church official and is written largely by former
 
 
 655
 PARAGUAY
 "ABC Color" staffers, one of whom was briefly detained by the
 investigations police shortly after the magazine's debut. This
 magazine is also being harassed and its most recent editions
 could not be printed in Paraguay. Copies entering the country
 from Brazil were seized at the border. The unrecognized
 Popular Colorado Movement (MOPOCO) publishes a monthly
 newsletter "Patria Libre," which regularly lambastes the
 Government. Similarly, the Colorado Party publishes a daily
 paper which regularly and often shrilly attacks the political
 opposition. The Government claims that it permits these
 non-daily newspapers considerable latitude because their
 political bias is clearly established. Also, these
 publications have less impact because of their small
 circulation and less frequent appearance.
 The daily papers report activities of the politicial
 opposition, both recognized and unrecognized, as well as
 information on charges of abuse of authority. However, their
 coverage is not marked by the aggressive investigatory
 journalism which characterized "ABC Color."
 Paraguay's two television stations are both privately owned.
 Their news programs are carefully self-censored and closely
 monitored by the Government. They always carry commentary
 laudatory of the Government, and reporting on the activities of
 opposition parties is virtually nonexistent.
 Two of Asuncion's radio stations, Radio Caritas, which is
 affiliated with the Catholic Church, and Radio Nanduti, which
 is privately owned, have been notable for their willingness to
 broadcast more sensitive items of local news. Radio Nanduti,
 in particular, has specialized in carrying interviews with
 politicians of all parties, including those which are not
 legally recognized, sometimes on sensitive issues. As a
 result, the station was shut down for ten days in 1985. The
 station's owner, Humberto Rubin, has received occasional
 warnings from the authorities about airing the views of
 "unrecognized" politicians and about giving too much coverage
 to the closure of "ABC Color". He was detained by the police
 for 34 hours for allegedly having broadcast "sensationalist
 disinformation" about a high government official, a charge
 which he rebutted. The station operates "illegally" in the
 sense that the Government has refused to accept payment for
 renewal of the station's license for several years.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Despite constitutional guarantees concerning the rights of
 peaceful assembly and association, these rights are often
 violated in practice. Under the State of Siege it is
 technically necessary to obtain permission for any assembly,
 regardless of purpose, of more than five unrelated persons.
 Generally, however, the provision is not applied to
 organizations which are non-political in nature and is strictly
 enforced only in the case of gatherings sponsored by opposition
 political parties or other organizations critical of the
 Government. For example, a group of opposition Liberal Party
 members who formed a movement to reunify the various sections
 of that divided party were denied permits to hold public
 meetings to give publicity to their movement.
 On the other hand, there were occasions when the Government did
 permit public meetings by those political parties which are not
 
 
 656
 PARAGUAY
 legally recognized. For example, the Christian Democratic
 Party was able to hold the inauguration of a new center for
 training party members in Asuncion. Similarly, while the
 police normally do not permit public demonstrations, even
 peaceful ones, that criticize the Government or its policies,
 occasionally such events do take place.
 Most of the labor unions in Paraguay are members of the
 Federation of Paraguayan Workers, which claims to represent
 over 90 percent of organized labor. The Federation is
 carefully controlled by the Government and does not actively
 attempt to defend the interests of the Paraguayan work force.
 The leadership of the Federation, and of most of its member
 unions, is not freely elected by the membership, but rather is
 chosen on the basis of acceptability to the Government. Union
 officials who differ with the Federation's policies are often
 harassed or fired by their employers, with tacit support of the
 Government.
 Paraguayan workers are not permitted to organize freely. In
 1985, a bus drivers union leader, along with other activists,
 was fired from his job. He was then arbitrarily detained twice
 during the year for his efforts to organize "solidarity"
 rallies to pressure for reinstatement. It is virtually
 impossible to call a legal strike.
 There do exist a number of independent unions in Paraguay,
 several organized at the company level. Some have been strong
 enough to bargain with management, despite efforts by the
 private firms--sometimes supported by the Government--to resist
 their efforts. Some of the independent unions have been
 granted legal recognition by the Government, but others have
 not, making it difficult or impossible for them to bargain
 effectively. The Government is less likely to recognize groups
 which it perceives to be more independent of its control.
 The activities of the independent unions are carefully
 monitored by the security forces and the Ministry of Labor.
 Their leaders are often summoned by officials of the police or
 the Ministry of Labor for questioning and, on occasion, for
 warnings about those activities of which the Government
 disapproves.
 The Federation of Paraguayan Workers does not maintain ties
 with any of the public or private international labor
 organizations. It was expelled from the International
 Confederation of Free Trade Unions (ICFTU) several years ago.
 The ICFTU in late 1983 complained that the Government was
 systematically violating the rights of the Paraguayan working
 class. Some of the independent labor unions in Paraguay do
 maintain ties with the International Labor Organization. The
 ICFTU, in criticizing the Paraguayan Government, has called for
 greater international support for these independent unions.
 An international meeting of the Catholic Action Workers
 Movement (MOAC), under the sponsorship of the Paraguayan Roman
 Catholic Church, took place in July. Three Colombian
 participants were detained by Government authorities and sent
 out of the country because they were carrying publications of
 "an eminently subversive nature." The Colombians were also
 carrying money to defray conference expenses, which they charge
 was taken from them by authorities. The Government denied this
 latter charge.
 
 
 657
 PARAGUAY
 Another international conference, of ORIT (the ICFTU's
 Organizacion Regional Interamericana de Trabajadores)
 affiliated labor leaders, took place in Asuncion sponsored by
 the Paraguayan free trade union movement, Intersindical. It
 was criticized in the government media but was not interfered
 with beyond the presence of the police, who routinely attend
 all labor meetings.
 In the ILO, in June 1985, Paraguay requested a direct contact
 mission to treat the issue of the application of conventions
 number 87 (freedom of association) and 98 (right to organize
 and collective bargaining). These areas, of concern deal with
 the lack of guarantees in Paraguayan law for such rights as
 collective bargaining, strikes in public sector enterprises,
 and firing without indemnification or previous notice. The
 acceptance by Paraguay of the need for a direct contact mission
 represented a step forward; previously the Government of
 Paraguay had completely disregarded ILO expressions of concern.
 The Direct Contact Mission occurred in the fall, and the annual
 ILO report reflected the Government's position on the cases
 under review. As a result, the ILO made some recommendations
 to the Government for more careful future observance or ILO
 conventions.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 The Constitution establishes Roman Catholicism as the official
 state religion, but it also guarantees freedom of conscience
 for other denominations. With very few exceptions, this
 freedom is respected. Adherence to a particular creed confers
 no advantages within Paraguayan society and conversion from one
 faith to another is permissible. Many denominations conduct
 their activities freely, and missionaries are, for the most
 part, permitted to enter the country and proselytize. However,
 Paraguayan law prohibits the granting of legal status to new
 religious groups, and a few evangelical churches have been
 unable to obtain government approval for their operations. The
 Jehovah's Witnesses lost legal registration in 1979. The
 church filed an appeal with the Supreme Court, but no action
 has ever been taken on it. Further, under orders of the
 Ministry of Education, Jehovah's Witness children have been
 expelled from school because of their refusal, as a matter of
 their faith, to salute the national flag or sing the national
 anthem. Lower courts have found in favor of the children, but
 the cases have been overturned upon appeal, and the first test
 case is now before the Supreme Court.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration and Repatriation
 The Constitution provides for freedom of movement, which is
 usually not restricted within the country. Most citizens may
 enter or leave the country freely. However, members of one
 unrecognized political group have complained about a police
 requirement that they report any intention to leave the country
 48 hours in advance. In addition, opposition figures and human
 rights activists continue to complain about difficulties in
 obtaining passports. Nonetheless, there appear to have been
 fewer incidents of such restrictions on travel recently, and a
 number of prominent critics of the Government have traveled to
 international meetings. Three Paraguayans who live in exile
 and are not permitted to return despite the 1983 open door
 policy are Domingo Laino, the former head of the Authentic
 Radical Liberal Party; Luis Resck, the Vice President of the
 
 
 658
 PARAGUAY
 unrecognized Christian Democratic Party; and Agosto Roa Bastos,
 a leftist who is arguably Paraguay's most famous novelist.
 Members of the outlawed Paraguayan Communist Party living in
 exile would likely face imprisonment if they returned. During
 1985 the Government used State of Siege powers to relegate
 three individuals to internal exile.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 President Stroessner dominates the Paraguayan political
 system. He rules through the Colorado Party, which administers
 public patronage, through the military and police forces, which
 maintain public order and guarantee the security of the regime,
 and through the governmental bureaucracy. The legislative
 branch, consisting of a Senate and a Chamber of Deputies, is
 responsive to the desires of the President on all important
 matters. The Colorado Party's two-thirds majority in both
 houses gives it complete control of the legislature. There
 have been very few occasions under President Stroessner's rule
 when the legislative branch has rejected government proposals
 or policy. The legislative branch also automatically includes
 representatives of the opposition. Their one-third of the
 seats, divided among the two recognized opposition parties that
 present candidates, allow them to express their views and
 criticize the Government. Yet even though they have more seats
 than they actually have earned in recent elections, they have
 no real power to affect the workings of the legislature.
 General elections are held every five years for the presidency
 and the two houses of the legislature and were held most
 recently in 1983. Municipal elections, which were held in
 1985, also occur every five years. The law requires that all
 Paraguayans 18 to 60 years of age vote. However, sanctions for
 not voting are not usually applied except for public service
 employees. Two of the three legally recognized opposition
 parties participate in the electoral process; the third has
 participated in the past, but it currently declines to do so on
 the grounds that the Government's control over the political
 process makes such participation meaningless. In 1985, as in
 past elections, the absence of some opposition political
 parties, the system of indirect selection of candidates, and
 the control of the electoral machinery by the dominant Colorado
 Party resulted in a seriously flawed election. Secret ballot
 provisions were frequently abused, votes were counted in many
 cases without the presence of opposition poll watchers, and the
 Colorado Party ended up with over 100 percent of the votes of
 registered voters in some instances.
 Access to positions in the government, as well as in the
 officer ranks of the military and the police, is in practice
 limited to members of the Colorado Party. Individuals often
 join the party for economic and social advantages, such as
 enrollment in the national university or permission to bid on
 public contracts. At the local level, police and other
 government officials use their considerable powers and
 influence to support the Colorado Party. The opposition has
 yet to be awarded even one municipal election contest among the
 190 municipalities of the country.
 In addition to the three legally recognized opposition parties,
 there also exist three political parties which do not enjoy
 juridical recognition from the Government, and therefore cannot
 participate in the political process. These parties, the
 
 
 659
 PARAGUAY
 Christian Democratic Party, the Authentic Radical Liberal
 Party, and the Popular Colorado Movement (MOPOCO) are joined
 with the recognized Febrerista Party in the opposition
 coalition, the National Accord. The National Accord has as one
 of its primary tenets nonparticipation in elections until the
 election process has been opened up. Regardless of their legal
 status, all the National Accord parties are subject to even
 greater limitations on their political activities by the
 authorities than are the recognized opposition parties.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The Government describes negative comments about its human
 rights performance from outside sources as unwarranted
 interference in Paraguay's internal affairs. Nonetheless, the
 Government has recently begun to respond to inquiries from
 organizations such as the United Nations Human Rights
 Commission and the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights.
 In 1984 the UNHRC adopted a resolution concerning the impact of
 the State of Siege. in Paraguay. The Paraguayan Government has
 generally cooperated with the Commission. The Government has
 never agreed to a long-standing request from the Inter-American
 Human Rights Commission that it be invited to visit Paraguay.
 The most recent visits by private human rights organizations
 were in 1984, when the Inter-American Press Association and
 America's Watch each sent missions. They were received and
 permitted wide access, although not until after initial
 difficulties which displayed the Paraguayan Government's
 ambivalence towards such visits. While for the most part
 willing to allow visits by human rights activists, the
 Government rejects any suggestion that serious human rights
 problems exist in Paraguay.
 The Government allowed international efforts to determine
 whether Joseph Mengele, the Nazi war criminal, was still in
 Paraguay, despite its repeated assertions that Mengele was
 nowhere in the country. The Government points to the
 confirmation of Mengele's residence and death in Brazil as
 indicative that the international media are too ready to
 believe adverse information concerning Paraguay.
 A number of local private organizations continued to be active
 during 1985 in trying to protect individual liberties. These
 included the Inter-Faith Committee, which is supported by three
 church groups, the Paraguayan Human Rights Commission, the
 Paraguayan Chapter of the Association of Latin American Lawyers
 for the Defense of Human Rights, and the Union of Paraguayan
 Women. The opposition political parties and certain of the
 media also have sought to publicize human rights problems and
 to express support for a more open and democratic society.
 These human rights groups have made known cases involving
 alleged human rights violations and provided legal assistance
 to individuals. Their efforts have also helped to keep human
 rights abuses under international scrutiny and to secure the
 release of a number of detainees. As it is with foreign
 organizations concerned about human rights problems, the
 Government is critical of the work of local human rights
 organizations. Some local human rights activists complain of
 government harassment, which they attribute to their public
 criticism of human rights abuses.
 
 
 660
 PARAGUAY
 Amnesty International Report 1985, which covers events in 1984,
 expressed concern about 30 prisoners of conscience, most of
 whom faced charges under Law 209 which, according to Amnesty
 International, "has been used increasingly to prosecute people
 for the peaceful expression of their beliefs." Concern was
 also expressed about short term arrests under state of siege
 provisions, as well as legal proceedings in political trials
 which did not appear to conform to internationally recognized
 standards. Freedom House rated Paraguay "partly free."
 ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND CULTURAL SITUATION
 Paraguay's population, .estimated to be 3.7 million in 1985 and
 .growing at a rate of 3 percent per year, is small in relation
 to its land area of 157,047 square miles. The relative
 economic prosperity from the mid-1970's to the early 1980's
 pushed Paraguay into a middle-income developing country
 category with a per capita gross domestic product surpassing
 $1,000. Agriculture is the most important economic activity,
 accounting for nearly one-third of gross domestic product,
 one-half of employment, and over 95 percent of merchandise
 exports. Probably because of the relative abundance of good
 land, urban poverty and landlessness -- though on the rise --
 are not as apparent in Paraguay as in many other developing
 countries. Since economic policies and international prices
 for Paraguay's exports have not evolved in a manner conducive
 to a sustained recovery, the balance of payments remains in a
 deficit position, and there are substantial delays on
 international obligations.
 Even though nearly one quarter of the central government budget
 is devoted to health and education, funds available for social
 programs are low relative to needs. Users complain that public
 health and social security funds go to hospital construction
 and the purchase of sophisticated equipment, while staffing for
 basic health needs and supplies of medicines are inadequate.
 Basic health indicators, however, are improving. Life
 expectancy at birth was 66 years in 1985 and infant mortality
 was measured at 52.2 per thousand live births, down sharply
 from 109 in 1972. The population as a whole is judged to have
 a daily caloric intake approximately 20 percent greater than
 the minimum daily requirement. In the agrarian-based
 Paraguayan economy, adequacy of food is seldom a problem,
 although an imbalanced diet sometimes leads to problems of
 malnutrition among the poor. Government and private agencies
 attempt to address the latter problem through stronger home
 extension services. In 1980, it was estimated that 21 percent
 of the population--39 percent in urban areas and 10 percent in
 rural areas--had access to safe drinking water.
 Adult literacy was estimated at 80 percent in 1972. Over the
 years, education has become more widely available so that
 virtually all children receive some schooling. There are wide
 disparities, however, in the quality of primary education and
 the availability of secondary education in rural areas, where
 it is more difficult to provide services. Whereas nearly
 two-thirds of urban school children enter the sixth and last
 year of primary education, little more than a quarter of rural
 school children do so. The total retention rate from the first
 to the sixth year of primary education is about 40 percent.
 Furthermore, although nearly two-thirds of primary school
 graduates pass on to secondary education, only one-half that
 number (or about 13% of the population) actually graduate from
 secondary or intermediate level education.
 
 
 661
 PARAGUAY
 The Paraguayan Labor Code contains minimum guarantees of worker
 rights and benefits. Temporary, public sector and domestic
 workers are not covered under this law. According to the code,
 maximum hours are set at eight hours per day or seven hours for
 night work, with one day of rest per week. A minimum wage is
 established by the labor authority depending on the type of
 work and the region, based on studies of the cost of living by
 the National Economic Coordinating Committee. The law provides
 for a one month annual bonus. Minors between 15 and 18 years
 of age may be employed only with parental authorization and
 cannot be employed in dangerous or unhealthy conditions.
 Between 12 and 15 years, these same standards apply in addition
 to the restriction that work be at a family enterprise, an
 apprenticeship, or an agricultural endeavor. Married women
 require their husband's consent to enter a labor contract;
 however labor contracts may not be denied to women who worked
 prior to marriage. Paid maternity leave of six weeks prior to
 and after birth is required. Day care centers for children
 under two years are mandatory for enterprises employing more
 than fifty women. Severance pay is specified and compensation
 is provided for in the case of unjustified dismissal. The
 labor code also governs conditions of safety, hygiene and
 comfort.   Forced labor is not permitted. Finally, all workers
 must be enrolled in the Social Security Institute. The absence
 of a strong independent trade union movement, and the slowness
 of the labor law system to correct abuses, result in the
 frequent failure to apply the protections of the labor code.
 The Constitution guarantees "the equality of civil and
 political rights" of women, while emphasizing the importance of
 marriage and the unity of the family. Women play a minor role
 in the political life of Paraguay. The executive and judicial
 branches of government have only a few prominent female
 officials, and there are three women in the 90-member
 parliament. Several others, including a prominent human rights
 leader and a municipal council member, enjoy independent
 political renown. While the traditional social system limits
 the participation of women, particularly those from lower
 income groups, increasing numbers are participating in
 business, the professions, and the artistic world. However,
 women usually receive less renumeration than men for comparable
 work. There are two organizations concerned with women's
 rights: the Paraguay League of Women's Rights, a wing of the
 ruling Colorado Party; and the Union of Paraguayan Women, an
 organization founded in 1982 by a former opposition Member of
 the Parliament.
 Paraguay has an unassimilated Indian population estimated at
 45,000. The government's National Indigenous Institute can
 purchase land on behalf of the Indians and expropriate private
 property to establish tribal homelands. Implementation of this
 program has been slow and its promise thus far unrealized, but
 during 1985 the Institute purchased land on behalf of Indians
 for the second consecutive year. The problems of the Indian
 population continue to receive wide publicity in the Paraguayan
 media. The most controversial issue during 1985 concerned
 efforts by a prominent businessman to forcibly evict Indians
 from a traditional tribal area on a large landholding he had
 purchased. This occurred despite assurances from the Institute
 that it would protect the Indians from expulsion.
 
 
 662
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: PARAGUAY
 1983     1984     1985
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL..          3.2      2.7      1.6
 LOANS .................    0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................    3.2      2.7      1.6
 A.AID ....................      0.0      0.2      1.0
 LOANS .................    0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................    0.0      0.2      1.0
 (SEC.SUPP.ASSIST.)...         0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.FOOD FOR PEACE .......        0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS .................     0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................    0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE I-TOTAL ..........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS .....        0.0      0.0      0.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR .....        0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE 11-TOTAL .........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.RELIEF.EC.DEV & WFP.         0.0      0.0      0.0
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY .....        0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST,.          3.2      2.5      0.6
 LOANS .................     0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................     3.2      2.5      0.6
 PEACE CORPS ......        2.5      2.1      0.0
 NARCOTICS ........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 OTHER ..............      0.7      0.4      0.6
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL.:.         0.1      0.1      0.1
 LOANS ..............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................    0.1      0.1      0.1
 A.MAP GRANTS ..........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.CREDIT FINANCING ....        0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.INTL MIL.ED.TRNG ....        0.1      0.1      0.1
 D.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK...         0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS ........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. & NIL...         3.3      2.8      1.7
 LOANS .................     0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................     3.3      2.8      1.7
 OTHER US LOANS ..........        1.1      0.0      0.0
 EX-IM BANK LOANS .......        0.0      0.0      0.0
 ALL OTHER .................... 1.1       0.0      0.0
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1983     1984     1985     1946-85
 TOTAL ........   114.7     45.4     39.3   1089.5
 IBRD              40.0     30.0      0.0    457.6
 IFC                0.0      0.3      0.8     18.0
 IDA                0.0      0.0      0.0     45.5
 108               72.9     14.1     37.5    533.8
 ADS                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 AFDB               0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 UNOP               1.8      1.0      0.0     27.1
 OTHER-UN           0.0      0.0      1.0      7.5
 EEC                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 
 
 663
