Paraguay
Paraguay continues to make progress toward democratic reform and the rule of law since the overthrow of the Stroessner regime in 1989. The State Department's 1992 report on Paraguay is generally thorough and accurate. As noted by the report, Paraguay's adoption of a new constitution represents a major achievement. Unfortunately, the 1993 presidential elections, which took place after publication of the report, were marred by widespread reports of irregularities and thus undermined the first transition from one democratically elected government to another in decades. It is worth noting, however, that the report's introduction optimistically equates "full democracy" with the successful completion of an electoral process, when other sections of the discussion establish clearly that important aspects of democratic government have yet to be institutionalized. Problems of corruption, detention of suspects without court order or trial, torture by police of those in custody, eviction of squatters, the lack of an independent judiciary and failure to redress past abuses persist. The "discovery" of archives which document repression and human rights abuses from the Stroessner dictatorship will present additional challenges to the fledgling democracy.
A new Constitution was approved by the elected legislature in June 1992, replacing the Stroessner-era constitution from 1967. The new Constitution is comprehensive and enacts several institutional changes, some of which are discussed by the report. It limits, for example, the presidency to a single five-year term. The legislative branch is composed
of the Senate and Chamber of Deputies, whose members will serve five-year terms of office. Both chambers may create investigatory committees concerning issues of public interest. The Constitution also created the position of Public Defender, a congressional commissioner whose role is to defend human rights.
The Constitution institutes a council of magistrates which is responsible for nominating judges. This body is comprised of eight individuals: one representative each from the executive branch, Chamber of Deputies, Senate and Supreme Court; two law professors; and two attorneys from the Bar. Currently sitting judges will stay in office until the new executive comes to office, which is scheduled to occur on August 15, 1993.
The report fails to note several other significant provisions of the new Constitution. For example, the Constitution abolishes the death penalty, although the military Penal Code permits its use during wartime. It also states that there is no statute of limitations for crimes of genocide, torture, use of force for "disappearance" and politically-motivated homicide. In addition, military personnel and police officers on active duty may not join any political party or engage in any political activity.
The report does not mention the discovery late in the year of two groups of secret files from the Stroessner dictatorship (and a third set in January 1 993), which are known as "The Archives of the Terror" (Los Archivos del Terror). They document a range of the mechanisms
290
Paraguay
used by the former regime to violate human rights and to track suspected political opponents. The first set of files was located on December 22 in a police precinct in Lambare, outside Asunción. It contained documents from the Dirección de Política y Afines, the political wing of the Investigaciones police, which were taken to Judge José Agustin Fernandez' office in the Palace of Justice.
On December 23, files at the Dirección Nacional Asuntos Técnicos of the Ministry of the Interior were found. This department, which was known as a torture center, was responsible for political intelligence and surveillance; that it continued to function after the 1989 coup was a surprise to many. The Archives contain a variety of information, including identification documents of some individuals who had been "disappeared" during the Stroessner era, lists of paid informants, transcripts of intercepted telephone calls, reports of killings of several individuals, cards concerning the interrogations of Raul Schaerer Prono (which may further implicate General Britez Borges) and detentions and interrogations of others identified as "disappeared." These documents are now being reviewed.
"Operation Condor" (Operativo Condor) was also revealed in these archives. Operation Condor concerned the cooperation among the security forces in Argentina, Paraguay, Uruguay and Chile to track and detain suspected political opponents and to exchange political prisoners (suspected "communists" and "subversives") in the mid to late 1970s. The report's failure to discuss these documents may be attributable to their discovery in December, and a full discussion and analysis
should be included in next year's report.
The report accurately observes that, as a general rule, cases concerning abuses during the Stroessner regime have not keen actively pursued by the judiciary. In a landmark decision on May 21, Judge Luis Maria Benitez Riera handed down the convictions of four police officers for the torture and murder of Mario Raul Schaerer Prono. The police officers each received the maximum prison sentence of 25 years. Former police chief General Britez Borges was convicted of participating in covering up the crime and was sentenced to five years in prison. Appeals by all defendants are pending.
The Schaerer case represents the only conviction of members of the police or military for past human rights violations. Human rights advocates working on such matters are still subject to harassment. Amnesty International reports that Rodolfo Manuel Aseretto and Pedro Dario Portillo, attorneys representing victims and relatives of victims of past human rights abuses, received death threats in March. The Archives' discovery provides an evidentiary basis for accountability and redressing past violations, but it is premature to conclude that decisive action will be taken as a result of their discovery.
The report correctly notes that juveniles and adults detained by the police are frequently tortured. These abuses often occur before criminal charges are filed if charges are filed at all. Victims of torture are generally peasants or poor persons and do not seem to include political detainees as a class. Although a number of police officers have been charged with
291
Paraguay
torture, most cases are not pursued. In light of the near total absence of conviction and appropriate punishment of torturers, the State Department's attempt to recast as a virtue the fact that some security force agents are held for investigations and trial is curious. This fact seems to demonstrate the judicial system's unwillingness and/or inability to hold such persons fully responsible for violations of basic human rights, a situation which is more properly considered cause for concern.
Prisoners are reportedly held for significant periods of time without trial despite the constitutional provision which requires that the individual may be arrested only by a court order and that the police most notify a judge of a detention within 24 hours. Many are detained without warrant or court order. In fact, approximately 90% of the prisoners at several facilities (Emboscada, Tacumbu and Buen Pastor) serve the maximum term for the crime for which they have been charged and then are released without receiving a trial.
While the report notes several instances of abuse of minors, it should have recognized a pattern of abuse of juveniles which typically includes: detention by law enforcement after which transfer is made to Emboscada prison or other facility for questioning, followed by mistreatment or torture if he or she does not have the money to bribe the police. One such example of police abuse of juveniles not mentioned in the report is that of Ramon Melgarejo Ortega, a 16-year-old who was detained on April 6, taken to the 26th Comisarfa, tortured and released two days later without being
charged with any crime. The police reportedly placed a plastic bag over his head and tied the bag around his neck (which made it difficult for him to breathe), used pliers to rip flesh in his mouth under his tongue and beat him on the hands. A medical certificate issued on April 8 corroborated that he suffered injuries consistent with the torture he described. Melgarejo filed an official complaint (querella) against two officers. Melgarejo has alleged that after he filed the querella, he was detained without reason twice and that the police harassed him and his family and fired shots at him (but missed).
An example of torture of a peasant leader is that of Marcelino Corazon Medina. On December 10, he was arrested on a warrant during a protest march for having "instigating [a] land invasion." The warrant concerned a land occupation by peasant families. He reportedly was beaten before he was transported to Tacumbu prison. Doctors reported that he had suffered fractured ribs and severe bruising.
While the new Constitution recites the importance of agrarian reform, it seems to do little more than assert general principles and guidelines. As noted by the report, rural violence between peasants and landowners persists. While it appears to have diminished in comparison with the past few years, it remains a serious problem. In May and June, court-ordered evictions were conducted. These evictions resulted in the destruction of homes and crops in San Pedro and Alto Parana.
The report correctly describes in-
292
Paraguay
stances of political killings in 1992. One such example not discussed in the report is that of Bernardo Ramirez, reportedly killed by a soldier from Military Detachment No. 1. Although the State Department is not required to mention all instances of human rights abuses, this case has been brought to the attention of the Special Rapporteur on Extrajudicial, Summary or Arbitrary Executions of the UN Commission on Human Rights and is symptomatic of a widespread problem. On February 15, 1992, a peasant farmer named Rodolfo Ramirez was arrested near Yhovy (in the Canindiyu department). He and his brother, Bernardo, were taken to the house of Carlos Achucarro, the president of a local peasant neighborhood commission. At Achucarro's home, a soldier shot and killed Bernardo Ramirez and wounded Achucarro. Rodolfo Ramirez, who witnessed these shootings, was released one week later without charge. According to the Special Rapporteur, the government failed to rebut the allegation that there was no investigation of the case.
The new Constitution ensures freedom of the press; it proclaims that the mass media is of "public interest" and therefore cannot be shut down or suspended and also recognizes the people's right to be informed. There are, however, a few restrictions which are not discussed in the report. One provision, for example, proclaims that "any publication on pending court cases must not appear to pre-judge" and another states that "anyone affected by the dissemination of false, distorted, or ambiguous information" has the right to demand that the media correct or clarify the information. It is unknown at this time how these
articles will be applied. The inclusion of "ambiguous" information among the causes of action indicates that the provision is itself vague and open to potential abuse.
The report's description of worker rights is accurate. The Constitution pronounces the rights of freedom of association and non-discrimination of workers. It permits public and private workers to organize unions for the first time (with the exception of the armed forces and police). It also allows them to call strikes or lockouts, although the government may regulate these rights so that they do not affect essential public services.
The Constitution further proclaims that all persons are equal and specifically states that women have equal civil, political, social, and cultural rights. Women have equal rights on paper but have not achieved equality in the public sphere. The State Department, however, accurately reports discrimination experienced by women, the indigenous population, Koreans and Chinese.
293
