 PARAGUAY
 Paraguay is a constitutional republic with a strong executive branch and an in-
 creasingly important bicameral legislature. The President is the head of government
 and cannot succeed himself. In 1993 Juan Carlos Wasmosy became the country's
 first freely elected civilian president. (Authoritarian regimes had ruled the country
 until 1989, when dictator Alfredo Stroessner was overthrown by General Andres
 Rodriguez, who was electedpresident later that year.) There are three major politi-
 cal parties and a number of smaller ones. The opposition's power has increased as
 a result of the changes brought about by the 1992 Constitutin and the subsequent
 election of a civilian President and an opposition-controlled Congress. The Constitu-
 
 
 533
 tion provides for an independent judiciary and the Supreme Court completely re-
 staffed judicial and prosecutorial positions during the course of the year.
 President Wasmosy has worked to consolidate the nation's democratic transition,
 and in April he resisted an attempted coup by the then-army commander. The mili-
 tary no longer plays an overt political role, and the national police force, under the
 overall authority of the Ministry of the Interior, has responsibility for maintaining
 internal security and public order. The civilian authorities maintain effective control
 of the security forces. The police committed some human rights abuses.
 Paraguay has a market economy with a large informal sector. The formal economy
 is oriented towards services, with less than half of the $8 billion gross domestic
 product resulting from agriculture and industry. Over 40 percent of the population
 is engaged in agricultural activity. Wealth continues to be concentrated, with both
 urban and rural areas supporting a large subsistence sector. Agricultural commod-
 ities (soybeans, cotton, lumber, and cattle) continue to be the most important export
 items. Due to the lingering effects of a 1995 financial crisis, the economy grew 2
 percent in 1996, down from an average of 3 to 3.5 percent over the previous 5 years.
 Annual per capita income is approximately $1,500.
 The Government's human rights record improved somewhat, but serious problems
 remain in certain areas. Principal human rights problems included instances of
 extrajudicial killings, torture and mistreatment of criminal suspects and prisoners,
 poor prison conditions, detention of suspects without judicial orders, lengthy pretrial
 detention, general weaknesses within the judiciary, infringements on citizens' pri-
 vacy, and firings of labor organizers. Discrimination against women and indigenous
 people and violence against women are also problems. The Government used violent
 force to repress one general strike but acted with relative restraint during two oth-
 ers. The Government continued its efforts to convict and punish those who commit-
 ted human rights abuses during the Stroessner era, bringing several cases to a suc-
 cessful conclusion.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were at least three politically
 related killings prior to the November 17 municipal elections. The authorities ar-
 rested the opposition Liberal party mayor of Lambare, Celso Cabral, in connection
 with the November 1 slaying of Agustin Veron Prieto, a member of the ruling Colo-
 rado party, during a late-night barroom argument over politics. Cabral has been
 charged and is to be tried for the killing. The police arrested policeman Teofilo
 Sanabria for fatally shooting Colorado party activist Raul Bitter November 5, when
 Sanabria was trying to break up a fracas between Colorado and Liberal party mem-
 bers. Sanabria claimed the shooting was accidental; by year's end the prosecutor
 had not yet decided whether to file charges. The authorities arrested Tiburcio
 Nunez, a Colorado party member, for the November 6 killing of Arnaldo Gonzalez,
 an Encuentro Nacional supporter shot during a political gathering in the town of
 Capitan Bado. Another killing that may have been politically motivated was the No-
 vember 3 slaying of Ramn Alvarenga, a campaign manager for Encuentro Nacional,
 whom an unknown assailant shot twice outsidehis party office. The police were in-
 vestigating this incident at year's end.
 There were two instances of possible extrajudicial killings by law enforcement off-
 cials while performing their duties. On July 1, a guard shot in the back and killed
 Lourdes Estigarribia Velazquez, a pregnant inmate of the Buen Pastor women's
 prison, during an escape attempt. The prison guard who fired the shot claimed that
 it was a warning shot not aimed at the deceased. The case remained under judicial
 investigation at year's end. On November 2, police officer Oscar Raul Miranda
 Mazacote shot and killed Gilberto Ramon Diaz, a transvestite prostitute. Miranda,
 under arrest pending an investigation, said that the fatal round was a warning shot
 fired after Diaz and several other transvestites began throwing rocks at his police
 car.
 There were numerous allegations of mistreatment of military recruits by non-
 commissioned and commissioned officers, and several conscripts died in unclear cir-
 cumstances. Investigations into these incidents were still in progress at year's end.
 In February the Supreme Court of Military Justice sentenced a noncommissioned
 officer to 8 years in jail for murdering a conscript in 1994. The military formally
 charged another noncommissioned officer for the 1995 killing of a naval recruit.
 Two of the three judges who were in the process of trying the sedition case
 against former army commander Lino Oviedo received death threats; there were
 also allegations of bribery. The tribunal ruled that Oviedo had not committed sedi-
 tion, a decision very favorable to the defendant.
 
 
 534
 There were no major developments in the investigations into the 1995 killing of
 peasant protester Pedro Jimenez or the 1994 killings of peasant leaders Sebastian
 Larrosa and Esteban Balbuena.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution prohibits torture, as well as cruel, inhuman or degrading punish-
 ment or treatment; however, torture and brutal and degrading treatment of con-
 victed prisoners and other detainees continued. A human rights group, the Commit-
 tee of Churches, reported several cases of torture and other abusive treatment of
 persons, including women and children, designed to extract confessions, punish es-
 cape attempts, or intimidate detainees.
 The Public Ministry (Attorney General's office) and the Committee of Churches
 have filed several criminal complaints on behalf of prisoners, and these cases re-
 mained pending in the courts at year's end. The Justice and Labor Ministry sus-
 pended and commenced administrative disciplinary proceedings against four juve-
 nile prison guards charged with mistreating detained minors. These cases were
 pending at year's end. Mistreatment of conscripts was also a problem, and several
 conscripts died under unclear circumstances (see Section L.a.).
 There were charges that the police used excessive force during the May 2-3 gen-
 eral strike, when 130 people were injured-including 15 policemen-and more than
 20 persons were hospitalized. Police reportedly used truncheons against the dem-
 onstrators; none of the injuries were life-threatening.
 Credible reports continued that landowners, many of them Brazilians living near
 the border in the Alto Parana, Canindeyu, and Amambay departments, acted with-
 out court orders and armed their employees for the purpose of removing squatters
 from their property. Some of the evictions reportedly were violent, and there were
 unsubstantiated reports of fatalities. However, the authorities undertook no effec-
 tive action in response to these reports.
 On December 31, the Supreme Court overturned the 1963 murder conviction of
 Captain Napoleon Ortigoza, who had been released from prison in 1988. The Court
 ruled that the conviction was based on a confession obtained under torture.
 Orti~oza, an opponent of dictator General Stressner, was reportedly subjected to
 beatings, electroshocks, and 6 months' confinement in a 2-by-i meter cell during his
 years m prison. A delegation from the Inter-American Human Rights Commission
 called the Court's decison "a very positive action that speaks well of the judicial
 branch."
 Prison conditions are extremely poor. Overcrowding and unsanitary living condi-
 tions were the most serious problems affecting all prisoners. Mistreatment of pris-
 oners is also a serious problem. Tacumbu prison, the largest in Asuncion, was built
 to hold 800 inmates but currently houses over 1,400. Similar cases of overcrowding
 exist at other facilities. At the priso  n Encarnacion there is one latrine for 280
 detainees.
 President Wasmosy was shocked b   conditions in_ the Panchito elpez juvenile de-
 tention enter during an Otober visit, and directed the prompt installation of rof-
 ing and a new sewage system, which was completed before the end of that month.
 In December the Supreme Court upheld a lower court decision that ordered  the
 Ministry of Justice and Labor (responsible for prison operations) to report on the
 status of the criminal cases against, and the physical condition and needs of, each
 minor being held at Panchito Lopez. The Mimstry had sought to overturn the deci-
 sion, which responded to a habeas orpus suit ied by Fundacion Tekojoja, a non-
 governmental organization (NGO) dedicated to the protection of children's rights.
 The Government permits independent monitoring of prison conditions by inter-
 estd NGO's.
 d. Arbitra y Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The Constitution prohibits detention
 without an arrest warrant signed by a judge and stipulates that any person arrested
 must appear before a judge within 48 hours to make a statement. The police can
 arrest persons without a warrant if the  cath  hem ingte act of committing a
 crime, but must bring them before a judge witbin 24 hours. However, the authori-
 ties often violated these provisions.
 More than 95 percent of an estimated 3,052 prisoners are being held pending
 trial, many for months or years after their arrest. Only 4 of 224 jailed juveniles
 have been convicted. While the law encourages speedy trials, the Constitution per-
 mits detention without trial until the accused completes the minimum sentence for
 the alleged crime, which often occurs in practice. A bail system exists for most
 crimes, but does not apply to juveniles. Judges frequently set relatively high bail,
 and many accused are unable to post bond. The Supreme Court, the Public Min-
 istry, anda judicial working group took steps to reduce the large number of detain-
 ees held without being sentenced or without cause, but achieved only modest re-
 
 
 535
 sults. The Supreme Court and many criminal court judges also make quarterly vis-
 its to the prisons to identify and release iroperly held individuals.
 The Constitution expressly prohibits emplyng exile as a punishment.
 e. Denial of Fair Public 7W&.-The Constitution provides for an independent judi-
 ciary, and the nine-member Supreme Court is independent in practice.
 There are four types of appellate tribunals: Civil and commercial, criminal, labor,
 and juvenile. Several minor courts and justices of the peace fall within these four
 functional areas. Based on recommendations from the Magistrates Council, the Su-
 preme Court named some 215 lower court judges and magistrates. While judges tra-
 ditionally have been subject to political and economic influence, the new Supreme
 Court acted promptly in several cases to investigate and sanction judges and pros-
 ecutors suspected of improper activity. It prosecuted three judges and four more are
 under investigation. The judicial system remains relatively inefficient, however, due
 to outdated penal and criminal procedure codes, insufficient resources, and delays
 as the new judicial officials learn their tasks.
 The 1992 Constitution stipulates that all defendants have the right to an attor-
 ney, at public expense if necessary, but this right often is not respected in practice.
 Many destitute suspects receive ittle legal assistance, and few have access to an
 attorney sufficiently in advance of the trial to prepare a defense. There are only 31
 public defenders available to assist the indigent. Moreover, the public defenders lack
 the resources to perform their jobs adequately. For example, it is reported that no
 public defender visited the Emboscada prison from January until September be-
 cause none could obtain access to an official vehicle.
 Trials are conducted almost exclusively by presentation of written documents to
 a judge who then renders a decision. A Public Ministry official is responsible in most
 cases for bringing charges against accused persons. Defendants and the Public Min-
 istry can present written testimony of witnesses as well as evidence. All interested
 parties have access to all documents reviewed by the judge, and defendants can
 rebut witnesses. Defendants en'  a presumption of innocence. The judge alone de-
 termines guilt or innocence and decides punishment. During the pretrial phase, the
 udge receives and may request investigative reports. In this phase, the judge is also
 ikely to make a personal inspection of the scene of the crime and of the available
 physical evidence. The accused often appears before the court only twice: To plead
 and to be sentenced. An appellate judge automatically reviews all verdicts, and the
 law provides for appeals to the Supreme Court. The military has its own judicial
 system.
 A separate documentation center and repository holds the government archives
 discovered in December 1992, which document various human rights abuses and im-
 plicate many former government officials of the Stroessner regime. The appellate
 court affirmed the convictions for human rights abuses of five Stroessner-era offi-
 cials (former police investigations director Pastor Coronel and police officers Lucilo
 Benitez Santacruz, Agustin Bellotto Vouga, Camilo Almada Morel, and Juan Aniceto
 Martinez), as well as their sentences from 9 to 25 years in prison.
 There were no reports of political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-While
 the Government and its security forces generally did not interfere in the private
 lives of citizens, there were exceptions in which local officials and police officers
 abused their authority by entering homes or businesses without warrants and
 harassing private citizens. The Constitution provides that police may not enter pri-
 vate homes except to prevent a crime in progress or when the police possess a judi-
 cial warrant. There were allegations that the Government occasionally spied on indi-
 viduals and monitored communications for political and security reasons. There also
 were credible allegations that some government agencies required or pressured their
 employees to join or campaign on behalf of the ruling Colorado party.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of expres-
 sion and the press, and the Government respects these rights in practice. The public
 and the press exercised these rights more freely than at any time in the nation's
 recent history.
 The print and electronic media are independently owned. The media commonly
 criticized the Government and freely discussed opposition viewpoints. Although the
 authorities made several attempts to use the judicial system to silence the press
 the courts dismissed them at the trial or appellate level. An appellate court reversed
 a lower court decision that found a columnist for the afternoon daily Ultima Hora
 guilty of libeling a prominent Colorado party politician in 1992. The appellate court
 ruling stated that, although a free press may at times offend, its overall value in
 democracy outweighs its costs. Vladimir Jara, a journalist for the ABC Color news-
 
 
 paper,had his residence broken into and received death threats after he published
 reports on suspected law enforcement corruption.
 The Government does not restrict academic freedom
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution provides for
 the right of all citizens to free association and peaceful assembly. A law regulating
 demonstrations in Asuncion limits the areas where and the hours when demonstra-
 tions may take place, and requires that organizers notify the Asuncion police 24
 hours before any rally in the downtown area. The police may ban a protest but must
 provide written notification of such a ban within 12 hours of receipt of the organiz-
 ers' request. The law permits a police ban only if a third part has already given
 notice of plans for a similar rally at the same place and time. in addition, the law
 prohibits public meetings or demonstrations in front of the Presidential Palace and
 outside military or police barracks.
 Most political and social demonstrations and rallies occurred without major inci-
 dents, including the Marh 15 peasant march, and the March 28 and August 28
 gneral stries. However, there was violence during the May 2-3 general strike,
 which resulted in the arrest of several union leaders, 130 injries, and charges of
 excessive use of force by the police (see Section 1.c.).
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for freedom of conscience for
 all persons and recognizes no official religion; the Government continued to respect
 this freedom. Roman Catholicism is the predominant religion, but all denominations
 are free to worship as they choose. Adherence to a particular creed confers no legal
 advantage or disadvantage, and foreign and local missionaries proselytize freely. All
 religious groups must be registered with the Ministry of Education and Worship,
 but the Government impoes no controls on these groups.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country,. Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-All citizens may travel freely within the country with virtually no re-
 strictions, and there are no restrictions on foreign travel or emigration.
 The Government cooperates with the office of the United Nations High Commis-
 sioner for Refugees and other humanitarian organizations in assisting refugess.
 There are no established provisions to grant asylum or refugee status; the Immigra-
 tion Department determines each reuest on a case-by-case basis in consultation
 with the Ministries of Foreign Relations and the Interior and the Committee of
 Churches (an NGO that investigates claims to refugee status). The issue of the pro-
 vision of first asylum has never arisen. There were no reports of the forced return
 of persons to countries where they feared persecution.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens have the right and ability to change their government through demo-
 cratic means. Multiple parties and candidates contest the nation's leadership posi-
 tions. Four parties are represented in the Congress, and nine candidates ran Tor the
 presidency in 1993. The Constitution and the Electoral Code mandate general elec-
 tions every 5 years, voting by secret ballot, and universal suffrage. The executive
 and legislative branches govern the country; opposition political parties control the
 Congress. Debate is free and frank. The Congress often rejects important govern-
 ment proposals and overrides presidential vetoes.
 The Government survived a test in April, when army commander General Lino
 Oviedo threatened to remove President Wasmosy. Strong public reaction and
 prompt international condemnation convinced him to back down and accept appoint-
 ment as Defense Minister, a pst not in the chain of command. However, President
 Wasmosy rescinded that offer, in the face of continued public demonstrations, after
 Oviedo retired from the army.
 Vestiges remain, however, of the Stroessner-era merging of the State, the armed
 forces, and the Colorado party. The press has reported the use of state resources,
 particularly vehicles, to support party political rallies. There were also credible re-
 ports of government officials requiring public employees to attend Colorado party
 functions and contribute to party coffers. Since the failure of the April coup attempt,
 military influence over political activity diminished markedly.
 There are no formal legal impediments to women seeking to participate in govern-
 ment and politics. Voters elected 5 women to the Congress (3 of 45 Senators, 1 of
 whom died7 in October, and 2 of 80 national Deputies), and there is 1 woman, the
 Secretary for Women's Affairs, in the Cabinet. The new Electoral Code requires
 that, in their internal primaries, 20 percent of each party's candidates for elective
 office be women. Women are well-represented in the judicial system as judges and
 prosecutors.
 Members of indigenous     ups are entitled to vote, and the percentage of indige-
 nous people who exercise this right grew dramatically in recent years. Neverthe-
 
 
 537
 less, the inhabitants of some indigenous communities report being threatened and
 inhibited from fully exercising their political rights.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Several human rights groups operate in Paraguay, including the Committee of
 Churches (an interdenominational group that monitors human rights and provides
 legal assistance), Prodemos (a group linked to the Catholic church), Tekojoja (a
 group dedicated to protection of-children's rights), SERPAJ (a group that defends
 conscientious objectors), and the local chapter of the Association of Latin American
 Lawyers for the Defense of Human Rights. The Government did not restrict the ac-
 tivities of any human rits grup.
 The Director Geneal, of Human Rights, located in the Ministry of Justice and
 Labor, chairs the National Commission on Human Rights, which is drafting a na-
 tional plan on human rights and sponsors seminars to promote human rights aware-
 ness. This office has access to congressional, executive, and judicial authorities. It
 does not have subpona or prosecutorial powers, but may forward information con-
 cerning human rights abuses to the Attorney General for action. It also serves as
 a clearing house for information on human rights and has trained thousands of edu-
 cators in human rights law.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 Although the Constitution and other laws prohibit discrimination, certain groups
 faced significant discrimination in practice.
 Women.-Spousal abuse is common. In 1994 primary care centers treated over
 5,000 women for injuries linked to domestic violence, and greater numbers are esti-
 mated for 1996. Official complaints are rarely iled, or wen fled are soon with-
 drawn due to spousal recnciation or family pressure. The Public Ministry is pros-
 ecuting just two cases of spousal abuse, both of which are pending before the courts.
 To date the courts have not yet convicted any perpetrators of domestic violence
 against women. The Secretariat of Women's Affairs chairs a national committee,
 made up of other governmentn an   eand NGO's, that has developed a national
 plan to prevent and punish violence against women. Pursuant to the plan, an office
 of care and orientation receives reports on violence against womnt and coordinates
 responses with the National Police, primary health care units, the Attorney Gon-
 eral's office, and NGO's. The Secretariat also conducts training courses for the po-
 lice, health care workers, prosecutors, and others.
 The law prohibits trafficking and sexual exploitation of women, but the authori-
 ties do not enforce it effectively. Exploitation of women, especially teenage pros-
 titutes, remains a serious problem. Law enforcement officials regularly stage raids
 on houses of prostitution, and several brothel owners were being tried for employing
 minors, although there were no convictions in these cases by year's end.
 The Secretary for Women's Affairs continued to sponsor programs intended to en-
 able women to have free and equal access to employment, social security, housing,
 ownership  of land, and    business  opportumties. However, sex-rolated jb
 discriminationcontinues to be common and widely tolerated. Seoe women com-
 plained that job promotions were conditioned upon their granting sexual favors.
 Several groups work to improve conditions for women. One is SEFEM, which
 highlights such issues as women and public policy, women and social policy, partici-
 pation of women in local development, and women in the Americas. Other groups
 includ Sumand, an NGO promoting educational reform policy and voter participa-
 tion in elections, and Women for Democracy, which is active in civic and electoral
 education. These groups are effective advocates for change.
 Children.-The Constitution protects certain children as rights, and stipulates that
 parents and the State should care for, feed, educate, and support children. Boys aed
 girls are entitled to equal treatment in education and health care.
 There is no societl pattern of abuse of children. However, approximately 26,000
 children work in urban areas as street vendors or as prostitutes. The majority of
 these children suffer from malnutrition, lack of access to education, and disease. The
 employers of some young girls working as domestic servants or nannies deny them
 access to education and mistreat them. Employers sometimes falsely charge those
 who seek to leave domestic jobs with robbery and turn them over to the police.
 Baby trafficking continued to be a serious problem, as foreign adoptive parents
 were willing to pay from $20,000 to $40,000 in adoption fees and costs to adopt a
 healthy baby. In order to develop new legislation to address the problem, in 1995
 the Government suspended international adptions for 1 year; Congress extended
 this suspension for an additional 6 months in September.
 
 
 538
 President Wasmosy and the armed forces chief of staff have ordered all officers
 responsible for recruiting to ensure that all conscripts meet the constitutionally
 mandated minimum age of 17 years for military service. There were several re-
 ported violations, including allegations of military recruiters forcing underage re-
 cruits to join units. The military took no significant disciplinary action against those
 responsible for underage recruits.
 People With Disabilities.-The 1992 Constitution provides for equal opportunity
 for people with disabilities and mandates that the State provide them with health
 care, education, recreation, and professional training. It further requires that the
 State formulate a policy for the treatment, rehabilitation, and integration into soci-
 ety of people with disabilities. Congress has never enacted, however, legislation to
 establish such programs. Many people with disabilities face significant discrimina-
 tion in employment; others are unable to seek employment because of a lack of ac-
 cessible public transportation. Accessibility for the disabled has not yet been man-
 dated through law; the vast majority of the nation's buildings, both public and pri-
 vate, are inaccessible to people with disabilities.
 Indigenous People.-The unassimilated and neglected indigenous population is es-
 timated at 75,000 to 100,000. Weak organization and lack of financial resources
 limit access by indigenous people to the political and economic system. Indigenous
 groups relied primarily upon parliamentary commissions to promote their particular
 interests, notwithstanding the fact that the Constitution provides indigenous people
 with the right to participate in the economic, social, political, and cultural life of
 the nation. The Constitution also protects their property interests, but these rights
 are still not fully codified. The Constitution provides that Public Ministry officials
 may represent indigenous people in matters involving the protection of life and
 property. The Public Ministry has charged landowners with exploiting and killing
 Indians on their estates. These cases remained under judicial investigation at year's
 end.
 The Government's National Indigenous Institute has the authority to purchase
 land on behalf of indigenous communities and to expropriate private property under
 certain conditions to establish tribal homelands. However, many indigenous people
 find it difficult to travel to the capital to solicit land titles or process the required
 documentation associated with land ownership.
 The main problems facing the indigenous population are lack of education, mal-
 nutrition, lack of medical care, and economic displacement resulting from develop-
 ment and modernization. Scarce resources and limited government attention re-
 sulted in little progress in dealing with these problems.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Associaton.-The Constitution allows both private and public sec-
 tor workers (with the exception of the armed forces and the police) to form and join
 unions without government interference. The Constitution contains several provi-
 sions that protect fundamental worker rights, including an antidiscrimination
 clause, provisions for employment tenure, severance pay for unjustified firings, col-
 lective bargaining, and the right to strike. Approximately 10 percent (150,000) of
 workers are organized.
 In general, unions are independent of the Government and political parties. How-
 ever, one of the nation's three labor centrals, the Confederation of Paraguayan
 Workers (CPT), has traditionally been closely aligned with the ruling Colorado
 party. These ties appear to be loosening, as the CPT supported all three general
 strikes.
 All unions must be registered with the Ministry of Justice and Labor. The reg
 istration process is cumbersome and can take several months. Employers who wish
 to oppose the formation of a union can further delay union recognition by filina
 writ opposing it. However, virtually all unions that request recognition eventuly
 receive it, and the Ministry recognized 29 new unions through October. The Con-
 stitution provides for the right to strike, bans binding arbitration, and prohibits ret-
 ribution against strikers and leaders carrying out routine union business, a prohibi-
 tion often violated by employers. Voluntary arbitration decisions are enforceable by
 the courts, but this mechanism is still rarely employed. High-level labor ministry
 officials are available to mediate disputes, and helped resolve over 50 cases.
 The International Labor Organization (ILO) Committee on Freedom of Association
 criticized the Government for failing to protect worker rights in five cases dealing
 with minimum-wage fixing machinery, the right to organize, abolition of forced
 labor, discrimination in employment and occupation, and employment policy.
 Unions are free to form and join federations or confederations and affiliate with
 and participate in international labor bodies.
 
 
 539
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The law provides for collec-
 tive bargaining, and many collective contracts were sucessfully concluded. The
 number of negotiated collective contracts continued to grow; however, they were still
 the exception rather than the norm in labor-management relations and typically re-
 affirmed minimum standards established by law. When wages are not set in free
 negotiations between unions and employers, they are made a condition of individual
 offers of employment made to employees.
 While the Constitution prohibits antiunion discrimination, the firing and harass-
 ment of some union organizers and leaders in the private sector continued. Fired
 union leaders can seek redress in the courts, but the labor tribunals have been slow
 to respond to complaints and typically favored business in disputes. The courts are
 not required to order the reinstatement of workers fired for union activities. As in
 previous years, in some cases where judges ordered reinstatement of discharged
 workers, the employers disregarded the court order with impunity. There are a
 number of cases in which trade union leaders, fired as long as 5 years ago, have
 not yet received a decision from the courts.
 There were more than 30 strikes by unions affiliated with the Unitary Workers
 Central alone. The vast majority of these were directly related to the firing of union
 officials (over 100 cases reported), to management violations of a collective contract,
 to management efforts to prevent the free association of workers, or to demands for
 benefits such as payment of the minimum wage or contribution to the social security
 system. The failure to meet salary payments also frequently precipitated labor dis-
 putes. Principal problems included bottlenecks in the judicial system and the inabil-
 ity or unwillingness of the Government to enforce labor laws. There were also com-
 plaints of management creating parallel or "factory" unions to comte with inde-
 pendently formed unions. There were several cases of workers who chose not to pro-
 test because of fear of reprisal or anticipation of government inaction.
 The major labor centrals and peasant organizations organized general strikes on
 March 15, May 2-3, and August 28. The strikes were relatively peaceful, with scat-
 tered incidents of violence, demonstrations, and vandalism, but no deaths or serious
 inuries were reported (see Section 1.c.). Police arrested several labor leaders during
 the May strike, but quickly released them.
 c. Prohibition of Frced or Compulsory Labor.-The law prohibits forced labor.
 However, cases of abuse of national service obligations occurred. There were several
 reports of conscripts forced to work as servants or construction workers for military
 officers in their residences or privately owned businesses. Apart from abusing na-
 tional service obligations the authorities appear to effectively enforce the law.
 d. Minimum Age for Emloyment of Children.-The Director General for the Pro-
 tection of Minors in the Minstry of Justice and Labor is responsible for enforcing
 child labor laws. Minors between 15 and 18 years of age may be employed only with
 parental authorization and cannot be employed in dangerous or unhealthy condi-
 tions. Children between 12 and 15 years of age may be employed only in family en-
 terprises, apprenticeships, or in agriculture. The Labor Code prohibits work by chil-
 dren under 12 years of age, and all children are required to attend elementary
 school. In practice, however, many thousands of children many of them younger
 than 12 years of age, may be foundin urban areas engaged in informal employment
 such as selling newspapers and sundries, shining shoes, and cleaning car windows.
 In rural areas, it is not unusual for children as young as 10 years of age to work
 beside their parents in the field. Local human rights groups do not regard families
 harvesting the crop together as an abuse of child labr.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The executive, through the Ministry of Justice
 and Labor, has established aprivate sector minimum wage sufficient to maintain
 a minimally adequate standardof living. The minimum salary is adjusted whenever
 annual inflation exceeds 10 percent and was $240 per month (480,069 guaranies)
 at year's end. The Ministry is unable to enforce the minimum wage, however, and
 most analysts agree that from 50 to 70 percent of workers earn less than the de-
 creed minimum
 The Labor Code allows for a standard legal workweek of 48 hours (42 hours for
 night work), with 1 day of rest. The law also provides for an annual bonus of 1
 month's salary and a minimum of 6 vacation days a year. The law rqis overtime
 payment for hours in excess of the standard, but there are no prohibitions on exces-
 sive compulsory overtime. Many employers violate these provisions. Workers in the
 transport sector routinely stage strikes to demand that their employers comply with
 the Labor Code's provisions on working hours, overtime, and minmum wage pay-
 ments.
 The Labor Code also stipulates conditions of safety, lygiene, and comfort. The
 Ministry of Justice and Labor and the Ministry of Health did not effectively enforce
 these provisions, due in part to a lack of inspectors and other resources. This led
 
 
 540
 
 the labor movement to sponsor inspector training programs designed to ensure that
 unsafe or unhealthy conditions were registered. Workers have the right to remove
 themselves from situations that endanger health or safety without jeopardy to their
 continued employment, but may not do so until such conditions are formally recog-
 nized by the Ministries of Labor and Health. Although workers who file complaints
 about such conditions are protected by law, many employers reportedly took discipli-
 nary action against them.