 PARAGUAY
 Paraguay is a constitutional republic with a strong executive branch and an in-
 creasingly important bicameral legislature. The President is the head of government
 and cannot succeed himself. 'On May 10, Raul Cubas Grau of the Colorado Party
 became the country's second freely elected civilian President. The turnover of power
 that occurred on August 15 was the first from one civilian government to another
 in over 50 years and resulted from the most transparent electoral process in the
 country's history. Former army commander Lino Oviedo, elected as the Colorado
 Party presidential candidate in September 1997, was disqualified as a candidate due
 to his conviction by a military tribunal for sedition and rebellion, and he forfeited
 the nomination to his running mate, Cubas. Two days after taking office, Cubas
 commuted Oviedo's sentence, only to have the Supreme Court overturn that decree
 in early December. Cubas issued another decree that simply noted the decision and
 ordered that it be fied. He then sent the Court's decision back to the military tribu-
 nal (newly constituted with pro-Oviedo officers) for review and implementation. Al-
 though the Constitution provides for an independent judiciary and the Supreme
 Court continued its process of reform, the courts are subject to pressure by politi-
 cians and others, and there also were concerns at year's end about the President's
 handling of the Supreme Court decision against his decree commuting Oviedo's sen-
 tence.
 The military no longer plays an overt political role; however, rumors of coup-plot-
 ting persisted during the year until Oviedo's disqualification. Although the mili-
 tary's political role has diminished considerably since 1989, many citizens were con-
 cerned that the major personnel changes made by the new Government may erode
 its apolitical status. The national police force has responsibility for maintaining in-
 ternal security and public order, while it is nominally under the authority of the
 presidency, under the current administration it reports to the Ministry of the Inte-
 rior. The civilian authorities maintain effective control of the security forces. The
 police committed some human rights abuses.
 Paraguay has a market economy with a large informal sector. The formal economy
 is orientedtoward services, with less than half of the $10 billion gross domestic
 product resulting from aiculture and industry. Over 40 percent of the population
 is engaged in agricultural activity, and approximately 20 percent of families depend
 on cotton farming. Wealth continues to be concentrated, with both-urban and rural
 areas supporting a large subsistence sector. Agricultural commodities (soybeans, cot-
 ton, lumber, and cattle) were the most important export items. The economy con-
 tracted by a pproximately 0.5 percent in 1998. Annual per capita income was ap-
 proximately $1,600.
 The Government's human rights record improved slightly, but serious problems
 remain. The principal human rights problems included torture and mistreatment of
 criminal suspects, prisoners, and military recruits; poor prison conditions; arbitrary
 arrest; detention of suspects without judicial orders; lengthy pretrial detention, gen-
 eral weaknesses within the judiciary; infringements on citizens' privacy; discrimma-
 tion against women, the disabled, and indigenous people; violence against women;
 abuse of children and child labor; and firings of labor organizers.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no reports of politically
 motivated killings in 1998.
 Human rights monitors, including a support group for families of military re-
 cruits, report that 53 military recruits have died since 1989 at the hands of the mili-
 tary and the police. In January two conscripts disappeared and were presumed
 dead, allegedly having been abandoned in the Chaco region by their commanding
 officer, Lieutenant Blas Vera. A judge opened a case in Filadelfia and named Vera
 as the accused. At year's end, a conflict in jurisdiction between military and civilian
 courts had delayed the case.
 In 1997 police officers were involved in the shooting death of a student, Gustavo
 Daniel Gonzalez Delgado. Human rights monitors claimed that Gonzalez was shot
 three times, after police opened fire on his car, following a traffic incident between
 Gonzalez's car and a police vehicle. Gonzalez's parents declined to bring charges
 against the police. The authorities elevated the case from an internal police inves-
 tigation to a criminal case in May 1997, but there has been no further action.
 There was no further action in the investigations into the 1995 killing of peasant
 protester Pedro Jimenez or the 1994 killings of peasant leaders Sebastian Larrosa
 and Esteban Balbuena.
 
 
 729
 Authoritarian regimes ruled the country until 1989, when dictator Alfredo
 Stroessner was overthrown by General Andres Rodriguez, who was elected Presi-
 dent later that year. The judicial branch continued its efforts to convict and punish
 those who committed human rights abuses, including extrajudicial killings, during
 the Stroessner era.
 In one case, Judge Ruben Dario Frutos ordered the return of police official
 Eusebio Torres to jail for the 1974 double homicide of Benjamin and Rodolfo
 Villalba. Frutos had released Torres in 1996 after a police report stated that Torres
 had been working in a different section of the police department than the one in
 which the victims were interrogated and murdered. The testimony of three wit-
 nesses, who testified that they had seen Torres take part in the interrogations, and
 that of Pastor Coronel, a Stroessner-era police official who also has been jailed for
 his role in human rights abuses, convinced Frutos to reverse his decision.
 On July 30, the Supreme Court upheld the constitutionality of two laws that could
 provide as much as $6 million in reparations to former political prisoners and other
 victims of human rights violations during the Stroessner regime. However, budg-
 etary and bureaucratic constraints could delay the payment process.
 On October 2, President Cubas annulled the decrees issued by former president
 Stroessner in 1970, which had been used to wrongfully imprison and discharge Cap-
 tain Modesto Napoleon Ortigozo and Captain Heran Fernando Falcon for the mur-
 der of cadet Alberto Benitez. Ortigoza and Falcon were convicted in 1963. The Su-
 preme Court ruled in 1996 that the confessions were extracted under duress and
 therefore invalid. Imprisoned for 25 years, Ortigoza endured numerous beatings and
 was once sentenced to over 6 months' solitary confinement in a tiny cell.
 The October arrest of former Chilean dictator General Augusto Pinochet in the
 United Kingdom drew renewed attention to extrajudicial killings and other abuses
 that occurred under the Stroessner regime. There were renewed allegations that
 Stroessner cooperated in Operation Condor, a regional plan to eliminate leftists.
 One human rights activist, who was a political prisoner during that time, has filed
 cases with Spanish judge Baitasar Garzon, who was preparing the case against
 Pinochet, and provided him with documents from Paraguayan archives that he
 claims implicate General Pinochet in Operation Condor.
 In 1996 an appellate court affirmed the convictions for human rights abuses of
 five Stroessner-era officials (former police investigations director Pastor Coronel and
 olie officers Ludio Benitez Santacruz, Agustin Bellotto Vouga, Camilo Almada
 orel, nd Juan Aniceto Martinez). The authorities also continued their cases
 against former police chief Ramon Duarte Vera (see Section 1.c.).
 On November 11, three armed civilian security guards reportedly killed
 Gumersindo Pavon Diaz, a peasant laborer, on land that had been expropriated in
 1996 from a businessman who had rejected the Government's offered price and was
 seeking judicial redress. Rural peasants responded violently, burning down build-
 ings owned by the real estate company that operates on the land. Landowner Ro-
 berto Antebi stated publicly that the security guards had found Pavon Diaz trying
 to steal a horse, and that the shooting was accidental. The authorities arrested one
 of the guards; two remained at liberty. The cases were pending at year's end.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution prohibits torture, as well as cruel, inhuman or degrading punish-
 ment or treatment; however, torture (primarily beatings) and brutal and degrading
 treatment of convicted prisoners and other detainees continued. A human rights
 nongovernmental organization (NGO), the Committee of Churches, reported several
 cases of torture and other abusive treatment of persons, including women and chil-
 dren, designed to extract confessions, punish escape attempts, or intimidate detain-
 ees.
 The Attorney General's office and the Committee of Churches compiled examples
 of numerous incidents of police abuse and extrajudicial killings. One incident, re-
 ported by local human rights advocates, involved the torture of juvenile detainees
 in the Pedro Juan Caballero prison by police guards. According to the juveniles, they
 were handcuffed and hung by their wrists, without their feet touching the floor, for
 several hours. The guards then forced them to undress and humiliated them. A
 judge decided to detain two of the alleged perpetrators, while acquitting-the others.
 In May 1997, the United Nations Committee against Torture criticized the Gov-
 ernment for continued torture and mistreatment of prisoners and detainees by the
 police.
 There were numerous allegations of mistreatment of military recruits by non-
 commissioned and commissioned officers. Such mistreatment has resulted in a num-
 ber of deaths (see Section l.a.). One incident reported to the Senate Commission on
 Human Rights involved a group of women involuntarily brought to a police station
 
 
 730
 without cause and left in the care of 17-year-old noncommissioned officer Edgar
 Dulcirio Ojeda. The women escaped and Silvio Silvero, the commanding officer, beat
 Dulcirio until he lost consciousness. On July 21, the authorities arrested Silvero,
 charged him with a "serious infraction" involving "abuse of authority," and imposed
 an administrative punishment of 30 days' disciplinary arrest. Silvero remained on
 the police force.
 Stroessner-era police chief, retired General Duarte Vega, arrested in 1997 for acts
 of torture committed in 1963, remained in a military prison. Victims continued to
 file additional charges against him, and the case was ongoing at the end of the year.
 Credible reports continued that landowners, many of them Brazilians living near
 the border in the Alto Parana, Canindeyu, and Amambay departments, forcibly re-
 moved squatters from their property with the help of the police. Some of the evic-
 tions reportedly were violent, with paid armed civilians operating in conjunction
 with police personnel. The authorities undertook no effective action in response to
 these reports.
 Prison conditions are extremely poor. Overcrowding and unsanitary living condi-
 tions were the most serious problems affecting all prisoners. Mistreatment of pris-
 oners is also a serious problem. Tacubu prison, the largest in Asuncion, was built
 to hold 800 inmates but houses over 1,400. Other regional prisons generally hold
 about three times more inmates than origially planned. Jailing large numbers of
 landless peasants for trespassing exacerates prison overcrowding. The regional
 prison in Coronel Oviedo has a capacity of 120 inmates but holds almost 500.
 Security is another problem. For example, there are only 30 guards to supervise
 over 600 inmates in the Alto Parana prison. In 1997 the Congressional Human
 Rights Commission criticized the prisons for heir poor nutitional standards. Pris-
 ons generally serve one meal a day and prisoners seldom get vegetables, fruit, or
 a meat protein source, unless they have individual means to urchase them. At the
 prison in Encarnacion there is one latrine for 280 detainees. risons have separate
 accommodations for well-to-do prisoners, ensuring that those with sufficient means
 receive far better treatment than other prisoners.
 The Government permits independent monitoring of prison conditions by human
 rights organizations.   h
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-Arbitrary arrest and detention are prob-
 lems. The Constitution prohibits detention without an arrest warrant signed by a
 judge and stipulates that any person arrested must appear before a judgewithin
 24 hours to make a statement. The police can arrest persons without a warrant if
 they cateh them in the act of committing a crime but must bring them before a
 judge within 24 hours. However, according to human rights activists, the authorities
 often violated these provisions.
 Pretrial detention remains a serious problem. More than 95 percent of the over
 5,000 prisoners were held pending trial, many for months or years aer their arrest.
 Of the 600 inmates in Almto Parana prison, for example, only 18 have been sen-
 tenced. While thelaw encourages speedy trials, the Constitution permits detention
 without trial until the accused completes the minimum  sentence for the alleged
 crime, which often occurs in practice. A bail syest ess for most crimes, and
 judges have discretion over it. Judges frequently set relatively high bail, and many
 accused persons are unable to post bond. The Supreme Court, the Public Ministry,
 and a judicial working group have taken steps to reduce the large number of pre-
 trial detainees but achieved only modest results. The Supreme Court and many
 criminal court judges also make quarterly visits to the prisons to identify, and re-
 lease improperly held individuals.
 The Constitution expressly prohibits exile, and the Government does not use it.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-sThe Constitution provides for an independent judi-
 ciary; however, it often is pressured by politicians and other persons whose interests
 are at stake. There also were concerns about the Presidentes handling of the Su-
 reme Court decision against his decree commuting General Oviedo's sentence (see
 S ection 3). Nonetheless, the judiciary is not allied with any one political group.
 The nine-member Supreme Court appoints lower court judges and magistrates,
 based upon recommendations by the Magisrate's Council. There are five types of
 appellate tribunals: Civil and commercial, criminal, labor, administrative disputes,
 and juvenile. Several minor courts and justices of the peace fall within these five
 functional areas. The judicial system remains relatively inefficient, due to outdated
 penal and criminal procedure codes, insufficient resources, and delays as new judi-
 cial officials learn their tasks. There is also a large backlog of cases. The military
 has its own judicial system.
 The Constitution stipulates that all defendants have the right to an attorney, at
 ublic expense if necessary, but this right often is not respected in practice. Many
 estitute suspects receive little legal assistance, and few have access to an attorney
 
 
 sufficiently in advance of the trial to prepare a defense. In Asuncion, for example,
 there are only 13 public defenders available to assist the indigent. Some judicial dis-
 tricts have not even been assigned public defenders. Moreover, the public defenders
 lack the resources to perform their jobs adequately.
 Trials are conducted almost exclusively by presentation of written documents to
 a judge who then renders a decision. A Public Ministry official is responsible in most
 cases for bringing charges against accused persons. Defendants and the Public Min-
 istry can present written testimony of witnesses as well as evidence. In practice, tes-
 timony is oral and generally taken by members of the judicial staff, without a judge
 present. All interested parties have access to all documents reviewed by the judge,
 and defendants can rebut witnesses. Defendants enjoy a presumption of innocence.
 The judge alone determines guilt or innocence and decides punshment During the
 pretrial phase, the judge receives and may request investigative reports. In this
 phase, the judge is also likely to make a personal inspection of the scene of the
 crime and of the available physical evidence. The accused often appears before the
 court only twice: to plead and to be sentenced. If the sentence is appealed, an appel-
 late judge reviews the verdict, and the law provides for appeals to the Supreme
 Court in certain cases.
 Judicial reform has been under way since 1992. A new Penal Code entered into
 force in November and replaced the antiquated 1914 code. It establishes the protec-
 tion of fundamental human rights. In July Congress passed another important re-
 form, the Criminal Procedures Code, which is to take effect in July 1999. It includes
 procedures for an oral and accusatorial system, as well as a faster and more trans-
 parent criminal trial process. If implemented effectively, these reforms could im-
 prove the credibility of the judicial system and reduce the number of persons in pre-
 trial detention.
 A separate documentation center and repository holds the government archives
 discovered in December 1992, which document various human rights abuses and im-
 plicate many former government officials of the Stroessner regime (see Section l.a.).
 There were no reports of political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-While
 the Government and its security forces generally did not interfere in the private
 lives of citizens, human rights activists claimed that local officials and police officers
 abuse their authority by entering homes or businesses without warrants and
 harassing private citizens. The Constitution provides that police may not enter pri-
 vate homes except to prevent a crime in progress or when the police possess a judi-
 cial warrant. There were allegations that the Government occasionally spied on indi-
 viduals and monitored communications for political and security reasons. There also
 were credible allegations that some government agencies required or pressured their
 employees to join or campaign on behalf of the ruling Colorado Party. There were
 allegations of forced conscription of underage youth (see Section 5).
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Constitution provides for freedom of expres-
 sion and the press, and the Government respects these rights in practice. The public
 and the press exercised these rights freely.
 The print and electronic media are independently owned. The media commonly
 criticized the Government and freely discussed opposition viewpoints.
 The police did not reopen the investigation into the 1991 murder of journalist and
 radio station owner Santiago Leguizamon in Pedro Juan Caballero. According to one
 of the major daily newspapers, two suspects have been identified, Luiz Henry
 Rodrigez Georges and Daniel Alvarez Georges, who are living in Brazil across the
 border from Pedro Juan Caballero. Leguizamon's widow stated publicly that the in-
 vestigation was held up because "the accused are people of considerable influence."
 The Government does not restrict academic freedom.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution provides for
 the right of all citizens to peaceful assembly, and the Government generally respects
 this right in practice. In 1997 the Government amended a law regulating dem-
 onstrations in Asuncion that further restricted areas where demonstrations may
 take place, but it expanded slightly the hours in which they may be held. Union
 groups were the most vocal opponents of the modifications. The law requires that
 organizers notify the Asuncion police 24 hours before any rally in the downtown
 area. The police may ban a protest but must provide written notification of such a
 ban within 12 hours of receipt of the organizers' request. The law permits a police
 ban only if a another party already has given notice of plans for a similar rally at
 the same place and time. In addition, the law prohibits public meetings or dem-
 onstrations in front of the presidential palace and outside military or police bar-
 racks. This law does not apply to religious processions.
 
 
 Political demonstrations and rallies occurred without major incidents. In March
 thousands of peasants from the interior marched on Asuncion to protest perceived
 government indifference to problems of land, health, and education. On December
 22, supporters of General Oviedo protested in the streets of Asuncion, breaking win-
 dows at the Supreme Court building and blocking two major highways for 3 hours.
 The police stopped buses that defied a transportation strike, bringing charges of
 government complicity in the demonstration.
 The Constitution provides for the right of all citizens to free association, and the
 Government respects this right in practice.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for freedom of conscience for
 all persons and recognizes no official religion; the Government respects this right
 in practice. Roman Catholicism is the predominant religion, but all persons are free
 to worship as they choose. Adherence to a particular creed confers no legal advan-
 tage or disadvantage, and foreign and local missionaries proselytize freely. All reli-
 gious groups must be registered with the Ministry of Education and Worship, but
 the Government imposes no controls on these groups.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-All citizens may travel within the country with virtually no restrictions,
 and there are no restrictions on foreign travel or emigration.
 The Government cooperates with the office of the United Nations High Commis-
 sioner for Refugees and other humanitarian organizations in assisting refugees.
 There are no established provisions to grant asylum or refugee status; the Immigra-
 tion Department determines each'request on a case-by-case basis in consultation
 with the Ministries of Foreign Relations and the Interior and the nongovernmental
 Committee of Churches (that investigates claims to refugee status). The issue of the
 provision of first asylum has never arisen.
 There were no reports of the forced return of persons to countries where they
 feared persecution.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right ofCitizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens have the right and ability to change their government through demo-
 cratic means. Multiple parties and candidates contest the nation's leadership posi-
 tions. Four parties are represented in the Congress, The Constitution and the Elec-
 toral Code mandate general elections every 5 years, voting by secret ballot, and uni-
 versal suffrage. Debate in Congress is free and frank. The Congress often rejects the
 executive branch's proposals.
 The executive branch.and other political players asserted significant pressure on
 the Supreme Electoral Tribunal (TSJE), in an attempt to delay the May elections.
 However, the TSJE took a hard line against-this pressure, and, in the end, the
 TSJE and the executive branch ensured that the elections took place at the constitu-
 tionally mandated time. Raul Cubas Grau defeated the opposition Democratic Alli-
 ance candidate, Domingo Laino, by 11 percentage points in elections observed by the
 Organization of American States and other international observers, who considered
 them to be free and fair.
 There are three major political parties and a number of smaller ones. The opposi-
 tion's power had increased as a result of the changes brought about by the 1992
 Constitution and the subsequent election of a civilian president and an opposition-
 controlled Congress. However, the Colorado Party swept the 1998 general elections,
 and the opposition lost control of both chambers of Congress.
 The Government survived a test in April 1996, when then-army commander Gen-
 eral Lino Oviedo defied a presidential order to resign and attempted to pressure
 President Juan Carlos Wasmosy to resign. A strongly negative public reaction and
 prompt international criticism convinced Oviedo to back down. After retiring from
 the military, he entered politics and ran for president.
 In 1997 the TSJE declared Oviedo the winner of the Colorado Party presidential
 primary. However, the TSJE disqualified him after the Supreme Court in April
 upheld his conviction by a military tribunal for insubordination and armed rebellion
 in connection with his actions in April 1996. Oviedo already had been subjected to
 30 days' detention for violating military discipline, and to a further indefinite deten-
 tion, pursuant to a military court order, as a "moral author or suspected accomplice"
 in the 1996 crisis. The TSJE named Oviedo's running mate, Raul Cubas Grau, as
 the Colorado Party's presidential candidate 3 weeks prior to the election. Oviedo and
 his supporters argued that there were major irregularities in the decisions of the
 military tribunal and the Supreme Court. After the election, in June the Chamber
 of Deputies passed a bill that would have prevented Oviedo from receiving a pardon
 for 5 years and disqualifying him from running for president through 2008.
 
 
 733
 
 After assuming office, President Cubas commuted Oviedo's sentence and freed
 him, and in August a new military court (newly constituted with pro-Oviedo officers)
 annulled his previous conviction. Opponents challenged these measures in the judi-
 cial system. In September the Supreme Court ruled that the new military tribunal's
 ruling was invalid, and that the original sentence should stand. In December the
 Supreme Court ruled that Cubas' decree commuting Oviedo's sentence was unconsti-
 tutional, and that its original decision to uphold the 10-year sentence imposed by
 the first military tribunal should be enforced. Cubas responded with another decree,
 noting the court's decision and ordering that it be filed. He then sent the case to
 a lower military tribunal for review and implementation. At year's end, there was
 considerable tension regarding the President's refusal to honor the Supreme Court's
 decision. The Supreme Court also sent a copy of its decision to the TSJE, which
 must rule on whether or not Oviedo retains hiF political rights, i.e., the right to vote
 and run for office.
 The Colorado Party controls Congress, and vestiges remain of the Stroessner-era
 merging of the State, the armed forces, and the Colorado Party. The press reported
 the use of state resources, particularly vehicles, to support party political rallies.
 There were also credible reports of government officials requiring public employees
 to attend Colorado Party functions and contribute funds to the party (see Section
 1.f.). These allegations increased during the Colorado Party presidential primary
 campaign, and continued during the general election campaign, as th- Colorado
 Party used state employees and resources to fend off the strongest challenge in 50
 years to its hold on the presidency. Only a few weeks before the election, President
 Wasmosy ordered state employees to take to the streets to protest an unfavorable
 TSJE ruling. This trend continued in the Cubas administration when, in early De-
 cember, it was reported that public employees were encouraged to attend a pro-
 Oviedo rally and protest in front of the Congress.
 There are no legal impediments to women seeking to participate in government
 and politics, but in practice they are somewhat underrepresented. In May voters
 elected 10 women to Congress (8 of 45 senators and 2 of 80 national deputies), and
 there are 3 women in the Cabinet. The new Electoral Code requires that, in their
 internal primaries, 20 percent of each party's candidates for elective office be
 women. Women are well-represented in the judicial system as judges and prosecu-
 tors.
 Members of indigenous groups are entitled to vote, and the percentage of indige-
 nous people who exercised this right has grown significantly in recent years. Never-
 theless, the inhabitants of some indigenous communities report being threatened
 and inhibited from fully exercising their political rights.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Several human rights groups operate, including the Committee of Churches (an
 interdenominational group that monitors human rights, investigates refugee claims,
 and provides legal assistance), Tekojoja (a group dedicated to the protection of chil-
 dren s rights), and SERPAJ (a group that defends conscientious objectors). The Gov-
 ernment did not restrict the activities of any human rights group; however, it has
 a mixed record in cooperating with or responding to recommendations.
 The Director General of Human Rights, located in the Ministry of Justice and
 Labor, chairs the National Commission on Human Rights. The Commission sponsors
 seminars to promote human rights awareness. The Director General's.office has ac-
 cess to congressional, executive, and judicial authorities. It does not have subpoena
 or prosecutorial powers but may forward information concerning human rights
 abuses to the Attorney General for action. It also serves as a clearinghouse for infor-
 mation on human rights and has trained thousands of educators in human rights
 law.
 The office of the Attorney General's special adviser on human rights has been ex-
 tremely active in pursuing justice against human rights abusers from the Stroessner
 regime. Although the position has little real authority, the adviser is an ardent
 spokesman for the human rights community and the rights of the disenfranchised
 and uses his position to identify and publicize human rights abuses by the Govern-
 ment.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 Although the Constitution and other laws prohibit discrimination, certain groups
 faced significant discrimination in practice.
 Women.-Spousal abuse is common. Thousands of women are treated annually for
 injuries sustained in violent domestic situations. According to women's rights activ-
 
 
 734
 ists, official complaints rarely are fied, or when filed are soon withdrawn due to
 spousal reconciliation or family pressure. The Secretariat of Women's Affairs chairs
 a national committee, made up of other government agencies and NGO's, that has
 developed a national plan to prevent and punish violence against women. Pursuant
 to the plan, an office of care and orientation receives reports on violence against
 women and coordinates responses with the national police, primary health care
 units, the Attorney General's office, and NGO's. The Secretariat also conducts train-
 ing courses for the police, health care workers, prosecutors, and others.
 Violence against women has been targeted as a key area of concern by several
 NGO's and the Secretariat of Women's Affairs. According to a 1995-96 national cen-
 sus on reproductive health, 14 percent of women reported that they were abused at
 some point in their lives. Most observers believe this number understates the re-
 ality. In Asuncion alone, observers believe close to 5,000 cases of violence against
 women go unreported each year. Almost 30 percent of the women who responded
 that they had been physically abused but did not report the abuse said that they
 believed that they could resolve the situation themselves. Approximately 20 percent
 feared reprisals from their attacker. About 25 percent of all violent crimes take
 place in the home, with the vast majority directed against women. Almost 20 per-
 cent of women with less than 2 years of education reported being abused; roughly
 10 percent of women report being hit by their spouses. Under the Criminal Code,
 a rapist may be exonerated of the crime if he agrees to marry the victim and the
 victim accepts.- Women's rights and advocacy groups succeeded in widening the de-
 bate about violence against women. The Women's November 25th Collective oper-
 ates a shelter for battered and abused women, where they can seek medical and
 legal assistance.
 The law prohibits trafficking and sexual exploitation of women, but the authori-
 ties do not enforce it effectively. Exploitation of women, especially teenage pros-
 titutes, remains a serious problem. Law enforcement officials regularly stage raids
 on houses of prostitution, and there were cases of arrests and closures of brothels
 where minors were involved in prostitution.
 The Secretariat of Women's Affairs continued to sponsor programs intended to en-
 able women to have free and, equal access to employment, social security, housing,
 ownership of land, and business opportunities. Sex-related job discrimination contin-
 ues to be common and widely tolerated. Claiming that a majority of women in the
 workplace face sexual harassment, in 1997 several unions and NGO's sponsored a
 campaign against sexual harassment. The campaign was prompted in part by the
 plight of two women who sued their employer for sexual harassment, lost their suit,
 and then were held criminally liable for defamation and injury. The unions' cam-
 paign against sexual harassment is an ongoing effort.
 Women have much higher illiteracy rates than men. In addition, maternal mortal-
 ity rates are high, and as many as 65 percent of such deaths are related to poor
 medical care. Several groups work to improve conditions for women. One is Women
 for Democracy, which is active in-civic and electoral education. Other groups include
 Sumando, an NGO promoting educational reform policy and voter participation in
 elections; Sefem, which highlights such issues as women and public policy, women
 and social policy, participation of women in local development, and women in the
 Americas; and the Women's November. 25th Collective, which sponsors a home for
 battered women and helps coordinate legal assistance. These groups are effective
 advocates for change.
 Children.-The Constitution protects certain children's rights, and stipulates that
 parents and the State should care for,feed, educate, and support children. Boys and
 girls are entitled to equal treatment in education and health care. Elementary
 school education is compulsory through the sixth grade. Access to primary education
 is widespread, with approximately 95 percent of eligible children attending first
 grade, although only 54 percent reach the sixth grade. However, female access to
 education is lower, particularly in rural areas.
 Abuse of children is a problem. According to the United Nations Children's Fund,
 one in three children (some 462,000) between the ages of 7 and 17 work, many in
 unsafe labor conditions. According to a study by a local NGO, between 3,700 and
 6,000 children and adolescents work in the streets of Asuncion. Many of these chil-
 dren suffer from malnutrition, lack of access to education, and disease. The typical
 work day extends from before 7:00 a.m., uninterrupted, until 5:00 p.m. The employ-
 ers of some of the estimated '11,500 young girls working as domestic servants or
 nannies deny them access to education and mistreat them. Employers sometimes
 file false charges of robbery against those who seek to leave domestic jobs and turn
 them over to the police. Sexual exploitation is a problem, and of all.the females who
 report being sexually exploited, 58.5 percent are 16 years old or younger. According
 to the Attorney Generals office, there are approximately 200 complaints per month
 
 
 regarding mistreatment and sexual abuse of minors. The Government has taken ef-
 fective steps to combat the problem of baby trafficking and in 1995 enacted a mora-
 torium on international adoptions.
 In 1996 then-president Wasmosy and the armed forces Chief of Staff ordered all
 officers responsible for recruiting to ensure that all conscripts meet the constitu-
 tionally mandated minimum age of 17 years for military service. However, there
 were several reported violations, including allegations of military recruiters forcing
 underage youths to join units. The military took no significant disciplinary action
 against those responsible for underage recruits. Human rights groups and some
 military personnel allege that poor families knowingly send underage children to
 the armed forces for the economic benefits.
 People With Disabilities.-The Constitution provides for equal opportunity for peo-
 ple with disabilities and mandates that the State provide them with health care,
 education, recreation, and professional training. It further requires that the State
 formulate a policy for the treatment, rehabilitation, and integration into society of
 the disabled. However, the Congress has never enacted legislation to establish such
 programs. Many persons with disabilities face significant discrimination in employ-
 ment; others are unable to seek employment because of a lack of accessible public
 transportation. The law does not mandate accessibility for the disabled, and the vast
 majority of the nation's buildings, both public and private, are inaccessible to the
 disabled.
 Indigenous People.-The Constitution provides indigenous people with the right to
 participate in the economic, social, political, and cultural life of the nation. Never-
 theless, the indigenous population, estimated at 75,000 to 100,000, is unassimilated
 and neglected. Low wage levels, long work hours, infrequent payment (or non-
 payment) of wages, job insecurity, lack of access to social security benefits, and ra-
 cial discrimination are common. Weak organization and lack of financial resources
 limit access by indigenous people to the political and economic system. Indigenous
 groups relied primarily upon parliamentary commissions to promote their particular
 interests. The Constitution also protects the property interests of indigenous people,
 but these rights still are not codified fully. The Constitution provides that Public
 Ministry officials may represent indigenous people in matters involving the protec-
 tion of life and property.
 A lack of access to sufficient land hinders the ability of indigenous groups to
 progress economically and maintain their cultural identity. The Government's Na-
 tional Indigenous Institute (INDI) has the authority to purchase land on behalf of
 indigenous communities and to expropriate private property under certain condi-
 tions to establish tribal homelands. However, there have been significant allegations
 of wrongdoing within INDI, and in 1997 a congressional human rights committee
 requested an accounting of INDI's land purchases and transfers. In 1998 allegations
 of poor performance because of corruption continued. Many indigenous people find
 it difficult to travel to the capital to solicit land titles or process the required docu-
 mentation associated with land ownership. After spending much time petitioning
 the Government, on July 28 between 50 and 70 families in indigenous communities
 received title to about 50,000 acres of traditional lands that the Government had
 acquired from cattle ranchers; additional requests were pending at year's end.
 Significant problems facing the indigenous population are lack of education, mal-
 nutrition, lack of medical care, and economic displacement resulting from other
 groups' development and modernization. Scarce resources and limited government
 attention resulted in little progress in dealing with these problems. On October 12,
 2,000 representatives of the Enxet and Toba Qom indigenous communities from the
 Chaco region marched on Asuncion to demand 'and, food, health care, and edu-
 cation." Leaders of the tribal groups met with President Cubas and congressional
 leaders.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The Constitution allows both private and public sec-
 tor workers (with the exception of the armed forces and the police) to form and join
 unions without government interference. The Constitution contains several provi-
 sions that protect fundamental worker rights, including an antidiscrimination
 clause, provisions for employment tenure, severance pay for unjustified firings, col-
 lective bargaining, and the right to strike. Approximately 150,000, or 10 percent, of
 workers are organized in approximately 1,300 unions.
 In general, unions are independent of the Government and political parties. One
 of the nation's three labor centrals, the Confederation of Paraguayan Workers
 (CPT), traditionally was aligned closely with the ruling Colorado Party, but these
 ties appear to be loosening.
 
 
 736
 All unions must be registered with the Ministry of Justice and Labor. The reg-
 istration process is cumbersome and can take several months. Employers who wish
 to oppose the formation of a union can further delay union recognition by filing a
 writ opposing it. However, virtually all unions that request recognition eventually
 receive it. The Constitution provides for the right to strike, bans binding arbitration,
 and prohibits retribution against strikers and leaders carrying out routine union
 business, a prohibition often violated by employers. Voluntary arbitration decisions
 are enforceable by the courts, but this mechanism still is employed rarely. Senior
 labor ministry officials are available to mediate disputes.
 The International Labor Organization (ILO) Committee of Experts has noted defi-
 ciencies in the application of certain conventions ratified by the Government. These
 include conventions dealing with minimum wage fixing machinery, abolition of
 forced labor, minimum age of employment, freedom of association, equal remunera-
 tion, and employment policy.
 There were numerous strikes by members of all three worker centrals. Many of
 these were related to the firing of union officials, management violations of a collec-
 tive contract, management efforts to prevent the free association of workers, or de-
 mands for benefits such as payment of the minimum wage or contribution to the
 social security system. A 24-hour general strike on November 25 led to some scat-
 tered acts of violence and vandalism, but largely was ineffective. The most notice-
 able effect was the lack of public transportation, more a testament to the superior
 organizational skills of the transport unions than symbolic of public support for the
 strike. Rural peasant groups had threatened to shut down major roadways through-
 out the country, but inclement weather largely undermined these efforts. The strike
 was indicative of much of the disorganization and discord that exists within the
 labor movement.
 One major strike in April involving 3 unions and 44 bus lines lasted 6 days.
 Transport workers protested violations of the Labor Code by bus managers, includ-
 ing long work days and lack of access to social security benefits. Violence occurred
 during the strikeperiod, as strikers attacked two buses, burning one. There were
 no injuries or deaths.
 Violence against bus owners and their buses oftn erupts during strikes. In one
 instance a bus was set on fire and its driver, who ownedthe bus, was robbed and
 assaulted. Police suspected that striking union members were responsible for the at-
 tack.
 Unions are free to form and join federations or confederations and affiliate with
 and participate in international labor bodies.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The law provides for collec-
 tive bargaining. The number of negotiated collective contracts continued to grow;
 there were 93 in 1998. However, they were still the exception rather than the norm
 in labor-management relations and typically reaffirmed minimum standards estab-
 lished by law. When wages are not set in free negotiations between unions and em-
 ployers, they are made a condition of individual offers of employment.
 While the Constitution prohibits antiunion discrimination, the firing and harass-
 ment of some union organizers and leaders in the private sector continued. Union
 organizers sometimes are incarcerated for their role in leading demonstrations. In
 February the authorities jailed six union members accused of leading bus drivers
 in a demonstration. One of the accused openly admitted that he had participated
 in the demonstration but maintained that he had broken no law. Fired union lead-
 ers can seek redress in the courts, but the labor tribunals have been slow to respond
 to complaints and typically favored business in disputes. The courts are not required
 to order the reinstatement of workers fired for union activities. As in previous years,
 in some cases where judges ordered the reinstatement of discharged workers, the
 employers disregarded the court order with impunity. There are a number of cases
 in which trade union leaders, fired as long as 5 years earlier, have not yet received
 a decision from the courts.
 The failure to meet salary payments also frequently precipitated labor disputes.
 Principal problems inciuded bottlenecks in the judicial system and the inability or
 unwillingness of the Government to enforce labor laws. There were also complaints
 that management created parallel or "factory" unions to compete with independently
 formed unions. There were several cases of workers who chose not to protest be-
 cause of fear of reprisal or anticipation of government inaction.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The law prohibits forced labor, in-
 cluding that performed by children (see Section 6.d.). However, cases of abuse of na-
 tional service obligations occurred. There were several reports of conscripts forced
 to work as servants or construction workers for military officers in their residences
 or privately owned businesses. There also were allegations of forced conscription of
 
 
 underage youths (see Section 5). Apart from the abuse of national service obliga-
 tions, the authorities appear to enforce the law effectively.
 d. Status of Child Labor Practices and Minimum Age for Employment.-The Di-
 rector General for the Protection of Minors in the Ministry of Justice and Labor is
 responsible for enforcing child labor laws. The law prohibits forced or bonded labor
 by children, and generally is enforced effectively, although there were allegations of
 forced conscription of underage youths (see Sections 5 and 6.c.). Minors between 15
 and 18 years of age may be employed only with parental authorization and cannot
 be employed in dangerous or unhealthy conditions. Children between 12 and 15
 years of age may be employed only in family enterprises, apprenticeships, or in agri-
 culture. The Labor Code prohibits work by children under 12 years of age, and all
 children are required to attend elementary school through the sixth grade. In prac-
 tice, however, many thousands of children, many of them younger than 12 years of
 age, may be found in urban areas engaged in informal employment such as selling
 newspapers and sundries, shining shoes, and cleaning car windows (see Section 5).
 In rural areas, it is not unusual for children as young as 10 years of age to work
 beside their parents in the field. Local human rights groups do not regard families
 harvesting the crop together as an abuse of child labor.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-The executive, through the Ministry of Justice
 and Labor, has established a private sector minimum wage sufficient to maintain
 a minimally adequate standard of living for a worker and family. The minimum sal-
 ary is adjusted whenever annual inflation exceeds 10 percent and was approxi-
 mately $211 (591,444 guaranies) per month at year's end. However, the Ministry is
 unable to enforce the minimum wage, and most analysts agree that 50 to 70 percent
 of workers earn less than the decreed minimum.
 The Labor Code allows for a standard legal workweek of 48 hours (42 hours for
 night work), with 1 day of rest. The law also provides for an annual bonus of 1
 month's salary and a minimum of 6 vacation days a year. The law requires overtime
 payment for hours in excess of the standard, but many employers violate these pro-
 visions. There are no prohibitions on excessive compulsory overtime. Workers in the
 transport sector routinely stage strikes to demand that their employers comply with
 the Labor Code's provisions on working hours, overtime, and minimum wage pay-
 ments.
 The Labor Code also stipulates conditions of safety, hygiene, and comfort. The
 Ministry of Justice and Labor and the Ministry of Health did not effectively enforce
 these provisions, due in part to a lack of inspectors and other resources. In 1997
 the Ministry sponsored the reconvening of a tripartite group of government, labor,
 and employers in an effort to update the labor inspection manual, which was se-
 verely outdated. In addition to updating the labor manual, the program was initi-
 ated with the goal of expanding transparency in the labor inspection process. On
 April 30, the Minister for Justice and Labor approved the use of the new manual
 by all labor inspectors. The Ministry distributed 2,000 copies throughout the country
 and devised an action plan to provide feedback on the manual's utility.
 Workers have the right to remove themselves from situations that endanger
 health or safety without jeopardy to their continued employment, but they may not
 do so until such conditions are recognized formally by the Ministries of Justice and
 Labor and Health. Although there are laws intended to protect workers who file
 complaints about such conditions, many employers reportedly took disciplinary ac-
 tion against them.
