PARAGUAY
Once again, the State Department has produced a report that accurately portrays human rights practices in Paraguay. Over the last several years, the reports have provided a consistently frank and well-informed assessment of the patterns of repression that have characterized the dictatorship of General Alfredo Stroessner.
In 1988 " an election year in Paraguay — the report observes: The Government continued to repress human rights and to do so unpredictably. Not only did authorities violate at will constitutional and legal provisions protecting persons and groups, but they did so inconsistently. Such extralegal arbitrariness made it difficult for those opposing the Government to know the boundaries within which they were allowed to operate. The only guaranteed safe course was to refrain from any criticism of the Government.
The report appropriately discredits General Stroessner's re-election, explaining that "control of the electoral machinery by the dominant Colorado Party and the absence of participation by most opposition parties significantly diminished the importance of the February election." It emphasizes the extent to which General Stroessner, through the Colorado Party, the military and the police, controlled the legislative and judicial branches of government.
The report also describes the government's attacks on the emboldened Paraguayan Catholic Church in the aftermath of the visit of Pope John Paul II in May 1988. Among the attacks described are a fierce media campaign against Church leaders; the arrest and expulsion of a Spanish Jesuit priest; and the violent response of the police toward participants in a silent march protesting the priest's expulsion.
The State Department is meticulous in discussing the major human rights concerns in General Stroessner's 34th and final year in power. It notes a substantial increase in arbitrary short-term detentions of opposition figures,
135
Critique
some of whom claim to have been mistreated, and many of whom were held incommunicado. It also provides an account of what it refers to as the first alleged case of torture of a political prisoner in several years; and describes police abuse as an apparently common practice in criminal cases, noting a press report of torture by police of oiminal suspects in one city.
The report covers other persistent abuses such as the further restriction of press fi-eedom with the dosing of La República, a political and literary journal; the frequent and often violent disruption of opposition activities, including a peaceful march to commemorate the 40tb anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights during which more than 100 organizers and participants were arrested; and the harassment of trade unionists and failure to respect internationally recognized worker rights, which led the U.S. to suspend trade benefits in 1987. The State Department points out that these abuses continued despite the lapsing of the sixty-year-old state of siege in 1987.
One area of special concern mentioned only superficially in this year's report is the plight of peasants involved in land disputes with powerful landowners mostly tied to the Colorado Party. A May 1988 Americas Watch report, "Repression in the Countryside," detailed recent cases, and reports of violent evictions and detentions of peasants continued throughout 1988. This is an issue worthy of closer attention.
U.S. Ambassador Clyde Taylor was an effective force, under great adversity, in the promotion of human rights in General Stroessner's Paraguay. This solid report is evidently the product of Ambassador Taylor's interest in human rights. Only months before the February 1989 coup in which General Andrés Rodr^ez ousted General Stroessner, Ambassador Taylor was replaced by Timothy Towel. We encourage Ambassador Towel to continue the work of his predecessor by making clear to the new government that he supports a reversal of General Stroessner's abysmal human rights record. Human rights practices must remain at the center of U.S. attention during this critical moment in Paraguayan history.
136
