Putting Development to Rights:
Integrating Rights into a Post-2015 Agenda
By David Mepham
Before Tunisia’s popular uprising erupted in late 2010, many in the international
community saw the country as a development success story. Economic growth
was close to 4 percent, 9 in 10 children went to primary school, and life expectancy
was an impressive 75 years.
But for many Tunisians this progress was clearly not enough: higher incomes and
better access to services did not compensate for the ills and costs of corruption,
repression, inequality, and powerlessness. Nor did it satisfy aspirations for
greater justice, freedom, and dignity. In January 2011, popular protests ousted
Zine el-Abidine Ben Ali from the presidency after 23 years in power.
While Tunisia’s struggle for rights-respecting democracy continues, its recent
experience exposes the narrowness and inadequacy of many existing approaches
to development. It also provides a compelling case for development to be
reframed more broadly, not just as higher income (important as this is), but as
the creation of conditions in which people everywhere can get an education, visit
a doctor, and drink clean water, and also express themselves freely, be protected
by a fair and accessible justice system, participate in decision-making, and live
free of abuse and discrimination. These are some of the basic economic, social,
cultural, civil, and political rights that governments are obligated to honor but
deny to hundreds of millions of people.
Many of those who are most impoverished belong to society’s most marginalized
and vulnerable social groups—women, children, people with disabilities, ethnic
minorities, people infected with HIV—who often lack the power, social or legal
standing, or access to decision-making that allows them to challenge their disadvantaged
status or improve their circumstances.
For the most part, development policy and programs have ignored the critical
interdependence of economic and social rights with civil and political rights, and
so have failed to challenge systemic patterns of discrimination and disadvantage
that keep people in poverty. As a result, many poor people have been excluded, or have failed to benefit, from development programs. More disturbingly still,
people have been harmed by abusive policies carried out in the name of development:
forced from their land to make way for large commercial investors, compelled
to toil long days for low pay in dangerous and exploitative conditions, or
exposed to life-threatening pollution from poorly regulated industries.
Development can also be unsustainable, achieved at considerable cost to the
environment —including carbon emissions, soil erosion, pollution, depletion of
fresh water supplies, over-fishing, or damage to biodiversity—which then damage
people’s rights, including those to life, health, safe food, and clean water.
More than a decade ago, in 2001, world governments set about addressing such
problems by agreeing on eight Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). Set for
achievement by 2015, they included halving the proportion of people suffering
from extreme hunger, reducing child and maternal mortality, and achieving universal
primary education.
With this date fast approaching, a United Nations-led process is under way to
agree on successor goals. This is a crucial opportunity to change the daily reality
for millions of people currently overlooked, disadvantaged, or damaged by development
efforts. Despite growing civil society support for rooting development in
human rights standards, many governments, especially authoritarian ones,
remain hostile to them, and will seek to minimize and marginalize the role of
rights in any new international agreement.
To counter this threat and build wider international support for rights, it is essential
and urgent to show how their fuller integration can contribute to improved
development outcomes—promoting a form of development that is more inclusive,
just, transparent, participatory, and accountable, precisely because it is rightsrespecting.
An Unfulfilled Vision
The UN Millennium Declaration of 2000 was strong on human rights and democratic
principles. World governments endorsed it in September 2000, asserting
that freedom, equality, solidarity, and tolerance were fundamental values. Making
progress on development, they said, depended on “good governance within each
country,” adding that they would “spare no effort” to promote democracy, strengthen the rule of law, and respect internationally recognized human rights
and fundamental freedoms.
Strong words. But the Millennium Declaration’s vision, and the important principles
it contained, never found their way into the new Millennium Development
Goals (MDGs), which emerged from a UN working group in early 2001 and soon
became the dominant framework for international development cooperation.
While drawn from the Millennium Declaration, the MDGs were far more circumscribed.
They prioritized an important set of economic and social issues, which
were seen as less political and easier to measure, such as child and maternal
mortality and access to primary education. These issues were defined in technical
terms rather than as a set of rights obligations. Nor did the MDGs set any goals or
targets related to political freedom or democratic participation, equality for ethnic
minorities or people with disabilities, freedom from violence and abuse in the
family and community, freedom of expression, or rights to peaceful protest and
assembly.
Despite these limitations, the MDGs have contributed to real progress for many
people. They have embodied and helped generate substantial international consensus
about the focus of development cooperation. And in many countries they
have facilitated higher levels of public investment in health and education, contributing
to significant increases in school enrolment rates and big reductions in
child mortality over the last decade. Since 1990, for example, child mortality has
almost halved globally, plummeting from 12 million to 6.6 million in 2012, while
the number of primary school-age children out of school has fallen from 102 million
in 1990 to 69 million in 2012.
But the neglect of human rights by many governments, donors, international institutions,
and the MDG framework has been a serious missed opportunity, which
has greatly diminished development efforts and had other harmful consequences
for poor and marginalized people, as elaborated below.
Unequal Development
Even before the MDG framework was established, many governments were unwilling
or unable to address discrimination and exclusion in their development
strategies and their broader social and economic policies. Authoritarian governments were obviously reluctant to empower restless minorities or disadvantaged
groups that might threaten their grip on power, and were generally unwilling to
address sensitive issues around ethnic or religious conflict. Such governments
also often refuse to accept that women, girls, indigenous people, or other marginalized
social groups deserve equal status under the law.
But development donors and international institutions like the World Bank also
shied away from the more complex and politicized approach to development
implied by an explicit emphasis on rights. The MDGs, with their stress on measuring
development in terms of average or aggregate achievement of particular
goals, for example on child and maternal mortality, did little to change these calculations
and meant that marginalized communities continued to be overlooked.
Indeed, because it is often more difficult or expensive to assist poor and marginalized
communities, the MDG framework may have actually worked against them,
incentivising a focus on people who are easier to reach and assist, such as those
living in cities rather than far-flung rural areas.
Nowhere is unequal development better documented and more visible than in the
widespread and systematic discrimination against women and girls. Most development
organizations have identified gender discrimination as a major obstacle
to inclusive development and there is a growing international consensus on the
need to tackle it. For example, the World Bank, the European Commission, and
the United Kingdom’s Department for International Development (DFID) have all
made strong statements on the importance of combating gender inequality and
empowering women and girls. As the World Bank’s Chief Economist Justin Yifu Lin
put it in 2012, “Blocking women and girls from getting the skills to succeed in a
globalized world is not only wrong but economically harmful. Sharing the fruits of
growth equally between men and women is essential to meeting key development
goals.”
Nonetheless, development agencies often underreport or fail to address properly
many forms of gender discrimination. In Bangladesh, for example, where considerable
progress has been made (at the aggregate level) towards some MDGs,
Human Rights Watch has documented entrenched discrimination in the country’s
Muslim, Hindu, and Christian laws governing marriage, separation, and divorce.
These often trap women or girls in abusive marriages or drive them into poverty when marriages fall apart, contributing to homelessness, reduced incomes,
hunger, and ill-health.
Our 2012 report “Will I Get My Dues Before I Die?,” for example, documented the
disastrous consequences of this discrimination for Shefali S., a Muslim woman
who was abandoned by her abusive husband while pregnant and, according to
the country’s laws, not entitled to maintenance from 90 days after notice of
divorce. Without income, she was plunged into poverty and dependence, and was
forced to live with her in-laws who beat her.
Many of the 1 billion people with disabilities worldwide—80 percent live in the
developing world—also experience unequal development. Human Rights Watch’s
research on education in Nepal and China has documented widespread discrimination
against children with disabilities, who are much less likely to be in school
than other children. This is despite the fact that both countries are state parties
to the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC), which affirms the right to
education, and to the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities
(CRPD).
Our 2011 report, Futures Stolen, documented how in one school in the far west of
Nepal, a 16-year-old boy had to crawl to his classroom due to lack of ramps,
and—unable to use the toilet by himself, and unaided by teachers—was forced to
wait until he got home, or have another child run home to fetch his mother to
assist him. Other children, afraid to sit near him, left him isolated in a corner.
These patterns of discrimination are replicated across the world and explain why
people with disabilities are disproportionately represented among the world’s
poor people. And yet, the MDGs make no reference whatsoever to disability.
In our 2008 report A Question of Life or Death, we similarly documented barriers
to treatment for women and children in Kenya living with HIV, violating their right
to health. Mothers and children suffered discrimination, abuse, and abandonment
by husbands and relatives, and many lived in precarious conditions after
being kicked out of their homes. In addition, HIV policies prioritized HIV care for
adults, and HIV care for children was not widely available. Many children died as
a result.
Ethnic and religious minorities also often experience serious discrimination,
sometimes rooted in basic prejudice towards them on the part of other groups; at other times linked to hostility towards the political or separatist agendas of particular
ethnic groups. This discrimination can worsen levels of poverty and prevent
these groups from benefiting from development opportunities. The Londonbased
Overseas Development Institute (ODI) suggested in a recent report that
two-thirds of the world’s poorest people live in households headed by a member
of an ethnic minority, with these families more likely to be sick, illiterate, and
malnourished.
Abusive Development
The neglect of human rights in many development strategies and programs, as
well as in the MDGs, has another serious, adverse consequence. Incongruous as
it may sound—especially to those who view development as a uniformly benign
process—large numbers of poor, vulnerable, and marginalized people around the
world are harmed by policies carried out in the name of development. These abusive
patterns occur because basic rights—including the right to consultation, participation,
fair treatment, to join with others in a trade union, and to just and
accessible legal processes—are missing.
In China, for example, the government maintains that its development progress is
extraordinarily successful. Income poverty has indeed fallen very rapidly in recent
years, with the UN estimating a decline in extreme poverty from 60 to 12 percent
from 1990 to 2010. But the record is decidedly less impressive if development is
defined, as it should be, to include freedom from fear, violence, ill-health, lifethreatening
environmental pollution, and abusive employment practices, as well
as the opportunity to be protected from abuse, or seek remedy for abuse, through
a fair and accessible justice system.
In our 2011 report, My Children Have Been Poisoned, Human Rights Watch documented
the devastating effects of lead poisoning on children who could no longer
talk or walk, had stopped eating, or were constantly sick. This poisoning epidemic
in four provinces—Shaanxi, Henan, Hunan, and Yunnan—is rooted in tension
between the Chinese government’s goals for economic growth and its stated commitments
and international obligations to protect its citizens’ health and wellbeing.
Without institutions to protect their rights and hold local officials accountable
for abuses, hundreds of thousands of Chinese children have had their right
to health violated and have suffered appallingly, including from reading and learning disabilities, behavioural problems, comas, and convulsions. Some have
even died.
Aspects of Ethiopia’s development model have similar problems. The country has
made commendable progress in relation to the MDGs on health and education,
but other elements of its development strategy have led to serious rights abuses.
Our 2012 report “Waiting Here for Death,” documented rights violations linked to
the “villagization” resettlement program in Gambella region. Ethiopia’s government
justifies the program in development terms, and says it is voluntary. Some
1.5 million people in five regions are being relocated to new villages with the stated
aim of giving them better infrastructure and services. But our research into the
first year of the program in one of those regions found people were forced to
move against their will and that government security forces beat and abused
some who objected. Moreover, new villages often lacked promised services and
adequate land for farming needs, resulting in hunger, and even starvation.
Our 2012 report What Will Happen if Hunger Comes? also documented that the
Ethiopian government is forcibly displacing indigenous peoples from southern
Ethiopia’s Lower Omo Valley to make way for large-scale sugar plantations. The
cost of this development to indigenous groups is massive: their farms are being
cleared, prime grazing land is being lost, and livelihoods are being decimated.
While failing to meaningfully consult, obtain their free, prior, and informed consent,
compensate, or discuss with these affected communities, and recognize
their rights to land, the Ethiopian government has used harassment, violence,
and arbitrary arrests to impose its development plans.
Workers are particularly vulnerable to abusive development. They include the
more than 50 million domestic workers worldwide, most of them women and girls,
who are employed as cooks, cleaners, and nannies. In many countries, such
workers lack basic legal rights and protection. Yet their work provides essential
services to households and enables the economic activity of others. Human
Rights Watch’s research over 10 years, in countries as diverse as Indonesia, Saudi
Arabia, Morocco, Guinea, and El Salvador, has exposed many examples of abuse,
including employers insisting on extremely long working hours; withholding or
providing low wages; confiscating passports; and subjecting workers to beatings,
verbal abuse, and sexual violence. 
Similarly, millions of migrant workers in more visible sectors of the economy, like
construction, suffer abuses. Ironically, these are often most egregious in the context
of hugely expensive and high-profile construction projects intended to showcase
economic achievements and encourage investment and tourism. In our 2012
report, Building a Better World Cup, Human Rights Watch documented pervasive
abuses against migrants as they build sleek hotels, state-of-the-art infrastructure,
and other glossy construction projects in Qatar linked to the 2022 World Cup.
Abuses include arbitrary wage deductions, lack of access to medical care, and
dangerous working conditions. A recent investigation by the UK’s Guardian newspaper
found that 44 Nepalese workers died from work-related accidents in Qatar
between June and August 2013, more than half of them from heart attacks, heart
failure, or workplace accidents.
Human Rights Watch has also exposed the terrible abuses and right to health violations—
including fevers, nausea, and skin conditions that leave fingers corroded
to stumps, and flesh prematurely aged, discolored, and itchy—that many thousands
of people suffer while working in tanneries in and around Hazaribagh, a
neighbourhood of Bangladesh’s capital, Dhaka. Our 2012 report, Toxic Tanneries,
shows that these abuses are occurring in what is the backbone of the country’s
lucrative leather industry. The tanneries employ some 15,000 people—some as
young as seven-years-old—and export millions of dollars’ worth of leather goods
to around 70 countries worldwide. Our 2013 report on Tanzania Toxic Toil documented
similar abuses in Tanzania, especially affecting young children working in
small-scale gold mines. Many are exposed to toxic mercury and vulnerable to
mercury poisoning.
Rights-Respecting Development
Making rights integral to a post-2015 global development framework would have
a number of clear benefits, not least by:
• Ensuring focus on the poorest and most marginalized communities. The
MDGs include global targets for percentage reductions of child and maternal
mortality and hunger. By contrast, a rights approach to development would
need to set universal goals for providing effective and accessible healthcare
and nutrition for all women and children, including the poorest and most
disadvantaged, alongside specific targets for reducing disparities between social groups and improving the conditions of the worst off. Progress would
be greatly aided and incentivised by disaggregating national and international
data, making it possible to measure policy impact on different social,
income, and age groups.
• Prompting action to address root causes of poverty—such as inequality, discrimination,
and exclusion—by requiring legal and policy reforms and challenging
patterns of abuse, as well as harmful cultural practices like child
marriage. Governments and donors should be obliged in a new development
framework to bring their policies and practices into line with international
standards on non-discrimination and equality. Concerted action is also
needed to tackle formal, informal, and cultural barriers that prevent women,
ethnic minorities, people with disabilities, and indigenous peoples in particular
from owning and having equal access to land, property, assets, and
credit; inheriting and transferring property; and accessing education and
health services.
• Making people agents and not subjects of development by emphasising
empowerment, participation, transparency, the rule of law, and access to
justice. A rights approach requires that poor people are fully consulted
about development projects or programs that affect them. Indigenous peoples,
for example, have the right to give or withhold consent to development
projects on their traditional lands before they are approved and after receiving
all relevant information. Such safeguards would help prevent the kind of
abusive, environmentally harmful patterns of development already cited. But
abusive development also occurs in places like China because basic civil
and political freedoms are not respected more generally and because the
legal system is politicized and discriminatory. Commitments to civil and
political rights should be integral to the post-2015 development agenda,
including to freedom of speech, assembly, and association, the ability of
people to participate in free elections, and access to fair and effective justice
systems. Transparency and free flow of information are critical too, creating
space for informed debate about use of the national budget, exposing
mistakes and environmental harm, and allowing communities to mobilize for
social change and redress for abuse and malpractice.
• Tackling corruption. Each year, senior government officials or powerful private
individuals steal hundreds of millions of dollars that were intended to
benefit the poor through development programs in health, education, nutrition,
or water. In our 2013 report on Uganda, Letting the Big Fish Swim,
Human Rights Watch documented a lack of political will to address corruption
and the harmful consequences of this. Ugandan anti-corruption institutions
have been crippled by political interference, as well as harassment
and threats to prosecutors, investigators, and witnesses. Most recently,
US$12.7 million in donor funds was discovered to have been embezzled
from Uganda’s Office of the Prime Minister. This money had been earmarked
to help rebuild northern Uganda, ravaged by a 20-year war, and to help
development in Karamoja, Uganda’s poorest region. Rights-respecting development
would help to tackle corruption of this kind by emphasizing budget
transparency, freedom of information, and free media; strengthening efforts
to prosecute those responsible for corrupt practices, including the highest
ranking members of the government; and supporting anticorruption civil
society organizations.
• Bringing rights standards into the work of business and international institutions.
In the debate about the post-2015 development agenda, there has
been little discussion about the responsibilities of either the private sector
or international financial institutions to protect, respect, and fulfil rights.
Over the years, Human Rights Watch has documented many cases of corporate
complicity with human rights violations, including a Canadian mining
company using forced labor, via a local contractor, in Eritrea; out-of-control
mining operations fuelling corruption and abuse in India; and sexual violence
by private security guards employed by a Canadian company in Papua
New Guinea. Governments should introduce mandatory requirements for
corporations to report publicly on human rights, and the social and environmental
impact of their work. Similarly, international financial institutions
such as the World Bank, which influence development in many countries by
providing millions of dollars-worth of development assistance and loans,
should have to respect human rights in all their work and be held accountable
if they fail to do so, as set out in our 2013 report, Abuse Free
Development.
• Strengthening accountability. Accountability is fundamental to rightsrespecting
development: rights are of limited value if no one is charged with
guaranteeing them or if citizens whose rights are denied have no opportunity
to seek redress or remedy. The post-2015 development agenda should
therefore require all those involved in development—governments and international
bilateral donors, international financial institutions, the business
sector, private foundations, and NGOs—to be more accountable and transparent
about implementing their commitments and the impact their policies
have on the rights of the poor, including through feedback and complaints
mechanisms and regular reporting at the local, national, and global level.
• Affirming the universality of the global development agenda. Low income is
not an excuse for governments of poor countries to abuse their citizens’
rights, and many developing country governments have scope to make different
choices about how they allocate national resources. Still, low income
and limited capacity can make it harder for well-intentioned governments to
meet their rights obligations. A post-2015 development agenda should
therefore place two important obligations on the world’s wealthier governments:
— To do no harm, by ensuring that existing policies and practices do not
directly or indirectly contribute to human rights violations, unequal
development, or abusive development elsewhere, through policies on
trade, tax, investment, intellectual property, arms sales, and transfers
of surveillance technology. These governments have an obligation to
respect and protect human rights and to remedy any violations.
— To proactively help to advance rights-respecting development in other
countries, including through support for inclusive development in
areas like health, education, nutrition, and sanitation, as well as support
for the rule of law, and police, justice, and security sector reform.
Bringing Rights to the Fore
How human rights issues will be dealt with in any new post-2015 development
agreement remains unclear. Support for rights emerged as a priority among civil
society participants in the UN-sponsored global consultations on post-2015, and
there were strong references to human rights in the reports of the High Level Panel of Eminent Persons on the post-2015 Development Agenda and the UN secretary
general’s report on the same topic in June 2013.
But many governments remain hostile. With the process now at the stage of intergovernmental
negotiations, we can anticipate serious efforts to marginalize the
role of rights or chip away at progress that has been made. Some will no doubt
continue to invoke the tired old argument that poor people care mainly about
material improvements and that wider human rights entitlements, like freedom of
speech and association or access to justice, are not necessary to secure these.
But this position has been thoroughly discredited, not least by ordinary peoples’
own actions and expressed preferences. Across the globe, people are striving not
only for economic improvement, but also for an end to indignity and injustice, for
their voices to be heard, and for the opportunity to shape their future.
As UN Secretary General Ban Ki-moon stated in July 2013, “Upholding human
rights and freeing people from fear and want are inseparable.” A post-2015 development
agenda that embraces this essential truth will help promote development
that is more inclusive and just, and advances basic rights and freedoms for
allSome of the most powerful and sophisticated actors on the world stage are
companies, not governments. In 2011 alone, oil and gas behemoth ExxonMobil
generated revenues of US$467 billion—the size of Norway’s entire economy.
Walmart, the world’s third-largest employer with more than 2 million workers, has
a workforce that trails only the militaries of the United States and China in size.
David Mepham is UK director at Human Rights Watch.