 QATAR
 Qatar, an Arab state on the Persian Gulf, is a monarchy without democratically
 elected institutions or political -parties. It is governed by the ruling A1-Thani family
 through its head,-the Amir. The current Amir, Sheikh Hamad bin Khalifa Al-Thani,
 took power from his father in June 1995-with the support of leading branches of
 the A1-Thani family, and in consultation with other- leading Qatari families. This
 transition of authority did not represent a change in the basic governing order. The
 Amir holds absolute power, the exercise of which is influenced by religious law, con-
 sultation with leading citizens,- rule -by consensus, and the right of any citizen to
 gain access to the Amir to appeal government decisions. The Amir generally legis-
 lates after consultation-with leading citizens, an arrangement institutionalized in an
 appointed advisory council that assists the Amir in formulating policy. The judiciary
 is nominally independent, but most judges hold their positions at the Government's
 pleasure.
 The country has- efficient police and security services. The civilian security force,
 controlled by the Interior Ministry, comprises two sections: The police and the Gen-
 eral Administration of Public Security, and the Investigatory Police (Mubahathat),
 which is responsible for sedition and espionage cases. The Interior Ministry has a
 special state security investigative unit (Mubahith) that performs internal security
 investigations and gathers intelligence. In addition, there is an independent civilian
 intelligence service (Mukhabarat).
 The State owns most basic industries and services, but the retail and construction
 industries are in private hands. Oil is the principal natural resource, but the coun-
 try's extensive natural gas resources are playing an increasingly important role. The
 rapid development of the 1970's and 1980's created an economy in which foreign
 workers, mostly South Asian and Arab, outnumber citizens by a ratio of 4 or 5 to
 1. The Government tries to reduce this ratio by offering many government jobs only
 to citizens.
 The Government restricts citizens' rights; however, there was some progress in a
 few areas. Citizens do not have the right to change their government, but in Feb-
 ruary, July, and October the Amir issued decrees that paved the way for the estab-
 lishment of a democratically elected council with powers over the local government
 throughout the country. Elections to the council are scheduled for March 1999. In
 
 
 1783
 a significant development, the Government issued a decree that granted the right
 to vote and run for office on the council to all adult citizens, both male and female.
 Arbitrary detention in security cases, and restrictions on the freedoms of speech,
 press, association, religion, and on workers' rights, continued to be problems. How-
 ever, the Government continued to take unpublicized steps to ease restrictions on
 the practice of non-Muslim religions. Despite the decree that opened the vote to
 women, in practice women's rights are restricted by social customs. Noncitizen
 workers, who make up a majority of the residents of the country, face systematic
 discrimination in the workplace.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no reports of political or
 other extrajudicial killings.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 There have been no reported instances of torture for several years. The Government
 administers most corporal punishment prescribed by Islamic law but does not allow
 amputation.
 Prison conditions generally meet minimum international standards. The Govern-
 ment does not permit domestic human rights groups to exist, and no international
 human rights organization has asked to visit the country or its prisons.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The authorities generally charge suspects
 within 48 hours. In most cases involving foreigners, the police promptly notify the
 appropriate consular representatives. Suspects detained in security cases generally
 are not afforded access to counsel and may be detained indefinitely while under in-
 vestigation. There are no known recent cases of incommunicado detention.
 In  June the Amir ordered the arrest of Ministry         of Education  official
 Abdulrahman Al-Nuaimi, who distributed to the press a letter criticizing the Amir's
 decision to allow women to vote and run for office in the municipal elections (see
 Section 3), as well as other purportedly anti-Islamic actions. He was detained for
 10 days and released.
 The public trial of persons arrested for involvement in the February 1996 coup
 attempt continued, with no significant developments during the year. Several non-
 citizen suspects were released and deported.
 Involuntary exile has occurred but is rare. There were no reported cases this year.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The judiciary is nominally independent, but most
 judges are foreign nationals who hold residence permits granted by the civil authori-
 ties, and thus hold their positions at the Government's pleasure. The number of citi-
 zen judges is increasing.
 The judiciary deals with the bureaucracies of two ministries. Civil (or Adlea)
 courts are subordinate to the Ministry of Justice, and Shari'a (Islamic law) courts
 fall under the Ministry of Endowments and Islamic Affairs. The prosecutors fall
 under the Ministry of Interior.
 There are three types of courts: The civil courts, which have jurisdiction in civil
 and commercial matters; the Shari'a Court, which has jurisdiction in family and
 criminal cases; and the rarely convened state security courts. There are no perma-
 nent state. security courts. Security cases, which are rare, are tried by ad hoc mili-
 tary courts. Although state security cases may be conducted in secret, there have
 been no cases before these courts since the Amir assumed power. Defendants tried
 by all courts have the right to appeal. Occasionally in the Shari'a Court, the same
 judge will hear the original case and the appeal.
 The legal system is biased in favor of citizens and the Government. A Muslim liti-
 gant may request the Shari'a Court to assume jurisdiction in commercial or civil
 cases. Non-Muslims are not allowed to bring suits as plaintiffs in the Shari'a Court.
 This practice prevents non-Muslim residents from obtaining full legal recourse.
 Trials in the civil courts are public, but in the Shari'a Court only the disputing par-
 ties, their relatives, associates, and witnesses are allowed in the courtroom. Lawyers
 do not play a formal role except to prepare litigants for their cases. Although non-
 Arabic speakers are provided with interpreters, foreigners are disadvantaged, espe-
 cially in cases involving the performance of contracts.
 Defendants appear before a judge for a preliminary hearing within 7 days of their
 arrest. Judges may extend pretrial detention for a week at a time to allow the au-
 thorities to conduct investigations. Defendants in the civil courts have the right to
 be represented by defense attorneys but are not always permitted to be represented
 by counsel in the Shari'a court.
 
 
 1784
 Shari'a trials are usually brief. Shari'a family law trials are often held without
 counsel. After both parties have stated their cases and examined Witnesses, judges
 are likely to deliver a verdict after a short deliberation. Criminal cases are normally
 tried within 2 to 3 months after suspects aire detained. There is no provision for bail
 in criminal cases. However, foreigners charged with: minor crimes may be released
 to a citizen sponsor. They are prohibited from departing the country until the case
 is resolved.
 There were no reports of political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-Tradi-
 tional attitudes of respect for the sanctity of the home and the privacy of women
 provide a great deal of protection against arbitrary intrusions for most citizens and
 residents. A warrant must be obtained before police' may search a residence or busi-
 ness, except in.cases involving national security or emergencies. However, warrants
 are issued by police officials rather than by judicial authorities. There were no re-
 ports of unauthorized searches of homes during the year. The police and security
 forces are believed to monitor the communications of suspected criminals, of those
 considered to be security risks, and of selected foreigners.
 With prior permission, which is usually granted,-citizens may marry.foreigners of
 any nationality and apply for residence permits or citizenship for their spouses.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-Although the Government reduced restrictions
 on freedom of speech and of the press in 1997, and permitted a significant expan-
 sion of press freedom, some restrictions still remain. The Government formally lifted
 censorship of the media in 1995, and since then the press has been essentially free
 of government interference. However, journalists'continue to practice self-censor-
 ship, due to real or perceived social and political pressures. For example, no in-
 stance of explicit criticism of any citizen, whether in public or private life, has been
 noted in local newspapers. Television and radio are state-owned, but the privately-
 owned satellite television channel A1-Jazeera operates freely..
 There were no reports of instances of political censorship of foreign news media
 or broadcasts of foreign programs on local television over the past year. The Censor-
 ship Office in the Ministry of Information was abolished (together with the Min-
 istry) in 1996, but censors still work at broadcast media under the overall super-
 vision of the Ministry of Religious Endowments. Pornography and expressions
 deemed hostile to Islam are subject to censorship, but in practice censorship is ap-
 plied irregularly.
 In June the Amir ordered the arrest of an official who wrote a letter criticizing
 several of the Amir's decisions as anti-Islamic (see Section 1.d.).
 Customs officials screen imported print media, videocassettes, and other such
 items for pornography, but have stopped blocking the importation of non-Muslim re-
 ligious items.
 A growing number of citizenli and residents have access to the Internet, which is
 provided through the state-owned telecommunications monopoly. Internet access ap-
 pears to be uncensored and unrestricted.
 Citizens enjoy broad freedom of speech, but are restricted by the social and family
 restraints of a very traditional society. There is no apparent fear of government
 monitoring of private speech. -However, the larger foreign population does not be-
 lieve it enjoys the same freedoms and acts accordingly.
 - There is no legal provision for academic freedom. Most instructors at the Univer-
 sity of Qatar exercise self-censorship.
 'b. Freedom of Peaceful Asembly and Association,--The Government severely lim-
 its freedom of assembly. The Government does not allow political demonstrations.
 The Government severely limits freedom of association. The Government does not
 allow political parties or membership-in international professional organizations
 critical of the Government or of any other Arab government. Private social, sports,
 trade, professional; and cultural societies must be registered with the Government.
 Security forces monitor the activities of such groups.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The state religion is Islam, as interpreted by the puri-
 tanical Wahhabi branch of the Sunni tradition. The Government officially prohibits
 public worship by non-Muslims; however, it tolerates and protects private services
 conducted behind closed doors with prior notification to the authorities. The police
 provide traffic control for authorized Catholic services, which may be attended by
 up to 1,000 or more persons-at times. The Government recently began to issue visas
 to Christian clergy under foreign embassy sponsorship. 'There are no restrictions on
 non-Muslims providing religious instruction to their children. However, non-Mus-
 lims may not proselytize and conversion from Islam is theoretically a capital offense.
 
 
 1785
 However, there is no record of an execution for such a conversion since independ-
 ence.
 The Government allows Shi'a Muslims to practice their faith freely; however, com-
 munity leaders have agreed to refrain from certain public practices such as self-flag-
 ellation.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-There are no restrictions on internal travel, except around sensitive
 military and oil installations. In general, women do not require permission from
 male guardians to travel. However, men may prevent female relatives from leaving
 the country by providing their names to immigration officers at ports of departure.
 Technically, women employed-by the Government must obtain official permission to
 travel abroad when requesting leave, but it is not known to what extent this regula-
 tion is enforced. Citizens critical of the Government face restrictions on their right
 to travel abroad.
 All citizens have the right to return. Foreigners are subject to immigration restric-
 tions designed to control the size of the local labor pool. Foreign workers must have
 the permission of their sponsor (usually their employer) to enter and depart the
 country, but their dependents may leave the country without restriction. Foreign
 women married to citizens are granted residence permits and may apply for citizen-
 ship; however, they are expected to relinquish their foreign citizenship.
 The Government has not formulated a formal policy regarding refugees, asylees,
 or first asylum. Those attempting to enter illegally, including persons seeking asy-
 lum from nearby countries, are refused entry. Asylum seekers who can obtain local
 sponsorship or employment are allowed to enter and may remain as long as they
 are employed. A Bahraini Air Force pilot defected to Qatar in 1996, and the Govern-
 ment stated that he was free to stay, calling him a refugee and offering him its full
 protection.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens do not have the right to change their government or the political system
 eacefully. Qatar has no formal democratic institutions. The political institutions
 blend the characteristics of a traditional Bedouin tribal state and a modern bureauc-
 racy. There are no political parties, elections, or organized opposition groups.
 The Amir exercises most executive and legislative powers, including appointment
 of cabinet members. In July the Amir issued legislation to establish a democratically
 elected municipal council with representatives from the entire country. All citizens
 over the age of 18, both male and female, are to have the right to vote and to run
 as candidates for the council. Elections are scheduled for February 1999. Although
 the council's powers are to be limited largely to local government issues, the council
 is expected to debate national issues and issue independent advice to the Amir.
 Under the amended Provisional Constitution, the Amir must be chosen from and
 by the adult males of the Al-Thani family.
 Women do not have the right to vote or participate in politics. However, in July
 the Amir issued legislation to give women the right to vote and to run for election
 to the proposed municipal council.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 The Government does not permit local human rights organizations to exist. No
 international human rights organizations are known to have asked to investigate
 conditions in the country. However, Amnesty International and foreign embassies
 were invited to send observers to sessions of the public trial of those accused in the
 1996 coup attempt. Foreign observers attended the sessions of the trial held during
 the year.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 Institutional, cultural, and legal discrimination based on gender,- race, religion, so-
 cial status, and disability exists.
 Women.-Violence against women and spousal abuse occur but are not believed
 to be widespread. However, some foreign domestics, especially those from South
 Asia and the Philippines, have been mistreated by employers. In keeping with Is-
 lamic law, all forms of physical abuse are illegal. The maximum penalty for rape
 is death. The police actively investigate reports of violence against women. In the
 last few years, the Government has demonstrated an increased willingness to arrest
 and punish offenders, whether citizens or foreigners. Offenders who are citizens
 usually receive lighter punishments than foreigners. Abused domestic workers usu-
 ally do not press charges for fear of losing their jobs.
 
 
 1786
 The activities of women are restricted closely both by law and tradition. For ex-
 ample, a woman is prohibited from applying for a driver's license unless she has
 permission from a male guardian. This restriction does not apply to noncitizen
 women. The Government adheres to Shari'a law in matters of inheritance and child
 custody. While Muslim wives have the right to inherit from their husbands, non-
 Muslim wives do not, unless a special exception is arranged. In cases of divorce,
 Shari'a (Islamic law) prevails; younger children remain with the mother and older
 children with the father. Both parents retain permanent rights of visitation. How-
 ever, local authorities do not allow a noncitizen parent to take the children out of
 the country without permission of the citizen parent. Women may attend court pro-
 ceedings but are generally represented by a male relative. There has been a steady
 increase in the number and severity of complaints of spousal abuse by the foreign
 wives of local and foreign men.
 Women are largely relegated to the roles of mother and homemaker, but some
 women are now finding jobs in education, medicine, and the news media. The num-
 ber of professional women is too small to determine whether they are receiving
 equal pay for equal work. Increasingly, women are receiving government scholar-
 ships to pursue degrees at universities overseas. The Amir has entrusted his second
 wife, who is the mother of the Heir Apparent, with the high-profile task of establish-
 ing a university in Doha. In 1996, the Government appointed its first female under-
 secretary, in the Ministry of Education. Although women are legally able to travel
 abroad alone (see Section 2.d.), tradition and social pressures cause most to travel
 with male escorts. There also have been complaints that Qatari husbands take their
 foreign spouses' passports and, without prior approval, turn them in for Qatari doc-
 uments. The husbands then inform their wives that the wives have lost their former
 citizenship. In other cases, foreign wives report being forbidden by their husbands
 or in-laws to visit or to contact foreign embassies.
 There is no independent women's rights organization, nor has the Government
 permitted the establishment of one.
 Children.-The Government demonstrates its commitment to children's rights
 through a well-funded, free public education system (elementary through university)
 and a complete medical protection program for Qatari children. However, children
 of most foreigners are denied free education and have only limited medical coverage.
 There is no societal pattern of abuse of children.
 People With Disabilities.-The Government has not enacted legislation or other-
 wise mandated provision of accessibility for the disabled, who also face social dis-
 crimination. The Government maintains a hospital and schools that provide high-
 quality, free services to the mentally and physically disabled.
 Religious Minorities.-Shi'a Muslims experience discrimination in employment in
 sensitive areas, such as security and education.
 National/Racial/Ethnic Minorities.-The Government discriminates against some
 citizens of non-Qatari origin. In the private sector, many citizens of Iranian origin
 occupy some of the highest positions. However, they are rarely found in senior deci-
 sionmaking positions in government.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The right of association is strictly limited, and all
 workers, including foreigners, are prohibited from forming labor unions. Despite this
 restriction, almost all workers have the right to strike after their case has been pre-
 sented to the Labor Conciliation Board and ruled upon. Employers may close a place
 of work or dismiss employees once the Conciliation Board has heard the case. The
 right to strike does not exist for government employees, domestic workers, or mem-
 bers of the employer's family. No 'worker in a public utility or health or security
 service may strike if such a strike would harm the public or lead to property dam-
 age. Strikes are rare.
 The Labor Law provides for the establishment of joint consultative committees
 composed of representatives of the employer and workers. The committees do not
 discuss wages but may consider issues such as organization and productivity, condi-
 tions of employment, training of workers, and safety measures and their implemen-
 tation.
 Since 1995, Qatar has been suspended from the U.S. Overseas Private Investment
 Corporation (OPIC) insurance programs because of the Government's lack of compli-
 ance with internationally recognized worker rights standards.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-Workers are prohibited from
 engaging in collective bargaining. In general, wages are set unilaterally by employ-
 ers without government involvement. Local courts handle disputes between workers
 and employers.
 There are no export processing zones.
 
 
 1787
 
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The law prohibits forced or com-
 pulsory labor. Three-quarters of the work force are expatriate workers, -who are de-
 pendent on a single employer for residency rights. This leaves them vulnerable to
 abuse. For instance, employers must give consent before exit permits are issued to
 any foreigner seeking to leave the country. Some employers temporarily withhold
 this consent to force foreign employees to work for longer periods than they wish.
 The Government prohibits forced and bonded labor by children and enforces this
 prohibition effectively.
 d. Status of Child Labor Practices and Minimum Age for Employment.-Minors
 between the ages of 15 and 18 may be employed with the approval of their parents
 or guardians and some, children may work in small, family-owned businesses. How-
 ever, child labor is rare, Education is compulsory through the age of 15. Very young
 children, usually of African or South Asian background, have been employed as rid-
 ers in camel racing. Little information is available on wages and working conditions
 for these children. The Government prohibits forced and bonded labor by children
 and enforces this prohibition effectively (see Section 6.c.).
 Minors may not work more than 6 hours a day or more than 36 hours a week.
 Employers must provide the Ministry of Labor with the names and occupations of
 their minor employees. The Ministry may prohibit the employment of minors in jobs
 that are judged dangerous to the health, safety, or morals of minors. Employers
 must also obtain permission from the Ministry of Education to hire a minor.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-There is no minimum wage, although a 1962
 law gives the Amir authority to set one. The 48-hour workweek with a 24-hour rest
 period is prescribed by law, although most government offices -follow a schedule of
 36 -hours -a week. Employees who work more than 48 hours a week, or 36 hours a
 week during the Muslim month of Ramadan, are entitled to overtime. This law is
 adhered to in government offices and major private sector companies. It is not ob-
 served with respect-to domestic and personal employees. Domestic servants fre-
 quently work 7 days a week, more than 12 hours a day, with few or no holidays,
 and have noeffective -way to redress grievances against their employers.
 The Government has enacted regulations concerning worker safety and health,
 but enforcement, which is the responsibility of the Ministry of Energy and Industry,
 is lax. The Department of Public Safety oversees safety training and conditions, and
 the state-run petroleum company has its own set of safety standards and proce-
 dures. ThaLabor Law of 1964, as amended in 1984, lists partial and permanent dis-
 abilities for which compensation may. be awarded, some connected with handling
 chemicals-and petroleum products or construction injuries. The law does not specifi-
 cally set rates of payment and compensation.
 Foreignworkers must be sponsored by a citizen or a legally recognized organiza-
 tion to obtain an entry visa and must have their sponsor's permission to depart the
 country. Any worker may seek legal relief from onerous work conditions, but domes-
 tic workers generally accept their situations in order to avoid repatriation. The Gov-
 ernment also penalizes Qatari employers who violate residence and sponsorship
 laws. Some foreign domestics have been mistreated by their employers (see Section
 5).
