 QATAR
 The State of Qatar occupies a small peninsula in the
 middle of the western coast of the Persian Gulf. It
 became fully independent on September 3, 1971, after
 the British Government ended a special treaty
 relationship with it.
 Qatar is a traditional Islamic principality, ruled by
 a hereditary Amir, chosen from the ruling Al-Thani
 family. Its governmental system is laid out in the
 "Basic Law" of 1970, which is equivalent to a con-
 stitution. The law provides for a Council of
 Ministers (cabinet) and an Advisory Council whose
 members are appointed by the Amir for three-year
 terms. The country's outlook on human rights reflects
 both the Islamic and Bedouin traditions of the region
 as well as concepts of the rule of law instilled
 during the long British presence.
 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Torture
 No instances of torture have come to the attention of
 the Department of State.
 b. Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 Criminal law in Qatar is drawn from both Koranic and
 Western sources. The Department of State has no
 evidence that cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment
 or punishment occurs. Prison conditions are adequate.
 The Department of State knows of no instances of
 capital punishment.
 c. Arbitrary Arrest or Imprisonment
 The law does not prohibit summary arrest or
 
 (617)
 
 
 618
 imprisonment, but the Department of State has no
 evidence of anyone having been imprisoned for his
 political beliefs.
 d. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Qatari courts provide fair and public trials. The
 judges, most of whom come from other Arab countries,
 are experienced. Crimes and punishments are defined
 by law, and an accused is presumed innocent until
 proven guilty by a court of law. The accused is
 entitled to representation by legal counsel at his
 or her own expense.
 e. Invasion of the Home
 The Department of State is unaware of examples of
 arbitrary search. Such searches may well occur in
 extraordinary circumstances, such as those perceived
 by the Government to be threats to the security of
 the state.
 2. Governmental Policies Relating to the Fulfillment
 of Such Vital Needs as Food, Shelter, Health Care
 and Education
 Virtually all of the revenues of the State of Qatar
 come from the export of crude oil and natural gas,
 which yielded about $2.1 billion both in 1976 and 1977.
 Qatar has approximately 250,000 inhabitants of whom
 about 50,000 are Qataris.
 Qatar has made great strides in fulfilling the basic
 needs of its citizens for food, shelter, health care
 and education. Free medical treatment is available
 to all citizens and non-citizens. The Government sub-
 sidizes the education of all academically eligible
 male citizens from kindergarten through university.
 The education of female citizens, conducted in
 classes separate from those of males, is subsidized up-
 to the university level. Qatar subsidizes foreign
 university education for male citizens; for female
 
 
 619
 citizens, it subsidizes education at the University of
 Qatar. The relatively few Qatari females attending
 universities outside Qatar do so at the expense of
 their families. Public sentiment in this conservative
 Muslim society opposes government financing of women
 students at universities abroad. The lack of job
 opportunities outside of traditional fields, mainly
 medicine and education, may well limit Qatari women's
 desire for higher education. The Qatari Government
 has provided land for the establishment of schools for
 some of the expatriate community. The Government has
 expended much of its energies in finding ways to
 channel oil revenues to the citizenry. Given these
 efforts and the strong public welfare policy of the
 State of Qatar, a considerable portion of the nation's
 petroleum income has reached its citizens.
 3. Respect for Civil and Political Liberties, Includ-
 ing:
 a. Freedom of Thought, Speech, Press, Religion
 and Assembly
 While the State of Qatar is an Islamic state, it does
 not restrict freedom of thought and religion. Polit-
 ical meetings are unknown and there is no organized
 labor movement in the country. Virtually the whole
 work force, laborers as well as professionals, is
 expatriate. Most of these expatriates come from South
 Asia, other Arab countries and Iran. A relatively
 small number, perhaps 10,000, come from Western Europe,
 Japan and the United States. The large alien
 population presents a potentially serious security
 problem for the State of Qatar. Labor organizations
 or unions are not encouraged by the Government, and
 strikes are prohibited in practice. The press is not
 subject'to pre-publication censorship, but adheres to
 government guidelines. Foreign publications are
 available and are rarely censored.
 b. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel and Emigration
 
 
 620
 
 There are no restraints on freedom of movement within
 the country except for entry into the industrial zone
 in the southern portion of the peninsula where a
 serious fire and explosion destroyed a new refinery in
 1977. Foreign travel and emigration are unrestricted.
 c. Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 The Advisory Council has very little real power. No
 electoral system has been instituted, nor have general
 provisions for suffrage been established. In the
 tribal traditions of the Arabian Peninsula, citizens
 express their views to their leaders. Governmental
 decisions are normally made after consultation with
 leading members of the community. Expatriates are
 expected to desist from political activity.
 The status of women continues to be governed by con-
 servative tribal traditions and Islamic precepts.
 Younger women, however, have begun to avail themselves
 of opportunities for modern education. Family and
 societal pressures still tend to confine Qatari women
 to the home.
 4. Government Attitude and Record Regarding Inter-
 national and Non-governmental Investigations of
 Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 To the knowledge to the Department of State, no inter-
 national investigation of the human rights situation
 in Qatar has been proposed.
 
 
