 QATAR
 Qatar, an Arab state on the Persian Gulf, is a monarchy without democratically
 elected institutions or political parties. It is ruled by an Amir from the Al Thani
 family. The 1970 Basic law institutionalizes the customs and mores of the country's
 conservative Islamic heritage. These include respect for the sanctity of private prop-
 erty, freedom from arbitrary arrest and imprisonment, and punishment of trans-
 pressions against Islamic law. The Amir holds absolute power, the exercise of which
 is influenced by consultation with leading citizens, rule by consensus, and the right
 of any citizen to a ppeal personally to the Amir. The Amir considers the opinions of
 leading citizens, whose influence is institutionalized in the Advisory Council, an ap-
 pointed body that assists the Amir in formulating policy.
 The Government operates an efficient security apparatus. The civilian security ap-
 paratus, controlled by the Interior Ministry, is comprised of two sections: the police
 and the General A    inistration of Public Security- and the Investigatory Police
 (Mubahathat) which is responsible for sedition and espionage cases. There have
 been reports in the past that officers in the Mubahathat physically abused suspects.
 There were no such reports in 1994. The armed forces have under their jurisdiction
 another enforcement organization, known as the Intelligence Service (Mukhabarat),
 which intercepts and arrests terrorists and monitors political dissidents.
 The State owns most basic industries and services, but the retail and construction
 industries are in private hands. Oil is the principal natural resource, but the coun-
 try's extensive natural gas resources are expected to play an increasingly important
 role. The rapid development of the 1970's and early 1980's created an economy in
 which expatriate workers, mostly South Asian and Arab, outnumber Qataris by a
 ratio of 4 to 1. The Government tries to reduce this ratio by offering many govern-
 ment jobs only to citizens.
 There was no significant change in the human rights situation in 1994. Human
 rights remain closely restricted. The main problems continued to include the denial
 of the right of citizens to change their government, arbitrary detentions in security
 cases, and restrictions on worker rights and the freedoms of speech, press, assembly,
 and association. Women's rights are closely restricted, and non-Qatari workers face
 systematic discrimination.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no reports of political or
 extrajudicial killing.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 There have been no reported instances of torture for several years. The Government
 administers most corporal punishment prescribed by Islamic law but does not allow
 am utation.
 dlArbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The authorities generally charge suspects
 within 48 hours. In most cases involving foreigners, the police promptly notify the
 appropriate consular representative. Suspects detained in security cases are gen-
 erally not afforded access to counsel and may be detained indefinitely while under
 investigation. There are no known recent cases of incommunicado detention. Invol-
 untary exile is rare. There were no reported cases in 1994.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-There are two types of courts: the civil courts,
 which have jurisdiction in civil and commercial matters, and the Shari'a Court,
 which has jurisdiction in family and criminal cases. There are no permanent secu-
 rity courts. Security cases, which are rare, are tried by ad hoc military courts. De-
 fendants tried by all courts have the right to appeal. Occasionally in the Shari'a
 Court, the same judge will hear the original case and the appeal.
 Defendants appear before a judge for a preliminary hearing within 7 days of their
 arrest. Judges may extend pretrial detention a week at a time to allow the authori-
 ties to conduct investigations. Defendants in the civil courts have the right to be
 represented by defense attorneys but are not always permitted to be represented by
 counsel in the Shari'a Court.
 
 
 1162
 The judiciary is nominally independent, but most 4udges are foreign nationals who
 hold residence: permits granted by the civil authorities and thus hold their positions
 at the Government's reasure. The legal system is biased in favor of Qataris and
 the Government. A Muslim litigant may request the Shari'a Court to assume "'ris-
 diction in commercial or civil cases. Non-Muslims are not allowed to bring suits as
 plaintiffs in the Shari'a Court. This practice prevents non-Muslim residents from ob-
 taining full legal recourse.
 Trials in the civil courts are public, but in the Shari'a Court only the disputing
 parties, their relatives, associates, and witnesses are allowed in the courtroom. Law-
 yers do not play a formal role except to prepare litigants for their cases. Although
 non-Arabic speakers are provided with translators, foreigners are disadvantaged, es-
 pecially in cases involving the performance of contracts.
 Shari'a trials are normally brief. After both parties have stated their cases and
 examined witnesses, judges are likely to deliver a verdict after a short deliberation.
 Criminal cases are normally tried within 2 to 3 months after suspects are detained.
 There is no provision for bail in criminal cases. However, foreigners charged with
 minor crimes may be released to a Qatari sponsor. They are prohibited from depart-
 ing the country until the case is resolved.
 There are no known political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-Tradi-
 tional attitudes of respect for the sanctity of the home provide a great deal of protec-
 tion against arbitrary intrusions for most citizens and residents of Qatar. A warrant
 must normally be obtained before police may search a residence or business, except
 in cases involving national security or emergencies. However, warrants are issued
 by police officials themselves rather than by judicial authorities. There were no re-
 orts of unauthorized searches of homes in 1994. The police and security forces are
 lieved to monitor the communications of suspected criminals, those considered to
 be security risks, and selected foreigners.
 With prior permission, which is usually granted, Qataris may marry foreigners of
 any nationality and apply for residence permits for their spouses.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The freedoms of both speech and press are sig-
 nificantly restricted. While citizens may express political opinions in private, the
 Government does not tolerate any public criticism of the ruling family or Islam and
 discourages criticism of other Arab governments. Such restrictions apply to the pri-
 vately owned press and the state-owned electronic media. Censors review the con-
 tent of local newspapers, books, and other locally published material for objection-
 able material, but in general, journalists censor themselves. Foreign journalists
 avoid challenging press restrictions because they fear the Government may cancel
 their residency permits.
 Customs officials routinely screen imported video cassettes, audio tapes, books,
 and periodicals for politically obectionable or pornographic content. Foreign cable
 television service was introduced in 1993, but censors review broadcasts for objec-
 tionable material. There is no legal provision for academic freedom. Most instructors
 at the University of Qatar exercise self-censorship.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-These rights are severely lim-
 ited. The Government does not allow political parties, political demonstrations, or
 membership in international professional organizations critical of the Government
 or any other Arab government. Private social, sports, trade, professional, and cul-
 tural societies must be registered with the Government. Security forces monitor the
 activities of such groups.
 c. Freedom of Relgion.-The state religion is Islam, as interpreted by the puri-
 tanical Wahabbi branch of the Sunni tradition. Non-Muslims are prohibited from
 public worship and may not proselytize. The Government tolerates private gather-
 ings of non-Muslims but closely monitors them for political content. Non-Muslim
 parents may raise their children in their own faiths. The Government allows Shi'a
 Muslims to practice their faith. However, the latter have tacitly agreed to refrain
 from such public rituals as self-flagellation.
 In 1993 two leaders of a Christian group known as the Indian Brethren were ar-
 rested and subsequently deported, allegedly for converting a Hindu to Christianity.
 Apostasy from Islam is a capital offense, although no one is known to have been
 executed for it.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-There are no restrictions on internal travel, except around sensitive
 military and oil installations. Generally, women do not require permission from
 male guardians to travel. However, men may prevent female relatives from leaving
 the country by placing their names with immigration officers at ports of departure.
 
 
 1163
 Technically, Qatari women employed by the Government must obtain official per-
 mission to travel abroad when requesting leave, but it is not known to what extent
 this regulation is enforced. Citizens critical of the Government may face restrictions
 on their right to travel abroad.
 All citizens have the right to return. Foreigners are subject to immigration restric-
 tions designed to control the size of the local labor pool. Foreign workers must have
 a sponsor, usually their employer, to enter or depart the country.
 The Government has no formal refugee policy. Those attempting to enter illegally,
 including persons seeking to defect from nearby countries, are refused entry. Asy-
 lum seekers who can obtain local sponsorship or employment are allowed to enter
 and may remain as long as they are employed. Foreign women married to Qataris
 are granted residence permits and may apply for Qatari citizenship. However, they
 are expected to relinquish their foreign citizenship.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens do not have the legal right to change their government or the political
 system peacefully. Qatar has no formal democratic institutions. There have been re-
 ports that some of the 19 signers of a December 1991 petition calling for greater
 political freedom and constitutional reform continued to be subject to travel restric-
 tions. The political institutions blend the characteristics of a traditional Bedouin
 tribal state and a modern bureaucracy. There are no political parties, elections, or
 organized opposition groups.
 The Amir exercises most executive and legislative powers, including appointment
 of cabinet members. However, his rule is tempered by local custom. Interlocking
 family networks, together with the right of citizens to submit appeals or petitions
 to the Amir, provide informal avenues for the redress of many grievances. The cus-
 tom of rule by" onsensus leads to extensive onsultations among the Amir, leading
 merchant families, religious leaders, and other notables on imporant policies.
 Under the Basic Law of 1970, the Amir must be chosen from and by the adult
 males of the Al Thani family. The current Amir, Khalifa bin Hamad, has desigated
 his son, Hamad bin Khalifa, as the heir apparent. This designation was made with
 the consent of local notables and religious leaders in accordance with local custom.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Local human rights organizations are not permitted to exist. No international
 human rights organization is known to have asked to investigate conditions in
 Qatar.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Religion, Se, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 Women.-The activities of Qatari women are closely restricted both by law and
 tradition. For example, women are prohibited from applying for drivers' licenses un-
 less they have permission from a male guardian. This restriction does not apply to
 non-Qatari women. The Government adheres to Shari'a law in matters of ilerit-
 ance and child custody. While Muslim wives have the right to inherit from their
 husbands, non-Muslim wives do not, unless a special legacy is arranged. In cases
 of divorce wives rarely obtain custody of children and never if the wife is not a
 Muslim. Women may attend court proceedings but are generally represented by a
 male relative.
 Women are largely relegated to the roles of mother and homemaker, but some
 women are now finding jobs in education, medicine, and the news media. However,
 the number of professional women is too small to determine whether they are re-
 ceiving equal pay for equal work. Increasingly, women are receiving government
 scholarships to pursue degrees at universities overseas. Although women are legally
 able to travel abroad alone (see Section 2.d.), tradition and social pressures cause
 most to travel with male escorts.
 Violence against women, primarily foreign domestic workers, occurs but is not be-
 lieved to be widespread. However, some foreign domestics, especially those from
 South Asia and the Philippines, have been severely mistreated by employers. In
 keeping with Islamic law, all forms of physical abuse are illegal. The maximum pen-
 alty for rape is death. The police actively investigate reports of violence against
 women. In the last few years, the Government has demonstrated an increased will-
 ingness to arrest and punish offenders, whether citizens or foreigners. Offenders
 who are citizens usually receive lighter punishments than foreigners. Abused do-
 mestic workers usually do not press charges for fear of losing their jobs.
 There is no independent women's rights organization, nor would the Government
 permit the establishment of one.
 
 
 1164
 Children.-There is no pattern of societal abuse of children.
 National/Racial/Ethnic Minorities.-The Government discriminates against some
 citizens of non-Qatari orn  In the private sector, many Qataris of Iranian extrac-
 tion occupy positions of the highest importance. However, in government they are
 rarely found in senior decisionmaking positions.
 Religious Minorities.-Non-Muslims experience discrimination in employment,
 particularly in sensitive areas such as security and education. Non-Muslims also en-
 counter official prohibitions in the public practice of their religions (see Section 2.c.).
 People With Disabilities.-The Government has not enacted legislation or other-
 wise mandated provision of accessibility for the handicapped, who also face social
 discrimination. The Government does maintain a hospital and schools that provide
 free services to the mentally and physically handicapped.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The right of association is strictly limited, and all
 workers, including foreigners, are prohibited from forming labor unions. Despite
 this, almost all workers have the right to strike after their case has been presented
 to the Labor Conciliation Board and ruled upon. Employers may close a place of
 work or dismiss employees once the Conciliation Board has heard the case. The
 right to strike does not exist for government employees, domestic workers, or mem-
 bers of the employer's family. No worker in a public utility or health or security
 service may strike if such a strike would harm the public or lead to property dam-
 age. Strikes are rare, and there were none in 1994.
 Qatar's labor law provides for the establishment of joint consultative committees
 composed of representatives of the employer and workers. The committees may con-
 sider issues including work organization and productivity, conditions of employment,
 training of workers, and safety measures and their implementation.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-Workers are prohibited from
 engaging in collective bargaining. Generally, wages are set unilaterally by employ-
 ers without government involvement. Local courts handle disputes between workers
 and employers. There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The law prohibits forced or com-
 pulsory labor. Such activity is not known to exist. However, employers must give
 consent before exit permits are issued to any foreigner seeking to leave the country.
 Some employers temporarily withhold this consent to force foreign employees to
 work for longer periods than they wish.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-Minors between the ages of 15
 and 18 may be employed with the approval of their parents or guardians. However,
 younger non-Qatari children sometimes work in small family-owned businesses.
 Education is compulsory through age 15. While the laws governing the minimum
 age for employment of children are not strictly enforced, child labor, either Qatari
 or foreign, is rare. Very young children, usually of African or south Asian back-
 ground, have been employed as riders in camel racing. While little information is
 available on wages and working conditions for these children, accidents involving se-
 rious injury or death have been known to occur.
 Minors may not work more than 6 hours a day or more than 36 hours a week.
 Employers must provide the Ministry of Labor with the names and occupations of
 their minor employees. The Ministry may prohibit the employment of minors in jobs
 which are judged as dangerous to the health, safety, or morals of minors. Employers
 must also obtain permission from the Ministry of Education to hire a minor.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-There is no minimum wage in Qatar, although
 a 1962 law gives the Amir authority to set one. The 48-hour workweek with a 24-
 hour rest period is prescribed by law, although most government offices follow a
 schedule of 36 hours a week. Employees who work more than 48 hours a week, or
 36 hours a week during the Muslim month of Ramadan, are entitled to overtime.
 This law is adhered to in government offices and major private sector companies.
 It is not observed in the case of domestic and personal employees. Domestic servants
 frequently work 7 days a week, more than 12 hours a day, with few or no holidays,
 and have no effective way to redress grievances against their employers.
 Qatar has enacted regulations concerning worker safety and health, but enforce-
 ment, which is the responsibility of the Ministry of Energy and Industry, is lax. The
 Department of Public Safety oversees safety training and conditions, and the state-
 run petroleum company has its own set of safety standards and procedures. The
 Labor Law of 1964, as amended in 1984, lists partial and permanent disabilities for
 which compensation may be awarded, some connected with handling chemicals and
 petroleum products or construction injuries. The law does not specifically set rates
 of payment and compensation.
 
 
 1165
 Foreign workers must be sponsored by a citizen or legally recognized oranization
 to obtain an entry visa, and must have their sponsor's permission to depart the
 country. Theoretically, any worker may seek legal relief from onerous work condi-
 tions, but domestic workers generally accept their situations in order to avoid repa-
 triation.
