Qatar
Unlike most other Gulf states, Qatar has not experienced serious domestic
unrest. Yet the human rights climate remains problematic, particularly for the
large and growing migrant worker population. Migrants continue to experience
serious rights violations, including forced labor and arbitrary restrictions on the
right to leave Qatar, which expose them to exploitation and abuse by employers.
Qatar’s poor record on freedom of expression declined further with the
announcement of a draft cyber crime law.
Migrant Workers’ Rights
Qatar is upgrading its infrastructure in preparation for the 2022 FIFA World Cup,
but authorities have yet to implement reforms that are needed to afford foreign
migrant workers adequate protection against serious rights abuses, including
forced labor and trafficking.
According to official 2013 statistics, Qatar has a population of about 2million,
of whom only 10 percent are Qatari nationals. The number of economically
active foreign nationals increased by 122,000, almost 10 percent, in the 12
months from April 2012, and is expected to rise further in response to the
demands of Qatar’s burgeoning construction sector.
Qatar’s Law 14 of 2004 regulating labor in the private sector limits workers’
hours requires that they receive paid annual leave, sets requirements on health
and safety, and requires on-time payment of wages each month. However, the
authorities fail to enforce this and other laws intended to protect workers’
rights.
Workers typically pay exorbitant recruitment fees and employers regularly take
control of their passports when they arrive in Qatar. The kafala (sponsorship)
system ties a migrant worker’s legal residence to his or her employer, or sponsor.
Migrant workers commonly complain that employers fail to pay their wages
on time if at all, but are barred from changing jobs without their sponsoring
employer’s consent other than in exceptional cases and with express permission
of the Interior Ministry. Adding to their vulnerability, they must obtain an
exit visa from their sponsor in order to leave Qatar. Migrant workers are prohibited from unionizing or engaging in strikes, although they make up 99 percent
of the private sector workforce.
Many migrant workers live in cramped, unsanitary conditions, especially those
working without documentation.
Workers can become undocumented when employers report them as having
absconded, or when they fail to pay to renew workers’ annual ID cards. A lack
of proper documentation leaves workers at risk of arrest and detention or
deportation. It also leaves them at risk of further labor exploitation. Authorities
rarely, if ever, bring criminal prosecutions against employers for violating
Qatar’s labor or anti-trafficking laws.
In May 2013, the Qatar Foundation, a quasi-governmental organization heavily
engaged in property development, announced a code of conduct relating to
workers’ conditions that it requires contractors and sub-contractors on its projects
to respect. Another quasi-governmental organization, the 2022 Supreme
Committee, plans to follow suit for projects related to the World Cup. These
codes, if properly enforced, would improve conditions for workers on certain
projects and possibly bring them up to international minimum standards.
However, they are no substitute for enforced state-led regulation and they will
not alleviate conditions for most of Qatar’s low-paid migrant workers, since
these projects constitute only a fraction of those ongoing in Qatar.
Domestic migrant workers, almost all women, are especially vulnerable. In
addition to the problems the general migrant worker population face, they are
also subject to verbal, physical, and in some cases, sexual abuse. Some are not
allowed to speak to strangers or are locked up in the homes where they work.
Many do not receive a day off. They are not afforded any protection under
Qatari labor law, which could provide them with days of rest and limit their
working hours among other measures. A regional unified contract for domestic
workers, expected to be approved in 2014, falls well short of the minimum standards
outlined in the recently adopted International Labour Organization’s
Domestic Workers’ Convention.
Freedom of Movement
A number of foreign professionals working as expatriates in Qatar complained
they were unable to leave the country because their employers failed or refused
to issue them exit visas.
Law No. 4 of 2009, which regulates the sponsorship, employment, and residence
of expatriate workers, requires they obtain residence permits, and exit
permits when they wish to leave the country. Under the kafala system, these
permits are provided by “residence sponsors,” who can effectively prevent
those they sponsor from leaving Qatar.
The law does not require residence sponsors to justify their failure to provide
an exit permit, instead placing the onus on the sponsored expatriate to find
another Qatari national willing to act as an exit sponsor. Alternatively, the expatriate
must publish a notice in two daily newspapers and then provide a certificate
15 days later showing that he or she faces no outstanding legal claims. The
exit visa requirement cannot be justified as a means of preventing foreigners
fleeing court cases in Qatar, as the Interior Ministry has separate powers to
impose travel bans on non-citizens facing criminal charges or civil claims in
Qatar’s courts.
There are also concerns over the arbitrary manner in which Qatar imposes
indefinite travel bans against individuals accused of criminal or civil offences
by their employers.
The exit visa requirement and the authorities’ use of arbitrary travel bans
means that Qatari employers can prevent their foreign employees from leaving
Qatar indefinitely, a power they may use unfairly to secure concessions from
foreign employees with whom they are in dispute. Formerly highly-paid expatriates
trapped in Qatar in 2013 included the French professional footballer, Zahir
Belounis, and three former employees of the Al Jazeera Children’s Channel.
Freedom of Expression
In February, an appeal court reduced to 15 years the life imprisonment sentence
imposed on poet Mohammed Ibn al-Dheeb al-Ajami, a Qatari national, in
November 2012, by a court in Doha. The court convicted him of incitement to
overthrow the regime after he recited poems critical of Qatar’s then-emir, Sheikh Hamad bin Khalifa al-Thani. In June 2013, the emir abdicated, handing
power to his son, Sheikh Tamim bin Hamad al-Thani.
In May, Qatar’s cabinet approved a draft cyber-crimes law, but it remained
unclear when it would be enacted. The authorities did not consult the statefunded
Doha Center for Media, whose role is to promote media freedom in
Qatar, when preparing the draft law and they did not disclose its full contents.
According to state media, however, it “punishes anyone who infringes on the
social principles or values or otherwise publishes news, photos, audio or visual
recordings related to the sanctity of the private and familial life of persons,
even if they were true; or infringes on others by libel or slander via the Internet
or other information technology means.” As yet, authorities have also not
enacted a problematic draft media law of 2012 that would expose journalists in
Qatar to prohibitive financial sanctions if they criticize any Gulf Cooperation
Council states.
Provisions of Qatar’s penal code are inconsistent with international free speech
standards. Article 134, for example, prescribes a penalty of up to five years’
imprisonment for anyone who is convicted of criticizing the emir or vice-emir.
Women’s Rights
Provisions of Law No. 22 of 2006, Qatar’s first codified law to address issues of
family and personal status law, discriminate against women. Article 36 states
that two men must witness marital contracts, which are concluded by male matrimonial
guardians. Article 57 prevents husbands from hurting their wives physically
or morally, but article 58 states that it is a wife’s responsibility to look
after the household and to obey her husband. Marital rape is not a crime.