 QATAR
 Qatar, an Arab state on the Persian Gulf, is a monarchy without democratically
 elected institutions or political parties. It is governed by the ruling Al-Thani family
 through its head, the Amir. In June 1995, the ruling family, in consultation with
 other leading Qatari families, replaced Sheikh Khalifa bin Hamad Al Thani with his
 son, Sheikh Hamad bin Khalifa Al Thani. This transition of authority did not rep-
 resent a change in the basic governing order. The former Amir and his retinue were
 implicated in a foiled coup attempt in February 1996. Subsequently, in October
 1996, the former Amir concluded an agreement to return an unspecified amount of
 funds from his private accounts to the state treasury, a move widely seen as tacit
 recognition of his son's regime. The former Amir remains outside of Qatar. The
 amended Provisional Constitution, promulgated in April 1972, institutionalizes the
 customs and mores of the country's conservative Islamic heritage. The Amir holds
 absolute power, the exercise of which is influenced by religious law, consultation
 with leading citizens, rule by consensus, and the right of any citizen to appeal per-
 sonally to the Amir. The Amir usually legislates only after consultation with leading
 citizens, an arrangement institutionalized through the advisory council, an ap-
 pointed body that assists the Amir in formulating policy. The judiciary is nominally
 independent, but most judges hold their positions at the Government's pleasure.
 Qatar has efficient police and security services. The civilian security force, con-
 trolled by the Interior Ministry, comprises two sections: The police and the General
 Administration of Public Security, and the Investigatory Police (Mubahathat) which
 is responsible for sedition and espionage cases. The Interior Ministry is also in the
 process of establishing a special state security investigative unit (Mahabat) to per-
 form internal security investigations throughout the government and to gather in-
 telligence. In addition, there is an independent civilian intelligence service
 (Mukhabarat).
 The State owns most basic industries and services, but the retail and construction
 industries are in private hands. Oil is the principal natural resource, but the coun-
 try's extensive natural gas resources are playing an increasingly important role. The
 rapid development of the 1970's and 1980's created an economy in which expatriate
 workers, mostly South Asian and Arab, outnumber Qataris by a ratio of 4 or 5 to
 1. The Government tries to reduce this ratio by offering many government jobs only
 to citizens.
 The Government restricts citizens' rights. However, there -was limited progress in
 a few areas. Citizens do not have the right to change their government. Other prob-
 lems include arbitrary detentions in security cases, restrictions on the freedoms of
 speech, press, association, religion, and workers' rights. There was some progress in
 the areas of press freedom and religon. Women's rights are closely restricted, and
 non-Qatari workers face systematic discrimination.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no reports of political or
 other extrajudicial killings.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 There have been no reported instances of torture for several years. The Government
 administers most corporal punishment prescribed by Islamic law but does not allow
 amputation.
 Prison conditions generally meet minimum international standards. The Govern-
 ment does not permit domestic human rights groups to exist, and no international
 human rights organization has asked to visit the country or its prisons.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The authorities generally charge suspects
 within 48 hours. In most cases involving foreigners, the police promptly notify the
 appropriate consular representative. Suspects detained in security cases are gen-
 erally not afforded access to counsel and may be detained indefinitely while under
 investigation. There are no known recent cases of incommunicado detention.
 A number of persons suspected in the attempted February 1996 coup were ar-
 rested. A public trial of 110 defendants began in November 1997; the court granted
 
 
 1552
 
 a defense motion to postpone further action in the case until February 1998 to allow
 the defense time to prepare its case.
 Involuntary exile has occurred but is rare. There were no reported cases this year.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The judiciary is nominally independent, but most
 judges are foreign nationals who hold residence permits granted by the civil authori-
 ties and thus hold their positions at the Government s pleasure. The number of
 Qatari citizen judges is increasing.
 The judiciary finds itself dealing with the bureaucracies of two ministries. Civil
 (or Adlea) courts are subordinate to the Ministry of Justice, and religious (or
 Shari'a) courts fall under the Ministry of Endowments and Islamic Affairs. The
 proseutors fall under the Ministry of Interior.
 There are three types of courts: the civil courts, which have jurisdiction in civil
 and commercial matters; the Shari'a Court, which has jurisdiction in family and
 criminal cases; and the rarely convened state security courts. There are no perma-
 nent state security courts. Security cases, which are rare, are tried by ad hoc mili-
 tary courts. Although state security cases may be conducted in secret, there have
 been no cases before these courts since the new Amir assumed power. Defendants
 tried by all courts have the right to appeal. Occasionally in the Shari'a Court, the
 same judge will hear the original case and the appeal.
 The legal system is biased in favor of Qataris and the Government. A Muslim liti-
 gant may request the Shari'a Court to assume jurisdiction in commercial or civil
 cases. Non-Muslims are not allowed to bring suits as plaintiffs in the Shari'a Court.
 This practice prevents non-Muslim residents from obtaining full legal recourse.
 Trials in the civil courts are public, but in the Shari'a Court only the disputing par-
 ties, their relatives, associates, and witnesses are allowed in the courtroom. Lawyers
 do not play a formal role except to prepare litigants for their cases. Although non-
 Arabic speakers are provided with interpreters, foreigners are disadvantaged, espe-
 cially in cases involving the performance of contracts.
 Defendants appear before a judge for a preliminary hearing within 7 days of their
 arrest. Judges may extend pretrial detention a week at a time to allow the authori-
 ties to conduct investigations. Defendants in the civil courts have the right to be
 represented by defense attorneys but are not always permitted to be represented by
 counsel in the Shar'a court.
 Shari'a trials are usually brief. Shari'a family law trials are often held without
 counsel. After both parties have stated their cases and examined witnesses, judges
 are likely to deliver a verdict after a short deliberation. Criminal cases are normally
 tried within 2 to 3 months after suspects are detained. There is no provision for bail
 in criminal cases. However, foreigners charged with minor crimes may be released
 to a Qatari sponsor. They are prohibited from departing the country until the case
 is resolved.
 There were no reports of political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-Tradi-
 tional attitudes of respect for the sanctity of the home and the privacy of women
 provide a great deal of protection against arbitrary intrusions for most citizens and
 residents. A warrant must be obtained before police may search a residence or busi-
 ness, except in cases involving national security or emergencies. However, warrants
 are issued by police officials rather than by judicial authorities. There were no re-
 ports of unauthorized searches of homes during the year. The police and security
 forces are believed to monitor the communications of suspected criminals, those con-
 sidered to be security risks, and selected foreigners.
 With prior permission, which is usually granted, Qataris may marry foreigners of
 any nationality and apply for residence permits or Qatari nationality for their
 spouses.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-The Government reduced restrictions on free-
 dom speech and of the press, and permitted a significant expansion of press freedom
 during the year. The Government formally lifted censorship of the media in 1995
 and since then the press has been essentially free of governent interference. How-
 ever, journalists continue to practice self-censorship, due to real or perceived social
 and political pressures. For example, no instance of explicit criticism of any citizen,
 whether in ublic or private life, has been noted in local newspapers. Qatar tele-
 vision and radio are state-owned, but the privately-owned Qatari satellite television
 channel A1-Jazeera operates freely.
 There were no reports of instances of political censorship of foreign news media
 or broadcasts of foreign programs on local television over the past year. The Censor-
 ship Office in the Ministry of Information was abolished (together with the Min-
 istry) in October 1996, but censrs still work at broadcast media under the overall
 
 
 1553
 supervision of the Ministry of Religious Endowments. Pornography and expressions
 deemed hostile to Islam are subject to censorship, but actual censorship is applied
 irregularly.
 Customs officials screen imported print media, videocassettes, etc., for pornog-
 raphy, but have stopped blocking the importation of non-Muslim religious items.
 A growing number of citizens and residents have access to the Internet, provided
 through the state-owned telecommunications monopoly. Internet access appears to
 be uncensored and unrestricted.
 Citizens enjoy broad freedom of speech, but are restricted by the social and family
 restraints of a very traditional society. There appears to be no fear of government
 monitoring of private speech. The larger expatriate population, however, does not
 believe it enjoys the same freedoms and acts accordingly.
 There is no legal provision for academic freedom. Most instructors at the Univer-
 sity of Qatar exercise self-censorship.
 b. Freedom of Peacefit  Assembly and Association.-The Government severely lim-
 its freedom of assembly. The Government does not allow political demonstrations.
 The Government severely limits freedom of association. The Government does not
 allow political parties or membership in international professional organizations
 critical of the Government or any other Arab government. Private social, sports,
 trade, professional, and cultural societies must be registered with the Government.
 Security forces monitor the activities of such groups.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The state religion is Islam, as interpreted by the puri-
 tanical Wahhabi branch of the Sunni tradition. The Government officially prohibits
 public worship by non-Muslims, however, it tolerates and protects private services
 conducted behind closed doors if notification is provided to the authorities. The po-
 lice provide traffic control for previously notified catholic services, which number up
 to a thousand or more persons at times. The Government recently began to issue
 visas to Christian clergy, as clergy, under foreign embassy sponsorship. There are
 no restrictions on non-Muslims providing religious instruction to their children.
 However, non-Muslims may not proselytize and conversion from Islam is theoreti-
 cally a capital offense. However, there is no record of any execution for such a con-
 version since independence.
 The Government allows Shi'a Muslims to practice their faith freely, however, com-
 munity leaders have agreed to refrain from certain public practices such as self-flag-
 ellation.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-There are no restrictions on internal travel, except around sensitive
 military and oil installations. Generally, women do not require permission from
 male guardians to travel. However, men may prevent female relatives from leaving
 the country by placing their names with immigration officers at ports of departure.
 Technically, women employed by the Government must obtain official permission to
 travel abroad when requesting leave, but it is not known to what extent this regula-
 tion is enforced. Citizens critical of the Government face restrictions on their right
 to travel abroad.
 All citizens have the right to return. Foreigners are subject to immigration restric-
 tions designed to control the size of the local labor pool. Foreign workers must have
 the permission of their sponsor (usually their employer) to enter and depart the
 country, but their dependents may leave the country without restriction. Foreign
 women married to Qataris are granted residence permits and may apply for citizen-
 ship. However, if they apply for citizenship, they are expected to relinquish their
 foreign citizenship.
 The Government has not formulated a formal policy regarding refugees, asylees,
 or fist asylum. Those attempting to enter illegally, including persons seeking to de-
 fect from nearby countries, are refused entry. Asylum seekers who can obtain local
 sponsorship or employment are allowed to enter and may remain as long as they
 are employed. A Bahraini Air Force pilot defected to Qatar in December 1996, and
 the Government said he was free to stay, calling him a refugee and offering him
 its full protection.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens do not have the right to change their government or the political system
 peacefully. Qatar has no formal democratic institutions. There have been reports
 that some of the 19 signers of a December 1991 petition calling for greater political
 freedom and constitutional reform continued to be subject to travel restrictions. The
 political institutions blend the characteristics of a traditional Bedouin tribal state
 and a modem bureaucracy. There are no political parties, elections, or organize& op-
 position groups.
 
 
 1554
 In November, the Amir publicly pledged to create a democratically elected munici-
 pal council; and legislation to establish an election law and create the council re-
 mained under discussion at year's end.
 The Amir exercises most executive and legislative powers, including appointment
 of cabinet members. However, his rule is tempered by local custom, including the
 need for consensus and religious traditions. Interlocking family networks, together
 with the right of citizens to submit appeals or petitions to the Amir, provide infor-
 mal avenues for the redress of many grievances. The custom of rule by consensus
 leads to extensive consultations among the Amir, leading merchant families, reli-
 gious leaders, and other notables on important matters.
 Under the amended Provisional Constitution, the Amir must be chosen from and
 by the adult males of the Al Thani family.
 Women do not have the right to vote or participate in politics. However, in No-
 vember the Amir announced plans to give women the right to vote and to run for
 election to the proposed municipal council. Draft legislation that would provide for
 these rights remained under discussion at year's end.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 The Government does not permit local human rights organizations to exist. No
 international human rights organizations are known to have asked to investigate
 conditions in Qatar. However, in November Amnesty International was asked to
 send an observer to the trial of those accused in the February 1996 coup attempt,
 as were some foreign embassies.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 Institutional, cultural, and legal discrimination based on gender, race, religion, so-
 cial status, and disability exists.
 Women.-Violence against women and spousal abuse occur but are not believed
 to be widespread. However, some foreign domestics, especially those from South
 Asia and the Philippines, have been mistreated by employers. In keeping with Is-
 lamic law, all forms of physical abuse are illegal. The maximum penalty for rape
 is death. The police actively investigate reports of violence against women. In the
 last few years, the Government has demonstrated an increased willingness to arrest
 and punish offenders, whether citizens or foreigners. Offenders who are citizens
 usually receive lighter punishments than foreigners. Abused domestic workers usu-
 ally do not press charges for fear of losing their jobs.
 The activities of women are closely restricted both by law and tradition. For ex-
 ample, a woman is prohibited from applying for a driver's license unless she has �
 permission from a male guardian. This restriction does not apply to non-Qatari
 women. The Government adheres to Shari'a law in matters of inheritance and child
 custody. While Muslim wives have the right to inherit from their husbands, non-
 Muslim wives do not, unless a special legacy is arranged. In cases of divorce, Shari'a
 (Islamic) law prevails; younger children remain with the mother and older children
 with the father. Both parents retain permanent rights of visitation. Local authori-
 ties, however, do not allow a non-Qatari parent to take the children out of the coun-
 try without permission of the Qatari parent. Women may attend court proceedings
 but are generally represented by a male relative. There has been a steady increase
 in the number and severity of complaints of spousal abuse by foreign wives of
 Qatari and foreign national men.
 Women are largely relegated to the roles of mother and homemaker, but some
 women are now finding jobs in education, medicine, and the news media. However,
 the number of professional women is too small to determine whether they are re-
 ceiving equal pay for equal work. Increasingly, women are receiving government
 scholarships to pursue degrees at universities overseas. The Amir has entrusted his
 second wife, who is the mother of the Heir Apparent, with the high-profile task of
 establishing a university in Doha. In November 1996, the Government appointed its
 first female undersecretary, in the Ministry of Education. Although women are le-
 gally able to travel abroad alone (see Section 2.d.), tradition and social pressures
 cause most to travel with male escorts. There have also been complaints that Qatari
 husbands retrieved their foreign spouses' passports and, without prior approval,
 turned them in for Qatari documents. The husbands then inform these wives that
 they had lost their previous nationality. In other cases, foreign citizen wives report
 being forbidden by husbands or in-laws to visit or contact foreign embassies.
 There is no independent women's rights organization, nor has the Government
 permitted the establishment of one.
 
 
 1555
 Children.-The Government demonstrates its commitment to children's rights
 through a well-funded, free public education system (elementary through university)
 and a complete medical protection program or Qatari children. However, children
 of most foreigners are denied free education and have only limited medical coverage.
 There is no societal pattern of abuse of children.
 People With Disabilities.-The Government has not enacted legislation or other-
 wise mandated provision of accessibility for the disabled, who also face social dis-
 crimination. The Government maintains a hospital and schools that provide high
 quality free services to the mentally and physically disabled.
 Religious Minorities.-Shi'a Muslims experience discrimination in employment in
 sensitive areas such as security and education.
 National/Racial/Ethnic Minorities.-The Government discriminates against some
 citizens of non-Qatari origin. In the private sector, many Qataris of Iranian extrac-
 tion occupy positions of the highest importance. However, in government they are
 rarely found in senior decisionmaking positions.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The right of association is strictly limited, and all
 workers, including foreigners, are prohibited from forming labor unions. Despite
 this, almost all workers have the right to strike after their case has been presented
 to the Labor Conciliation Board and ruled upon. Employers may close a place of
 work or dismiss employees once the Conciliation Board has heard the case. The
 right to strike does not exist for government employees, domestic workers, or mem-
 bers of the -employer's family. No worker in a public utility or health or security
 service may strike if such a strike would harm the public or lead to property dam-
 age. Strikes are rare, but workers at a Korean construction firm went on strike
 early in the year.
 The labor aw provides for the establishment of joint consultative committees com-
 posed of representatives of the employer. and workers. The committees do not dis-
 cuss wages but may consider issues including work organization and productivity,
 conditions of employment, training of workers, and safety measures and their imple-
 mentation.
 Since July 1995, Qatar has been suspended from the U.S. Overseas Private In-
 vestment Corporation (OPIC) insurance progams because of the Government's lack
 of compliance with internationally recognized worker rights standards.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-Workers are prohibited from
 engaging in collective bargaining. Generally, wages are set unilaterally by employ-
 ers without government involvement. Local courts handle disputes between workers
 and employers.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The law prohibits forced or com-
 pulsory labor. Three-quarters of the work force are expatriate workers, who are de-
 pendent on a- single employer for residency rights. This leaves them vulnerable to
 abuse. For instance, employers must give consent before exit permits are issued to
 any foreigner seeking to leave the country. Some employers temporarily withhold
 this consent to force foreign employees to work for longer periods than they wish.
 The Government prohibits forced and bonded labor by children and enforces this
 prohibition effectively.
 d. Status of Child Labor Practices and Minimum Age for Employment.-Minors
 between the ages of 15 and 18 may be employed with the approval of their parents
 or guardians and some children may work in small, family-owned businesses. How-
 ever, such child labor, Qatari or foreign, is rare. Education is compulsory through
 the age of 15. Very young children, usually of African or South Asian background,
 have been employed as riders in camel racing. Little information is available on
 wages and working conditions for these children. The Government prohibits forced
 and bonded labor by children and enforces this prohibition effectively (see Section
 6.c.).
 Minors may not work more than 6 hours a day or more than 36 hours a week.
 Employers must provide the Ministry of Labor with the names and occupations of
 their minor employees. The Ministry may prohibit the employment of minors in jobs
 which are judged as dangerous to the health, safety, or morals of minors. Employers
 must also obtain permission from the Ministry of Education to hire a minor.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-There is no minimum wage, although a 1962
 law gives the Amir authority to set one. The 48-hour workweek with a 24-hour rest
 period is prescribed by law, although most government offices follow a schedule of
 36 hours a week. Employees who work more than 48 hours a week, or 36 hours a
 week during the Muslim month of Ramadan, are entitled to overtime. This law is
 adhered to in government offices and major private sector companies. It is not ob-
 
 
 1556
 served in the case of domestic and personal employees. Domestic servants frequently
 work 7 days a week, more than 12 hours a day, with few or no holidays, and have
 no effective way to redress grievances against their employers.
 Qatar has enacted regulations concerning worker safety and health, but enforce-
 ment, which is the responsibility of the Ministry of Energy and Industry, is lax. The
 Department of Public Safety oversees safety training and conditions, and the state-
 run petroleum company has its own set of safety standards and procedures. The
 Labor Law of 1964, as amended in 1984, lists partial and permanent disabilities for
 which compensation may be awarded, some connected with handling chemicals and
 petroleum products or construction injuries. The law does not specifically set rates
 ofpayment and compensation.
 Foreign workers must be sponsored by a citizen or legally recognized organization
 to obtain an entry visa and must have their sponsor's permission to depart the coun-
 try. Any worker may seek legal relief from onerous work conditions, but domestic
 workers generally accept their situations in order to avoid repatriation. The Govern-
 ment also -penalizes Qatari employers who violate residence and sponsorship laws.
 Some foreign domestics have been mistreated by their employers (see Section 5).
