 QATAR
 Qatar, a small, wealthy Persian Gulf state ruled by an Amir
 from the Al Thani family, is governed by a 1970 basic law,
 which institutionalizes the customs and social mores of
 Oatar's conservative Wahhabi Muslim heritage. These include
 respect for the sanctity of private property, freedom from
 arbitrary arrest and imprisonment, and protection against
 transgressions of Islamic law (the Shari'a). Thus, although
 the Amir holds nearly absolute power, he must exercise
 authority with care. While he may, for example, suspend any
 secular law or countermand any civil court decision, he is
 unlikely to do so, especially without consulting his council
 of ministers and the advisory council of notables that assist
 him in making policy decisions. The Amir is also unlikely to
 reach any major decision without achieving a consensus within
 his family.
 Qatar's economy is not expanding as rapidly as it did during
 the seventies and early eighties. The economy is mixed, with
 the State owning and operating most basic industries and
 services while retail trade and the construction industry
 remain in private hands. Its fast developing industrial
 infrastructure has led to the creation of an expatriate
 community which now outnumbers the native-born population by a
 ratio of almost four to one. Limiting the influence and
 controlling the activities of expatriates is for most Qataris
 a major national goal. Qatari resentment against expatriates
 makes them more likely than natives to be the victim's of
 arbitrary police action. It is also difficult for an alien to
 take legal action against a citizen. The economic downturn of
 1983 and early 1984 has in addition led the Government to
 continue its policy of reducing the number of expatriates.
 This policy, however, has been carried out with some
 compassion. Palestinians, for example, have on the whole not
 been forced to leave unless able to make arrangements to
 settle elsewhere. Expatriates from South Asia have not been
 so lucky, and their numbers have dropped noticeably.
 In this conservative society, women remain in a subordinate
 position. Their activities are still bound by a number of
 social customs and quasi-legal restrictions such as veiling
 and prohibitions against the issuance of drivers licenses. On
 the other hand, mandatory schooling for girls and the opening
 of employment opportunities for women in medicine and
 education represent a shift in attitudes. So too does the
 slowly expanding trickle of women allowed to go abroad for
 university studies.
 The human rights situation in Qatar is changing only very
 slowly. There are many factors against change--not the least
 being the absence of any credible internal threat to the
 regime. So long as the Government feels secure, major
 innovation is likely to occur only as the result of a
 consensus within the ruling and other leading families.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 There were no known instances of political killings in 1984.
 
 
 1372
 QATAR
 b.  Disappearance
 There were no reports of disappearances in 1984.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 Although non-European expatriates routinely complain of
 maltreatment after their arrest by Qatari authorities, the
 practice does not seem to have official sanction. Torture is
 not condoned by the authorities and, although the Government
 does administer most of the corporal punishments prescribed by
 the Shari'a, it no longer allows physical mutilation.
 Executions rarely occur. Prison conditions are uncomfortable
 but adequate. Family members and friends may bring food to
 supplement the monotonous prison fare as well as small
 luxuries and mail. There have been private allegations of
 overcrowded and unsanitary conditions in the women's prison.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 As a general rule, the authorities must charge suspects before
 a competent court within 48 hours. In most cases involving
 expatriates, the police have promptly notified the appropriate
 consular representative. Suspects detained in security cases
 are generally not afforded their rights. An expatriate
 arrested in 1983 in a security case has not been formally
 charged and was still being held under house arrest in late
 1984. A Qatari detained in the same case remains
 incommunicado. Other expatriates arrested in this case have
 apparently been released, but only after being held for at
 least one year without being charged.
 Involuntary exile remains a rare practice. The last known
 major instance took place over 10 years ago. It involved the
 previous deposed Amir, his family, and close supporters.
 Expatriate offenders are normally deported upon completion of
 their sentences.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Except for security cases, most disputes are judged before
 either a civil or Shari's court. Most commercial litigation
 involving expatriates takes place before the civil courts.
 The Shari'a courts administer criminal and family law and may,
 if one party requests, take jurisdiction in business cases.
 Although the judiciary is nominally independent, most judges
 are expatriates holding residence permits granted by the civil
 authorities and thus hold their positions at the Government's
 pleasure.
 Many expatriates find proceedings in the Shari'a courts
 bewildering. Only the disputing parties, their relatives and
 associates, and witnesses are allowed in the courtroom.
 Lawyers may not play any formal role save that of preparing
 litigants for their cases. Although non-Arabic speakers are
 provided with translators, foreigners report being at a
 considerable disadvantage, especially in cases involving the
 nonperformance of contracts. Shari'a trials are normally
 brief. After both parties have stated their cases, and
 examined witnesses, the judge is likely to deliver a verdict
 with only a short delay. Criminal cases are normally tried
 two to three months after suspects are detained.
 
 
 1373
 QATAR
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Traditional attitudes regarding the sanctity of the home
 provide a great deal of protection against arbitrary
 intrusions. Except in security cases or emergencies, the
 police must normally obtain a warrant before searching a
 residence or business. However, Qatari pclice are reported to
 have conducted many warrantless searches of expatriate homes
 during the summer of 1984 in connection with an armed robbery
 for which Qataris were eventually charged.
 Police routinely monitor the communications of criminal and
 security suspects. Mail thought to contain either pornography
 or drugs is also opened as a matter of course.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Although both expatriates and Qataris are free to say what
 they wish privately, public criticism of the ruling family and
 its policies is not tolerated. The Government strongly
 discourages attacks on other Arab governments as well. This
 policy applies to the electronic media, which are
 government-owned and controlled, and to the press. The
 journalistic community, particularly the expatriates,
 generally avoids pressing against these restrictions because
 of the risk of having residence permits cancelled.
 The authorities routinely screen all video cassettes, audio
 tapes, books, and periodicals for objectionable political
 sentiments and pornography.
 b. Freedom cf Peaceful Assembly and Association
 The Government allows private social, sports, trade,
 professional, and artistic societies to operate. The
 activities of these organizations, which must register with
 the Government, are closely watched.
 Government policy does not allow political parties, labor
 unions, or demonstrations.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Qatar's state religion is Islam, the Koran is its basic
 constitution, and the Shari'a its legal code. Muslims enjoy
 certain advantages such as preferential employment. All other
 faiths are prohibited public worship, they may not organize
 churches, schools, or associations and may not proselytize.
 Apostasy from Islam remains a capital crime, although no one
 has been executed for it in recent memory. The Government
 does tolerate the private practice of non-Muslim religions,
 both by allowing parents to raise children in non-Muslim
 faiths, and by allowing private gatherings in private homes
 for worship.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 There are no restrictions on internal travel. Male Qataris
 travel abroad at will. Females, both Qatari and foreign,
 usually require the permission of a male guardian or relative
 
 
 1374
 QATAR
 to leave the country. All Qatari citizens have the right to
 return. Foreigners are subject to immigration restrictions
 designed to control the local labor pool. They require a
 local sponsor to enter and tneir sponsor's permission to
 depart.
 Tne Government has no formal policy on refugees. Those
 attempting to enter illegally, including defectors from nearby
 countries, are denied entry. Often refugees who can get local
 sponsorship or employment may enter. If they lose their jobs,
 however, they are expected to leave. The Government has
 apparently been willing to relax its rules in order to help
 Palestinians unable to find refuge elsewhere.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Qatar's political institutions blend the characteristics of a
 traditional Bedouin tribal state and of a modern bureaucracy.
 There are no political parties, elections, or organized
 opposition to the Government, and the Amir exercises all
 executive and legislative powers. His autocratic rule,
 however, is checked to some extent by entrenched local
 customs. Interlocking family networks and the recognized
 right of citizens to submit appeals or petitions personally to
 their Amir provide effective, if informal, avenues for redress
 of grievances and also serve to limit abuses. The custom of
 rule by consensus leads to extensive consultations between the
 Amir, leading merchants, religious leaders, and other notables
 on important policies. Women for the most part play no role
 in public life.
 Under Qatar's Basic Law of 1970, the Amir must be chosen from
 among and by the adult males of the Al Thani family. The
 current Amir, Khalifa bin Hamad, has designated his son Hamad
 as heir apparent. This took place with the consent of the
 notables and religious leaders according to established
 custom. There are no serious challenges to this arrangement,
 and in the foreseeable future effective political power will
 remain in the hands of the Amir, his family, and the local
 notables.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Non-governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 No major international or non-governmental organization
 monitoring human rights abuses has asked to investigate
 conditions in Qatar. Amnesty International's 1984 report did
 not include Qatar among the countries surveyed. Freedom House
 calls Qatar "partly free." The Qatari Government has
 expressed concern over the plight of Palestinian, Lebanese,
 and Afghan refugees.
 ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND CULTURAL SITUATION
 Qatar's population is estimated to be 291,000 and to be
 growing at an annual rate of about 3.4 percent. The per
 capita gross national product is around $22,000 (1982). Life
 expectancy at birth, according to the World Bank, is 68
 years. The 1984 infant mortality rate was 43 per 1,000.
 Virtually all the population has access to safe water.
 Education is free for citizens through graduate school; most
 of the large expatriate communities have their own schools.
 
 
 1375
 QATAR
 Oil revenues have enabled the Government to develop an
 extensive network of social services. Health care is provided
 free to all residents. Staple foods such as flour, milk, and
 rice are subsidized; prices of other items are regulated.
 Citizens receive subsidized housing and scholarships for
 higher study abroad. Most Qatari males, and all heads of
 families, are guaranteed a reasonable income either through
 government employment or social security payments.
 Women remain largely relegated to roles as mothers and
 homemakers but are now finding jobs in education, medicine,
 and the news media. They continue to face widespread
 discrimination, however. For example, women do not regularly
 receive the overseas university scholarships available for
 males, and their employment, while tolerated, is discouraged
 beyond such fields as nursing, teaching, and home economics.
 Public life is a male sphere. Expatriate women find it easier
 to get jobs or to own and manage a business than their Qatari
 counterparts. There are signs that as more Qatari women
 receive education, they will press for a relaxation of some of
 the restrictions from their country's tribal past.
 
 
 1376
