 QATAR
 Qatar, an Arab state on the Persian Gulf, is a monarchy without democratically
 elected institutions or political parties. It is ruled by an Amir from the Al Thani
 family. The 1970 Basic Law institutionalizes the customs and mores of the country's
 conservative Islamic heritage. These include respect for the sanctity of private prop-
 erty, freedom from arbitrary arrest and imprisonment, and punishment of trans-
 gressions against Islamic law. The Amir holds absolute power, the exercise of which
 is influenced by continuing traditions of consultation, rule by consensus, and the
 citizen's right to appeal personally to the Amir. In practice, the Amir must consider
 the opinions of leadgcitizens, whose influence is institutionalized in the Advisory
 Council, an appointed body that assists the Amir in formulating policy.
 The Government operates an efficient security apparatus. The civilian security ap-
 paratus, controlled by the Interior Ministry, has two sections the police and the
 General Administration of Public Security. A second branch of the Interior Ministry,
 the Investigatory Police (Mubahathat), deals with sedition and espionage. The
 Mubahathat is nearly independent of the regular civil security forces and has been
 known to use severe force in its investigations. It can incarcerate suspects without
 charge but reportedly does this infrequently. The armed forces have under their ju-
 
 
 1270
 
 risdiction another enforcement organization, known as the Intelligence Service
 (Mukhabarat) whose function is to intercept and arrest terrorists and to monitor
 political dissidents.
 Qatar's economy is mixed. The State owns and operates most basic industries and
 services, while retail trade and the construction industry remain in private hands.
 Oil is the principal product, accounting for about 70 percent of the gross national
 product. However the country's extensive natural gas resources are expected to play
 an increasingly important role in the economy. The rapid development of Qatar's in-
 frastructure in the 1970's and early 1980's led to the creation of a ratio of expatri-
 ates (mostly south Asian and Arab) to nationals of four to one. The Government has
 continued efforts, begun during the economic downturn of the 1980's, to reduce this
 ratio by offering many positions in the Government to Qatari citizens only.
 Human rights remain closely restricted. The main human rights problems include
 the denial of the right of citizens to change their government, arbitrary detentions
 in security cases, and restrictions on worker rights and the freedoms of speech
 press, assembly and association. Constraints on women's rights continued, as did
 the systematic discrimination faced by non-Qatari workers.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from:
 a. Political and Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no reports of political or
 extraudicial killings.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 There were no reports of torture. Instances of torture have been reported in the
 past, usually by the security forces during the investigative phase following deten-
 tion. Improved standards of conduct were introduced in 1989. The Government ad-
 ministers most corporal punishment prescribed by Shari'a law but does not allow
 amputation.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The authorities generally charge suspects
 within 48 hours. In most cases involving foreigners, the police promptly notify the
 appropriate consular representative. Suspects detained in security cases, however,
 are generally not afforded access to counsel and may be detained indefinitely while
 under investigation.
 Involuntary exile is rare. There were no reported cases in 1993.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-There are two types of courts: the civil courts,
 which have jurisdiction in civil and commercial matters, and the Shari'a Court,
 which has jurisdiction in family and criminal cases. There are no permanent secu-
 rity courts; security cases, which are extremely rare, are tried by ad hoc military
 courts. Defendants tried by all types of courts may submit their cases to an appeals
 court. However, in cases tried bythe Shari'a Court, it is possible that the same
 judges will hear both the original case and the appeal.
 The judiciary is nominally independent, but most judges are foreign nationals who
 hold residence permits granted by the civil authorities and thus hold their positions
 at the Government's pleasure. Qatar's legal system is biased in favor of Qataris and
 the Government.
 The Shari'a Court may assume jurisdiction in commercial or civil cases if re-
 quested to do so by a Muslim litigant. Non-Muslims are not allowed to bring suits
 as plaintiffs in the Shari'a Court. This practice prevents non-Muslim residents from
 obtaining full legal recourse when being sued by, or trying to sue, a Qatari national.
 In the Shari'a Court, only the disputing parties, their relatives, associates, and
 witnesses are allowed in the courtroom. Lawyers do not play a formal role except
 to prepare litigants for their cases. Although non-Arabic speakers are provided with
 translators, foreigners are disadvantaged, especially in cases involving the perform-
 ance of contracts.
 Shari'a trials are normally brief. After both parties have stated their cases and
 examined witnesses, judges are likely to deliver a verdict after only a short delibera-
 tion. Criminal cases are normally tried 2 to 3 months after suspects are detained.
 There is no provision for release on bail in criminal cases. However, foreigners
 charged with minor crimes may be released to a Qatari sponsor. They are required
 to deposit their passport with the police and are prohibited from leaving Qatar until
 the case is resolved.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-Tradi-
 tional attitudes of respect for the sanctity of the home provide a great deal of protec-
 tion against arbitrary intrusions for most citizens and residents of Qatar. A warrant
 must normally be obtained before police may search a residence or business, except
 in cases involving national security or emergencies. However, warrants are issued
 
 
 1271
 by police officials themselves, rather than by judicial authorities. There were no re-
 ports of unauthorized searches of homes in 1993. The police and security forces are
 beheved to monitor the communications of suspected criminals, those considered to
 be security risks, and selected foreigners.
 With prior permission, which is usually granted, Qataris may marry foreigners of
 any nationality and apply for residence permits for their spouses.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-Foreigners and Qataris can and do express po-
 litical opinions in private. However, public criticism of the ruling family or of Islam
 is not tolerated. The Government also discourages public criticism of other Arab gov-
 ernments. This policy also applies to the government-owned electronic media and
 the privately owned press.
 Since December 1989, the Government has permitted a modest degree of freedom
 of the press, although still within limits. Arrayah, the country's official newspaper,
 was suspended for3 days during the summer. This decision followed an official pro-
 test by the Embassy of Kuwait regarding the paper's overt support for the acquisi-
 tion of Iraqi players by a local soccer team. Non-Qatari journalists generally avoid
 challenging press restrictions because of the risk of having residence permits can-
 celed. Cable television service was introduced in 1993, although it is subject to gov-
 ernment censorship. The Customs Division of the Ministry of Finance and Petro-
 leum routinely screens incoming video cassettes, audio tapes, books, and periodicals
 for politically objectionable or pornographic content. Locally published books and
 other materials and all dramatic productions must be cleared by a board of censors
 before release.
 There are no legal provisions for academic freedom. Most instructors at the Uni-
 versity of Qatar are believed to exercise self-censorship.
 b. Freedom of Peacefd Assembly and Association.-These rights are severely lim-
 ited. The Government does not allow political parties or political demonstrations or
 membership in international professional organizations critical of the Government
 or any other Arab government. The Government allows private social, sports, trade,
 professional, and cultural societies to operate, but they must register with the Gov-
 ernment, and their activities are closely watched. Membership in international pro-
 fessional organizations critical of the Government, or any other Arab government,
 is not permitted. The Government does not allow political parties or political dem-
 onstrations.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-Qstar's state religion is Islam, as interpreted by the puri-
 tanical Wahabbi branch of the Sunni tradition. Adherents of religions other than
 Islam are prohibited from public worship and may not proselytize. In 1993 two lead-
 ers of a Christian group known as the Indian Brethren were arrested and subse-
 quently deported, allegedly for converting a Hindu to Christianity. Apostasy from
 Islam is a capital offense, although no one is known to have been executed for it.
 The Government tolerates the private practice of non-Muslim religions, and non-
 Muslim parents may raise their children in their own faiths. Private gatherings of
 non-Muslims are tolerated but are closely monitored for political content. The Gov-
 ernment allows Shi'a Muslims to practice their faith. However, the latter have tac-
 itly agreed to refrain from the more public aspects of their rituals, such as self-flag-
 ellation.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-There are no restrictions on internal travel, except around sensitive
 military and oil installations. Generally, women do not require permission from
 male guardians to travel. However, Qatari men may prevent female relatives from
 leaving the countr by placing their names with immigration officers at ports of de-
 parture. Technically, Qatari women employed by the Government must obtain offi-
 cial permission to travel abroad when requesting leave, but it is not known to what
 extent this regulation is enforced.
 All Qatari citizens have the right to return. Foreigners are subject to immigration
 restrictions designed to control the size of the local labor pool. Foreigners who work
 in Qatar must have a sponsor (usually an employer) in order to enter the country.
 They must also obtain the sponsor's permission to leave.
 The Government has no formal refugee policy. Those attempting to enter illegally,
 including officials seeking to defect from nearby countries, are refused entry. Asy-
 lum seekers who can obtain local sponsorship or employment are allowed to enter
 and may remain as long as they keep their employment. Foreign women married
 to Qataris are granted residence permits and may apply for Qatari citizenship. How-
 ever, they are expected to give up their foreign citizenship in exchange.
 
 
 1272
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens do not have the legal right to change their government or the political
 system peacefully. Qatar has no formal democratic institutions. There were reports
 at some of the 19 signers of a December 1991 petition calling for greater political
 freedom and constitutional reform continued to be subject to travel restrictions.
 Qatar's political institutions blend the characteristics of a traditional Bedouin tribal
 state and a modern bureaucracy. There are no political parties, elections, or orga-
 nized opposition groups.
 The Amir exercises most executive and legislative powers, including appointment
 of Cabinet members. His rule, however, is tempered by local custom. Interlocking
 family networks and the recognized right of citizens to submit appeals or petitions
 directly to the Amir provide informal avenues for the redress of many grievances.
 The custom of rule by consensus leads to extensive consultations among the Amir,
 leading merchant families, religious leaders, and other notables on important poli-
 cies.
 Under Qatar's Basic Law of 1970, the Amir must be chosen from and by the adult
 males of the Al Thani family. The current Amir, Khalifa bin Hamad, has designated
 his son, Hamad bin Khalifa, as the heir apparent. This designation was made with
 the consent of the notables and religious leaders in accordance with local custom.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Local human rights organizations are not permitted to exist, and no international
 human rights organization is known to have asked to investigate conditions in
 Qatar.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Religion, Sex, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 Women.-The activities of Qatari women are closely restricted both by law and
 by traditional customs. For example, Qatari women are prohibited from applying for
 drivers' licenses unless they have permission from a male guardian. This restriction
 does not apply to non-Qatari women. Qatar adheres to Shari'a law in matters of in-
 heritance and child custody. While Muslim wives have the right to inherit from
 their husbands, non-Muslim wives do not, unless a special legacy is arranged. In
 cases of divorce, it is rare for wives to obtain custody of children and impossible if
 the father is Muslim and the wife is not. Women may attend court proceedings but
 are generally represented by a male relative.
 Qatari women are largely relegated to the roles of mother and homemaker, but
 some women are now rlmdinq jobs in education, medicine, and the news media. How-
 ever, the number of professional women is too small to indicate whether they are
 receiving equal pay for equal work. Increasingly, Qatari women are receiving gov-
 ernment scholarships to pursue degrees at universities overseas. Although Qatari
 women are legally rable to travel abroad alone (see Section 2.d.), traditions and social
 pressures cause most to travel with male escorts.
 Violence against women, primarily foreign domestic workers, occurs in Qatar but
 is not believed to be widespread. However, some foreign domestics working in Qatar
 (especially those from south Asia and the Philippines) have suffered severe mistreat-
 ment. In keeping with Islamic law all forms of physical abuse are illegal, and the
 maximum penalty for rape is death. The police actively investigate reports of vio-
 lence against women. In 1992 and 1993, the Government demonstrated an increased
 willingness to arrest and punish offenders, both Qatari and non-Qatari. However,
 most domestic worker victims do not press charges for fear of losing their jobs and
 being deported. The law is applied unevenly, with Qataris facing lighter punishment
 than foreigners.
 Children.-Great importance is placed upon children in Qatari society. The Gov-
 ernment provides most medical care for free to all residents, including children.
 Qatari children and the children of expatriates employed by the Government are al-
 lowed to enroll in public schools without charge.
 National/Racial /Ethnic Minorities.- The Government discriminates against some
 citizens of non-Qatari origin. In the private sector, many Qataris of Iranian extrac-
 tion occupy positions of the highest importance. However, in government they are
 rarely found in senior decisionmaking positions.
 Reigious Minorities.-Non-Muslims experience discrimination in employment,
 particularly in sensitive areas such as security and education.
 People with Disabilities.-The Government has not enacted legislation or other-
 wise mandated provision of accessibility for the handicapped, who also face social
 
 
 1273
 discrimination. However, the Government maintains a hospital and schools that
 provide free services to the mentally and physically handicapped.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The right of association is strictly limited, and all
 workers, including foreigners, are prohibited from forming labor unions. Despite
 this, almost all workers have the right to strike after their case has been presented
 to the Labor Conciliation Board and ruled upon. Employers may close a place of
 work or dismiss employees once the Conciliation Board has heard the case. The
 right to strike does not exist for government employees, domestic workers, or mem-
 bers of the employer's family. No worker in a public utility or health or security
 service may strike if such a strike would harm the public or lead to property dan-
 age. Strikes are rare, and there were none in 1993.
 Qatar's labor law provides for the establishment of joint consultative committees
 composed of representatives of the employer and workers. The committees may con-
 sider issues including work organization and productivity, conditions of employment,
 training of workers, and safety measures and their implementation.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-Workers are prohibited from
 engaging in collective bargaining. Generally, wages are set unilaterally by employ-
 ers without government involvement. Local courts handle disputes between workers
 and employers. There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-There have been no reports of
 forced or compulsory labor, which are prohibited by law. However, employers must
 give consent before exit permits are issued to any foreigner seeking to leave the
 country. There have been instances of employers withholding this consent in ret-
 ribution against departing employees.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-Minors between the ages of 15
 and 18 may be employed with the approval of their parents or guardians. However,
 younger non-Qatari children sometimes work in small family-owned businesses.
 Education is compulsory through age 15. While the laws governing the minimum
 age for employment of children are not strictly enforced, child labor, either Qatari
 or foreign, is rare. Very young children, usually of African or south Asian back-
 ground, have been employed as riders in camel racing. While little information is
 available on wages an working conditions for these children, accidents involving se-
 rious injury or death have been known to occur.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-There is no minimum wage in Qatar, although
 a 1962 law gives the Amir authority to set one. The 48-hour workweek with a 24-
 hour rest period is prescribed by law, although most government offices follow a
 schedule of 36 hours a week. Employees who work more than 48 hours a week, or
 36 hours a week during the Muslim month of Ramadan, are entitled to overtime.
 This law is adhered to in government offices and major private sector companies.
 It is not observed in the case of domestic and personal employees. Domestic servants
 frequently work 7 days a week, more than 12 hours a day, with few or no holidays,
 and have no effective way to redress grievances against their employers.
 Qatar has enacted regulations concerning worker safety and health, but enforce-
 mer.t, which is the insponsibility of the Ministry of Industry and Public Works, is
 lax. The Department of Public Safety oversees safety training and conditions, and
 the state-run petroleum company has its own set of safety standards and proce-
 dures. The Labor Law of 1964, as amended in 1984, lists partial and permanent dis-
 abilities for which compensation may be awarded, some connected with handling
 chemicals and petroleum products or construction injuries. The law does not specifi-
 cally set rates of payment and compensation.
 Foreign workers must be sponsored by a legally recognized organization or a
 Qatari citizen. Foreign workers need a sponsor to receive a visa to enter Qatar as
 well as the sponsor's permission to leave. Theoretically, any worker may seek legal
 relief from onerous work conditions. However, domestic workers, who experience the
 most difficulties, generally accept their situations in order to avoid repatriation.
