 QATAR
 A small Arab state on the Persian Gulf ruled by an Amir from
 the Al Thani family, Qatar is governed by a 197& basic law
 which institutionalizes the customs and social mores of the
 country's conservative Wahhabi (a rigidly puritanical school of
 Islamic jurisprudence) heritage. These include 'respect for the
 sanctity of private property, freedom from arbitrary arrest and
 imprisonment, and punishment of transgressions of Islamic law
 (the Shari'a). The Amir holds absolute power but his role is
 influenced by continuing traditions of consultation, rule by
 consensus, and the citizen's right to appeal personally to the
 Amir. The Amir, while directly accountable to no one, cannot
 violate the Shari'a and, in practice, must consider the
 opinions of leading notables and the religious establishment.
 Their position was institutionalized in the Advisory Council,
 an appointed body that assists the Amir in formulating policy.
 The Government, concerned by the presence of a large number of
 non-Qatari workers, has established an efficient security
 apparatus to control subversion. The civilian security
 apparatus is controlled by the Interior Ministry. Before 1991
 it had two sections, the police and the Criminal Investigation
 Department (CID). In July 1991, the CID was dissolved and its
 functions incorporated in a new General Administration of
 Public Security. The positions of Police Commander and Deputy
 Police Commander were also abolished. The new organization
 falls under the administrative control of the Ministry of
 Interior. A second branch of the Interior Ministry, the
 Mubahathat (Investigatory Police), deals with sedition and
 espionage. The Mubahathat is nearly independent of the regular
 civil security forces and has b.een'known to use severe force
 during its investigations. It can incarcerate suspects without
 charge, but reportedly does this infrequently. The armed
 forces have no significant role in assuring internal security,
 although the army could be used against serious civil
 disturbances. However, the armed forces have under their
 jurisdiction another enforcement organization, known as the
 Mukhabarat (Intelligence Service), whose function is to
 intercept and arrest incoming terrorists and to keep
 surveillance over political dissidents.
 Qatar's economy is mixed, with the State owning and operating
 most basic industries and services, while retail trade and the
 construction industry remain in private hands. The economy is
 beginning to recover slowly from the fall in the price of oil,
 and was able to expand slightly in 1990/91. The rapid
 development of Qatar's infrastructure in the 1970's and early
 1980's led to the creation of a ratio of expatriates (mostly'
 South Asian and Arab) to nationals of four to one. Major
 Qatari goals include limiting the influence and controlling the
 activities of the.expatriate population, and the economic
 downturn of the mid-to-late 1980's has spurred a government
 program to reduce the expatriate-to-national ratio by offering.
 employment in many positions in government to Qatari citizens
 only. Work permits are not being renewed for many
 nationalities, but particularily not for Somalis, Sudanese,
 Jordanians, Yemenis, and Palestinians. Because the Qatari
 national population is so small, Qatar will be dependent on
 expatriate labor for the foreseeable future.
 Human rights remain significantly restricted, but the overall
 situation has shown a slight improvement, especially with
 respect to the freedoms of speech and press, since the
 appointment of the new Cabinet in 1989 and various additional
 
 
 1570
 QTA
 appointments since then. The main human rights problems
 include abuse of detainees; arbitrary detentions in security
 cases; and restrictions on freedom of speech and press, freedom
 of assembly and association, the right of citizens to change
 their government, and worker rights. Expatriate workers also
 continued to face systematic discrimination; Qatari resentment
 against expatriates makes foreign workers more likely than
 nationals to be the victims of arbitrary police action or
 harassment, and those who are not Muslim are denied the right
 to bring suit against a Qatari national in the Shari'a court.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing
 There were no known instances of such killings.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no reports of disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 The Government of Qatar follows the conservative teachings of
 Wahhabi Islam, which forbid torture. Instances of torture in
 connection with security force actions involving political and
 security-related cases, however,'have been reported, usually
 during the investigative phase after the person has been
 detained. Improved standards of conduct were reportedly
 introduced in late 1989 in a direct effort to end unacceptable
 practices. Nevertheless, in the fall of 1991 several Qataris
 were detained on unpublicized charges related to the
 unauthorized publication of letters and tracts critical of the
 Government (see Section l.d.). The Government seldom
 acknowledges mistreatment or even comments on such reports.
 Officials are seldom tried and convicted for physical abuse of
 detainees. The Government administers most of the corporal
 punishments prescribed by Shari'a law but does not allow
 physical mutilation. Many expatriates complain of mistreatment
 after their arrest by Qatari authorities.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 The authorities generally charge suspects before a competent
 court within 48 hours. In most cases involving expatriates,
 the police promptly notify the appropriate consular
 representative. Suspects detained in security.cases, however,
 are generally not afforded their right to counsel and may be
 detained indefinitely while under investigation. Qatar had one
 incident of security-related arrest in 1991. Several Qataris,
 including a few members of the ruling family, were arrested in
 September. Security officials reportedly questioned them
 concerning the publication of letters and tracts critical of
 the Government. There were unconfirmed reports that at least
 one of those arrested was beaten during interrogation. The
 Government has not responded to the reports or publicly
 commented on the case. All those detained in the case were
 released by the end of November.
 Involuntary exile is rare.
 
 
 1571
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The judiciary is nominally independent, but most judges are
 non-Qataris holding residence permits granted by the civil
 authorities and thus hold their positions at the Government's
 pleasure. Qatar's legal system is tilted in favor of Qataris
 and the Government of Qatar. There are two types of courts:
 the civil courts, which have jurisdiction in civil and
 commercial matters, and the Shari'a court, which has
 jurisdiction in family and criminal cases. There are no
 permanent security courts; security cases are tried by military
 courts established specifically for a given case. Such cases
 have been extremely rare. Defendants tried by all types of
 courts may submit their cases to an appeals court. However, in
 cases tried in the Shari'a courts, it is possible that the same
 judge will hear both the original case and the appeal.
 Technically, the Shari'a court may assume jurisdiction in
 commercial or civil cases if requested to do so by one of the
 litigants. In practice, the Shari'a court assumes
 discretionary jurisdiction only if a Muslim litigant makes the
 request. It does not allow non-Muslims to bring suits as
 plaintiffs. This anomaly prevents non-Muslim residents from
 obtaining full legal recourse when being sued by or trying to
 sue a Qatari national. There are no statutes preventing
 individuals from suing the Government, but the threat or fear
 of losing a residence permit in retaliation discourages such
 suits.
 Many expatriates find proceedings in the Shari~a court
 bewildering. Only the disputing parties, their relatives and
 associates, and witnesses are allowed in the courtroom.
 Lawyers may not play 'any formal role, except to prepare
 litigants for their cases. Although non-Arabic speakers are-
 provided with translators, foreigners report being at a
 considerable disadvantage, especially in cases involving the.
 nonperformance of contracts. Shari'a trials are normally
 brief. After both parties have stated their cases and examined
 witnesses, the judge is likely to deliver a verdict after only
 a short deliberation. Criminal cases are normally tried 2 to A
 months after suspects are detained. No bail is set in criminal
 cases. However,-persons charged with minor or economic crimes
 may be released to a Qatari sponsor afterdepositing their
 passport with the police. The person is prohibited from
 leaving Qatar until after the case has been resolved.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Traditional attitudes of respect for the sanctity of the home
 provide a great deal of protection against arbitrary intrusions-
 for most citizens and residents of Qatar. A warrant must
 normally be obtained before police may search'a residence or-
 business, except in cases involving national security or
 emergencies, but such warrants are issued by police officials
 themselves, operating under the Ministry of Interior, rather
 than by judicial authorities.  There were no reports of
 unauthorized searches of homes in 1991. The police and-
 security forces routinely monitor the communications of
 suspected criminals, security risks, and selected expatriates..
 The Government imposes strict controls on all printed and
 visual materials imported into the country. Mail and
 periodicals thought to contain pornography, politically
 
 
 1572
 QATAR
 sensitive material, or criticism of Islam are opened and
 routinely censored. Likewise, books and video tapes brought
 into the country are confiscated and reviewed for sensitive
 material before being released to their owners. With prior
 ,permission, Qataris may marry foreigners of any nationality.
 Qataris who had previously married foreigners may apply for,
 residence for their spouses.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Although expatriates aDd Qataris may express political opinions
 in private, public criticism of the ruling family and its
 policies or of Islam is not tolerated. The Government
 discourages public criticism of other Arab governments as well,
 although Iraq and its supporters were frequent targets of
 criticism before, during, and after the Gulf War. This policy
 applies to the electronic media, which are government owned and
 operated, as well as to the press, which is completely
 privately owned and operated. Since December 1989, the
 Government has encouraged a modest degree of freedom of the
 press, although still within limits. During the Gulf War, the
 Cable News Network was broadcast uncensored for 18 hours a day
 but a contract to continue these broadcasts was not signed.
 Journalists, particularly expatriates, generally avoid
 challenging restrictions because of the risk of. having
 residence permits cancelled. The Customs Division of the
 Ministry of Finance and Petroleum routinely screens all video
 cassettes, audio tapes, books, and periodicals for
 objectionable political sentiments and pornography. Books and
 other materials published in Qatar, as well as all dramatic
 productions, must be approved by a board of censors before
 being released to the public.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 The Government allows private social, sports, trade,
 professional, and cultural societies to operate. These
 organizations must register with the-Government and their
 activities are closely watched. Membership in international
 professional organizations critical of the Government of Qatar,
 or any other Arab government, is not permitted. The Government
 would severely restrict operations of any organized group which
 it deemed detrimental to the national interest. The Government
 does not allow political parties or political demonstrations.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Qatar's state religion is Islam and its legal code is based on
 Islamic Shari'a law. Members of other religions are prohibited
 from public worship, and they may not proselytize. Apostasy
 from Islam is a capital offense, although no one is known to
 have been executed for it. The Government tolerates non-Muslim
 religions, and non-Muslim parents may raise their children in
 their own faiths. Private gatherings of non-Muslims for
 religious purposes are tacitly allowed but are closely
 monitored for potential political implications. The Government
 does not formally restrict Shi'a Muslims from practicing their
 beliefs, although, through a tacit understanding with the
 Government, Shi'a Muslims refrain from practicing the more
 public aspects of their faith, such as self-flagellation.
 
 
 1573
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 There are no restrictions on internal travel, except around
 certain offshore areas and sensitive Qatari military and oil
 installations. In general, both Qatari and foreign women do
 not require permission from a male guardian to travel either
 within the country or abroad. However, Qatari men may prevent
 their female relatives from leaving the country by placing
 their names with immigration officers at the ports of
 departure. Technically, Qatari women employed by the
 Government must obtain official permission to travel abroad
 when requesting leave; it is not known to what extent this
 regulation is enforced.
 All Qatari citizens have the.right to return. Foreigners are
 subject to immigration restrictions designed to control the
 size of the local labor pool. Foreigners who work in Qatar
 --both men and women--must have a sponsor to enter Qatar and
 the sponsor's permission to leave.
 During the Persian Gulf crisis between August and December
 1990, several prominent Palestinians were deported. Some were
 later allowed to return, but most were not-  There were no
 known deportations in 1991.
 The Government has no formal policy to recognize refugees.
 Those attempting to enter illegally, including defectors from
 nearby countries, are refused entry. Asylum-seekers who can
 obtain local sponsorship or employment will be allowed to
 enter. However, if they lose their jobs, they are expected to
 leave or face deportation. In 1989 the Government reversed ,its
 policy of not issuing residence permits to the foreign wives of
 Qataris. Foreign women married to Qataris are now granted %
 residence permits, and may apply for Qatari citizenship:
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Qatar has no formal democratic institut'ions, and citizens do
 not, therefore, have the legal right or the ability to change
 their government or the political system peacefully. Qatar's
 political institutions blend the characteristics of a
 traditional Bedouin tribal state and a modern bureaucracy.
 There are no political parties, elections, or organized
 opposition to the Government. The Amir exercises most
 executive and legislative powers. His rule, however, is
 tempered somewhat by local-custom. Interlocking family
 networks and the recognized right of citizens to submit appeals
 or petitions personally to the Amir prbvide informal avenues  -
 for the redress of many grievances and also serve as a check on*
 abuses. The custom of rule by consensus leads to extensive
 consultations among'the Amir, leading merchant families,
 religious leaders, and other notables on important p6licies.
 Under Qatar's basic law of 1970, the Amir must be chosen from
 and by the adult males of the Al Thani family. The current
 Amir, Khalifa bin Hamad, has designated his son, Hamad bin
 Khalifa, as the heir apparent. This designation was made with
 the consent of the notables and religious leaders in accordance
 with local custom. Effective power remains in the hands of the
 Amir, his family, and local notables.
 
 
 1574
 QATAR
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 No local organizations that concern themselves with human
 rights are permitted to exist. No international or
 nongovernmental organization monitoring human rights abuses is
 known to have asked to investigate conditions in Qatar.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 The Government discriminates against expatriates and persons of
 non-Qatari origin even though they may be citizens of Qatar.
 Qatar had naturalized a number of persons of Iranian origin,
 but; after the fall of the Shah and the rise of Shi'ite
 fundamentalism in Iran, the Government began to revoke the
 Qatari citizenship of many of these naturalized citizens.
 There have been reports of Qataris of Iranian descent being
 expatriated, fired from their government jobs, and deported
 without the benefit of due process. At least some of those
 affected by this policy have successfully regained Qatari
 citizenship since the new Minister of Interior took office.
 Violence against women, primarily expatriate domestic workers,
 occurs in Qatar but is not believed to be widespread. In
 keeping with Islamic law, all forms of physical abuse are
 illegal, and the maximum penalty for rape is the death
 sentence. The police actively investigate all reports of
 violence against women; few cases come to the attention of the
 authorities, however, since most victims do not press charges
 for fear of losing their jobs and being repatriated. The law
 is applied unevenly, with Qataris-particularly members of the
 ruling family-facing less severe punishment than do
 expatriates charged with rape or physical abuse.
 The activities of Qatari women are governed by strict Wahhabi
 customs and quasi-legal restrictions, such as a prohibition
 against the issuance of driver's licenses to women unless they
 have permission from a male guardian and can demonstrate a need
 to drive based on employment or other acceptable reasons.
 However, these restrictions generally do not apply to
 non-Qatari women. Qatari women are largely relegated to the
 roles of mother and homemaker, but some women are now finding
 jobs in education, medicine, and the news media, and more
 Qatari women are receiving government scholarships to pursue
 degrees in these fields at universities overseas. By law,
 Qatari women are able to travel abroad without a-male escort.
 However, as a result of social pressures, most women travel
 abroad with a male escort. Qatar adberes to Shari'a law in
 matters of inheritance and child custody. Women may attend
 court but are generally represented by a male relative.
 It is common practice to discriminate against the employment of
 non-Muslims, particularly in sensitive areas such as security
 and education. There also are reports that those who hold to
 Wahhabi fundamentalist tenets have an advantage in employment
 and hiring practices.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 The right of association is strictly limited, and all workers,
 including the some 85 percent of the work force that is
 
 
 1575
 QATAR
 comprised of expatriates, are prohibited from forming labor
 unions. Despite this prohibition, workers have the right to
 strike after their case has been presented to the Labor
 Conciliation Board and a decision has been made. Strikes are
 rare. There were at least two organized work stoppages over
 unpaid wages in 1988 and another in 1990 involving laborers at
 a private contracting firm, but none in 1991.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectivelk
 Workers in Qatar are prohibited from engaging in collective
 bargaining. Wages are generally set unilaterally by
 employers. Local courts handle all disputes between workers
 and employers. There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 There have been no reported instances of forced or compulsory
 labor, which are prohibited by law.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 The minimum working age is 18 years, but expatriate children
 sometimes work at younger ages in small family-owned businesses
 and shops after school or during school holidays. Although the
 laws governing the minimum age for employment of children are
 not strictly enforced, child labor, either Qatari or
 expatriate, is rare.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 Qatar has enacted regulations concerning worker safety and
 health, but enforcement, which is the responsibility of the
 Ministry of Industry and Public Works, is lax at best. There
 is no minimum wage in Qatar. The 48-hour workweek is
 prescribed by law, although most government offices follow a
 schedule of 36 hours a week. Employees who work more than 48
 hours a week or 36 hours a week during the Muslim-month of
 Ramadan are entitled to overtime. The law is enforced in
 government offices and major private sector companies, but not
 for domestic or personal employees. Domestic servants
 frequently work 7 days a week, 12 hours a day, with few or no
 holidays, and have no effective way to redress grievances
 against their employer.
 Expatriate workers in Qatar must be sponsored by a recognized
 organization or person legally responsible for them during
 their residence in Qatar. Technically, any worker can seek
 legal relief. Unskilled workers, including domestic servants,
 who constitute the group most likely to experience onerous
 working conditions, generally accept their situation rather
 than risk repatriation.
 
 
 1576
