 QATAR
 
 The State of Qatar occupies a-amall peninsula in the middle
 of the western side of the Persian Gulf. It became fully
 independent on September 3, 1971, after the British
 Government ended a special treaty relationship.
 Qatar is a traditional Islamic principality, ruled by a
 hereditary Amir, chosen from the ruling Al-Thani family.
 Its governmental system is laid out in the "Basic Law" of
 1970, which is equivalent to a constitution. The law
 provides for a Council of Ministers (cabinet) and an
 Advisory Council whose members are appointed by the Amir for
 three-year terms. The country's outlook on human rights
 reflects both the Islamic and Bedouin traditions of the
 region as well as concepts of the rule of law instilled
 during the long British presence.
 1.   Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a.   Torture
 No instances of torture have come to the attention of the
 Department of State, either during 1979 or since the
 establishment of the American embassy in 1973.
 b.   Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment
 Criminal law in Qatar is drawn from both Koranic and Western
 sources. The Department of State has no evidence that
 cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment occurs.
 Prison conditions are adequate. The Department of State
 knows of no instances of capital punishment during 1979.
 c.   Arbitrary Arrest or Imprisonment
 The law does not prohibit summary arrest or imprisonment,
 but the Department of State has no evidence of anyone
 having been imprisoned solely for political beliefs during
 the past six years.
 d.   Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Qatari courts provide fair and public trials. The judges,
 most of whom come from other Arab countries, are experienced.
 Crimes and punishments are defined by law, and an accused is
 presumed innocent until proven guilty by a court of law.
 The accused is entitled to representation by legal counsel
 at his or her own expense.
 e.   Invasion of the Home
 The Department of State is unaware of examples of arbitrary
 search. However, such searches may occur in extraordinary
 circumstances, such as those perceived by the Government'to
 be threats to State security.
 2.   Governmental Policies Relating to the Fulfillment
 of Such Vital Needs as Food, Shelter, Health Care
 and Education
 Virtually all of the revenues of the State of Qatar come
 from the export of crude oil and natural gas, which yielded
 about $4 billion in 1978. Qatar has approximately 250,000
 inhabitants of whom about 50,000 are Qataris.
 
 (816)
 
 
 817
 Qatar has made great strides in fulfilling the basic needs
 of its citizens for food, shelter, health care and education.
 Free medical treatment is available to all citizens and non-
 citizens. The Government fully subsidizes the education of
 all academically eligible male citizens from kindergarten
 through university. The education of female citizens,
 conducted in classes separate from those of males, is
 subsidized up to the university level. Qatar fully
 subsidizes foreign university education for male citizens;
 for female citizens, it subsidizes education at the University
 of Qatar. The relatively few Qatari females attending
 universities outside Qatar do so at the expense of their
 families. The Qatari Government has provided land for the
 establishment of schools for some of the expatriate community.
 The Government has expended much of its energies in finding
 ways to channel oil revenues to the citizenry. Given these
 efforts and the strong public welfare policy of the State of
 Qatar, a considerable portion of the nation's petroleum
 income has reached its citizens.
 3.   Respect for Civil and Political Liberties, Including:
 a.   Freedom of Speech, Press, Religion and Assembly
 The State of Qatar does not restrict freedom of belief and
 religion. However, formal political parties are not
 permitted, and there is no organized labor movement in the
 country. Strikes are not condoned. Virtually the whole
 work force, laborers as well as professionals, is expatriate.
 Most of these expatriates come from South Asia, other Arab
 countries and Iran. A relatively small number, perhaps
 10,000 come from Western Europe, Japan and the United
 States. The large alien population presents a potentially
 serious security problem for the State of Qatar. The press
 is not subject to pre-publication censorship, but adheres to
 government guidelines. Foreign publications are available
 and are politically censored only on rare occasions when
 their reporting is considered inflammatory.
 b.   Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel and Emigration
 There are no restraints on freedom of movement within the
 country. Foreign travel and emigration are unrestricted.
 c.   Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 The Advisory Council has very little real power. No
 electoral system has been instituted, nor have general
 provisions for suffrage been established. In the tribal
 traditions of the Arabian Peninsula, citizens express their
 views to their leaders. Governmental decisions are normally
 made after consultation with leading members of the community.
 Expatriates are expected to refrain from political activity.
 The status of women continues to be governed by conservative
 tribal traditions. Younger women, however, have begun to
 avail themselves of opportunities for modern education.
 Family and societal pressures still tend to confine Qatari
 women to the home.
 4.   Governmental Attitude and Record Regarding International
 and Non-governmental Investigations of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 To the knowledge of the Department of State, no international
 investigation of the human rights situation in Qatar has
 been proposed.
 
 
