 OATA
 Qatar, a small, wealthy Persian Gulf state ruled by an amir
 from the Al Thani family, is governed by a 1970 Basic Law,
 which institutionalizes the customs and social mores of
 Qatar's conservative Wahhabi Muslim heritage. These include
 respect for the sanctity of private property, freedom from
 arbitrary arrest and imprisonment, and protection against
 transgressions of Islamic law (the Shari'a). Thus, although
 the Amir holds nearly absolute power, he must-exercise
 authority with care. While he may, for example, suspend any
 secular law or countermand any civil court decision, he is
 unlikely to do so, especially without consulting his Council
 of Ministers and the Advisory Council of Notables that assist
 him in making policy decisions. The Amir is also unlikely to
 reach any major decision without achieving a consensus within
 his family.
 Qatar's economy is not expanding as rapidly as it did during
 the 1970's and early 1980's. The economy is mixed, with the
 State owning and operating most basic industries and services
 while retail trade and the construction industry remain in
 private hands. Its fast developing industrial infrastructure
 has led to the creation of a ratio of expatriates to nationals
 of almost four to one. Limiting the influence and controlling
 the activities of expatriates are for most Qataris a major
 national goal. Qatari resentment against expatriat6s makes
 them likelier than nationals to be the victims of arbitrary
 police action. It is also difficult for an alien to take
 legal action against a citizen. The economic downturn of
 1983-86 has given added strength to the Government's policy of
 reducing the number of expatriates. This policy, however, is
 administered with a degree of compassion. Palestinians, for
 example, have not been forced to leave unless they can make
 arrangements to settle elsewhere, a possibility which is
 facilitated by substantial severance payments. However,
 because of the current economic, social, and political
 conditions in Qatar, the Palestinian community is not as
 successful as it was in the past. Expatriates from South Asia
 have not been so lucky, since their numbers continue to drop
 while expatriates from other regions, some of whom are
 unemployed, are allowed to remain. In this conservative
 society, women remain in a subordinate position, with a number
 of restrictions on their activities.
 The human rights situation in Qatar is changing very slowly.
 There are many factors against change--not the least being the
 absence of any credible internal threat to the regime. So
 long as the Government feels secure, major innovation is
 likely to occur only as the result of a consensus within the
 ruling and other leading families.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 There were no known instances of political killings.
 
 
 1280
 QATAR
 b. Disappearance
 There were no reports of disappearances.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 Although non-European expatriates routinely complain of
 maltreatment after their arrest by Qatari authorities,.the
 practice does not seem to have official sanction. Torture is
 not condoned by the authorities and, although the Government
 does administer most of the corporal punishments prescribed by
 the Shari'a, it no longer allows physical mutilation.
 Executions rarely occur. Prison conditions are uncomfortable
 but adequate. Family members and friends may-bring food to
 supplement the monotonous prison fare as well as small
 luxuries and mail. There have been private allegations of
 overcrowded and unsanitary conditions in the women's prison.
 d.. Arbitrary Arrest,,.Detention, or Exile
 As a general rule, the authorities must charge suspects before
 a :competent court within 48 hours. In most cases involving
 expatriates, the police have promptly notified the appropriate
 consular .representative.. Suspects detained in security cases
 are .generally not afforded their rights. An expatriate
 arr~sted in 1983 -in a security case was never formally charged
 and was held under house arrest for over a year. Involuntary
 exile remains a rare practice. The last known major exile
 took Place .over 10 years ago. It involved the previous
 deposed amir, his family, and. close supporters., Expatriate
 offenders are normally deported upon completion of their
 sent.pnces.- During the flareup-of the boundary dispute between
 Qatar and Bahrain in 1986, the Government of Qatar seized
 29 foreign workers from the Fasht al-Dibal reef on April 26
 and denied the British Embassy consular access until April 30.
 There is no forced labor.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Except for security cases, most disputes are judged before
 either a civil or Shari'a court. Most commercial litigation
 involving expatriates takes place before the civil courts.
 The.,S hari'a courts administer criminal and family law and may,
 if one party requests, take jurisdiction in business cases.
 Although the judiciary is nominally independent, most judges
 are expatriates holding residence permits granted by the civil
 authorities and thus hold their positions at the Government's
 pleasure.
 Many expatriates find proceedings in the Shari'a courts
 bewildering. Only the disputing parties, their relatives and
 associates, and witnesses are allowed in the courtroom.
 Lawyers may not play any formal role, save that of preparing
 litigants for their cases. Although non-Arabic speakers are
 provided with translators, foreigners report being at a
 considerable disadvantage, especially in cases involving the
 nonperformance of contracts. Shari'a trials are normally
 brief. After both parties have stated their cases and
 examined witnesses, the judge is likely to deliver a verdict
 with only a short delay. Criminal cases are normally tried
 2 to 3 months after suspects are detained.
 
 
 1281
 QATAR
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Traditional attitudes regarding the sanctity of the home
 provide a great deal of protection against arbitrary
 intrusions. Except in security cases or emergencies, the
 police must normally obtain a warrant before searching a
 residence or business. There were reports in past years that
 police conducted many searches of expatriate homes without
 warrants but these were not repeated in 1986. Police
 routinely monitor the communications of criminal and security
 suspects. Mail thought to contain either pornography or drugs
 is also opened as a matter of course.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Although both expatriates and Qataris are free to say what
 they wish privately, public criticism of the ruling family and
 its policies is not tolerated. The Government strongly
 discourages attacks on other Arab governments as well. This
 policy applies to the electronic media, which are government
 owned and controlled, and to the press. The journalistic
 community, particularly the expatriates, generally avoids
 challenging these restrictions because of the risk of having
 residence permits cancelled.
 The authorities routinely screen all video cassettes, audio
 tapes, books, and periodicals for objectionable political
 sentiments and pornography.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 The Government allows private social, sports, trade,
 professional, and artistic societies to operate. The
 activities of these organizations, which must register with
 the Government, are closely watched.
 Government policy does not allow political parties or
 demonstrations.
 In practice, the Government does not allow labor unions or
 collective bargaining by employees.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Qatar's state religion is Islam, the Koran is its basic
 constitution, and the Shari'a its legal code. All other
 faiths are prohibited public worship; they may not
 proselytize. Apostasy from Islam remains a capital crime,
 although no one has been executed for it in recent memory.
 The Government tolerates the private practice of non-Muslim
 religions; non-Muslim parents may raise their children in
 their own faiths, and private gatherings of non-Muslims may
 worship in private homes.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 There are no restrictions on internal travel. Male Qataris
 travel abroad at will. Females, both Qatari and foreign,
 usually require the permission of a male guardian or relative
 to leave the country. All Qatari citizens have the right to
 
 
 1282
 QATA
 return. Foreigners are subject to immigration restrictions
 designed to control the local labor pool. They require a
 local sponsor to enter Qatar and the sponsor's permission to
 depart. The Government has no formal policy on refugees.
 Those attempting to enter illegally, including defectors from
 nearby countries, are denied entry. Often refugees who can
 get local sponsorship or employment may enter. If they lose
 their jobs, however, they are expected to leave. During the
 past year the Government has tightened its policy of
 discouraging Qatari males from marrying foreign-born
 (primarily Western) women by refusing to issue residency
 permits to those wives. In several instances, a foreign-born
 wife lives in another country, where she is visited by her
 Qatari husband because she is denied entry into Qatar. In
 another development in 1986, the Government withdrew the
 Qatari passports from some of its citizens of Iranian
 ancestry. This policy amounts to involuntary repatriation to
 Iran since the victims of the policy have been informed by the
 Government that they are Iranians even though they had been
 naturalized and issued Qatari passports.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Qatar's political institutions blend the characteristics of a
 traditional Bedouin tribal state and of a modern bureaucracy.
 There are no political parties, elections, or organized
 opposition to the Government, and the Amir exercises all
 executive and legislative powers. His autocratic rule,
 however, is checked to,some extent by entrenched local customs.
 Interlocking family networks and the recognized right of
 citizens to submit appeals or petitions personally to the Amir
 provide effective, if informal, avenues for redress of
 grievances and also serve to limit abuses. The custom of rule
 by consensus leads to extensive consultations between the
 Amir, leading merchants, religious leaders, and other notables
 on important policies. Women for the most part play no role
 in public life.
 Under Qatar's Basic Law of 1970, the amir must be chosen from
 and by the adult males of the Al Thani family. The current
 Amir, Khalifa bin Hamad, has designated his son Hamad as heir
 apparent. This took place with the consent of the notables
 and religious leaders according to established custom. There
 are no serious challenges to this arrangement, and in the
 foreseeable future effective political power will remain in
 the hands of the Amir, his family, and the local notables.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 No major international or nongovernmental organizations
 monitoring human rights abuses have asked to investigate
 conditions in Qatar. The Qatari Government has expressed
 concern over the plight of Palestinian, Lebanese, and Afghan
 refugees.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 Women and their activities are still bound by a number of
 
 
 1283
 QATAR
 social customs and quasi-legal restrictions such as veiling
 and prohibitions against the issuance of driver's licenses.
 While women remain largely relegated to the roles of mother
 and homemaker, some are now finding jobs in education,
 medicine, and the news media. However, they do not as a rule
 receive the overseas university scholarships available for
 males. While their employment is tolerated in such fields as
 nursing, teaching, and home economics, expansion beyond these
 areas is discouraged. Public life is a male sphere.
 Expatriate women find it easier to get jobs or to own and
 manage a business than their Qatari counterparts. There are
 signs that, as more Qatari women receive education, they will
 press for a relaxation of some of the restrictions from their
 country's tribal past.
 CONDITIONS OF LABOR
 The minimum working age is 18 years, but expatriate children
 frequently work at younger ages in small businesses and
 shops. Some regulations concerning worker safety and health
 exist, but enforcement is infrequent. There is no minimum
 wage in Qatar, and most workers spend less than 48 hours per
 week on the job.
 
 
 1284
