 QATAR
 Qatar, an Arab state on the Persian Gulf, is a monarchy without democratically
 elected institutions or political parties. It is governed by the ruling A1-Thani family
 through its head, the Amir. In June 1995, the ruling family, in consultation with
 other leading Qatari families, replaced Sheikh Khalifa bin Hamad Al Thani with his
 son, Sheikh Hamad bin Khalifa Al Thani. This transition of authority did not rep-
 resent a change in the basic governing order. While the change of rulers was accept-
 ed in public statements by most members of the ruling family and without notable
 objections from the general public, there remains a reservoir of support for the
 former Amir. However, in October the former Amir concluded an agreement to re-
 turn several billion dollars from his private accounts to the state treasury. This
 agreement is apparently tacit recognition of the legitimacy of his son's regime. The
 former Aniir and his retinue were implicated in a foled oup attempt in February.
 The amended Provisional Constitution, promulgated in April 1972, institutional-
 izes the customs and mores of the country's conservative Islamic heritage. These in-
 clude respect for the sanctity of private property, freedom from arbitrary arrest and
 imprisonment, and punishment of transgressions against Islamic law. The Amir
 holds absolute power, the exercise of which is influenced by consultation with lead-
 ing citizens, rule by consensus, and the right of any citizen to appeal personally to
 the Amir. The Amir considers the opinions of leading citizens, whose influence is
 institutionalized in the Advisory Council, an appointed body that assists the Amir
 in formulating Policy.
 Qatar has efficient plice and security services. The civilian security force, con-
 trolled by the Interior Miistry, comprises two sections: The police and the General
 Administration of Public Security, and the Investigatory Police (Mubahathat) which
 is responsible for sedition and espionage cases. The armed forces have under their
 jurisdiction the Intelligence Service (Mii.khabarat), which is responsible for combat-
 ing terrorism anda momtoring olitical dissidence.
 The State owns most basic industries and services, but the retail and construction
 industries are in private hands. Oil is the principal natural resource, but the coun-
 try's extensive natural gas resources will play an increasingly important role. The
 
 
 1362
 
 rapid development of the 1970's and 1980's created an economy in which expatriate
 workers, mostly South Asian and Arab, outnumber Qataris by a ratio of 4 or 5 to
 1. The Government tries to reduce this ratio by offering many government jobs only
 to citizens.
 There was no significant change in the human rights situation. Human rights re-
 main restricted, particularly the denial of the right of citizens to change their gov-
 ernment arbitrary detentions in security cases, restrictions on worker rights, and
 the freedoms of speech, press, assembly, and association. Women's rights are closely
 restricted, and non-Qatari workers face systematic discrimination.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no reports of political or other
 extra*udicial killings.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 There have been no reported instances of torture for several years. The Government
 administers most corporal punishment prescribed by Islamic law but does not allow
 amutation.
 Prison conditions generally meet minimum international standards. The Govern-
 ment does not permit domestic human rights groups to exist, and no international
 human rights organization has asked to visit the country or its prisons.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The authorities generally charge suspects
 within 48 hours. In most cases involing foreigners, the police promptly notify the
 appropriate consular representative. Suspects detained in security cases are gen-
 erally not afforded access to counsel and may be detained indefinitely while under
 investigation. There are no known recent cases of incommunicado detention.
 Involuntary exile has occurred but is rare. There were no reported cases this year.
 e. Denial of Fair Public TriaL.-The judiciary is nominally independent, but most
 judges are foreign nationals who hold residence permits granted by the civil authori-
 ties and thus hold their positions at the Government's pleasure.
 The judiciary is buried under the bureaucratic layers of two ministries. Civil (or
 Adlea) courts are subordinate to the Ministry of Justice, and religious (or Shari'a)
 courts fall under the Ministry of Endowments and Islamic Affairs. The prosecutors
 fall under the Ministry of Interior.
 There are three types of courts: the civil courts, which have jurisdiction in civil
 and commercial matters; the Shari'a Court, which has jurisdiction in family and
 criminal cases; and the rarely'convened state security courts. There are no perma-
 nent state security courts. Security cases, which are rare, are tried by ad hoc mili-
 tary courts. Although state security cases may be conducted in secret, there have
 been no cases before these courts since the new Amir assumed power. Defendants
 tried by all courts have the right to appeal. Occasionally in the Shari'a Court, the
 same judge will hear the original case and the appeal.
 The legal system is biased in favor of Qataris and the Government. A Muslim liti-
 gant may request the Shari'a Court to assume jurisdiction in commercial or civil
 cases. Non-Muslims are not allowed to bring suits as plaintiffs in the Shari'a Court.
 This practice prevents non-Muslim residents from obtaining full legal recourse.
 Trials in the civil courts are public, but in the Shari'a Court only the disputing par-
 ties, their relatives, associates, and witnesses are allowed in the courtroom. Lawyers
 do not play a formal role except to prepare litigants for their cases. Although non-
 Arabic speakers are provided with interpreters, foreigners are disadvantaged, espe-
 cially in cases involving the performance of contracts.
 Defendants appear before a judge for a preliminary hearing within 7 days of their
 arrest. Judges may extend pretrial detention a week at a time to allow the authori-
 ties to conduct investigations. Defendants in the civil courts have the right to be
 represented by defense attorneys but are not always permitted to be represented by
 counsel in the Shari'a court.
 Shari'a trials are usually brief. Shari'a family law trials are often held without
 counsel. After both parties have stated their cases and examined witnesses, judges
 are likely to deliver a verdict after a short deliberation. Criminal cases are normally
 tried within 2 to 3 months after suspects are detained. There is no provision for bail
 in criminal cases. However, foreigners charged with minor crimes may be released
 to a Qatari sponsor. They are prohibited from departing the country until the case
 is resolved.
 There were no reports of political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.
 
 
 1363
 
 Traditional attitudes of respect for the sanctity of the home provide a great deal
 of protection against arbitrary intrusions for most citizens and residents. A warrant
 must be obtained before police may search a residence or business, except in cases
 involving national security or emergencies. However, warrants are issued by police
 officials rather than by judicial authorities. There were no reports of unauthorized
 searches of homes during the year. The police and security forces are believed to
 monitor the communications of suspected criminals, those considered to be security
 risks, and selected foreigners.
 With prior permission, which is usually granted, Qataris may marry foreigners of
 any nationality and apply for residence permits for their spouses.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Pres.-The freedom of speech and press is significantly
 restricted. However, censorship of the local print media was formally lifted in 1995.
 Since then, the press has been essentially free of government interference. On at
 least two occasions, however, local newspapers were closed temporarily when their
 contents ran afoul of government sensitivities: El Watan when it prematurely pub-
 lished the concluding document of the 1995 GCC Summit, and El Sharq for printing
 a poem considered offensive to Saudi Arabia. The censorship function continues,
 however, for movies, videos, radio and television programming (including cable), and
 the foreign press. Although they increasingly test the limits, journalists continue to
 practice self-censorship. Scial and political pressures for self-censorship will deter-
 mine whether the new policy will usher in a period of increased public information
 and debate. Although the Ministry of Information was dissolved in October 1996,
 the ultimate effect of the suspension of formal press censorship is mitigated by the
 existence of a separate and unaffected censorship organ within the Ministry of En-
 dowments and Islamic Affairs. This office is charged with the protection of public
 morality and religious values. As a result, cable television programming is still de-
 layed for censorship, and offensive photos and stories continue to be blacked out of
 some foreign publications.
 Customs officials routinely screen imported video cassettes, audio tapes, books,
 and periodicals for politically objectionable or pornographic content. Foreign cable
 television service was introduced in 1993, but censors review broadcasts for objec-
 tionable material.
 There is no legal provision for academic freedom. Most instructors at the Univer-
 sity of Qatar exercise self-censorship.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-These rights are severely lim-
 ited. The Government does not allow political parties, political demonstrations, or
 membership in international professional organizations critical of the Government
 or any other Arab government. Private social, sports, trade, professional, and cul-
 tural societies must be registered with the Government. Security forces monitor the
 activities of such groups.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The state religion is Islam, as interpreted by the puri-
 tanical Wahabbi branch of the Sunni tradition. Non-Muslims are prohibited from
 public worship and may not proselytize. The Government tolerates private gather-
 ings of non-Muslims but closely monitors them for political content. Non-Muslim
 parents may raise their children in their own faiths. The Government allows Shi'a
 Muslims to practice their faith. However, the latter have tacitly agreed to refrain
 from such public rituals as self-flagellation.
 Conversion from Islam to another religion is a capital offense, although no one
 is known to have been executed for it.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-There are no restrictions on internal travel, except around sensitive
 military and oil installations. Generally, women do not require permission from
 male guardians to travel. However, men may prevent female relatives from leaving
 the country by placing their names with immigration officers at ports of departure.
 Technically, women employed by the Government must obtain official permission to
 travel abroad when requesting leave, but it is not known to what extent this regula-
 tion is enforced. Citizens critical of the Government face restrictions on their right
 to travel abroad.
 All citizens have the right to return. Foreigners are subject to immigration restric-
 tions designed to control the size of the loc  labor pool. Foreign workers must have
 a sponsor, usually their employer, to enter or depart the country. Foreign. women
 married to Qataris are granted residence permits and may apply for citizenship.
 However, they are expected to relinquish their foreign citizenship.
 The Government has not formulated a formal policy regarding refugees, asylees,
 or first asylum. Those attempting to enter illegally, including persons seeking to de-
 fect from nearby countries, are refused entry. Asylum seekers who can obtain local
 
 
 1364
 
 sponsorship or employment are allowed to enter and may remain as long as they
 are employed.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens do not have the right to change their government or the political system
 peacefully. Qatar has no formal democratic institutions. There have been reports
 that some of the 19 signers of a December 1991 petition calling for greater political
 freedom and constitutional reform continued to be subject to travel restrictions. The
 political institutions blend the characteristics of a traditional Bedouin tribal state
 and a modern bureaucracy. There are no political parties, elections, or organized op-
 position groups.
 The Amir exercises most executive and legislative powers, including appointment
 of cabinet members. However, his rule is tempered by local custom. Interlocking
 family networks, together with the right of citizens to submit appeals or petitions
 to the Amir, provide informal avenues for the redress of many grievances. The cus-
 tom of rule by consensus leads to extensive consultations among the Amir, leading
 merchant families, religious leaders, and other notables on important matters.
 Under the amended Provisional Constitution, the Amir must be chosen from and
 by the adult males of the Al Thani family.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 The Government does not permit local human rights organizations to exist. No
 international human rights organizations are known to have asked to investigate
 conditions in Qatar.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Religion, Sex, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 Institutional, cultural, and legal discrimination based on gender, race, religion, so-
 cial status, and disability exists.
 Women.-Violence against women and spousal abuse occur but are not believed
 to be widespread. However, some foreign domestics, especially those from South
 Asia and the Philippines, have been severely mistreated by employers. In keeping
 with Islamic law, all forms of physical abuse are illegal. The maximum penalty for
 rape is death. The police actively investigate reports of violence against women. In
 the last few years, the Government has demonstrated an increased willingness to
 arrest and punish offenders, whether citizens or foreigners. Offenders who are citi-
 zens usually receive lighter punishments than foreigners. Abused domestic workers
 usually do not press charges for fear of losing their jobs.
 The activities of women are closely restricted both by law and tradition. For ex-
 ample, a woman is prohibited from applying for a driver's license unless she has
 permission from a male guardian. This restriction does not apply to non-Qatari
 women. The Government adheres to Shari'a law in matters of inheritance and child
 custody. While Muslim wives have the right to inherit from their husbands, non-
 Muslim wives do not, unless a special legacy is arranged. In cases of divorce, wives
 rarely obtain custody of children and never if the wife is not a Muslim. Women may
 attend court proceedings but are generally represented by a male relative. There
 has been a steady increase in the number and severity of complaints of spousal
 abuse by foreign wives of Qatari and foreign national men.
 Women are largely relegated to the roles of mother and homemaker, but some
 women are now finding jobs in education, medicine, and the news media. However,
 the number of professional women is too small to determine whether they are re-
 ceiving equal pay for equal work. Increasingly, women are receiving government
 scholarships to pursue degrees at universities overseas. The Amir has entrusted his
 second wife, who is the mother of the Heir Apparent, with the high-profile task of
 establishing a university in Doha. In November the Government appointed its first
 female undersecretary, in the Ministry of Education. Although women are legally
 able to travel abroad alone (see Section 2.d.), tradition and social pressures cause
 most to travel with male escorts. There have also been complaints that Qatari hus-
 bands retrieved their foreign spouses' passports and, without prior approval, turned
 them in for Qatari documents. The husbands then inform these wives that they had
 lost their previous nationality. In other cases, foreign citizen wives report being for-
 bidden by husbands or in-laws to visit or contact foreign embassies.
 There is no independent women's rights organization, nor would the Government
 permit the establishment of one.
 Children.-The Government demonstrates its commitment to children's rights
 through a well-funded, free public education system (elementary through university)
 
 
 1365
 and a complete medical protection program for Qatari children. However, children
 of most foreigners are denied free education and have only limited medical coverage.
 There is no societal pattern of abuse of children.
 People With Disabilities.-The Government has not enacted legislation or other-
 wise mandated _provision of accessibility for the handicapped, who also face social
 discrimination. The Government maintains a hospital and schools that provide free
 services to the mentally and physically handicapped.
 Religious Minorities.-NonMuslims experience discrimination in employment,
 particularly in sensitive areas such as security and education. Non-Muslims also en-
 counter official prohibitions in the public practice of their religions (see Section 2.c.).
 National/Racial/Ethnic Minorities.-The Government discriminates against some
 citizens of non-Qatari origin. In the private sector, many Qataris of Iranian extrac-
 tion occupy positions of the highest importance. However, in government they are
 rarely found in senior decisionmaking positions.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The right of association is strictly limited, and all
 workers, including foreigners, are prohibited from forming labor unions. Despite
 this, almost all workers have the right to strike after their case has been presented
 to the Labor Conciliation Board and ruled upon. Employers may close a place of
 work or dismiss employees once the Conciliation Board has heard the case. The
 right to strike does not exist for government employees, domestic workers, or mem-
 bers of the employer's family. No worker in a public utility or health or security
 service may strike if such a strike would harm the public or lead to property dam-
 age. Strikes are rare, and there were none in 1995.
 The labor law provides for the establishment of joint consultative committees com-
 posed of representatives of the employer and workers. The committees do not dis-
 cuss wages but may consider issues including work organization and productivity,
 conditions of employment, training of workers, and safety measures and their imple-
 mentation.
 Since July 1995, Qatar has been suspended from the US. Overseas Private In-
 vestment Corporation (OPIC) insurance programs because of the Government's lack
 of compliance with internationally recognized worker rights standards.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-Workers are prohibited from
 engaging in collective bargaining. Generally, wages are set unilaterally by employ-
 ers without government involvement. Local courts handle disputes between workers
 and employers.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The law prohibits forced or com-
 pulsory labor. Three-quarters of the work force are migrant workers, who are fre-
 quently dependent on a single employer for residency rights. This leaves them vul-
 nerable to abuse. For instance, employers must give consent before exit permits are
 issued to any foreigner seeking to leave the country. Some employers temporarily
 withhold this consent to force foreign employees to work for longer periods than
 they wish.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-Minors between the ages of 15
 and 18 may be employed with the approval of their parents or guardians. However,
 younger non.Qatari children sometimes work in small, family-owned businesses.
 Education is compulsory through the age of 15. While the laws governing the mini-
 mum age for employment of children are not strictly enforced, child labor, either
 Qatari or foreign, is rare. Very young children, usually of African or South Asian
 background, have been employed as riders in camel racing. Little information is
 available on wages and working conditions for these children.
 Minors may not work more than 6 hours a day or more than 36 hours a week.
 Employers must provide the Ministry of Labor with the names and occupations of
 their minor employees. The Ministry may prohibit the employment of minors in jobs
 which are judged as dangerous to the health, safety, or morals of minors. Employers
 must also obtain permission from the Ministry of Education to hire a minor.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-There is no minimum wage, although a 1962
 law gives the Amir authority to set one. The 48-hour workweek with a 24-hour rest
 period is prescribed by law, although most government offices follow a schedule of
 36 hours a week, Employees who work more than 48 hours a week, or 36 hours a
 week during the Muslim month of Ramadan, are entitled to overtime. This law is
 adhered to m government offices and major private sector companies. It is not ob-
 served in the case of domestic and personal employees. Domestic servants frequently
 work 7 days a week, more than 12 hours a day, with few or no holidays, and have
 no effective way to redress grievances against their employers.
 
 
 1366
 
 Qatar has enacted regulations concerning worker safety and health, but enforce-
 ment, which is the responsibility of the Ministry of Energy and Industry, is lax. The
 Department of Public Safety oversees safety training and conditions, and the state-
 run petroleum company has its own set of safety standards and procedures. The
 Labor Law of 1964, as amended in 1984, lists partial and permanent disabilities for
 which compensation may be awarded, some connected with handling chemicals and
 petroleum products or construction injuries. The law does not specifically set rates
 of payment and compensation.
 Foreign workers must be sponsored by a citizen or legally recognized organization
 to obtain an entry visa and must have their sponsor's permission to depart the coun-
 try. Any worker may seek legal relief from onerous work conditions, but domestic
 workers generally accept their situations in order to avoid repatriation.
