 QATAR
 Qatar is a small gulf state ruled by an amir from the
 Al-Thani family. The basic law of 1970, a provisional
 constitution based on several Egyptian models,
 institutionalized existing practices and customs so that
 traditions rooted in Qatar's conservative Wahhabi Muslim
 heritage prevail over imported principles. The amir is
 vested with nearly absolute power. So long as the
 exercise of that power does not conflict with Islamic law
 (the sharia), he may suspend any law or countermand any
 court decision. A council of ministers and an advisory
 council of Qatari notables assist him in making policy
 decisions. Succession is determined through a consensus
 of adult males of the Al-Thani family.
 Although article 9 of the basic law provides that "all
 persons shall enjoy equal public rights and shall be
 subject to equal public duties without distinction on the
 grounds of race, sex or religion," the country's
 expatriate residents do not enjoy these rights. Resident
 aliens, who constitute 75 percent of the total population
 of 220,000, frequently are unable to obtain equal
 treatment before the law. It is often impossible, for
 example, for an expatriate to take legal action against a
 Qatari. Although women continue to occupy a subordinate
 position in the society, as dictated by its conservative
 mores, changes in their status have occurred during the
 last decade, particularly in terms of education.
 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Torture
 No allegations of torture were received in 1981.
 b. Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment
 There were no reports that anyone was subjected to cruel,
 inhuman, or degrading treatment or punishment by the
 government in 1981. Physical punishments are administered
 according to the sharia law. Detention facilities are
 spartan but adequate. Food is sufficient and can be
 supplemented from outside sources. Foremost among the
 complaints of prisoners is the lack of air-conditioning, a
 serious concern during the summer months. Little
 differentiation is made among the tiny prison population
 on the basis of social class, race, or religion. A small
 jail for women exists, but women are very rarely jailed.
 c. Disappearances
 No disappearances were reported in 1981.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest and Imprisonment
 There were no known allegations of arbitrary arrest or
 imprisonment in 1981. The right of habeas corpus is not
 codified in Qatar's civil law or in the sharia, but it
 exists in practice; police normally present suspects in
 custody to an appropriate court within 48 hours of their
 arrest.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Application of the law varies according to religion,
 social class and nationality. Members of the ruling
 
 (1083)
 
 
 1084
 family are effectively above the law. Qatari citizens
 receive preferential treatment over non-Qataris,
 especially in sharia courts. Cases against Western
 expatriates often do not reach the stage of a public trial
 because they may be quickly deported if suspected of
 violating the law. Court decisions and their underlying
 reasoning are not publicly announced, and due process for
 aliens is thus not easily verified. Appellate courts
 exist, but hearings before them often are simply
 recapitulations of previous arguments and, in sharia
 courts, the original qadi participates in appellate
 hearings. Defendants have the right to counsel and
 charges are formally and clearly stated. The judiciary is
 effectively subject to the ruler.
 f. Invasion of the Home
 No invasions of the sanctity of the home were reported in
 1981. Formal warrants are not required for an official to
 enter a private residence, but strong tradition against
 forced entry safeguards the sanctity of the home.
 2. Respect for Civil and Political Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech, Press, Religion and Assembly
 All of these freedoms are circumscribed for both Qatari
 and non-Qatari. The government controls the import of
 printed and cinematic materials. The self-censoring local
 press does not question or contradict government
 policies. Labor unions and strikes have been prohibited
 since 1976. Because Qatar is a theocratic state, with the
 Koran its basic constitution and the sharia its legal
 code, adherence to Islam confers religious, economic, and
 civil advantages. Non-Muslim religious organizations
 exist only informally; they can neither proselytize nor
 establish permanent facilities.
 b. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Qatari males may travel within the country and abroad
 without restraint. All citizens have the right to return
 to Qatar at will. Expatriates, on the other hand, must
 obtain permission from their sponsors before they can
 receive exit permits from the government to depart Qatar.
 All females, both Qatari and non-Qatari, must have the
 permission of their closest male relative before
 travelling. Even with these limitations, thousands of
 aliens choose to live in Qatar. Many hold important
 positions in government and business and contribute
 significantly to the operation and development of the
 country.
 Members of the Palestinian diaspora form one of the most
 influential expatriate groups in Qatar. Qatar normally
 does not accept immigrants, although in 1981 about 200
 Iranian families were reportedly permitted to enter.
 c. Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 Civil rights are restricted by the government's views of
 its security needs. Political parties and labor unions
 are not permitted, and no indigenous opposition groups are
 in evidence. Although the basic law, Article 46, provides
 for elected representation of Qataris on an advisory
 council to the council of ministers, it has never been
 implemented. Rather, the terms of the appointed members
 of the council (all Qatari notables) have been extended
 indefinitely "in the public interest," an act allowable
 under article 46.
 
 
 1085
 
 while there is no provision for suffrage, Qataris
 traditionally have the right to petition officials at all
 levels of government for a redress of grievances or for
 personal needs.
 The constitution also provides that the ruler "possesses
 any other powers with which he is vested under the
 provisional constitution or with which he may be vested
 under law." In order to retain his leadership position,
 however, the ruler must maintain consensus support of the
 Al-Thani family notables.
 3. Government Attitude and Record Regarding International
 and Non-governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 There were no international or non-governmental
 investigations of allegations of human rights violations
 in 1981. No discussions or communications between the
 government and external non-governmental human rights
 groups were reported. No local, national, or
 supranational organizations based within Qatar observe,
 report, and contest human rights violations, nor are there
 any regional human rights bodies to which Qatar belongs.
 4. Economic and Social Circumstances
 Qatar has a per capita income of about $19,000-(1981
 estimate), one of the highest in the world. The country
 earned over $5.2 billion in 1980 from the sale of oil and
 gas. Since 1972, roughly half of Qatar's national income
 has gone towards developing infrastructure and expanding
 social services. Water and electricity are supplied free
 to all Qatari citizens and at subsidized rates to
 expatriate residents. Low-interest building loans are
 available to all citizens; some Qataris receive housing
 and land grants. There are no personal income or
 municipal taxes.
 Wages are high. Article 10 of the Labor Law states: "An
 employer must, when engaging a worker, give preference as
 far as is practicable to a national and then to another
 Arab." In practice, preference is given first to Qatari
 males, then to other Arab Muslim males, then'other Muslim
 males, and finally, non-Muslim males. The employment of
 women of any nationality is curtailed by tradition. The
 labor force is maintained through a policy permitting
 entry for temporary residence. Wives and children usually
 do not accompany expatriate workers. Wage rates and
 working conditions are monitored, but some contractors
 have subverted the law and engaged expatriate workers
 under substandard conditions. This situation is
 influenced by the fact that an expatriate worker can
 remain in Qatar only so long as he retains sponsorship by
 a Qatari national. Otherwise, he may be deported.
 Extremely few residents are considered to be below the
 poverty level.
 The World Health Organization estimates life expectancy to
 be 57.5 years for 1976-79. Medical care is good, readily
 available, and provided to all residents without charge.
 The estimated ratios of medical professionals to
 population are: doctors--l:l,000; dentists--l:14,000; and
 nurses--l:350. Qataris often travel abroad for special
 medical treatment at government expense. Virtually all
 residents have access to safe water, and the ratio of
 calorie supply available for consumption relative to
 nutritional requirements nears 1:1. No estimates are
 available for the average number of persons housed per
 room, even on a national scale.
 According to the ministry of health, the estimated annual
 population growth rate is 11 per cent for expatriates and
 3.4 percent for Qataris. The adult literacy rate is about
 45-50 percent and quickly increasing. Education through
 the university level is free for all residents, though
 only Qatari males are eligible for government scholarships
 to study abroad. The total school enrollment through
 secondary school was 39,944 in 1980-81.
 
 
