 OATA
 Qatar, a small, wealthy Persian Gulf state ruled by an amir
 from the Al Thani family, is governed by a 1970 Basic Law,
 which institutionalizes the customs and social mores of Qatar's
 conservative Wahhabi Muslim heritage. These include respect
 for the sanctity of private property, freedom from arbitrary
 arrest and imprisonment, and protection against transgressions
 of Islamic law (the Shari'a). Thus, although the Amir holds
 nearly absolute power, he must exercise authority with care.
 While he may, for example, suspend any secular law or
 countermand any civil court decisions, he is unlikely to do so,
 especially without consulting his Council of Ministers and the
 Advisory Council of Notables that assist him in making policy
 decisions. The Amir is also unlikely to reach any major
 decision without achieving a-consensus within his family.
 Qatar's economy continues to expand at a slower rate than it
 did during the 1970's and early 1980's. The economy is mixed,
 with the state owning and operating most basic industries and
 services while retail trade and the construction industry
 remain in private hands. Its fast developing industrial
 infrastructure has led to the creation of an expatriate
 community which outnumbers the native population by almost four
 to one. Limiting the influence and controlling the activities
 of expatriates are for most Qataris major national goals.
 Qatari resentment against expatriates makes them more likely
 than natives to be the victims of arbitrary police action. It
 is also difficult for an alien to take legal action against a
 citizen. The economic slowdown of 1983-1985 has encouraged the
 Government to continue its policy of reducing the number of
 expatriates. This policy, however, has been carried out with
 some compassion. Palestinians, for example, have on the whole
 not been forced to leave unless able to make arrangements to
 settle elsewhere. Expatriates from South Asia have not been so
 lucky, and their numbers have dropped noticeably.
 The human rights situation in Qatar did not change appreciably
 in 1985. There are many factors against change--not the least
 being the absence of any credible internal pressure on the
 regime. So long as the Government feels secure, major
 innovation is likely to occur only as the result of a consensus
 within the ruling and other leading families.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section I Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a, Political Killing
 There were no known political killings in 1985.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no reports of disappearances in 1985.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 Torture is not condoned by the authorities and, although the
 Government does administer most of the corporal punishments
 prescribed by the Shari'a, it no longer allows amputation.
 Although non-European expatriates routinely complain of
 
 
 1364
 QATA
 maltreatment after their arrest by Qatari authorities, the
 practice does not seem to have official sanction. Executions
 rarely occur. Prison conditions are uncomfortable but
 adequate. Family members and friends may bring food to
 supplement the monotonous prison fare as well as small luxuries
 and mail. There have been allegations of overcrowded and
 unsanitary conditions in the women's prison.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 As a general rule, the authorities must charge suspects before
 a competent court within 48 hours. In most cases involving
 expatriates, the police have promptly notified the appropriate
 consular representative. Suspects detained in security cases
 are generally not afforded their rights. An expatriate
 arrested in 1983 in a security case was never formally charged
 and was held under house arrest for over a year.
 Involuntary exile has not been practiced in over a decade.
 Expatriate offenders are normally deported upon completion of
 their sentences. There is no forced labor.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Except for security cases, most disputes are judged before
 either a civil or Shari'a court. The civil courts adjudicate
 most commercial cases involving expatriates. The Shari'a
 courts administer criminal and family law and may, if one party
 requests, take jurisdiction in business cases. Although the
 judiciary is nominally independent, most judges are expatriates
 holding residence permits granted by the civil authorities and
 thus hold their positions at the Government's pleasure.
 Many expatriates find proceedings in the Shari'a courts
 bewildering. Only the disputing parties, their relatives and
 associates, and witnesses are allowed in the courtroom.
 Lawyers may not play any formal role save that of preparing
 litigants for their cases. Although non-Arabic speakers are
 provided with translators, foreigners report being at a
 considerable disadvantage, especially in cases involving the
 nonperformance of contracts. Shari'a trials are normally
 brief. After both parties have stated their cases, and
 examined witnesses, the judge is likely to deliver a verdict
 with only a short delay. Criminal cases are normally tried 2
 to 3 months after suspects are detained.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Traditional attitudes regarding the sanctity of the home
 provide a great deal of protection against arbitrary
 intrusions. Except in security cases or emergencies, the
 police must normally obtain a warrant before searching a
 residence or business.
 Police routinely monitor the communications of criminal and
 security suspects. Mail thought to contain either pornography
 or drugs is also opened as a matter of course.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Although both expatriates and Qataris are free to say what they
 wish privately, public criticism of the ruling family and its
 
 
 1365
 QATAR
 policies is not tolerated. The Government strongly discourages
 attacks on other Arab governments as well. This policy applies
 to the electronic media, which are government-owned and
 controlled, and to the press. The journalists, particularly
 expatriates, generally avoid pressing against these
 restrictions because of the risk of having residence permits
 cancelled.
 The authorities routinely screen all video cassettes, audio
 tapes, books, and periodicials for objectionable political
 sentiments and pornography.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 The Government allows private social, sports, trade,
 professional, and artistic societies to operate. The
 activities of these organizations, which must register with the
 Government, are closely watched.
 Government policy does not allow political parties or
 demonstrations.
 While there is no law forbidding the formation of labor unions
 or strikes, the Government in practice allows neither. There
 is no collective bargaining by workers.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Qatar's state religion is Islam, the Koran is its basic
 constitution, and the Shari'a its legal code. Muslims enjoy
 certain advantages such as preferential employment. All other
 faiths are prohibited public worship, and they may not
 proselytize. Apostasy from Islam remains a capital crime,
 although no one has been executed for it in recent memory. The
 Government does tolerate the private practice of non-Muslim
 religions, both by allowing parents to raise children in
 non-Muslim faiths and by allowing private gatherings in private
 homes for worship.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 There are no restrictions on internal travel. Male Qataris
 travel abroad at will. Females, both Qatari and foreign,
 usually require the permission of a male guardian or relative
 to leave the country. All Qatari citizens have the right to
 return. Foreigners are subject to immigration restrictions
 designed to control the local labor pool. They require a local
 sponsor to enter and their sponsor's permission to depart.
 The Government has no formal policy on refugees. Those
 attempting to enter illegally, including defectors from nearby
 countries, are denied entry. Often refugees who can get local
 sponsorship or employment may enter. If they lose their jobs,
 however, they are expected to leave. The Government has
 apparently been willing to relax its rules in order to help
 Palestinians unable to find refuge elsewhere.
 Section 3 Respect For Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 To Change Their Government
 Qatar's political institutions blend the characteristics of a
 traditional Bedouin tribal state and of a modern bureaucracy.
 There are no political parties, elections, or organized
 
 
 1366
 QATAR
 opposition to the Government, and the Amir exercises all
 executive and legislative powers. His autocratic rule,
 however, is checked to some extent by entrenched local
 customs. Interlocking family networks and the recognized right
 of citizens to submit appeals or petitions personally to their
 Amir provide effective, if informal; avenues for redress of
 grievances and also serve to limit abuses. The custom of rule
 by consensus leads to extensive consultations between the Amir,
 leading merchants, religious leaders, and other notables on
 important policies. Women for the most part play no role in
 public life.
 Under Qatar's Basic Law of 1970, the Amir must be chosen from
 among and by the adult males.of the Al Thani family. The
 current Amir has designated his oldest son as heir apparent.
 This took place with the consent of the notables and religious
 leaders according to established custom. There are no serious
 challenges to this arrangement, and in the foreseeable future
 effective political power will remain in the hands of the Amir,
 his family, and the local notables.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 No major international or nongovernmental organization
 monitoring human rights abuses has asked to investigate
 conditions in Qatar. Amnesty International's 1985 Report disl
 not include Qatar among the countries surveyed. Freedom House
 calls Qatar "partly free." Qatar has expressed concern over
 the plight of Palestinian, Lebanese, and Afghan refugees.
 ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND CULTURAL SITUATION
 Qatar's population is estimated to be 292,000 and to be growing
 at an annual rate of about 4.2 percent. The per capita gross
 national product is approximately $22,000 (1982).
 Life expectancy at birth is 72 years, and the infant mortality
 rate is 42 per 1,000. Education is free for citizens through
 graduate school; most of the large expatriate communities have
 their own schools. The adult literacy rate in 1981 was just
 over 50 for men and women.
 Oil revenues have enabled the Government to develop an
 extensive network of social services. Health care is provided
 free to all residents. Staple foods such as flour, milk, and
 rice are subsidized; prices of other items are regulated.
 Citizens receive subsidized housing and scholarships for higher
 study abroad. Most Qatari males, and all heads of families,
 are guaranteed a reasonable income either through government
 employment or social security payments.
 The minimum working age is 18 years, but expatriate children
 frequently work at younger ages in small businesses and shops..
 Some regulations concerning worker safety and health exist, but
 enforcement is spotty. There is no minimum wage in Qatar and
 most workers spend less than 48 hours per week on the job.
 In this conservative society, women remain in a subordinate
 position, largely relegated to roles as mothers and homemakers,
 although some are now finding jobs in education, medicine, and
 the news media. Their activities are still bound by a number
 of social customs and quasi-legal restrictions, such as veiling
 
 
 1367
 QATAR
 and prohibitions against the issuance of driver's licenses, and
 they continue to face widespread discrimination. For example,
 women do not regularly receive the overseas university
 scholarships available for males, and their employment, while
 tolerated, is discouraged beyond such fields as nursing,
 teaching, and home economics. Public life is a male sphere.
 Expatriate women find it easier to get jobs or to own and
 manage a business than their Qatari counterparts. On the other
 hand, mandatory schooling for girls and the opening of
 employment opportunities for women in medicine and education
 represent a shift in attitude, as does the slowly expanding
 number of women allowed to go abroad for university studies.
 There are signs that as more Qatari women receive education,
 they will press for a relaxation of some of the restrictions
 from their country's tribal past.
 
 
 1368
