 QATAR
 Qatar, a small, wealthy Arab Gulf state ruled by an Amir
 chosen from the Al-Thani family, is governed by a 1970 Basic
 Law which institutionalizes the customs and social mores of
 Qatar's conservative Wahhabi Muslim heritage. These include
 respect for the sanctity of private property, freedom from
 arbitrary arrest and imprisonment, and protection against
 transgressions of Islamic law (the Shari'a). Technically the
 Amir holds absolute power, but he is careful in exercising his
 authority. While he may, for example, suspend any secular law
 or countermand any civil court decision, he is unlikely to do
 so without first consulting his Council of Ministers, the
 Advisory Council of Notables, and most importantly obtaining a
 consensus from within the ruling Al-Thani family.
 The large number of expatriate workers in Qatar has been a
 source of concern to the Government, as has the threat of
 external aggression against the country resulting from the
 Iran-Iraq war. In response to these perceived threats to
 civil order, the Government has established an efficient
 security apparatus to control subversion. The civilian
 security apparatus is controlled by the Interior Ministry and
 operates on two levels, the police and the Criminal
 Investigation Department (CID). The CID is charged with
 investigation of all crimes, while the local police enforce
 laws and arrest violators. A second, more powerful branch of
 the Interior Ministry, the Mubahathat, deals with sedition and
 espionage. The Mubahathat is nearly independent of the
 regular civil security forces and has been alleged to use
 severe force during its investigations. It can incarcerate
 suspects without charge, but this apparently occurs
 infrequently. The armed forces have no significant role in
 guaranteeing internal security, although the army would
 certainly be used against serious civil disturbances.
 However, under the jurisdiction of the armed forces is another
 enforcement organization, known as Mukhabarat, whose function
 is to intercept and arrest incoming terrorists and to keep
 surveillance over political dissidents.
 Qatar's economy is mixed, with the State owning and operating
 most basic industries and services while the retail trade and
 the construction industry remain in private hands. The
 economy is still suffering from the fall in the price of oil,
 but was able to expand slightly in 1988. The development of
 the North Dome gas field, the single largest field of
 nonassociated gas in the free world, is expected to bring a
 much-needed boost to the local economy, as well as provide for
 Qatar's future economic security. The rapid development of
 Qatar's infrastructure in the 1970's and early 1980's led to
 the creation of a ratio of expatriates (mostly Indian,
 Pakistani, and Sri Lankan) to nationals of 4 to 1. Qatari
 resentment against the expatriate population makes the latter
 the most likely victims of arbitrary police action or
 harassment. It is also difficult for an expatriate to take
 legal action against a Qatari citizen, but once a matter has
 been referred to the courts the judicial process is generally
 fair. Limiting the influence and controlling the activities
 of the expatriate population are major Qatari national goals,
 and the economic downturn of the second half of the 1980's has
 spurred a government program to reduce the expatriate-to-
 national ratio by offering employment in many government-owned
 industries to Qatari citizens only. Because the Qatari
 national population is so small, however, Qatar will be
 dependent on expatriate labor for the foreseeable future.
 
 
 1478
 QATAR
 There was little change in the human rights situation in
 1988. There were no reports of arbitrary arrest or similar
 abuses, but civil liberties remained significantly
 restricted. Expatriate workers also continued to complain of
 systematic discrimination against them.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 There were no known political killings in 1988.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no reports of disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 Although many expatriates complain of mistreatment after their
 arrest by Qatari authorities, the practice is not believed to
 have official sanction. The Government of Qatar follows the
 conservative teachings of Wahhabi Islam, which forbids
 torture. However, instances to the contrary, in connection
 with security force actions involving political and
 security-related cases, have been reported. The Government
 administers most of the corporal punishments prescribed by
 Shari'a law, but it does not allow physical mutilation.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 The authorities generally charge suspects before a competent
 court within 48 hours. In most cases involving expatriates,
 the police promptly notify the appropriate consular
 representative. Suspects detained in security cases are
 generally not afforded their rights. Involuntary exile is
 very rare. The last known case occurred 10 years ago; it
 involved the previous Amir, who was deposed, his family, and
 close supporters. However, the Amir's sons were allowed to
 return to Doha, and now operate major businesses there.
 Expatriates convicted of crimes are usually deported after
 they have completed their prison sentences.
 With regard to forced or compulsory labor, see Section 6.c.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The judiciary is nominally independent. However, most judges
 are expatriates holding residence permits granted by the civil
 authorities, and thus hold office at the Government's pleasure.
 Qatar's legal system has an unusual balance, tilted in favor
 of Qataris and the Government of Qatar. There are two types
 of courts: the civil courts, which nave jurisdiction in civil
 and commercial matters, and the Shari'a court, which has
 jurisdiction in family and criminal cases. However, the
 Shari'a court may assume jurisdiction in a commercial or civil
 case if one of the litigants asks the Shari'a court to do so.
 Technically, the Shari'a court should take jurisdiction if
 either party requests it to do so, but in practice the Shari'a
 court only assumes jurisdiction if a Muslim litigant makes the
 request. It does not allow non-Muslims to bring a suit as
 
 
 1479
 QATAR
 plaintiffs. This anomaly prevents non-Muslim residents from
 obtaining full legal recourse, when being sued or trying to
 sue a Qatari national. There are no statutes preventing
 persons from suing the Government of Qatar, but the threat or
 fear of losing a residence permit discourages such suits.
 There have been at least three cases where a person has been
 injured as the result of the malpractice of doctors employed
 at the government-owned hospital. The patients and their
 families did not file suit.
 Many expatriates find proceedings in the Shari'a courts
 bewildering. Only the disputing parties, their relatives and
 associates, and witnesses are allowed in the courtroom.
 Lawyers may not play any formal role, save that of preparing
 litigants for their cases. Although non-Arabic speakers are
 provided with translators, foreigners report being at a
 considerable disadvantage, especially in cases involving the
 nonperformance of contracts. Shari'a trials are normally
 brief. After both parties have stated their cases and
 examined witnesses, the judge is likely to deliver a verdict
 with only a short delay. Criminal cases are normally tried 2
 to 3 months after suspects are detained.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Traditional attitudes regarding the sanctity of the home
 provide protection against arbitrary intrusions for most
 citizens. The police must normally obtain a warrant before
 searching a residence or business, but not in cases involving
 national security or emergencies. There were no reports of
 illegal searches of homes in 1988. The police and security
 forces routinely monitor the communications of suspected
 criminals and security risks. Mail and other periodicals
 thought to contain pornography or drugs are also opened and
 routinely censored.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Although both expatriates and Qataris may express political
 opinions in private, public criticism of the ruling family and
 its policies is not tolerated. The Government strongly
 discourages attacks on other Arab governments as well. This
 applies to the electronic media, which are government owned
 and operated, as well as to the press. Journalists,
 particularly the expatriates, generally avoid challenging
 these restrictions because of the risk of having residence
 permits cancelled.
 The authorities routinely screen all video cassettes, audio
 tapes, books, and periodicals for objectionable political
 material and pornography.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 The Government allows private social, sports, trade, artistic,
 and professional societies to operate. The activities of
 these organizations, which must register with the Government,
 are closely watched. The Government does not allow public
 political demonstrations. For a discussion of freedom of
 association as it applies to labor unions, see Section 6.a.
 
 
 1480
 QATAR
 C. Freedom of Religion
 Qatar's state religion is Islam, the Koran is its basic
 constitution, and Shari'a law its legal code. Members of
 other religions are prohibited from public worship, and they
 may not proselytize. Apostasy from Islam is a capital offense
 although no one is known to have been executed for it. The
 Government does tolerate non-Muslim religions; and non-Muslim
 parents may raise their children in their own faiths. Private
 gatherings of non-Muslims are allowed in private residences.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 There are no restrictions on internal travel, except around
 sensitive Qatari military installations. Females, both
 Qataris and foreign, usually require the permission of a male
 guardian or a relative to leave the country. All Qatari
 citizens have the right to return. Foreigners are subject to
 immigration checks designed to control the size of the local
 labor pool. Foreigners who work in Qatar must have a sponsor
 to enter the country and the sponsor's permission to leave.
 The Government has no formal policy on refugees. Persons
 attempting to enter Qatar illegally, including defectors from
 nearby countries, are refused entry. Refugees who can obtain
 local sponsorship or employment will be allowed to enter.
 However, if they lose their jobs, they are expected to leave.
 The Government continues to tighten its policy of discouraging
 Qatari males from marrying non-Qatari women by refusing to
 grant residency permits to those wives. In several instances,
 foreign-born wives live in other countries, where they are
 visited by their Qatari husbands because they are denied entry
 into Qatar.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Qatar has no formal democratic institutions. Consequently,
 most of its citizens do not have a say in the choice of
 leaders or in changing the political system. Qatar's
 political institutions blend the characteristics of a
 traditional Bedouin tribal state and a modern bureaucracy.
 There are no political parties, elections, or organized
 opposition to the Government. The Amir exercises all
 executive and legislative powers. His rule, however, is
 tempered somewhat by local custom. Interlocking family
 networks and the recognized right of citizens to submit
 appeals or petitions directly to the Amir may provide
 effective, if informal, avenues for redress of grievances and
 also serve to limit abuses. The custom of rule by consensus
 leads to extensive consultations between the Amir, leading
 merchant families, religious leaders, and other notables on
 important policies.
 Women for the most part play no visible role in public
 decisionmaking. Under Qatar's Basic Law of 1970, the Amir
 must be chosen from among the adult males of the Al-Thani
 family. The current Amir, Khalifa bin Hamad, has designated
 his son, Hamad bin Khalifa, as the heir apparent. This
 designation was made with the consent of the notables and
 religious leaders in accordance with local custom.
 
 
 1481
 QATAR
 Effective power remains in the hands of the Amir, his family,
 and local notables, and there is no evidence of serious
 opposition to this arrangement.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged
 Violations of Human Rights
 No international or nongovernmental organization monitoring
 human rights abuses has asked to investigate conditions in
 Qatar. No local organizations exist that concern themselves
 with human rights.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 The Government discriminates against people who are
 foreign-born members of the society and those of non-Qatari
 racial origin, even though they may be citizens of Qatar. In
 the past, Qatar naturalized a number of persons of Iranian
 origin who had either been born in Qatar or who had emigrated
 to Doha. After the fall of the Shah and with the rise of
 Shi'a fundamentalism in Tehran, the Government began to
 withdraw Qatari citizenship from such persons. There have
 been reports of persons born in Qatar, but of Iranian
 parentage and holding Qatari citizenship, being expatriated,
 fired from their government jobs, and deported, all without
 the benefit of due process.
 The activities of Qatari women are governed by strict Wahhabi
 customs and some quasi-legal restrictions, such as veiling and
 a prohibition against the issuance of driver's licenses.
 However, these restrictions generally do not apply to
 non-Qatari Women. Qatari women are primarily relegated to the
 role of mother and homemaker, but some women are now finding
 jobs in education, medicine, and the news media, and more
 Qatari women are receiving government scholarships to pursue
 degrees in these fields at universities overseas. There are a
 few women who hold positions in the Ministries of Information
 and Education. While women may work as nurses, teachers, and
 in home economics, employment outside these areas is
 discouraged. Expatriate women find it easier to work or to
 own and manage businesses than their Qatari counterparts; a
 woman, for example, is editor of Qatar's only English-language
 magazine.
 It appears to be common practice to discriminate against the
 employment of non-Muslims, particularly in sensitive areas
 such as security and education.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 The right of association is strictly limited, and workers are
 prohibited from forming labor unions. Persons are allowed to
 establish organizations based on their professional or private
 interests. Membership in international professional
 organizations which criticize the Government of Qatar or any
 other Arab government would be frowned upon. The Government
 would severely restrict operations of any organized group
 which it deemed detrimental to the national interest.
 
 
 1482
 QATAR
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 Although workers in Qatar are prohibited from engaging in
 collective bargaining, there were, nevertheless, at least two
 organized work stoppages over unpaid wages in 1988. All
 disputes between workers and employees are handled in the
 local labor courts.
 There are no export processing or free-trade zones in Qatar.
 Labor laws and regulations are applied uniformly throughout
 the country.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 There have been no reported instances of forced or compulsory
 labor.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 The minimum age for the employment of children is 18, but
 expatriate children frequently begin working at younger ages
 in small family-owned businesses and shops.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 Qatar has enacted regulations concerning worker safety and
 health, but the enforcement of these regulations is lax, at
 best. There is no minimum wage in Qatar. The workweek is
 usually less than 48 hours.
 
 
 1483
