 QATAR
 An Arab state on the Persian Gulf, Qatar is ruled by an Amir from the Al Thani
 family. The 1970 Basic Law institutionalizes the customs and social mores of the
 country's conservative "Wahhabi" (a rigidly puritanical school of Islamic jurispru-
 dence) heritage. These include respect for the sanctity of private property, freedom
 from arbitrary arrest and imprisonment, and punishment of transgressions of Is-
 lamic law (the Shari'a). The Amir holds absolute power, but his role is influenced
 by continuing traditions of consultation, rule by consensus, and the citizen's right
 to appeal personally to the Amir. The Amir, while directly accountable to no one,
 cannot violate the Shari'a and, in practice, must consider the opinions of leading
 notables and the religious establishment. Their influence was institutionalized in
 the Advisory Council, an appointed body that assists the Amir in formulating policy.
 The Government, concerned by the presence of a large number of non-Qatari
 workers, has established an efficient security apparatus. The civilian security a ppa-
 ratus controlled by the Interior Ministry, has two sections, the police and the Gen-
 eral Administration of Public Security. A second branch of the Interior Ministry, the
 Mubahathat (Investigatory   Police), deals with  sedition  and espionage. The
 Mubahathat is nearly independent of the regular civil security forces and has been
 known to use severe force during its investigations. It can incarcerate suspects with-
 out charge, but reportedly does this infrequently. The armed forces have under their
 jurisdiction another enforcement organization, known as the Mukhabarat (Intel-
 ligence Service), whose function is to intercept and arrest terrorists and to monitor
 political dissidents.
 atars economy is mixed, the State owning and operating most basic industries
 and services, while retail trade and the construction industry remain in private
 hands. Oil is the principal product, accounting for about 70 percent of the gross na-
 
 
 1075
 tional product. In an effort to increase public participation in the service sector, the
 Government signed the first of three agreements designed to privatize the produc-
 tion of water and electricity. The economy, still recovering from the fall in the price
 of oil, was able to expand only slightly over the last 2 years. The rapid development
 of Qatar's infrastructure in the 1970's and early 1980's led to the creation of a ratio
 of expatriates (mostly South Asian and Arab) to nationals of four to one. The Gov-
 ernment continued efforts, begun during the economic downturn of the mid-to-late
 1980's, to reduce the expatriate-to-national ratio by offering employment in many
 positions in government to Qatari citizens only.
 There was no important change in the human rights situation in 1992, and these
 rights remain significantly restricted. The main human rights problems include
 abuse of detainees; arbitrary detentions in security cases; restrictions on freedom of
 speech and press, freedom of assembly and association, and worker rights- and de-
 nIal of the right of citizens to change their government. Non-Qatari workers also
 continued to face systematic discrimination; Qatari resentment against them makes
 foreign workers more likely than nationals to be the victims of arbitrary police ac-
 tion or harassment. Those who are not Muslim are denied the right to bring suit
 against a Qatari national in the Shari'a court, although they can do so in a civil
 court.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no known political or
 extrajudicial killings in 1992.
 b.Disappearance.-There were no reports of disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or     ading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Government follows the conservative teachings of Wahhabi Islam, which form
 the basis of Qatar's legal system and which forbid torture. There were no reports
 of torture in 1992. Instanof tof torture in connection with security force actions in-
 volving political and security-related cases however, have been reported in the past,
 usually during the investigative phase folowing detention. Improved standards of
 conduct were reportedly introduced in late 1989 in an effort to end unacceptable
 practices. Most of the corporal punishments prescribed by Shari'a law are adminis-
 tered by the Government, but it does not allow physical mutilation.
 In 1992 two foreigners were arrested and charged with selling liquor and possess-
 g porngaphy. The court sentenced them to time in prison and ordered each
 fl  edi Te two served their prison sentences but were excused from the flogging.
 Several expatriate Muslims, one a United States citizen, were flogged for public in-
 toxication. After a protest from the U.S. Embassy, the Government said that for-
 eigners would not be subject to corporal punishment. There have been complaints
 by non-Qataris of mistreatment after their arrest by Qatari authorities. There were
 no such complaints in 1992.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The authorities generally charge suspects
 before a competent court within 48 hours. In most cases involving foreigners, the
 police promptly notify the appropriate consular representative. Suspects detained in
 security cases, however, are generally not afforded their right to counsel and may
 be detained indefinitely while under investigation.
 Involuntary exile is rare, and there were no reorted cases ia 1992.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The judiciary is nominally independent, but most
 judges are non-Qataris holding resident permits granted by the civil authorities and
 thus hold their positions at the Government's pleasure. Qatar's legal system is bi-
 ased in favor of Qataris and the Government of Qatar. There are two types of
 courts: the civil courts, which have jurisdiction in civil and commercial matters, and
 the Shari'a court, which has jurisdiction in family and criminal cases. In September
 the number of judges who have a vote in deciding each case was increasd from one
 to three. Previously, a case was heard by three judges, but only the chief judge could
 decide the case; now, all three have an equal vote in the final verdict. There are
 no permanent security courts; security cases are tried by ad hoc military courts.
 Suchcases have been extremely rare. Defendants tried by all types of courts may
 submit their cases to an appeals court. However, in cases tried by the Shari'a court,
 it is possible that the same judges will hear both the original case and the appeal.
 Technically, the Shari's court may assume jurisdiction in commercial or civil cases
 if requested toud so by one of the litigants. In practice, the Shari's court exercises
 discretionary jurisdiction only if a Muslim litigant makes the request. Non-Muslims
 are not allowed to b   rin  suits as plaintiffs in the Shari'a court. This anQ re-are
 vents non-Muslim residlyents from obtaining full legal recourse when bein suedby
 or trying to sue a Qatari national. There are no statutes preventing individuals from
 
 
 1076
 suing the Government, but the prospect of losing a residence permit in retaliation
 discourages such suits.
 Many non-Qataris find proceedings in the Shari'a court bewildering. Only the dis-
 puting parties, their relatives andassociates, and witnesses are allowed in the
 courtroom. Lawyers may not play any formal role, except to prepare litiants for
 their cases. Although non-Arabic speakers are provided with translators, foreigners
 are disadvantaged, especially in cases involving the nonperformance of contracts.
 Shari'a trials are normally brief. After both parties have stated their cases and ex-
 amined witnesses, judges are likely to deliver a verdict after only a short delibera-
 tion. Criminal cases are normally tried 2'to 3 months after suspects are detained.
 There is no provision for release on bail in criminal cases. However, persons charged
 with minor or economic crimes may be released to a Qatari sponsor, they are re-
 %uired to deposit their passport with the police and are prohibited from leaving
 Watar until the case is resolved.
 f. Arbitrar In teference with Privacy, Family Home, or Correspondence.-Tradi-
 tional attiudes of respect for the sanctity of the home provide a great deal of protec-
 tion against arbitrary intrusions for most citizens and residents of Qatar. A warrant
 must normally be obtained before police may search a residence or business except
 in cases involving national security or emergencies, but warrants are issued by po-
 lice officials themselves, operating under the Ministry of Interior, rather than by ju-
 dicial authorities. There were no reports of unauthorized searches of homes in 1992.
 The police and security forces are believed to monitor the communications of sus-
 pected criminals, those considered security risks, and selected foreigners. With prior
 permission, which is usually granted, Qataris may marry foreigners of any national-
 ity, and Qataris who had previously married foreigners may apply for residence for
 their spouses.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-Although foreigners and Qataris may express
 political opinions in private, public criticism of the ruling family and its policies or
 of Islam is not tolerated. The Government also discourages public criticism of other
 Arab governments. This policy applies to the electronic media, which are govern-
 ment owned and operated and the press, which is completely privately owned and
 operated. Since December 1989, the Government has permitted slightly more free-
 dom of the press, although still within limits. In September Qatar signed a contract
 with an American company for cable television service, but it is unclear if the con-
 tent of prog   m     to fee-paying customers will be censored. Journalists, particu-
 larly non-Qataris, generally avoid challenging press restrictions because of the risk
 of having residence permits canceled. The Customs Division of the Ministry of Fi-
 nance and Petroleum routinely screens all video cassettes, audio tapes, books, and
 periodicals for objectionable political sentiments and pornography. Locally published
 books and other materials and all dramatic productions must be cleared by a board
 of censors before release.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Government allows pri-
 vate social, sports, trade, professional, and cultural societies to operate. These orga-
 nizations must register with the Government, and their activities are closely
 watched. Membership in international professional organizations critical of the Gov-
 ernment of Qatar, or any other Arab government, is not permitted. The Government
 does not allow political parties or political demonstrations.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-Qatar's state religion is Islam and its legal code is based
 on Islamic Shari'a law. Adherents of religions other than Islam are prohibited from
 ublic worship, and they may not proselytize. Apostasy from Islam is a capital of-
 lense, although no one is known to have been executed for it. The Government toler-
 ates the private practice of non-Muslim religions, and non-Muslim parents may
 raise their children in their own faiths. Private gatherings of non-Muslims for reli-
 gious purposes are tolerated but we closely monitored fur political content. The Gov-
 ernment does not formally restrict Shi'a Muslims from practicing their beliefs, al-
 though the latter have tacitly agreed to refrain from practicing the mre public as-
 pects of their faith such as self-flagellation.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-There are no restrictions on internal travel, except around certain off-
 shore areas and sensitive Qatari military and oil installations. In general, both
 Qatari and foreign women do not reuire permission from a male guardian to travel
 either within the country or abroad. However, Qatari men may prevent their female
 relatives from leaving the country by placing their names with immigration officers
 at the ports of departure. Technically, Qatari women employed by the Government
 must obtain  acial permission to travel abroad when requesting leave; it is not
 known to what extent this regulation is enforced.
 
 
 1077
 
 All Qatari citizens have the right to return. Foreigners are subject to immigration
 restrictions designed to control the size of the local labor pool. Foreigners who work
 in Qatar -both men and women-must have a sponsor to enter Qatar and the
 sponsor's permission to leave.
 The Government has no formal refugee policy. Those attempting to enter illegally,
 including officials seeking to defect from nearby countries, are refused entry. Asy-
 lum-seekers who can obtain local sponsorship or employment will be allowed to
 enter. However if they lose their jobs, they are expected to leave or face deporta-
 tion. In 1989 ie Government reversed its policy of not issuing residence permits
 to the foreign wives of Qataris. Foreign women married to Qataris are now granted
 residence permits and may apply for Qatari citizenship.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Qatar has no formal democratic institutions, and citizens do not have the legal
 right or the ability to change their government or the political system peacefully.
 There were reports that some of the 19 signers of a December 1991 petition calling
 for greater political freedom and constitutional reform were subjected to interroga-
 tion, harassment, and, in the case of three persons, prevented from leaving the
 country to attend a human rights conference. Qatar's political institutions blend the
 characteristics of a traditional Bedouin tnial state and a modern bureaucracy.
 There are no political parties, elections, or organized opposition to the Government.
 The Amir exercises most executive and legislative powers, including appointment
 of cabinet members. His rule, however, is tempered somewhat by local custom.
 Interlocking family networks and the recognized right of citizens to submit appeals
 or petitions personally to the Amir provide informal-avenues for the redress of many
 grievances and also serve as a check on abuses. The custom of rule by consensus
 leads to extensive consultations among the Amir leading merchant families, reli-
 ious leaders, and other notables on important policies. Under Qatar's basic law of
 Amir must be chosen from an   by the adult males of the Al Thani family.
 The current Amir, Khalifa bin Hamad, has desigated his son, Hamad bin        a,
 as the heir apparent. This designation was made with the consent of the notables
 and religious leaders in accordance with local custom.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Local human rights organizations are not permitted to exist. No international or
 nongovernmental organization monitoring human rights abuses is known to have
 asked to investigate conditions in Qatar.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Language, or Social Status
 The Government discriminates against foreigners and persons of non-Qatari ori-
 gin even though they may be citizens of Qatar. Qatar had naturalized a number of
 oersans of Iranian origin, but, after the fall of the Shah and the rise of Shiite fun-
 damentalism in Ira, the Government began to revoke the Qatari citizenship of
 many of them. There were reports in the past of Qataris of Iranian descent being
 forcibly returned, fired from their government jobs, and deorted without the benefit
 of due process. In recent years, however, some of those aected by this policy have
 successfully regained Qatari citizenship.
 Violence against women, primarily foreign domestic workers ocurs in Qatar but
 is not believed to be widespread. However, while the problem had not attracted at-
 tention or publicity in the past, some foreign domestics working in Qatar (especially
 those from South Asia and the Philippines) have suffered from severe mistreatment
 or otherwise been treated in a manner unacceptable in terms of basic human rights
 and inconsistent with local labor law. Foreign media reports of several sensational
 cases in Saudi Arabia and the Gulf have awakened some elements of the public to
 the existence of this problem in Qatar. In March the plight of an Indian maid who
 was severely and repeatedly tortured by her Palestinian employers caused members
 of the foreign community taurge that criminal charges be instituted against the ac-
 cused empfoyers. This was done, and in December 1992 the employers were found
 gilty and sentenced to fines and prison terms. In keeping with Islamic law, all
 forms of physical abuse are illegal, and the maximum penalty for rape is the death
 sentence. The police actively investigate reports of violence against women; few
 cases come to the attention of the authorities, however, since most victims do not
 press charges for fear of losing their jobs and being repatriated. The law continues
 to be appied unevenly, with Qataris-nparticularly members of the ruling family-
 facing less severe punishment than do foreigners.
 The activities of Qatari women are governed by strict Wahhabi customs    and
 quasi-legal restrictions, such as a prohibition against the issuance of driver's li-
 
 
 1078
 censes to women unless they have permission from a male guardian and can dem.
 onstrate a need to drive based on employment or other acceptable reasons. These
 restrictions generally do not apply to non-Qatari women. Qatari women are largely
 relegated to the roles of mother and homemaker, but some women are now finding
 jobs in education, medicine, and the news media, and more Qatari women are re-
 ceiving government scholarships to pursue degrees in these fields at universities
 overseas. Although Qatari women are legally able to travel abroad without a male
 escort, social pressures cause most women to travel abroad with an escort. Qatar
 adheres to Shari'a law in matters of inheritance and child custody. Women may at-
 tend court but are generally represented by a male relative.
 Non-Muslims are routinely discriminated against in employment, particularly in
 sensitive areas such as security and education. Many believe that those who hold
 to Wahhabi fundamentalist tenets have an advantage in employment and hiring
 practices.
 Section 6. Worker Right.'
 a. The Right of Association.-The right of association is strictly limited, and all
 workers, incuding foreigners who make up about 85 percent of the work force, are
 prohibited from forming labor unions. Despite this prohibition, workers have the
 right to strike after their case has been presented to the Labor Conciliation Board
 and a decision has been made. Workers may belong to a "joint consultative commit-
 tee" composed of worker and employer representatives. If, after 6 days, agreement
 cannot be reached between the two sides, a board of conciliation is appointed by the
 Government, with one member for each side. No strike may occur until a board has
 heard the case. The right to strike exist for all workers, Qatari or foreign, except
 government employees; security forces employees; domestic workers; or members of
 the employe's family. No worker in a public utility or health or security service
 may strike if such a strike would harm the public or lead to property damage.
 Strikes are rare, and there were none in 1992.
 All workers, Qatari or foreign, are covered by the Labor Law of 1964 as amended
 in 1984 except the categories listed above.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-Workers in Qatar are prohib-
 ited from engaging in collective bargaining. Wages are generally set unilaterally by
 employers. Local courts handle all disputes between workers and employers. There
 are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-There have been no reports of
 forced or compulsory labor, which are prohibited by law.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The minimum working age is 18
 years, but younger non-Qatari children sometimes work in small family-owned busi-
 nesses and shops after school or during school holidays. Although the laws govern-
 ing the minimum ag for employment of children are not strictly enforced, child
 labor, either Qatari or foreign, is rare. Very young children, usually of African or
 South Asian backgrround, may be employed as camel riders in camel- racing. While
 little information is available on wg     orking onditions, accidents involving
 serious injur or death are known to occur.            u          al
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-There is no miiu   ainQtaratog
 a 1962 law gives the Amir authority to set one. The 48-hour workweek is prescribed
 by law, although most government offices follow a schedule of 36 hours a week. Em-
 ployees who work more than 48 hours a week, or 36 hours a week during the Mus-
 lim month of Ramadan, are entitled to overtime. The law is enforced in government
 offices and major private sector companies, but not for domestic or personal employ-
 ees. Domestic servants frequently work 7 days a week, 12 hours a day, with few
 or no holidays, and have no effective way to redress grievances against their em-
 Qst aar"- has enacted regulations concernin$ worker safety and health, but enforce-
 ment, which is the respnsibility of the Ministry of Industry and Public Works, is
 lax. The Department of Public Safety oversees safety training and conditions, and
 the state-run petroleum company has its own safety standards and procedures. The
 Labor Law of 1964 as amended in 1984 lists partial and permanent disabilities for
 which compensation may be awarded, some connected with handling chemicals and
 petroleum products or construction injuries, but does not specifically set rates of
 payments and compensation.
 Foreign workers in Qatar must be sponsored by a legally recgnized organization
 or Qatari citizen. In practice, foreign workers need a sponsor to enter Qatar as well
 as the sponsor's permission to leave. Theoretically, any worker may seek legal relief.
 Unskilled workers, including domestic servants, who constitute the group most like-
 lytoexperience onerous working conditions, generally accept their situation rather
 than rs repatriation.
 
 
 1079
