 QATAR
 Qatar is a small, oil-rich Persian Gulf State, whose ruler, the
 Amir, is traditionally selected from among the leading adult
 males of the Al-Thani family. The "Basic Law" of 1970
 institutionalized local customs rooted in Qatar's conservative,
 Wahhabi heritage, granting the Amir nearly absolute power.
 This seeming autocracy, however, is moderated by continuing
 traditions of consultation, rule by consensus, and the
 citizens' right to appeal personally to the Amir. In addition,
 strong interlocking family networks help protect the individual
 from abuses of power. The Amir, while directly accountable to
 no one, must not appear to violate the Shari'a (Islamic law)
 and in practice must consider the opinions of the leading
 notables and the religious establishment. Their position was
 institutionalized in the Advisory Council, an appointed body
 which assists the Amir in formulating policy.
 Qatar's mixed economy is dominated by the Government, which
 owns and operates most basic industries and services. Retail
 trade and some commercial sectors, such as construction and
 banking, are in private hands. The manpower for its industrial
 development has come from expatriate workers, who now outnumber
 the local population by four-to-one. As a minority in their
 own country, Qataris prevent the expatriates from engaging in
 activities which offend the citizenry's conservative Muslim
 sensibilities, threaten the status quo, or embroil Qatar in
 unwanted controversy with other countries.
 The expatriates are regarded as temporary residents, and almost
 none may aspire to citizenship. They may not own real estate
 or hold a majority share in any business, and they are not
 eligible for many of the benefits accorded to citizens. They
 may remain in Qatar only as long as they are sponsored by a
 Qatari employer, and they generally cannot change employers
 without leaving the country. The employer's bargaining power,
 under these circumstances, sometimes leads to the denial of
 rights conferred under local labor law, particularly for
 workers from low income countries who want to remain in Qatar.
 Also, in this conservative, Islamic society, women remain
 subordinate and secluded. Mandatory schooling for girls and
 and employment opportunities for women in fields such as
 medicine and education represent some change in traditional
 attitudes, however. Women themselves are beginning to
 challenge some restrictions imposed by local custom, such as
 veiling and the Government's denial of driving licenses to
 women, as impositions not required by the basic teachings of
 Islam and inconsistent with the Prophet Mohammad's concern with
 raising the status of the women of his time.
 In 1983 the human rights situation was affected primarily by
 the world recession and oil-glut, which led to the dismissal of
 many workers and their departure from the country. Some, such
 as Palestinian refugees with Lebanese documents, faced serious
 difficulties resettling elsewhere. Others were long-term
 residents who knew no other home but Qatar. Nevertheless, the
 Government remains determined to accord rights of citizenship
 (and the right to remain permanently) only to those from
 families long resident on the Qatari Peninsula.  The
 Government appears increasingly sensitive to the special
 problems of stateless persons and no longer subjects them to
 deportation. The Government is determined to reduce the
 expatriate presence, because it feels that the large number
 
 (1397)
 
 
 1398
 of expatriates threatens the country's traditional culture and
 identity, as well as obliging heavy expenditures for health,
 security, and other services. Cases of hardship and arbitrary
 treatment have inevitably resulted.
 The Government's actions following the discovery of an
 unauthorized arms cache near Doha in July 1983 raised human
 rights-related questions in both the Qatari and expatriate
 communities. Several allegations of arbitrary arrest,
 detention, and harsh treatment of suspects circulated among
 local observers. Diplomatic and consular officials were denied
 access to several foreign nationals held for questioning.
 Customary procedures usually observed by the regular police,
 such as the use of warrants and charging suspects before an
 appropriate court, were ignored by security officials. These
 measures, extreme by local standards, elicited strong criticism
 from many influential Qataris.
 The neglect of procedural safeguards in the face of Qatar's
 first serious internal security threat indicates that
 procedural checks on the police remain fragile. The fact that
 very few native Qatari suspects were held long suggests that
 traditional family and tribal ties still carry weight in Qatar
 and can be used to moderate governmental excesses. There is
 little prospect, however, for stronger institutional guarantees
 in the near future. The Government, perceiving itself beset by
 dangers on all sides and determined to maintain strict control
 over expatriate residents, is likely to regard such political
 innovations as elected legislative councils or an uncensored
 press as offering little gain at great risk.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1  Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Unlawful or Arbitrary Deprivation of Life
 There were no known instances of unlawful or arbitrary
 deprivation of life in 1983.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no reports of disappearances in 1983.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 While severe torture is neither practiced nor condoned by the
 Government, maltreatment of suspects does occur, particularly
 in routine arrests of expatriate workers in security cases. In
 the case discussed in the introduction, many reports circulated
 among local observers indicating that Qatari citizens,
 including at least one high government officer, were beaten
 during interrogation. In addition, a number of suspects were
 held incommunicado for several days, a highly unusual step. As
 indicated previously, these measures provoked widespread,
 private criticism of the Government.
 The Government administers canings as penalties under the
 Shari'a code. The weight of the bamboo cane and the amount of
 arm movement allowed in administering the strokes are strictly
 regulated to avoid serious injury. The physical mutilations
 
 
 1399
 prescribed by the Shari'a, such as the amputation of hands or
 stoning, for example, are no longer practiced. Instead, most
 criminal offenders are jailed under spartan but adequate
 conditions. Those held for crimes of violence are generally
 kept separate from other prisoners. Prisoners may receive
 visitors, mail, small luxuries, and additional food. The
 normal prison diet is monotonous but plentiful. In some
 facilities, lack of air-conditioning in the extreme summer heat
 is a serious discomfort. Expatriate offenders are usually
 deported when they complete their prison sentence. Women are
 very rarely jailed.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 As a general rule, suspects are charged before an appropriate
 court within.48 hours of their arrest. In most cases involving
 expatriates, the police notify appropriate congular
 representatives promptly. Exile is rarely used; the last known
 instance involved the previous, deposed Amir and some of his
 family and supporters over a decade ago.
 Several allegations of arbitrary arrest were noted in 1983,
 again in connection with the security case discussed earlier.
 Several persons, including Qatari citizens, were detained
 without warrants or formal charges for up to several weeks.
 One instance of alleged arbitrary imprisonment stemming from a
 business dispute in 1981 was finally resolved in 1983 with the
 release of the prisoner. The prisoner, an expatriate
 businessman, was sentenced to jail by a Shari'a court pending
 resolution of the dispute which involved a prominent Qatari
 citizen. Local observers noted a number of irregularities in
 the court's proceedings and the sentence, suggesting that the
 arrest had been at the behest of the Qatari party as a ploy to
 put the foreigner at a disadvantage in settling the dispute.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Qatar maintains both civil and Shari'a courts. Most commercial
 litigation involving expatriates is handled by the civil
 courts. The Shari'a courts administer criminal and family law
 and have sometimes taken jurisdication in business disputes.
 The judiciary is nominally independent. However, most judges
 are expatriates with temporary residence permits, and their
 independence to act against the wishes of the Government is
 questionable.
 Proceedings in the Shari'a courts are open only to the
 disputing parties, their relatives and associates, and
 witnesses. Lawyers are not permitted in the courtroom and
 non-Muslims are often at a disadvantage in presenting evidence,
 although counsel may help them in preparing the case. A
 translator is provided for those who do not speak Arabic.
 While the burden of proof is on the accuser, the elaborate
 procedural guarantees for defendants found in Western
 jurisprudence law are largely absent. The judge's primary
 interest is in establishing the facts of the dispute, then
 seeking the appropriate remedy or penalty under the Shari's
 code. Trials are usually short, often lasting no longer than
 the time it takes for each party to state his case, plus some
 time for the judge to reach a decision. Most suspects in
 criminal cases are tried within one to two months of arrest.
 
 30-231 0 - 84 - 89
 
 
 1400
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Although the record is somewhat mixed, traditional attitudes
 regarding the home and family continue to provide protection
 against arbitrary intrusions by the authorities. The police
 for example, must generally obtain a warrant before searching a
 residence. Police officers have been known to monitor the
 communications of suspects in security cases, and postal
 authorities screen the mail of such individuals. Also, mail
 thought to contain drugs or pornography may be opened by
 customs officials.
 Security precautions associated with the Gulf Cooperation
 Council summit meeting in Doha in early November led to
 numerous arbitrary searches, and some residents whose homes
 overlooked security zones had to relocate for the duration of
 the meetings. Searches conducted before the summit meetings
 were sometimes done without regard for the damage to personal
 belongings and furniture. Actions of this kind, however, are
 exceptional.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Private speech is regarded as a private matter; oataris and
 expatriates generally discuss freely affairs of local
 interest. However, public criticism of the regime or its
 legitimacy is not tolerated. The local radio and television
 outlets are government owned and controlled, while the local
 press is privately owned but subject to explicit guidelines
 regarding permissible conduct. Violation of these guidelines
 may result in the suspension of the publication, or, for
 foreign residents (the majority of Qatar's journalists), the
 offender's deportation. Government sensitivities include local
 politics, aspects of Qatari foreign policy, the Arab-Israeli
 dispute, Islam, and social mores. All local media otherwise
 freely report regional and international news. Because of
 Qatar's long history of outside contacts, censorship of
 international news is fairly relaxed. Western books and
 publications are widely available, although pornographic
 materials are forbidden, while publications deemed "favorable
 to Zionism" or anti-Arab may be censored. There are no
 restrictions on receiving international broadcasts.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Many private social and athletic clubs exist. Assemblies for
 political purposes, however, are either tightly restricted or
 forbidden altogether. Political parties, professional or trade
 associations, and labor unions are all forbidden by a
 paternalistic system of government which seeks, with
 considerable success, to hear and meet political, social, and
 economic grievances informally, rather than through popularly
 controlled institutions.
 The Government occasionally will permit controlled rallies for
 political events. The most typical have been those organized
 by the local Palestinian community during visits by high
 Palestinian Liberation Organization officials or following
 major Middle Eastern events, such as Israel's invasion of
 southern Lebanon in the summer of 1982. Unauthorized
 demonstrations are promptly broken up by the police.
 
 
 1401
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Qatar's state religion is Islam, the Koran is its "basic
 constitution," and the Shari'a its legal code. Muslims enjoy
 economic and legal advantages such as preferential employment
 and a better understanding of Shari'a system. All other faiths
 are prohibited public worship: they may not organize churches,
 schools, or associations and may not proselytize. Apostasy
 from Islam remains, formally at least, a capital crime. No one
 has been executed in recent memory for converting from Islam,
 but the likely reaction of the society would make it difficult
 for such a person to remain in Qatar.
 The Government tolerates the private practice of non-Muslim
 faiths in the home. Parents are free to raise their children
 in accordance with their own religious beliefs. Non-Muslim
 marriage ceremonies have no legal validity, however.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel,
 Emigration, and Repatriation
 There are no restrictions on travel within Qatar. Qatari males
 travel abroad at will. Females, both foreign and Qatari,
 usually require the permission of a male guardian or relative
 to leave the country. All Qatari citizens have the right to
 return. Foreigners, of course, are subject to the.immigration
 restrictions designed to control the local labor supply. They
 require a local sponsor to enter and their sponsor's permission
 to depart.
 The Government has no formal policy on refugees. Those
 attempting to enter illegally, including defectors from nearby
 countries, are denied entry. Often persons who can get local
 sponsorship or employment may enter; if their employment is
 terminated, however, they are expected to leave. Recently, the
 Government, in an attempt to reduce its expatriate staff,
 dismissed a number of Palestinians who cannot depart because no
 other state will accept them. The Government has not yet
 devised a policy concerning these unfortunates.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights:   The Right of Citizens to
 Change Their Government
 The political institutions of Qatar blend characteristics and
 practices surviving from the Bedouin tradition with the
 structure of a bureaucratic state. There are no political
 parties, elections, or organized opposition to the Government,
 and the Amir exercises all executive and legislative powers.
 His seemingly autocratic rule, however, is checked to some
 extent by entrenched local customs. Interlocking family
 networks and the constant and recognized right of citizens to
 submit appeals or petitions personally to the Amir provide
 effective, if informal, avenues for redress of grievances. The
 right of aggrieved citizens to appeal personally to the Amir
 also serves to limit abuses and offers a direct and efficient
 means for gaining redress. "The custom of rule by consensus
 leads to extensive consultations between the Amir, leading
 merchants, religious leaders, and other notables on important
 policies. Women for the most part take no part in public life.
 Under the Basic Law, the Amir must be chosen from among the
 adult males of the Al-Thani family. The current Amir, Khalifa
 bin Hamad, has designated his son, Hamad, as Crown Prince and
 
 
 1402
 heir-apparent, this was done with the consent of the notables
 and religious leaders according to established custom. There
 appears to be no serious challenge to the present arrangement,
 and in the foreseeable future, effective political power will
 remain in the hands of the Amir, his family, and the local
 notables.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Non-governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 There have been no significant allegations of human rights
 violations in Qatar which might attract the attention of
 investigating bodies. The Government of Qatar is willing to
 discuss such problems as they arise, especially those involving
 the expatriate communities. Such discourse takes place through
 private dialogue, as well as normal diplomatic and consular
 channels. There are no local groups concerned with human
 rights. The Government has expressed its concern over the
 plight of Palestinian, Lebanese, and Afghan refugees. As a
 rule, however, the Government is careful not to discuss the
 internal practices of other nations. The sole exceptions have
 been Israel and, recently, Lebanon. For the last three years,
 Amnesty International's annual reports have not mentioned
 Qatar. Freedom House rates Qatar "partly free."
 ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND CULTURAL SITUATION
 Qatar's population in 1983 is about 267,000 according to World
 Bank data. The population growth rate is 3.3 percent. In 1981
 the per capita gross national product was $27,000; this figure
 is probably somewhat lower now because of the recent world
 recession and the continuing soft oil market. The life
 expectancy at birth reported in 1980 is 57 years; it is
 difficult to calculate how this figure might be skewed by the
 unusual age and sex structure of the expatriate population.
 The 1983 infant mortality rate was 49 per 1,000. The adult
 literacy rate for Qataris is probably about 60 percent; no
 literacy survey has ever been done for expatriate residents.
 Virtually all of the population have access to safe water.
 Education is provided free for citizens through graduate school
 levels; most of the large expatriate communities have their own
 schools.
 Oil revenues have enabled the Government to develop an
 extensive network of social services. Education and health
 care are provided free to all residents (although expatriate
 community schools are private and charge tuition). Staple
 foods such as flour, milk, and rice are subsidized; prices of
 other items are regulated. Citizens receive subsidized housing
 and scholarships for higher study abroad. Most Qatari males,
 and all heads of families, are guaranteed a reasonable income
 either through government employment or social security
 payments.
 Women remain largely relegated to roles as mothers and
 homemakers but are now also finding jobs in education,
 medicine, and the media. They continue to face widespread
 discrimination, however. For example, women do not receive the
 university scholarships available for males, and their
 employment, while tolerated, is discouraged. Public life
 remains exclusively a male preserve. Expatriate women, on the
 whole, find it easier to get employment or to own and manage a
 business than their Qatari counterparts. There are signs that
 as more Qatari women receive education, they themselves will
 press for a relaxation of some of the restrictions inherited
 from Qatar's tribal past.
 
 
 1403
