A small Arab Gulf state ruled by an Amir from the Al Thani
 family, Qatar is governed by a 1970 basic law which
 institutionalizes the customs and social mores of the
 country's conservative Wahhabi Muslim heritage. These include
 respect for the sanctity of private property, freedom from
 arbitrary arrest and imprisonment, and punishment of
 transgressions of Islamic law (the Shari'a). The Amir holds
 absolute power but his role is influenced by continuing
 traditions of consultation, rule by consensus, and the
 citizen's right to appeal personally to the Amir. The Amir,
 while directly accountable to no one, cannot violate the
 Shari'a and, in practice, must consider the opinions of
 leading notables and the religious establishment. Their
 position-was institutionalized in the Advisory Council, an
 appointed body that assists the Amir in formulating policy.
 The Government, concerned by the presence of a large number of
 non-Qatari workers, has established an, efficient security
 apparatus to control subversion. The civilian security
 apparatus is controlled by the Interior Ministry and operates
 on two levels, the police and the Criminal Investigation
 Department (CID). The CID is charged with the investigation
 of all crimes, while the local police enforce laws and arrest
 violators. A second, more powerful branch of the Interior
 Ministry, the Mubahathat, deals with sedition and espionage.
 The Mubabathat is nearly independent of the regular civil
 security forces and has been known to use severe force during
 its investigations. It can incarcerate suspects without
 charge but reportedly does this infrequently. The armed
 forces have no significant role in assuring internal security,
 although the army could be used against serious civil
 disturbances. However, the armed forces have under their
 jurisdiction another enforcement organization, known as
 Mukhabarat, whose function is to intercept and arrest incoming
 terrorists and to keep surveillance over political dissidents.
 Qatar's economy is mixed, with~the State owning and operating
 most basic industries and services, while retail trade and the
 construction industry remain in private hands. The rapid
 development of Qatar's infrastructure in the 1970's :and early
 1980's led to the creation of a ratio of expatriates (mostly
 Indian, Pakistani, and Sri Lankan) to nationals of four to
 one. Limiting the influence and controlling'the activities of
 the expatriate population are major Qatari national goals, and
 the -economic downturn of the mid-to-late 1980's has spur-red a
 "government program to reduce the expatriate-to-national ratio
 by offering some categories of employment in many government
 industries to Qatari citizens only. Because the Qatari
 national population is small, Qatar will be dependent on
 expatriate labor for the foreseeable future.
 While human rights remain significantly restricted, the
 overall situation has improved since the appointment of a new
 ministerial cabinet in July 1989. Under the new Cabinet,
 efforts have heen made-to allow for greater freedom of
 expression through the press and to prevent such human rights
 problems as the abuse of detainees. Principal human rights
 problems include abuse of detainees; arbitrary detentions in
 security cases; limits on freedom of speech, press, assembly,
 association, religion, and worker rights; the ban on political
 parties; and the denial of the right of citizens to change
 their government. Expatriate workers also continued to
 complain of systematic discrimination; Qatari resentment
 
 
 1609
 
 QATAR
 against expatriates makes foreign workers more likely than
 nationals to be the victims of arbitrary police action or
 harassment, and they are denied the right to bring suit
 against a Qatari national in the Shari'a court.
 RESPECT FOR HUMANRIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing
 There were no known instances of political killings.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no reports of disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 The Government of Qatar follows the conservative teachings of
 Wahhabi Islam, which forbids torture. Instances of torture in
 connection with security force actions involving political and
 security-related cases, however, have been reported in the
 past, usually during- the investigative phase after the
 individual has been detained. Improved standards of conduct
 were reportedly introduced in late 1989 in a direct effort to
 end unacceptable practices. There were no reports of abuse of
 detainees during 1990. The Government administers most of the
 corporal punishments prescribed by Shari'a- law but does not
 allow physical mutilation.  Many expatriates complain of
 mistreatment after their arrest by Qatari authorities.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 The authorities generally charge suspects before a competent
 court within 48 hours. In most cases involving expatriates,
 the police promptly notify the appropriate- consular
 representative. However, suspects detained in security cases
 are generally not afforded their rights. There were no known
 security cases in 1990. Involuntary exile is very rare; the
 last known case occurred over 10 years ago. Expatriates
 convicted of crimes are usually deported after they have
 completed their sentences.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The judiciary is nominally independent, but most judges are
 non-Qataris holding residence permits granted by the civil
 authorities and thus hold their positions at the Government's
 pleasure. Qatar's legal system has a unusual balance, tilted
 in favor of Qataris and the Government of Qatar. There are
 two types of courts: the civil courts, which have
 jurisdiction in civil and commercial matters, and the Shari'a
 court, which has jurisdiction in family and criminal cases.
 There are no permanent security courts; security cases are
 tried by military courts established specifically for a given
 case. Such cases have been extremely rare. Defendants may
 submit their cases to an appeals court.
 Technically, the Shari'a court may assume jurisdiction in
 commercial or civil cases if requested to do so by one of the
 litigants. In practice, the Shari'a court only assumes
 discretionary jurisdiction if a Muslim litigant makes the
 
 
 1610
 QATAR
 request.. It does not allow non-Muslims to bring suits as
 plaintiffs. This anomaly prevents non-Muslim residents from
 obtaining full legal recourse when being sued by or trying to
 sue a Qatari national., There ate no statutes preventing
 individuals from suing the Government, but the threat or fear
 of losing a residence permit in retaliation discourages such
 suits.
 Many expatriates find proceedings in the Shari'a court
 bewildering. Only the disputing parties, their relatives and
 associates, and witnesses are allowed in the courtroom.
 Lawyers may not play any formal role, except to prepare
 litigants for their cases. Although non-Arabic speakers are-
 provided with translators, foreigners report being at a
 considerable disadvantage, especially in cases involving the
 nonperformance of contracts. Shari'a trials are normally
 brief. After both parties have stated their cases and
 examined witnesses, the judge is likely to deliver a verdict
 with only a short delay. Criminal cases are normally tried 2
 to 3 months after suspects are detained. No bail is set in
 criminal cases. However, persons charged with minor or
 economic crimes may be released to a Qatari sponsor after
 depositing their passport with the police. The person is
 prohibited from leaving Qatar until after the case has been
 resolved.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Traditional attitudes of respect for the sanctity of the home
 provide a. great deal of protection against arbitrary
 intrusions for most citizens and residents of Qatar. The
 police must normally obtain a warrant before searching a
 residence or business, except in cases involving national
 security or emergencies. The police (Ministry of Interior)
 are responsible for the issuance of warrants. There were no
 reports of unauthorized searches of homes in 1990. The police
 and security forces routinely monitor the communications of
 suspected criminals, security risks, and selected
 expatriates.
 The Government imposes strict controls on all printed and
 visual materials imported into the country. Mail and
 periodicals thought to contain pornography, politically
 sensitive material, or criticism of Islam are opened and
 routinely censored. Likewise, books and video tapes brought
 into the country are confiscated and reviewed for sensitive
 material before being released to their owners. With prior
 permission, Qataris may now marry foreigners of any
 nationality. Qataris who had previously married foreigners
 may apply for residence for their spouses.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil-Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Although both expatriates and Qataris may express poitital
 opinions in private, public criticism of the ruling f~mi-,'-and
 its policies is not tolerated. The Government generally'
 discourages attacks on other Arab governments as well;
 applies to the electronic media, which are government owned_.,,
 and operated, as well as to the press. Since December 1989-t
 the Government has issued statements calling for greater pres
 freedom; however, no specific guidelines have been issued.
 Journalists, particularly expatriates, .generally avoid
 
 
 1611
 QlATAR
 challenging these limits because of the risk of having
 residence permits canceled. This happened to two Palestinian
 journalists in August, evidently because of government fears
 of their influence through the media. Publication of the
 daily newspaper Al-Sharq was also suspended for 2 weeks when
 it issued an August 2 report on the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait
 before the Government of Qatar had released its official
 version. The authorities routinely screen all video
 cassettes, audio tapes, books, and periodicals for
 objectionable political sentiments and pornography. Books and
 other materials published in Qatar, as well as all dramatic
 productions, must be approved by a board of censors before
 being released to the public.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 The Government allows private social, sports, trade,
 professional, and cultural societies-to operate. The
 activities of these organizations, which must register with
 the Government, are closely watched. Membership in
 international professional organizations critical of the
 Government of Qatar, or any other Arab government, is not
 permitted. The Government would severely restrict operations
 of any organized group which it deemed detrimental to the
 national interest. The Government does not allow political
 demonstrations, nor are political parties allowed.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 'Qatar's state religion is Islam, the Koran is its basic
 constitution, and Shari'a law is its legal code. Members of
 other religions are prohibited from public worship, and they
 may not proselytize. Apostasy from Islam is a capital
 offense, although no one is known to have been executed for
 it. The Government tolerates non-Muslim religions, and
 non-Muslim parents may raise their children in their own
 faiths. Private gatherings of non-Muslims for religious
 purposes are tacitly allowed but- are closely monitored for
 potential political implications. The Government does not
 formally restrict Shi'a Muslims from practicing their beliefs,
 although, through a tacit understanding with the Government,
 Shi'a Muslims refrain from practicing the more public aspects
 of their faith, such as self-flagellation.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 There are no restrictions on internal travel, except around
 certain offshore areas and sensitive Qatari- military and oil
 installations. In general, women, both Qataris and
 foreigners, do not. require permission from a male guardian to
 travel either within the country or abroad. However, Qatari
 men may prevent their female relatives from leaving the
 country by placing their names with immigration officers at
 the ports of departure. Technically, Qatari women employed by
 the Government must obtain official permission to travel
 abroad when requesting leave; it is not known to what extent
 this regulation is enforced.
 All Qatari citizens have the right to return. Foreigners are
 subject to immigration restrictions desigred to control the
 size of the local labor pool. Foreigners who work in Qatar
 -both men and women-must have a sponsor to enter Qatar and
 the sponsor's permission to leave.
 
 
 1612
 
 QATAR
 The Government has no formal policy to recognize refugees.
 Those attempting to enter illegally, including defectors from
 nearby countries, are refused entry. Refugees who can obtain
 local sponsorship or employment'will be allowed to enter.
 However, if they lose their jobs, they are expected to leave
 or face deportation. In late 1989, the Government reversed
 its policy of not issuing residence permits to the foreign
 wives of Qataris. Foreign women married to Qataris are now
 granted residence permits, and may apply for Qatari
 citizenship.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Qatar has no formal democratic institutions, and citizens do
 not, therefore, have the legal right or the ability to change
 their government or the political system peacefully. Qatar's'
 political institutions blend the characteristics of a
 traditional Bedouin tribal state and a modern bureaucracy.
 There are no political parties, elections, or organized
 opposition to the Government. The Amir exercises most
 executive and legislative powers. His rule, however, is
 tempered somewhat by local custom. Interlocking family
 networks and'the recognized right of citizens to submit
 appeals or petitions personally to the Amir provide informal
 avenues for redress of many grievances and also serve as a
 check on abuses. The custom of rule by consensus leads to
 extensive consultations among the Amir, leading merchant
 families, religious leaders, and other notables on important
 policies.
 Under Qatar's basic law of 1970, the Amir must be chosen from
 and by the adult males of the Al Thani family. The current
 Amir, Khalifa bin Hamad, has designated his son, Hamad bin
 Khalifa, as the heir apparent. This designation was made with
 the consent of the notables and religious leaders in
 accordance with local custom. Effective power remains in the
 hands of the Amir, his family, and local notables.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 No local organizations that concern themselves with human
 rights are permitted to exist. No international or
 nongovernmental organization monitoring human rights abuses
 has asked to investigate conditions in Qatar.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 The Government discriminates against expatriates and persons
 of non-Qatari origin even though they may be citizens of
 Qatar. Qatar had naturalized a number of persons of Iranian
 origin, but after the fall of the Shah and the rise of Shi'ite
 fundamentalism in Iran the Government began to revoke the
 Qatari citizenship of many of these naturalized citizens.
 There have been reports of Qataris of Iranian descent being
 expatriated, fired from their government jobs, and deported
 without the benefit of due process. Under the new Minister of
 Interior, however, at least some of those affected by this
 policy have successfully regained Qatari citizenship.
 There were indications of growing friction between Qataris and
 the large Palestinian community, including unconfirmed reports
 -of gdnqs of Qatari youth beating Palestinians.
 
 
 1613
 
 QATAR
 Violence against women, primarily expatriate domestic workers,
 occurs in Qatar but is not believed to be widespread. In
 keeping with Islamic law, all forms of physical abuse are
 illegal, and the maximum penalty for rape is the death
 sentence. The police actively investigate all reports of
 violence against women; few cases come to the attention of the
 authorities, however, since most victims do not press charges
 for fear of losing their jobs and being repatriated. The law
 is applied unevenly, with Qataris--particularly members of the
 ruling family--facing less severe punishment than do
 expatriates charged with rape or physical abuse.
 The activities of Qatari women are governed by strict Wahhabi
 customs and quasi-legal restrictions, such as a prohibition
 against the issuance of driver's licenses to women unless they
 have permission from a male guardian and can demonstrate a
 need to drive based on employment or other acceptable
 reasons. However, these restrictions generally do not apply
 ;to non-Qatari women. Qatari women are largely relegated to
 the roles of mother and homemaker, but some women are now
 finding jobs in education, medicine, and the news media, and
 more Qatari women are receiving government scholarships to
 ,pursue degrees in these fields at universities overseas. By
 ,law, Qatari women are able to travel abroad without male
 escort. However, as a result of social pressures, most women
 travel abroad with a male escort. Qatar adheres to Shari'a
 law in matters of inheritance and child custody. Women may
 attend court but are generally represented by a male
 relative.
 It is common practice to discriminate against the employment
 of non-Muslims, particularly in sensitive areas such as
 security and education. There also are reports that those who
 hold to fundamentalist tenets have an advantage in employment
 and hiring practices.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 The right of association is strictly limited, and all workers,
 including some 85 percent of. the work force that is comprised
 of expatriates, are prohibited from forming labor unions.
 Despite this prohibition, workers have the right to strike
 after their case has been presented to the Labor Conciliation
 Board and a decision has-been made. Strikes are rare.. There
 were at least two organize& work stoppages over unpaid wages
 in 198a, and another in 1990 involving laborers at a private
 contracting firm. Qatar has been a member of the
 International Labor Organization (ILO) since-1972, but has
 ratified neither ILO Convention 87 on Ereedom of Association
 nor Convention 98 on the Right to Organize and Collective
 Bargaining.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 Workers in Qatar are prohibited from engaging in collective
 bargaining. Wages are generally-set unilaterally by
 employers. All disputes between workers and employers are
 handled in the local courts. There are no export processing
 zones.
 
 
 1614
 
 QATAR
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 There have been no reported instances of forced or compulsory
 labor, which are prohibited by law.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 The minimum working age is 18 years, but expatriate children
 sometimes .work at younger ages in small family-owned
 businesses and shops after school or during school holidays.
 Although the laws governing the minimum age for employment of
 children are not strictly enforced, child labor, either Qatari
 or expatriate, is rare.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 Qatar has enacted regulations concerning worker safety and
 health, but enforcement, which is the responsibility of the
 Ministry of Industry and Public Works, is lax at best. There
 is no minimum wage in Qatar. The 48-hour workweek is
 prescribed by law, although most government offices follow a
 schedule of 36 hours a week-. Employees who work more than 48
 hours a week or 36 hours a week during the Muslim month of
 Ramadan are entitled to overtime. The law is enforced in
 government offices and major private sector companies, but not
 for domestic or personalemployees. Domestic servants
 frequently work 7 days a week, 12 hours a day, with few or no
 holidays, and have no effective way to redress grievances
 against their employer.
 Expatriate'workers in Qatar must be sponsored by a recognized
 organization or-person legally responsible for them during
 their residence in Qatar. Technically, any worker can seek
 legal relief. Unskilled workers, including domesticservants,
 who constitute the group most likely to experience onerous
 working conditions, generally accept their situation rather
 than risk repatriation.
 
 
 1615