 QATAR
 Qatar is a small Persian Gulf state ruled by an Amir (Prince)
 from the Al-Thani family. The Basic Law of 1970, a provisional
 constitution based on several Egyptian models,
 institutionalized traditional customs and practices rooted in
 Qatar's conservative Wahhabi Muslim heritage. The Amir is
 vested with nearly absolute power, so long as the exercise of
 that power does not conflict with Islamic law (the Sharia); he
 may suspend any secular law or countermand any court decision.
 A Council of Ministers and an advisory Council of Notables
 assist him in making policy decisions. Succession is
 determined through a consensus of adult males of the extended
 ruling family.
 The economy is mixed, with the state owning and operating most
 basic industries and services while retail trade is largely in
 private hands. Qatar's rapidly developing modern industrial
 infrastructure has led to the creation of an expatriate
 community which now outnumbers the citizenry by four-to-one.
 As a minority in their own country, Qataris are concerned that
 these foreign nationals not engage in political activities
 which might challenge the status quo or embroil Qatar in
 unwanted controversy with a foreign state.
 Although the Basic Law provides that "a-l persons shall enjoy
 equal public rights and shall be subject to equal public duties
 without distinction on the grounds of race, sex, or religion,"
 the country's expatriate residents do not enjoy equality with
 Qataris. Resident aliens sometimes are unable to obtain equal
 treatment before the law. It is nearly impossible, for
 example, for an alien to take legal action against a citizen.
 Political organizations and labor unions are forbidden. There
 are no elected assemblies, but Qatar maintains the tradition of
 the Imajlis" -- or reception -- at which Qataris have the right
 to petition officials, notables, or even the Amir himself for a
 redress of grievances or for personal needs. This traditional
 method of recourse is still current and thirty notables are
 actively engaged in hearing petitions -- most hold several
 receptions per week.
 The long-term effect of modernization is extremely difficult to
 predict. As more and more Qataris return from colleges and
 universities in the US and Europe, they are bringing with them
 ideas and life styles that often conflict with established
 customs. The broadening opportunities for education of women
 may lead to their gradual emergence from a traditionally
 secluded, subordinate status.
 In the short run, the situation is unlikely to change very
 much. The Qataris are largely occupied with administering and
 controlling their burgeoning economy and creating a modern
 state. The regime does not appear to face a strong challenge
 to its legitimacy, nor are there visible popular demands for
 fundamental change, Elections for the advisory council are
 provided for in the Basic Law, but have yet to be held. Any
 such major innovation will occur only as the result of a
 consensus within the ruling family and among other notables.
 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Killing
 
 
 1256
 No allegations of politically-motivated killings were recorded
 in 1982. The internal security forces are closely controlled
 by the ruling family and are well-disciplined.
 b. Disappearance
 No allegations of disappearances were noted in 1982.
 c. Torture
 There was one allegation of torture in connection with the
 death of an Iranian national who died in police custody. The
 charge (discussed below) was not substantiated.
 d. Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment
 There was one allegation that a person was subjected to cruel,
 inhuman, or degrading treatment in 1982. The case involved an
 Iranian national accused of smuggling currency to Iran who died
 while in police custody. The autopsy suggested that he died
 of natural causes, however. This was the first allegation of
 police brutality in several years. Public canings are
 routinely administered according to Sharia law. The severe
 punishments sometimes associated with Sharia law -- amputation
 of hands or stoning -- have not occurred in recent years.
 Prisons and jails are spartan but adequate. Food is sufficient
 and can be supplemented from outside sources. Foremost among
 the complaints of the prisoners is a lack of air-conditioning,
 a serious concern during the summer months. Little
 differentiation is made among the tiny prison population on the
 basis of social class, race, or religion. Women are very
 rarely jailed.
 e. Arbitrary Arrest and Imprisonment
 There was one allegation this year of arbitrary arrest and
 imprisonment. A foreign businessman currently has been
 imprisoned one year for failing to pay a large legal judgment
 in a commercial action brought by a Qatari citizen. While this
 sentence does not appear capricious per se, it does illustrate
 the harshness that can occur in a country that has no
 bankruptcy laws to shield a debtor from hopeless indebtedness.
 The right of habeas corpus is not codified in Qatar's civil law
 or the Sharia, but does exist in practice; police normally
 present suspects in custody to an appropriate court within
 48 hours of their arrest.
 f. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Both secular and religious courts exist side by side. Right to
 counsel, formal statement of charges, and possibility of appeal
 exist in the secular courts. Recently the Sharia courts have
 been expanding their jurisdiction from family and inheritance
 matters into subject matter previously considered secular such
 as commercial disputes. Since counsel is not available in
 Sharia court, non-Muslims are at a disadvantage in defending
 themselves. Cases against foreigners usually do not reach the
 stage of a public trial because aliens are quickly deported if
 suspected of violating the law or opposing the regime. When
 aliens are prosecuted, the fairness of the trial is uncertain
 because reasons for court decisions are not announced.
 g. Invasion of the Home
 No invasions of the home were reported in 1982. Formal
 warrants are not required for an official to enter a private
 
 
 1257
 residence, but strong traditional sanctions against forced
 entry safeguard the sanctity of the home.
 2. Respect for Civil and Political Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of the Press and Speech
 The Government states that the media exist to raise the general
 level of education and to instill cultural and moral standards
 among Qatari citizens. Radio and television are government
 monopolies, and privately-owned newspapers and magazines are
 heavily subsidized by the Government. If private newspapers
 were to violate official policy in treating such topics as
 Islam, the state, the ruling family, inter-Arab politics, or
 social issues, they would probably face loss of subsidies and
 closure. Since the limitations are well understood, no
 newspaper has been closed down in the last decade. Artistic
 and academic freedoms are limited by the traditionalist nature
 of Qatari society.
 Because of Qatar's large expatriate community and a long
 history of outside contacts, censorship policies are fairly
 relaxed. Imported magazines, films, and television fare are
 routinely scrutinized, but the target is more often pornography
 than politics. Principal areas of sensitivity are criticism of
 the ruling family and favorable treatment of Israel. Western
 books and periodicals are sold openly. Local media offer broad
 coverage of international news, drawing on both Western and
 Arab news and wire services.
 Thus far there is little evidence that police efforts to
 monitor potential subversives have had a chilling effect on
 freedom of expression.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Assemblies and associations organized for purposes not
 sanctioned by the Government are prohibited. Sport and social
 clubs abound, but professional associations are virtually
 unknown. Political rallies or demonstrations are banned unless
 approved in advance by the Government. In 1982 two small
 protests over the case of alleged police brutality mentioned
 above were quickly dispersed by the police. Police also broke
 up a small demonstration outside of the American Embassy. On
 the other hand, sizeable indoor rallies were sanctioned during
 recent visits by Palestinian leaders following the evacuation
 of the Palestine Liberation Organization fighters from Beirut
 in September 1982.
 Most of the work force is foreign, and labor is not permitted
 to organize, strike, or engage in collective bargaining.
 Workers remain in the country only so long as they are
 sponsored by their employers. Imported laborers can be
 subjected to some unscrupulous practices by labor agents and
 employers. The lack of legal protection for unskilled workers
 has contributed to an urban underclass dwelling in unsanitary
 shantytowns. Exploitation of labor is contrary to official
 policy, but the Government has yet to devise effective ways to
 prevent it.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Islam is the state religion of Qatar and non-Muslims are
 disadvantaged to some extent. The law requires that Muslims be
 given preference for employment. While there is no other
 de jure discrimination on the basis of religion, neither is
 
 
 1258
 there an official policy to combat traditional de facto
 discrimination against those who are not followers of Sunni
 Islam in business, distribution of social benefits, and the
 courts. Non-Muslim religious organizations may neither
 proselytize nor establish permanent places of worship.
 However, non-Muslim religious ceremonies-are tolerated when
 conducted privately.
 d. Freedom of Movement wibhin the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Qatari males travel within, the country and abroad without
 restraint. Both Qatari and foreign females must generally have
 the permission of a male guardian or close male relative before
 leaving the country. All Qatari citizens have the right to
 return at will. Foreigners must obtain a sponsor before
 entering Qatar and must'have their sponsor's permission to
 leave. Immigration authorities may selectively enforce travel
 or residence restrictions against certain nationalities as part
 of the implementation of labor or security policies.
 Nevertheless, thousands of aliens choose to live in Qatar
 despite their second-class status and lack of opportunity to
 acquire Qatari citizenship. Many hold important positions in
 business and government and influence national policy.
 Qatar has no formal policies for handling refugees. In the
 past two years several hundred Iranian refugees may have been
 permitted to transit or stay. Qatar's contributions to
 international programs have been confined to the Muslim world.
 The Government provided generous support to Palestinian and
 Lebanese refugees in the wake of the recent Israeli invasion of
 Lebanon.
 e. Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 Few rights associated with institutionalized democracy exist in
 Qatar. There are no political parties or associations or any
 organized opposition to the Government. Under the provisional
 Constitution elections are optional and the ruling family has
 never chosen to permit them. Nevertheless, the apparently
 autocratic nature of the Government is limited by survivals of
 Bedouin tradition. Political participation may occur through
 traditional informal channels. Interlocking family networks
 and the right of every Qatari citizen to appeal to the Amir in
 person in some ways compensate for the lack of formal
 suffrage. Important policy decisions are rarely taken by the
 ruling family without consultation with religious scholars and
 prominent merchant houses. Women as yet have no public role in
 Qatari society.
 3. Government Attitude Regarding International and Non-
 governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations of
 Human Rights
 There were no international or non-governmental investigations
 of allegations of human rights violations in Qatar in 1982. No
 communications between the Government and external non-
 governmental human rights organizations have been reported.
 Qatar does not belong to any regional human rights
 organizations. There are no local groups to monitor human
 rights compliance. Freedom House calls Qatar "Partly Free.*
 4. Economic, Social, and Cultural Circumstances
 Qatar's gross national product per capita is one of the highest
 in the world, around $26,000. The country earned over
 
 
 1259
 $5.5 billion in 1981 from the sale of oil and natural gas.
 Since 1972 roughly half of Qatar's national income has been
 devoted to developing social services and the infrastructure of
 a modern, industrial state. Water and electricity are provided
 free to Qatari citizens and at subsidized rates to most foreign
 residents. Low interest building loans are available to
 citizens; some receive housing and land grants. There are no
 personal or municipal taxes. While wages are generally fairly
 high, and wages and working conditions are monitored, some
 contractors circumvent the laws and engage workers under
 substandard conditions.
 Life expectancy in Qatar is estimated at 57.6 years. Medical
 care is good, readily available, and free to all residents but
 this situation is too new to have raised the level of general
 health substantially. The estimated ratios of medical
 professionals to population are: doctors -- 1:1,000; dentists
 -- 1:14,000, and nurses -- 1:350; Qataris often travel abroad
 for special medical treatment at government expense. Nearly
 all residents have access to safe water and the average calorie
 intake meets nutritional requirements. Government figures show
 infant mortality is around 53 per 1,000 live births; UN figures
 for 1981 estimate 135 infant deaths per 1,000 live births.
 The adult literacy rate for Qatar is around 50 percent and
 increasing. Total school-age enrollment is over 40,000, half
 of whom are girls. An additional 7,000 citizens attend adult
 literacy classes. Education through the university level is
 free to all qualified residents, although only Qatari nationals
 are eligible for government grants to study abroad.
 The Government put the population in 1981 at 244,534; probably
 no more than 50,000 are Qatari citizens. The growth rate for
 the Qataris appears to be around four percent, while the rate
 for the entire country is around three percent.
 The Government's efforts to make education available to girls
 and to ensure that they in fact attend represents a first step
 towards equality for women. Scholarships for university
 education abroad are not available to women as they are to
 men. Employment for women of any nationality is curtailed by
 tradition. Public life in this conservative society remains a
 male preserve.
 
 
 1260
