 QATAR
 Qatar is a small Arabian Gulf state ruled by an Amir from
 al-Thani family. The "Basic Law of 1970," a provisional
 constitution based on several Egyptian models, institutional-
 ized existing practices and customs so that traditional
 practices rooted in Qatar's conservative Wahhdbi Muslim
 heritage prevail over imported principles. The Amir is
 vested with nearly absolute power, so long as the exercise
 of that power does not conflict with Islamic law (the
 Sharia); he may suspend any law or countermand any court
 decision. A council of ministers and an advisory council
 of Qatari notables assist him in making policy decisions.
 Succession is determined through a consensus of adult
 males of the al-Thani family.
 Although Article 9 of the Basic Law provides that "all
 persons shall enjoy equal public rights and shall be subject
 to equal public duties without distinction on the grounds
 of race, sex or religion," the country's expatriate resi-
 dents do not enjoy these rights. Resident aliens, who
 constitute 75 percent of the total population of 220,000
 frequently are unable to obtain equal treatment before
 the law. It is often impossible, for example, for an
 expatriate to take legal action against a Qatari. Although
 women continue to occupy a subordinate position in the
 society as dictated by its conservative mores, changes in
 their status have occurred during the last decade,
 particularly in terms of education.
 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Torture
 No allegations of torture have been received in 1980.
 b. Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punish-
 ment
 There are no confirmed reports that anyone has been subjected
 to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment by
 the government in 1980. Detention facilities are spartan
 but adequate. Food is sufficient and can be supplemented
 from outside sources. Foremost among the complaints of
 prisoners is the lack of air-conditioning, a serious
 concern during the summer months'.
 c. Disappearances
 No disappearances were reported in 1980.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest an d Imprisonment
 There were no known allegations of arbitrary arrest or
 imprisonment in 1980.
 
 
 1080
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The right of habeas corpus is not codified in Qatar's
 civil law or in the Sharia, but it exists in practice;
 police normally present suspects in custody to an
 appropriate court within 48 hours of their arrest. There
 are few prisoners because aliens are quickly deported if
 suspected of violating the law. Cases against expatriates,
 therefore, often do not reach the state of public trial.
 When they do, the fairness of the trial is uncertain
 because reasons for court decisions are not announced.
 Appellate court hearings often are simply recapitulations
 of previous arguments.
 f. Invasions of the Home
 No invasions of the sanctity of the home have been reported
 in 1980.
 2. Government Policies Relating to the Fulfillment of
 Such Vital Needs as Food, Shelter, Health Care and
 Education:
 Qatar has a per capita income of $18,000 (1979 estimate),
 one of the highest in the world. The country will earn
 more than five billion dollars in 1980 from the sale of
 oil and gas. Since 1972, roughly 50 percent of Qatar's
 income has gone towards developing infrastructure and
 expanding social services. Medical care is good,
 readily available, and provided to all residents without
 charge. The ratio of medical professionals to population
 are doctors-l: 1,000; dentists-l: 14,000 and nurses -
 1: 350. Qataris often travel abroad for special medical
 treatment at government expense.
 Education through the university level is free for all
 residents, though only Qatari males are eligible for
 government scholarships to study abroad. Water and
 electricity are supplied free to all Qatari citizens and
 at subsidized rates to expatriate residents. Low-interest
 building loans are available to all citizens; some Qataris
 receive housing and land grants. There are no personal
 income or municipal taxes.
 There is discrimination based on sex, nationality, and
 ethnic origin. Land ownership is restricted to Qataris
 and other Gulf Arabs. Article 10 of the Labor Law states:
 "An employer must, when engaging a worker, give preference
 so far as is practicable to a national and then to another
 Arab." In practice, preference is given first to Qatari
 males, then to other Arab Muslim males, then other Muslim
 males and finally, non-Muslim males. The employment of
 women of any nationality is curtailed by tradition. The
 labor force is maintained through a policy permitting
 immigration for temporary residence. Wives and children
 usually do not accompany expatriate workers.
 Labor unions and strikes have bean outlawed since 1976.
 Wages are high. Wage rates and working conditions are
 monitored, but some contractors have subverted the law and
 engaged workers under substandard conditions. This situation
 is influenced by the fact that an expatriate worker can
 
 
 1081
 remain in Qatar only so long as he retains sponsorship by
 a Qatari national. Otherwise, he may be deported.
 3. Respect for Civil and Political Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech, Press, Religion and Assembly
 Civil rights are restricted by the government's views cf
 its security needs. Political parties and labor unions
 are not permitted, and no indigenous opposition groups
 are in evidence. The government controls the import of
 printed and cinematic materials. The self-censoring
 local press does not question or contradict government
 policies. Non-Muslim religious organizations exist
 only informally. They can neither proselytize nor
 establish permanent facilities.
 b. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration and Repatriation
 Qatari males may travel within the country and abroad
 without restraint. All citizens have the right to return
 to Qatar at will. Expatriates,'on the other hand, must
 obtain permission from their sponsors before they can
 receive exit permits from the government to depart Qatar.
 All females, both Qatari and non-Qatari must have the
 permission of their closest male relative before travel-
 ling. Even with these limitations on civil and political
 rights, thousands of non-Qatari Arabs, particularly
 Palestinians, live in Qatar. Many hold important posi-
 tions in government and business and contribute significant-
 ly to the operation and development of the country. Some
 Palestinians are refugees and are aided informally by
 Islamic societies. These members of the Palestinian
 diaspora form one of the most influential expatriate
 groups in Qatar.
 c. Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 Although the Basic Law, Article 46, provides for elected
 representation of Qataris on an advisory council to the
 Council of Ministers, this article has never been imple-
 mented. Rather, the terms of the appointed members of
 the council (all Qatari notables) have been extended
 indefinitely "in the public interest," an act allowable
 under Article 45 of the Basic Law.
 While there is no provision for suffrage, Qataris, by
 tradition, have the right to petition officials at all
 levels of government for a redress of grievances or for
 personal needs.
 The constitution also provides that the ruler "possesses
 any other powers with which he is vested under the
 provisional constitution or with which he may be vested
 under law." In order to retain his leadership position,
 however, the ruler must maintain consensus support of
 the Al-Thani family notables.
 
 
 1082
 4. Government Attitude and Record Regarding International
 and Non-governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 There have been no international or non-governmental
 investigations of allegations of human rights violations
 in.1980.
 
 
 1083
