 QATAR
 Qatar, a small, wealthy Arab Gulf state ruled by an Amir from
 the Al Thani family, is governed by a 1970 Basic Law which
 institutionalizes the customs and social mores of Qatar's
 conservative Wahhabi Muslim heritage. These include respect
 for the sanctity of private property, freedom from arbitrary
 arrest and imprisonment, and protection against transgressions
 of Islamic law (the Shari'a). Thus, although the Amir holds
 nearly absolute power, he must exercise authority with care.
 While he may, for example, suspend any secular law or
 countermand any civil court decision, he is unlikely to do so,
 especially without consulting his Council of Ministers and the
 Advisory Council of Notables that assist him in maling policy
 decisions. The Amir is also unlikely to reach any major
 decision without achieving a consensus within his family.
 After expanding rapidly in the -1970's and early 1980's,
 Qatar's economy grew more slowly in 1987. The economy is
 mixed, with the state owning and operating most basic
 industries and services while retail trade and the
 construction industry remain in private hands. Its fast
 developing industrial infrastructure has led to the creation
 of a ratio of expatriates to nationals of almost 4 to 1.
 Limiting the influence and controlling the activities of
 expatriates are for most Qataris a major national goal.
 Qatari resentment against expatriates makes them more likely
 than nationals to be the victims of arbitrary police action.
 It is also difficult for an alien to take legal action against
 a citizen. The economic downturn of 1983-87 has given added
 impetus to the Government's policy of reducing the number of
 expatriates. This policy, however, is administered with a
 degree of compassion. Palestinians, for example, have not
 been forced to leave unless they can make arrangements to
 settle elsewhere, a possibility which is facilitated by
 substantial severance payments. However, because of the
 current economic, social, and political conditions in Qatar,
 the Palestinian community is not as successful as it was in
 the past. The number of expatriates from South Asia continues
 to drop, while expatriates from other regions, some of whom
 are unemployed, are allowed to remain.
 The human rights situation in Qatar continues to change very
 slowly. There are many factors against change--not the least
 being the absence of any credible internal threat to the
 regime. So long as the Government feels secure, major
 innovation is likely to occur only as the result of a
 consensus within the ruling and other leading families.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the'Person, Including
 Fredom from:
 a. Political Killing
 There were no known instances of political killings.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no reports of disappearances.
 
 
 i286
 QATAR
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 Although non-European expatriate's routinely complain of
 mistreatment after their arrest by Qatari authorities, the
 practice does not seem to have officill sanction. Torture is
 not- condoned by the authorities and, although the Governmet
 does administer most of the corporal punishments prescribed by
 the Shari'a, it no longer a-llows physical mutilation.
 Executions rarely bccur. Prison'conditibns'are uncomfortable
 but adequate  Family members and friends may bring food to
 supplement-the monotonous'prison fare as wdll a's small
 luxuries and mail. "There have been private allegations of
 unsanitary corfditioh in the w6men-s prison.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, Exile, or Forced Labor
 As a general rule, the authorities~must charge suspects before
 a competent court within 48 hours. In most cares involving
 expatriates, the police have promptly notified the appropriate
 consular representative. Suspects detained in security cases
 are generally not afforded theii rights. Involuntary exile
 remains a rare practice: The-last kn6wn-major d~ile took
 place over 10 yeard 'ago-:it 'involved the previous deposed
 Amir, his family, and bl6se-supporters. Expatriate offendprs
 are normally deported upon completion of their sentences.
 There is no-fdrced labor.
 ,e. -Denial 'of Fair Piblic Trial
 Except for security ca'ses; most disputes are judged before
 either a civil or a Shari'a court. Most comriercial .litigation
 involving 'expatriates' t1akds 'jaice'before the civil courts.
 The ShariV dourts administer'-ciminal and famiA4 law ard may,"
 if one'party-requests, -take j i'sdiction in business cases.
 Although;the 'judiciary 4s _nb'minalft  independnt, most judges
 are expatlatds -holdntg idsidehdee permits' granted by the civil
 authorite--and thus' hold thei' positions" at the Govexhment's
 pleasure.
 Many expatriates find proceedings in the'Sharila coirts'
 bewildering. Only the dispuing par ties, their 'relatives and
 associates, and witnesses'are- allowed in the courtroom.
 Lawyers may not' play any formal role, sa,e that' of preparing
 litigants for their cases' Although non-Arabic'speakers are
 provided with translatorS, foreigners teport being at a
 considerable disadvantage, especially in cases involving the
 nonperformance of contracts. Shari a tri'als are normally
 brief. After both parties have stated their cases and
 examined witnesses, 'the judge'is likely to deliver a'verdict
 with only a short delay. Criminal cases are normally tried 2
 to 3 months after suspects are detained.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Traditional attitudes regarding the sanctity of the'home
 provide a great deal of protection against arbitrary
 intrusions for most citizens. The police must normally obtain
 a warrant before searching a residence or business but not in
 security cases or emergencies. There were reports in past
 years that police conducted many searches of expatriate homes
 without warrants, but these were not repeated in 1987. Police
 routinely monitor the communications of criminal and security
 
 
 1287
 QATAR
 suspects. Mail thought to contain either pornography or drugs
 is also opened as a matter of course.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Although both expatriates and Qataris are free to express
 themselves privately, public criticism of the ruling family
 and its policies is not tolerated. The Government strongly
 discourages attacks on other Arab governments as well. This
 policy applies to the electronic media, which are government
 owned and controlled, and to the press. The journalistic
 community, particularly the expatriates, generally avoids
 challenging these restrictions because of the risk of having
 residence permits cancelled.
 The authorities routinely screen all video cassettes, audio
 tapes, books, and periodicals for objectionable political
 sentiments and pornography. In 1987 the Government
 confiscated a shipment of textbooks at Doha airport intended
 for students at the Iranian school because they contained
 pages insulting to other Arab governments.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 The Government allows private social, sports, trade,
 professional, and artistic societies to operate. The
 activities of these organizations, which must register with
 the Government, are closely watched.
 Government policy does not allow political parties or
 demonstrations.
 In practice, the Government does not allow labor unions or
 collective bargaining by employees.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Qatar's state religion is Islam, the Koran is its basic
 constitution, and the Shari'a its legal code. All other
 faiths are prohibited public worship; nor may they
 proselytize. Apostasy from Islam remains a capital crime,
 although no one has been executed for it in recent memory.
 The Government tolerates the private practice of non-Muslim
 religions; non-Muslim parents may raise their children in
 their own faiths, and private gatherings of non-Muslims may
 worship in private homes.
 d. .Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration,-and Repatriation
 There are no restrictions on internal travel. Male Qataris
 travel abroad at will. Females, both Qatari and foreign,
 usually require the permission of a male guardian or relative
 to leave the country... All Qatari citizens have the right to
 return. Foreigners are subject to immigration.-restrictions
 designed to control the local labor pool. They require a
 local sponsor to enter Qatar and the sponsor's permission to
 depart. The Government has no formal policy on refugees.
 Those attempting to enter illegally, including defectors from
 nearby countries, are denied entry. Often refugees who can
 get local sponsorship or employment may enter. If they lose
 their jobs, however, they are expected to leave. The
 Government continues to tighten its policy of discouraging
 
 
 1288
 QATAR
 Qatari males from marrying foreign-born (primarily Western)
 women by-refusing to issue residency permits to those wives.
 In several instances, a foreign-born wife lives in another
 country, where she is visited by her Qatari husband because
 she is denied entry into Qatar.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: -The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Qatar. has no formal -democratic institutions. Consequently,
 most of its citizens donot have a say iii the choice of
 leaders or in changing the political system. Qatar's
 political-institutions blend-the characteristics of a
 traditional Bedouin tribal state and of a modern bureaucracy.
 There are no political parties, elections, or organized
 opposition to the Government. The Amir exercises all
 executive and legislative -powers. His autocratic rule,
 however, is checked to some extent by entrenched local
 customs, Interlocking family networks and the recognized
 right of citizens to submit appeals or petitions personally to
 the Amir provide effective, if informal, avenues for redress
 of grievances and also-serve to limit abuses. The custom of
 rule by consensus leads to-extensive consultations between the
 Ami'r, leading.merchants, religious leaders, and other notables
 on important'policies. Women for the most part play no role
 in public life.
 Under Qatar's-Basic Law of 1970, the Amir must be chosen from
 and bythe adult males of the Al Thani family. The current
 Amir, Khalifa bin Hamad, has designated his son Hamad as heir
 apparent. This took place with the consent of the notables
 and religious leaders according to'established custom. There
 are no serious challenges to this arrangement, and in the
 foreseeable future effective political power will remain in
 the hands-of the Amir, his family, and the local notables.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 No major international or nongovernmental organization
 monitoring human rights abuses has asked to investigate
 conditions in 'Qatar.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 -Language, or Social Status
 Women and their activities are still bound by a number of
 social customs and quasi-legal restrictions, such as veiling
 and prohibitions against the issuance of -driver's licenses.
 While women remain largely relegated to the roles of mother
 and homemaker, some are now finding jobs in education,
 medicine, and the news media. However, they do not as a rule
 receive the overseas university scholarships available for
 males. While their employment is tolerated in such fields as
 nursing.,teaching, and home economics, expansion beyond these
 areas is discouraged. Public life is a male sphere.
 Expatriate women find it easier to get jobs or to own and
 manage a business than their Qatari counterparts. There are
 signs that, as more Qatari women receive education, they will
 pres  for a relaxation of some of the restrictions from their'
 country's tribal past.
 
 
 1289
 QATAR
 CONDITIONS OF LABOR
 The minimum working age is 18 years, but expatriate children
 frequently work at younger ages in small businesses and
 shops. Some regulations concerning worker safety and health
 exist, but enforcement is infrequent. There is no minimum
 wage in Qatar, and most workers spend less than 48 hours per
 week on the job.
 
 
 1290
