Qatar
In 2012, Qatar’s population grew nearly 5 percent, to 1.95 million, primarily due
to an influx of foreign labor to meet the demands of a booming construction
sector. Qatar has the highest ratio of non-citizens to citizens in the world, with
nationals comprising approximately 12 percent of the population. The country
has some of the most restrictive sponsorship laws in the Gulf region, and forced
labor and human trafficking are serious problems. The government has failed to
address shortcomings in the legal and regulatory framework despite the initiation
of many large-scale projects in preparation for Qatar hosting the World Cup
in 2022.
In June 2012, the Shura Council passed a new draft media law with provisions
on free speech that may jeopardize Qatar’s reputation as a center for media
freedom. While the constitution protects freedom of expression“in accordance
with the conditions and circumstances set forth in the law”, in practice Qatar
restricts freedom of speech. Local media tend to self-censor, and the law permits
criminal penalties, including prison terms, for defamation.
Migrant Workers
More than 1.2 million migrant workers—mostly from India, Pakistan, Sri Lanka,
the Philippines, Nepal, and Bangladesh—live and work in Qatar, and that number
is increasing rapidly. The country may recruit up to a million additional workers
in the next decade to overhaul its infrastructure and build the stadiums
required to host the 2022 World Cup.
Qatar’s Law 14 of 2004, governing labor in the private sector, limits working
hours, requires paid annual leave, sets requirements on health and safety, and
requires on-time payment of wages each month. However, laws intended to protect
workers are rarely enforced. Passport confiscation is customary and workers
typically pay exorbitant recruitment fees, much of which end up in Qatar,
according to a 2011 World Bank study on the Nepal-Qatar migration corridor.
Migrant workers have no right to unionize or strike, though they make up 99
percent of the private sector workforce. In addition, the kafala (sponsorship)
system ties a migrant worker’s legal residence to his or her employer, or “sponsor.” Migrant workers cannot change jobs without their sponsoring employer’s
consent except in exceptional cases and with Interior Ministry permission. If a
worker leaves his or her employer, even if fleeing abuse, the employer can
report the worker as “absconding,” leading to detention and deportation. In
order to leave Qatar, migrants must obtain an exit visa from their sponsor, and
some workers said sponsors denied them these visas. Reporting mechanisms
and remedies are effectively unavailable to migrant workers. In addition, the
labor law excludes domestic workers, almost all female, denying them basic
protections such as limits to hours of work and weekly days off.
Migrant workers reported extensive labor law violations. Common complaints
included late or unpaid wages. Some lived in overcrowded and unsanitary labor
camps, and lacked access to potable water. Many workers said they received
false information about their jobs and salaries before arriving and signed contracts
in Qatar under coercive circumstances.
Qatar employs only 150 labor inspectors to monitor compliance with the labor
law, and inspections do not include worker interviews.
The International Federation of Association Football (FIFA) pledged to raise
worker rights issues with Qatari authorities. While the local organizing committee
publicly said it would establish strict labor standards for contractors hired to
build World Cup venues, no such standards appeared to be in place at this writing.
Freedom of Expression
In June 2012, the Shura Council approved a new draft media law with provisions
on free speech that pose a threat to Qatar’s reputation as a center for media
freedom. The draft law still requires cabinet approval before becoming law. Al
Jazeera, the international news network broadcasting in Arabic and English, is
headquartered in Doha and funded by the Qatari government. While the station
played an important role in reporting the pro-democracy movements in many
Arab countries, it broadcasts few critical stories on Qatar, and the provisions of
the draft media law may make it difficult for any media outlets in Qatar to criticize
any Gulf Cooperation Council states. Article 53 of the draft law prohibits anyone from publishing or broadcasting anything that will “throw relations
between the state and the Arab and friendly states into confusion,” and provides
for a fine of one million Qatari Riyals (US$275,000) for offenders. The law
also prohibits the publication or broadcast of anything that offends the ruling
family or causes serious harm to the state or its interests.
After his arrest in November 2011, Qatari poet Muhammad ibn al-Dheeb al-Ajami
remained in detention a year later for a poem he recited in which he insulted
the emir, Sheikh Hamad bin Khalifa Al Thani. Article 134 of the penal code provides
for five years’ imprisonment for criticism of the ruler. The state prosecutor
charged al-Dheeb with “inciting the overthrow of the ruling regime” under article
130 of the penal code, a charge that can carry the death penalty.
Statelessness
Qatar has between 1,200 and 1,500 stateless Bidun who claim they have a right
to citizenship. The 2005 Nationality Law allows individuals to apply for citizenship
after living in Qatar for 25 years, but limits naturalization to 50 people per
year. Bidun cannot register for education or health benefits, or legally work. The
government does not register the birth of Bidun children.
In 2004 and 2005 the government stripped more than 5,000 Qataris from the al-
Murra tribe of citizenship as delayed punishment for some members’ participation
in a 1996 coup attempt against the current emir. In 2006, the Qatari government
officially reinstated the citizenship of most of this group, but an estimated
200 remain stateless.
Women’s Rights
Both women and men vote in municipal elections, though elected representatives
have limited power. Qatari women do not have the same rights as Qatari
men to obtain nationality for their spouses and children. In 2010, Qatar appointed
its first female judge.
Qatar has no law specifically criminalizing domestic violence, and the government
currently publishes no data on incidents of domestic violence.
Representatives of the Qatar Foundation for the Protection of Women and
Children, a government-funded charitable institution, told local media that
domestic violence remained a problem, based on their work with women and
children who sought assistance.
Qatar adjudicates family law and personal status matters in religious courts, in
which judges base rulings on their interpretations of Islamic law. People have
no option to seek adjudication pursuant to a civil code. Family law as generally
interpreted discriminates against women and grants men privileged status in
matters of divorce, inheritance, and child custody.
Key International Actors
The 2022 World Cup in Qatar provides an opportunity to apply international
pressure on Qatar to improve conditions for migrant workers who will be working
on infrastructure for the event. FIFA pledged to raise worker rights issues
with Qatari authorities. However, while Qatar’s World Cup organizing committee
publicly said it would establish strict labor standards for contractors hired to
build World Cup venues, no such standards appeared to be in place at this writing.