 QATAR
 Qatar, an Arab state on the Persian Gulf, is a monarchy without democratically
 elected institutions or political parties. It is governed by the ruling A1-Thani family
 through its head, the Amir. In June the ruling familyin consultation with other
 leading Qatari families, replaced Sheikh Khalifa bin Iamad Al Thani with his son,
 Sheikh Hamad bin Khalifa Al Thani. This transition of authority did not represent
 a change in the basic governing order. The 1970 Basic Law institutionalizes the cus-
 toms and mores of the country's conservative Islamic heritage. These include respect
 for the sanctity of private property, freedom from arbitrary arrest and imprison-
 
 
 1245
 
 ment, and punishment of transgressions against Islamic law. The Amir holds abso-
 lute power, the exercise of which is influenced by consultation with leading citizens,
 rule by consensus, and the right of any citizen to appeal personally to the Amir.
 The Amir considers the opinions of leading citizens, whose influence is institutional-
 ized in the Advisory Council, an appointed body that assists the Amir in formulating
 policy.
 Qatar has efficient police and security services. The civilian security force, con-
 trolled by the Interior Ministry, is comprised of two sections: the police and the Gen-
 eral Administration of Public Security; and the Investigatory Police (Mubahathat)
 whic isi-e  nsblefor ediionandesponag  caes.Thee wre no reports this
 arthat o   n the Mubahathat physicaly abused suspects. The armed forces
 ave une       jurisdiction the Intelligence Service (Muhabarat), responsible for
 combating terrorism and monitoring political dissidence.
 The State owns most basic industries and services, but the retail and construction
 industries are in private hands. Oil is the principal natural resource, but the coun-
 try's extensive natural gas resources will play an increasingly important role. The
 rapid development of the 1970's and 1980's created an economy in which expatriate
 workers, mostly South Asian and Arab, outnumber Qataris by a ratio of 4 to 1. The
 Government tries to reduce this ratio by offering many government jobs only to citi-
 zens.
 There was no significant change in the human rights situation. Human rights re-
 main restricted, particularly the denial of the right of citizens to change their gov-
 ermnent, arbitrary detentions in security cases, and restrictions on worker rights,
 and the freedoms of speech, press, assembly, and association. Women's rights are
 closely restricted, and non-Qatari workers face systematic discrimination.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from:
 a. Political and Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no reports of political or other
 extrajudicial killings.
 b. Disappearance.-here were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 There have been no reported instances of torture for several years. The Government
 administers most corporal punishment prescribed by Islamic law but does not allow
 amputation. In May an American citizen was sentenced to receive 90 lashes during
 a 6-month prison term for homosexual activity. However, the individual and his
 family rejected a pretrial offer of expulsion without prison or lashes in the hope of
 being able to return to Qatar. The sentence was carried out on June 6. A physician
 was present and the prisoner completed the ordeal bruised but in good health. He
 was released from Central Prison on July 22 and departed Qatar.
 Prison conditions generally meet minimum international standards.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The authorities generally charge suspects
 within 48 hours. In most cases involving foreigners, the police promptly notify the
 appropriate consular representative. Suspects detained in security cases are gen-
 erally not afforded access to counsel and may be detained indefinitely while under
 investigation. There are no known recent cases of incommunicado detention. Invol-
 untary exile is rare. There were no reported cases this year.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-here are two types of courts: the civil courts,
 which have jurisdiction in civil and commercial matters; and the Shari'a Court,
 which has jurisdiction in family and criminal cases. There are no permanent secu-
 rity courts. Security cases, which are rare, are tried by ad hoc military courts. De-
 fendants tried by all courts have the right to appeal. Occasionally in the Shari'a
 Court, the same judge will hear the original case and the appeal.
 Defendants appear before a judge for a preliminary hearing within 7 days of their
 arrest. Judges may extend pretrial detention a week at a time to allow the authori-
 ties to conduct investigations. Defendants in the civil courts have the right to be
 represented by defense attorneys but are not always permitted to be represented by
 counsel in the Shari'a court. The judiciary is nominally independent, but most
 judges are foreign nationals who hold residence permits granted by the civil authori-
 ties and thus hold their positions at the Government's pleasure. The legal system
 is biased in favor of Qataris and the Government. A Muslim litigant may request
 the Shari'a Court to assume jurisdiction in commercial or civil cases. Non-Muslims
 are not allowed to bring suits as plaintiffs in the Shari'a Court. This practice pre-
 vents non-Muslim residents from obtaining full legal recourse.
 Although nominally independent, the judiciary is buried under the bureaucratic
 layers of two ministries. Civil (or Adea) courts are subordinate to the Ministry of
 Justice, and religious (or Shari'a) courts fall under the Ministry of Endowments and
 
 
 1246
 Islamic Affairs. The prosecutors fall under the Ministry of Interior. Trials in the
 civil courts are public, but in the Shari'a Court only the disputing parties, their rel-
 atives, associates, and witnesses are allowed in the courtroom. Lawyers do not play
 a formal role except to prepare litigants for their cases. Although non-Arabic speak-
 ers are provided with interpreters, foreigners are disadvantaged, especially in cases
 involving the performance of contracts.
 Shari'a trials are normally brief. After both parties have stated their cases and
 examined witnesses, judges are likely to deliver a verdict after a short deliberation.
 Criminal cases are normally tried within 2 to 3 months after suspects are detained.
 There is no provision for bail in criminal cases. However, foreigners charged with
 minor crimes may be released to a Qatari sponsor. They are prohibited from depart-
 ing the country until the case is resolved.
 There were no reports of political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-Tradi-
 tional attitudes of respect for the sanctity of the home provide a great deal of protec-
 tion against arbitrary intrusions for most citizens and residents of Qatar. A warrant
 must normally be obtained before police may search a residence or business, except
 in cases involving national security or emergencies. However, warrants are issued
 by police officials themselves rather than by judicial authorities. There were no re-
 ports of unauthorized searches of homes in 1995. The police and security forces are
 believed to monitor the communications of suspected criminals, those considered to
 be security risks, and selected foreigners.
 With prior permission, which is usually granted, Qataris may marry foreigners of
 any nationality and apply for residence permits for their spouses.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-Although freedom of speech and press is signifi-
 cantly restricted, the Government announced in October the suspension of press
 censorship. Social and political pressures for self-censorship will determine whether
 or not the new policy will usher in a period of increased public information and de-
 bate. The ultimate impact of this change is mitigated by the existence of a separate
 and uneffected censorship organ within the Ministry of Endowments and Islamic Af-
 fairs. This office is charged with the protection of public morality and religious val-
 ues. As a result, cable TV programming is still delayed for censorship, and "offen-
 sive" photos and stories continue to be blacked out of such publications as Time and
 Newsweek.
 Customs officials routinely screen imported video cassettes, audio tapes, books,
 and periodicals for politically objectionable or pornographic content. Foreign cable
 television service was introduced in 1993, but censors review broadcasts for objec-
 tionable material.
 There is no legal provision for academic freedom. Most instructors at the Univer-
 sity of Qatar exercise self-censorship.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-These rights are severely lim-
 ited. The Government does not allow political parties, political demonstrations, or
 membership in international professional organizations critical of the Government
 or any other Arab government. Private social, sports, trade, professional, and cul-
 tural societies must be registered with the Government. Security forces monitor the
 activities of such groups.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The state religion is Islam, as interpreted by the puri-
 tanical Wahabbi branch of the Sunni tradition. Non-Muslims are prohibited from
 public worshi and may not proselytize. The Government tolerates private gather-
 ings of non-Muslims but closely monitors them for political content. Non-Muslim
 parents may raise their children in their own faiths. The Government allows Shi'a
 Muslims to practice their faith. However, the latter have tacitly agreed to refrain
 from such public rituals as self-flagellation.
 Apostasy from Islam is a capital offense, although no one is known to have been
 executed for it.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-There are no restrictions on internal travel, except around sensitive
 military and oil installations. Generally, women do not require permission from
 male guardians to travel. However, men may prevent female relatives from leaving
 the country by placing their names with immigration officers at ports of departure.
 Technically, women employed by the Government must obtain official permission to
 travel abroad when requesting leave, but it is not known to what extent this regula-
 tion is enforced. Citizens critical of the Government face restrictions on their right
 to travel abroad.
 
 
 1247
 All citizens have the right to return. Foreigners are subject to immigration restric-
 tions designed to control the size of the local labor pool. Foreign workers must have
 a sponsor, usually their employer, to enter or depart the country.
 The Government has no formal refugee policy. Those attempting to enter illegally,
 including persons seeking to defect from nearby countries, are refused entry. Asy-
 lum seekers who can obtain local sponsorship or employment are allowed to enter
 and may remain as long as they are employed. Foreign women married to Qataris
 are granted residence permits and may apply for citizenship. However, they are ex-
 pected to relinquish their foreign citizenship.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights. The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens do not have the legal right to change their government or the political
 system peacefully. Qatar has no formal democratic institutions. There have been re-
 ports that some of the 19 signers of a December 1991 petition calling for greater
 political freedom and constitutional reform continued to be subject to travel restric-
 he political institutions blend the charateristics of a traditional Bedouin
 tribal state and a modern bureaucracy. There are no political parties, elections, or
 orgaize oposiiongroups.
 most executive and legislative powers, including appointment
 of cabinet members. However, his rule is tempered by local custom. Interlocking
 family networks, together with the right of citizens to submit appeals or petitions
 to the Amir, provide informal avenues for the redress of many grievances. The cus-
 tom of rule by consensus leads to extensive consultations among the Amir, leading
 merchant families, religious leaders, and other notables on important matters.
 Under the Basic Law of 1970, the Amir must be chosen from and by the adult
 males of the Al Thani family.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Local human rights organizations are not permitted to exist. No international
 human rights organizations are known to have asked to investigate conditions in
 Qatar.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Religion, Sex, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 Institutional cultural, and legal discrimination based on gender, race, religion, so-
 cial status, and disability exists.
 Wornen.-Violene against women, primarily foreign domestic workers, occurs but
 is not believed to be widespread. However, some foreign domestics, especially those
 from South Asia and the Philippines, have been severely mistreated by employers.
 In keeping with Islamic law, all forms of physical abuse are illegal. The maximum
 penalty for rape is death. The police actively investigate ,eports of violence against
 women. In the last few years, the Government has demonstrated an increased will-
 ingness to arrest and punish offenders, whether citizens or foreigners. Offenders
 who are citizens usually receive lighter punishments than foreigners. Abused do-
 mestic workers usually  not press charges for fear of losing their jobs.
 The activities of women are closely restricted beth by law and tradition. For ex-
 ample, women are prohibited from applg for drivers' licenses unless they have
 permission from a male guardian. This restriction does not apply to non-Qatari
 women. The Government adheres to Shari'a law in matters of inheritance and child
 custody. While Muslim wives have the right to inherit from their husbands, non-
 Muslim wives do not, unless a special legacy is arranged. In cases of divorce, wives
 rarely obtain custody of children and never if the wife is not a Muslim. Women may
 attend court proceedings but are generally represented by a male relative.
 Women are largely relegated to the roles of mother and homemaker, but some
 women are now finding jobs in education, medicine, and the news media. However,
 the number of professional women is too small to determine whether they are re-
 ceiving equal pay for equal work. Increasingly, women are receiving government
 scholaships to pursue degrees at universities overseas. Although women are legally
 able to travel abroad alone (see Section 2.d.), tradition and social pressures cause
 most to travel with male escorts.
 There is no independent women's rights organization, nor would the Government
 permit the establishment of one.
 Children.-The Government demonstrates it commitment to children's rights
 through a well-funded, free public education system (elementary through university)
 and a complete medical protection program or Qatari children. However, children
 of most foreigners are denied free education and have only limited medical coverage.
 There is no pattern of societal abuse of children.
 
 
 1248
 
 People With Disabilities.-The Government has not enacted legislation or other-
 wise mandated provision of accessibility for the handicapped, who also face social
 discrimination. The Government maintains a hospital and schools that provide free
 services to the mentally and physically handicapped.
 Religious Minorities.-Non-Muslims experience discrimination in employment,
 particularly in sensitive areas such as security and education. Non-Muslims also en-
 counter official prohibitions in the public practice of their religions (see Section 2.c.).
 National/Raclal/Ethnic Minorities.-The Government discriminates against some
 citizens of non-Qatari origin. In the private sector, many Qataris of Iranian extrac-
 tion occupy positions of the highest importance. However, in government they are
 rarely found in senior decisionmaking positions.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-The right of association is strictly limited, and all
 workers, including foreigners, are prhibited from forming labor unions. Despite
 this, almost all worers have the right to strike after their case has been presented
 to the Labor Conciliation Board and ruled upon. Employers may close a place of
 work or dismiss employees once the Conciliation Board has heard the case. The
 right to strike does not exist for government employees, domestic workers, or mem-
 bers of the employer's family. No worker in a public utility or health or security
 service may strike if such a strike would harm the public or lead to property dam-
 age. Strike are rare, and there were none in 1995.
 Labor law provides for the establishment of joint consultative committees com-
 posed of representativ ofof the employer and workers. The committees do not dis-
 cuss wages, but may consider issues including work organization and productivity,
 conditions of employment, training of workers, and safety measures and their imple-
 mentation.
 Since July Qatar has been suspended from the U.S. Overseas Private Investment
 Corporation (OPIC) insurance programs because of the Government's lack of cmpli-
 anee with internationally recognized worker rights standards.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-hWorkers are prohibited from
 engaging in collective bargaining. Generally, wages are set unlaterallyy employ-
 ers without government involvement. Local courts handie disputes between workers
 and employers. There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Lbor.-The law prohibits forced or coin-
 pulsory labor. Three quarters of the work force are migrant workers, who are fre-
 quently dependent on a single employer for residency rghts. This leaves them vul-
 nerable to abuse. For instance, employers must give consent before exit permits are
 issued to any foreigner seeking to leave the country. Some employers temporarily
 withhold this consent to force foreign employees to work for longer perior than
 they wish.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-Minors between the ages of 15
 and 18 may be employed with the approval of their parents or guardians. However,
 y ounger non-Qatari children sometimes work in small, family owned businesses.
 education is compulsory through age 15. While the laws governing the minimum
 age for employment of children are not strictly enforced, cs.ld labor, either Qatari
 or foreign, is rare. Very young children, usually of African or South Asian back-
 ground, have been employed as riders in camel racing. Little information is avail-
 able on wages and working conditions for these children.
 Minors may not work more than 6 hours a day or more than 36 hours a week.
 Employers must provide the Ministry of Labor with the names and occupations of
 their minor employees. The Ministry may prohibit the employment of minors in jobs
 which are judged as dangerous to the health, safety, or morals of minors. Employers
 must also obtain permission from the Ministry of Education to hire a minor.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-There is no minimum wage, although a 1962
 law gives the Amir authority to set one. The 48-hour workweek with a 24-hour rest
 period is prescribed by law, although most government offices follow a schedule of
 36 hours a week. Employees who work more than 48 hours a week, or 36 hours a
 week during the Muslim month of Ramadan, are entitled to overtime. This law is
 adhered to in government offices and major private sector companies. It is not ob-
 served in the case of domestic and personal employees. Domestic servants frequently
 work 7 days a week, more than 12 hours a day, with few or no holidays, and have
 no effective way to redress grievances against their employers.
 Qatar has enacted regulations concerning worker safety and health, but enforce-
 ment, which is the responsibility of the Ministry of Energy and Industry, is lax. The
 Department of Public Safety oversees safety traninig and conditions, and the state-
 run petroleum company has its own set of safety standards and procedures. The
 Labor Law of 1964, as amended in 1984, lists partial and permanent disabilities for
 
 
 1249
 
 which compensation may be awarded, some connected with handling chemicals and
 petroleum products or construction injuries. The law does not specifically set rates
 ofpayment and compensation.
 Foreign workers must be sponsored by a citizen or legally recognized organization
 to obtain an entry visa and must have their sponsor's permission to depart the coun-
 try. Theoretically, any worker may seek legal relief from onerous work conditions,
 but domestic workers generally accept their situations in order to avoid repatriation.
