RACIAL DISCRIMINATION
AND RELATED INTOLERANCE
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
Ethnicity,often combined with religion, fueled and shaped conflict and systemic
human rights abuse in many countries around the globe in the year of the third
United Nations World Conference Against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia
and Related Intolerance (WCAR). Caste discrimination—based on
descent—held an estimated 250 million people locked in conditions of oppression
and intolerance.National and local leaders propagated hate and intolerance, seeking
political advantage in the discriminatory animus of racist movements. Across
the world, racism and related intolerance skewed the administration of justice and
denied or limited minorities and other marginalized groups’ access to education
and employment, to health care and housing—and to protection against exploitation.
The widespread fear generated by the attacks on the United States (U.S.) on September
11—and aspects of the global antiterrorism campaign that followed—
added a new dimension to xenophobia and intolerance in many parts of the world.
New antiterrorism measures introduced in the United States and under consideration
in many other countries reduced safeguards against arbitrary arrest on discriminatory
grounds and posed particular challenges to the rights of asylum
seekers and migrants.
In Africa, ethnicity remained a potent engine of conflict in years-long wars of
secession, inter-communal violence, and in partisan struggles for power as political
leaders played the ethnic card to mobilize supporters and to demonize their
rivals. Inter-ethnic clashes remained a pervasive feature of conflicts in the Great
Lakes region and other parts of Africa. In the Democratic Republic of Congo’s
(DRC) eastern provinces, spiralling conflicts involved both troops of the regular
armies of Uganda and Rwanda and militias sponsored by both regional powers. In
Rwanda and Burundi longstanding internal conflicts continued; those leading
Rwanda’s rebel forces included former leaders of the 1994 genocide. Sudan’s long
internal war was fueled not only by the ethnic and religious divide between north
and south but also by ethnic divisions between the southern rebels. Renewed conflict
in Liberia also followed largely ethnic lines; government forces perceived ethnic
Mandingo citizens indiscriminately as opposition supporters, and subjected them to violent attacks because of their ethnicity. Clashes spurred by ethnicity and
religion in Nigeria cost thousands of lives. (See Africa Overview.)
Determining who should be considered a national and who a foreigner also generated
xenophobia and violence in some African countries. In Côte D’Ivoire, as
Human Rights Watch detailed in a report it published in August, officials incited
xenophobic violence around elections in October and December 2000. They promoted
intolerance based on ethnic and religious differences that led gendarmes
and civilian supporters to attack Ivorians from the largely Muslim north of the
country—and others held to be “foreigners.” The report documented more than
two hundred killings, as well as torture, rape, and arbitrary detentions, committed
with impunity.
In Brazil, indigenous people were moved off their land, threatened, and killed in
land disputes in circumstances that suggested the acquiescence of public authorities.
Indigenous leader Francisco de Assis Santana was murdered on August 23 in
Pesqueira, Pernambuco, apparently in connection with his struggles for Xucuru
land rights in the territory. Members of the Guarani community were reportedly
fired on in November 2000 by police allegedly hired by a rancher who had taken
over their land. In February, several cases were reported of alleged sexual abuse by
army soldiers against Yanomami women in the Surucucus region of the Amazon.
(See Brazil.)
In Asia, the full complexity of the inter-ethnic and sectarian struggles in Afghanistan
burst belatedly upon the international consciousness only after the attacks of
September 11 and the launching of the U.S.-led military campaign against the Taliban.
Earlier, Human Rights Watch documented a series of incidents in which
largely ethnic Pashtun Taliban forces committed gross abuses, including summary
executions and the destruction of homes against civilians belonging to minorities
it associated with its rivals—Aymaqs, Hazaras, and Uzbeks, suspected of supporting
forces linked to the anti-Taliban Northern Alliance. (See Afghanistan.)
In Burma (Myanmar), government troops burned villages and forcibly displaced
tens of thousands of villagers in areas affected by ethnic-based insurgencies.
Hundreds of thousands were internally displaced in the ethnic minority states
while others fled to Thailand. (See Burma.)
In Indonesia, ethnicity and religion were factors shaping regional conflicts—
sometimes accentuating divisions between internal migrants and indigenous populations.
The conflict in Aceh and communal violence in West Kalimantan resulted
in many civilian casualties,while little progress was shown in the resolution of conflicts
in the Moluccas, Central Sulawesi, and Papua.Well over one million people
were reported displaced, half of them from the Moluccas.
Sri Lanka’s civil war, too, continued to claim a steady toll of civilian deaths. Both
the government and Tamil secessionist forces were responsible for serious abuses
and internal displacement created enormous hardship. (See Sri Lanka.)
In Europe, the question of who belongs in the nation state continued to impact
harshly upon displaced populations in the former Yugoslavia and many parts of the
former Soviet Union, as well as migrants and refugees seeking a better life in an
increasingly hostile Western Europe. Across the region, Roma were victimized by
discrimination in every aspect of their lives.
In Bulgaria, discrimination against Roma persisted in virtually every aspect of
public life. Roma were beaten by police and private individuals beat and shot at
Roma on numerous occasions with impunity. An Open Society Institute study
released in September detailed discrimination against Roma in the provision of
housing, social services and health care. (See Bulgaria.)
In the Czech Republic, de facto discrimination against Roma affected access to
justice, education, housing, employment, and public services. Racist attacks on
Roma continued, but police and prosecutors frequently failed to adequately investigate
and prosecute Roma complaints. (See Czech Republic.)
The Greek government took steps to address discrimination with an action plan
for Roma, designed to address health, education and housing needs. The resettlement
of a Roma community under the plan was marred, however, by discrimination
against the community’s children, whose attendance at local schools was
opposed by other residents. One school closed in November 2000 rather than admit
thirty-two Roma children. (See Greece.)
In Hungary, Roma faced continuing discrimination in employment, education,
and the criminal justice system, as well as physical attacks and the firebombing of
their homes. The French government granted asylum to fifteen Hungarian Roma
who were part of a group who fled from the Hungarian village of Zamoly to Strasbourg
during 2000 to escape threats, physical attacks and the destruction of their
homes.Anti-Semitic programming continued on state radio and anti-Jewish statements
by the vice-president of the parliamentary Hungarian Truth and Life Party
were widely disseminated. (See Hungary.)
In Serbia and Montenegro, too, police brutality against Roma was common,
although the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia acceded to the Council of Europe’s
1994 Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities on May 11.
Roma, Serbs, and other minorities faced continued violence in post-war
Kosovo. Organized violence targeting minorities, including attacks on Serb homes,
churches, and cultural sites, persisted, while convoys escorted by peacekeepers of
the multinational Kosovo Force (KFOR) were attacked by gunmen: eleven people
were killed and dozens injured in the most serious attack. United Nations (U.N.)
police had at the time of writing failed to bring the perpetrators to justice. (See Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia.)
Ethnically-motivated violence also continued to shake Bosnia and Herzegovina.
In Republika Srpska and, less frequently, in the Croat parts of the Federation,
attackers shot at returnees because of their ethnic identity and destroyed houses
reconstructed for them. (See Bosnia and Herzegovina.)
Although European Union (E.U.) states vigorously demanded that Eastern
European countries take measures to combat discrimination against Roma, the
steps they took themselves to restrict immigration and bar access to their territories
and asylum determination procedures for asylum seekers were often discriminatory.
The deployment of British immigration officials to Prague’s Ruzyne Airport
in July followed a wave of asylum claims by mostly-Roma Czech citizens. British
officials there barred 120 travellers—the majority of them Roma—before protests
at their targeting of Roma led to the temporary suspension of the pre-flight screenings.
(See Czech Republic.)
In Greece, following the September 11 attacks in the U.S., authorities fearing a
large influx of Afghan refugees refused to allow many asylum seekers even to apply
for refugee status, issuing expedited expulsion orders instead. (See Greece.) In
Spain, officials equated the global campaign against international terrorism with
the fight against illegal immigration.
Some states’ concepts of nationality also resulted in severe restrictions of minority
rights, even to the extent of denying minorities official recognition or restricting
the use of their language. In February, Sotiris Blatsas of the Society for
Aromanian (Vlach) Culture was tried in Greece and convicted of “disseminating
false information” because he had published a list of minority languages spoken in
Greece. He had distributed a publication of the E.U.’s European Bureau for Lesser
Used Languages (EBLUL) at an Aromanian festival in July 1995.He was sentenced
to fifteen months in prison.
In Turkey, state policies that denied recognition of the Kurdish minority were
enforced through censorship and imprisonment. Controls on freedom of expression
continued to prevent broadcasting and education in Kurdish. Local governors
prohibited the use of Kurdish street names and banned plays, cassettes, and films in
Kurdish on the grounds that they were “separatist.”Those that challenged or tested
state policies on ethnicity in their statements or writings—Kurds and non-Kurds
alike—faced prosecution and imprisonment.
In Morocco, there was freer discussion of the rights of the Berber minority, but
authorities twice barred the holding of meetings to address the issues. Authorities
seized an issue of the French weekly Courrier International which carried a feature
on Berbers in Morocco. (See Morocco.)
The United Kingdom’s (U.K.’s) response to the September 11 attacks on the
United States included proposed emergency measures that threatened to undermine
civil liberties and the rights of refugees and migrants. Draft anti-terrorism
legislation provided for the indefinite detention of foreigners with limited judicial
review and restricted the rights of suspects to seek asylum. September 11 was also
followed by a dramatic rise in attacks on Muslims living in the U.K. The attacks
were condemned by the government—with measures to toughen enforcement of
hate crimes legislation—but new government calls for anti-terrorist measures,
more restrictive immigration and asylum controls, and for halting the flow of
Afghan refugees into Europe contributed to an increasingly hostile climate toward
refugees and migrants in the U.K.
In the United States, longstanding patterns of discrimination in the criminal
justice system persisted,with the U.N.Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination
highlighting police brutality, notably against minority groups and foreigners;
disproportionately high incarceration rates of black and Hispanic
Americans; racial disparities in the application of the death penalty; and the effect
of felony disenfranchisement on minorities.Measures introduced in the aftermath
of the September 11 attacks raised concerns that minorities and foreigners distinguished
by their ethnicity would be subject to new forms of abusive discriminatory
treatment.New laws and other measures permitted the indefinite detention of noncitizens
and over 1,000 people were detained, mostly Arab or Muslim men.
The September 11 attacks were followed in the United States by a wave of racist attacks against Muslims, Sikhs, and people of Middle Eastern and South Asian
descent—with almost 1,000 reported by November. President Bush and other officials
condemned the violence and urged the public to reject national or religious
stereotyping that would blame whole communities for the acts of terrorism committed
by a few, simply because they shared the same religious, ethnic, or national
identity. (See United States.)
WHO BELONGS?
In an era of “ethnic cleansing,” ethnic and religious pogroms, genocide, and
massive displacement across borders, the question “who belongs?” in a community
or in a nation came to assume life and death proportions. In some cases the designated
outsiders faced oppression and exploitation at home—for example India’s
Dalits or Europe’s Roma—locked in a subordinate status and vulnerable to violence
by private citizens and authorities alike. In others, as in parts of Indonesia,
Africa’s Great Lakes region, and West Africa (and in the 1990s, the former
Yugoslavia), minorities became outsiders overnight, caught up in political movements
of terror and exclusion whose leaders were bent upon the physical destruction
or expulsion of those not of the dominant ethnicity or religion.
Although “who belongs?” was often defined in terms of citizenship, this too
became an increasingly mutable concept as new independent states emerged and
multiethnic states broke down. The denial or deprivation of citizenship could turn
solely on the basis of ethnicity or national origin—particularly in conflict situations
and periods of political transition. In some cases, however, whole communities
of “nationals without nationality” had long been denied citizenship on
discriminatory grounds.
States that defined citizenship in terms of racial or national Apurity@ often discriminated
both on grounds of ethnicity and national origin and on the basis of
gender. As citizenship was restricted to the children of male nationals, female citizens
were discouraged from marrying men of another nationality because their
children would be denied citizenship. Naturalization policies, too, were often
wholly or largely founded on discriminatory grounds, while shielded from criticism
as a sovereign prerogative of states.
Racial and gender discrimination intersected where citizenship was restricted to
the children of male nationals, the norm in many countries of the Middle East,
North Africa, and parts of Sub-Saharan Africa. Ethnic Kurdish women who were
classified as stateless “foreigners” in Syria could marry Syrian citizens with prior
authorization from the interior ministry, but ethnic Kurdish men with this status
were not permitted to marry female Syrian citizens. If they did so, the marriages
were not legally recognized and both spouses were described as unmarried on their
identity cards.“[I]n the case that a Syrian female should have the audacity to marry
any foreigner . . . that marriage is considered illegal,”the government stated in 1996.
“As a result, neither it nor the children that ensue will be registered in the civil registers.”
In Kuwait, authorities continued to deny citizenship to some 120,000 of the minority Bidun, many of whose families had lived in Kuwait for generations and
had no claim to citizenship of another country.
Denial of citizenship affected minority populations that were indigenous to a
country or had been present for generations—as well as majorities. The end of the
apartheid regime in South Africa spelled an end to denationalization taken to an
extreme: a “homelands” policy whose advocates aimed to make black South
Africans citizens of “bantustans”—and no longer citizens of South Africa.Moves to
strip the citizenship of more than a million Zairean nationals of the Banyarwanda
ethnic group after 1991 spurred domestic and interstate conflict there. Ethiopia
summarily denationalized and expelled some 70,000 Ethiopian citizens of Eritrean
origin after war broke out with Eritrea in May 1998—while Eritrea carried out
summary expulsions to Ethiopia on a lesser scale.Progress in post-war negotiations
offered hope of a review of the administrative measures by which Ethiopians of
Eritrean origin were summarily stripped of their citizenship.
The military junta ruling Burma excluded hundreds of thousands of members
of Burma’s minorities from citizenship with a 1982 citizenship law. In the 1990s
more than 250,000 Rohingya Muslims fled to neighboring Bangladesh. In 2001,
most Rohingya remained without full citizenship rights.
In Southeast Asia, the government of Thailand had issued special identity documents
to some 300,000 members of the country’s ethnic minority hill tribes, but
these indigenous people were denied a nationality or full citizenship rights. Hundreds
of thousands of other hill tribe villagers were unregistered and officially considered
illegal immigrants. This particularly affected hill tribe women who were
victims of trafficking to Japan and who, once free of their traffickers, could not gain
readmission to Thailand.
In South Asia, the government of Bhutan stripped of citizenship and expelled
more than 100,000 Bhutanese of ethnic Nepali origin in the early 1990s, the majority
of whom were still refugees. Bhutanese refugees spent a tenth year in exile in
camps in southeast Nepal, deprived of their right to return home.Despite the start
in early 2001 of a joint Nepal-Bhutan verification program to determine the status
of these refugees, no refugees had returned as of late November.
In the Americas, racial discrimination and related intolerance colored the treatment
of migrants as well as the implementation of laws concerning nationality.
Over half a million Haitians and Dominicans of Haitian descent lived in the
Dominican Republic, where certain government policies reflected racial discrimination
and xenophobia. Because the Dominican government made it difficult for
Haitians to obtain legal residency documents, the vast majority were undocumented.
In violation of the Dominican constitution, Haitians’ Dominican-born
children were frequently denied Dominican citizenship. Haitians’ precarious legal
status left them vulnerable to economic exploitation, arbitrary expulsion, and violations
of basic rights.
In Europe, the disintegration of the Soviet Union led to discriminatory norms
for citizenship in several newly independent countries. In the breakup of the former
Yugoslavia, the terrorizing and physical expulsion of minorities coincided with
measures to deny citizenship to members of ethnic minorities residing there or
seeking to return to their homes. Elsewhere in Europe, citizenship laws enacted by Slovakia and the Czech Republic after the division of Czechoslovakia served
directly to exclude Roma citizens from citizenship in the new republics: international
pressure led to reforms of the relevant laws, although obstacles remained,
and Roma continued to suffer discrimination.
UNITED NATIONS WORLD CONFERENCE
AGAINST RACISM
The third United Nations World Conference Against Racism, Racial Discrimination,
Xenophobia and Related Intolerance was held in Durban, South Africa
from August 31 to September 8, 2001. The first such conference since the end of
apartheid, this WCAR provided governments with an opportunity to combat both
the overt and more subtle forms of racial discrimination that existed abroad and at
home—a potential, sadly, that was largely unrealized. A great failing of the conference
was the inability of participants—governments and nongovernmental organizations
alike—to forge a common front to combat racism and related intolerance
in the spirit and within the framework of the International Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination.
The WCAR was plagued by a series of acrimonious disputes over the
Israel/Palestine question; the issue of reparations for slavery and colonialism; and
other issues. Both the United States and Israel withdrew at an early stage, citing
anti-Israel sentiment, and there was divisiveness and intolerance within the NGO
community itself on this and other issues.Yet in some respects, including on questions
such as the protection of migrants and refugees, repairing the legacy of slavery,
and equal nationality rights for women, significant progress was made.
The WCAR process led to an unprecedented mobilization of victims of racism
from communities around the world, which served to reinforce and reinvigorate
many community, national, and regional anti-racism movements. Groups seeking
to break the bonds of discrimination forged new alliances across continents with
hitherto unknown partners—not least as the United States civil rights movement
and black Latin Americans found common cause with South Asia’s Dalit movement.
The heightened international profile given to caste discrimination—despite
India’s successful efforts to prevent the WCAR from addressing the issue head on—
was a significant outcome.
U.S. government participation in the WCAR process was marked with scarcely
veiled hostility—although hundreds of U.S. NGOs participated actively and enthusiastically
in the preparatory meetings and NGO forum. The administration
warned NGOs and governments that the conference should not lead to any new
programs to combat racism, any new legal standards, any additional money to fund
anti-racism efforts, or any follow-up. It warned the conference not to call for reparations
for slavery and the trans-Atlantic slave trade or to adopt language specifically
criticizing Israel.
In the end, attending governments did reach compromise language on the Middle
East, which included specific reference to “the plight of Palestinian people
under foreign occupation,” but no specific reference to Israel’s or any other government’s human rights practices. Compromise language was also reached on
reparations, calling for governments to take “appropriate and effective measures to
halt and reverse the lasting consequences of [racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia
and related intolerance].”
The U.S. government’s decision to withdraw from the conference meant that the
administration lost a paramount opportunity for the administration to join and
shape the collective voice of the international community in moving forward
together in the struggle against racism. The U.S. lost a chance to lead by example,
while appearing to duck the international spotlight thrown on its own problems of
racial discrimination—to the dismay of the large NGO delegation attending from
the United States.
The summit called for far-reaching programs to address intolerance and discrimination
against the 150 million migrants in the world, including education
campaigns and prevention of workplace bias. It asked countries to combat intolerance
against refugees, and included a reference reminding governments of the standards
agreed in the 1951 U.N.Refugee Convention. It called on states to protect the
more than 30 million people displaced in their own countries, referring to the U.N.
guidelines on the internally displaced. It asked countries to monitor and ensure
accountability for police misconduct and to eliminate “racial profiling.” The conference
called on countries to fund anti-racism efforts and public awareness campaigns
in schools and the media and to promote tolerance and openness to
diversity. It urged governments to collect data disaggregated by race, as a first means
of identifying and then addressing discrimination in access to health care and the
provision of government services.
The conference acknowledged that slavery and the slave trade “are a crime
against humanity and should always have been so,”and said that states had a “moral
obligation” to “take appropriate and effective measures to halt and reverse the lasting
consequences of those practices.”This was an historic recognition of the criminality
of slavery and the moral obligation to repair its lasting damage.
In a significant step pressed by its women’s caucus, the conference urged countries
to allow women the right, on an equal basis with men, to pass on their nationality
to their children and spouses, a right denied in many countries. The
conference program of action also acknowledged the multiple and unique ways in
which racism and sexism interact to deny women their human rights.
Discrimination by reason of caste was a constant theme of the conference, not
least through public demonstrations and effective lobbying by the International
Dalit Solidarity Network (IDSN) and by India’s National Campaign on Dalit
Human Rights (NCDHR). Caste or “work and descent” discrimination was
referred to in many plenary speeches by government delegates. Reflecting the
emphasis on caste in the WCAR’s preparatory process, the Sub-Commission on the
Promotion and Protection of Human Rights in August 2001 passed by consensus a
decision to continue a study on work and descent-based discrimination.
India’s actions to keep caste out of the final conference documents served effectively
to stimulate international press coverage of the issue and to heighten pressure
for scrutiny through the international machinery of human rights. The conference
did not formally extend the desired recognition that caste-based discrimination
blighted the lives of hundreds of millions—but the attendant awareness generated by the conference sent a clear message that international programs were required
to remedy its consequences and to establish practical measures to facilitate its abolition.
Despite the conference’s failings and lost opportunities, South African Foreign
Affairs Minister Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma described the final agreements as “a
new road-map for the fight against racism.”But the conference was only a first step;
the real test is whether governments will deliver on what they agreed. Human
Rights Watch, for its part, will be working to ensure that they do.
THE WORK OF HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH
The fight against racism, racial discrimination, and related intolerance was an
integral part of Human Rights Watch’s regional and thematic research and advocacy
program. In the context of the WCAR, the organization focused especially on
caste discrimination; the protection of migrants and refugees; discrimination in
the denial of citizenship rights; on racial discrimination in criminal justice and in
the administration of state institutions, services, and resources; and the link
between racial or ethnic and gender discrimination. In the run-up to the conference,
Human Rights Watch also pressed for the WCAR to adopt a policy on reparations
for past abuses to address the most pressing needs arising from slavery, the
slave trade, certain especially racist aspects of colonialism, and other extreme official
racist practices. Our program of action included the publication of a series of
short reports, campaign action with partner nongovernmental organizations
(NGOs), and participation in official and informal preparatory meetings and the
conference itself.
Caste Discrimination
In much of Asia, parts of Africa, and in the South Asian diaspora caste was coterminous
with race in the definition and exclusion of groups distinguished by their
descent Over 250 million people worldwide suffered under a hidden apartheid of
segregation, modern-day slavery, and other extreme forms of discrimination
because they were born into a marginalized, subordinate caste.Although India was
home to the largest affected community—some 160 million people—caste-based
abuse was also rampant in Nepal, Sri Lanka, Bangladesh, Pakistan, Japan, and parts
ofWest Africa—and in the South Asian diaspora.
Caste discrimination was within the scope of the International Convention on
the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, which defined racial discrimination
to include discrimination by reason of “race, colour, descent, or
national or ethnic origin . . .”(emphasis added).The Committee on the Elimination
of Racial Discrimination affirmed that caste discrimination was founded on
descent—and constituted racial discrimination in the terms of the convention. It
did so most expressly in a 1996 comment on India’s report on compliance with the
convention—India had denied that caste discrimination was a form of racial discrimination
that it must address to meet its treaty obligations.
Human Rights Watch helped ensure that the WCAR brought caste discrimination to international attention and to overcome the efforts to exclude its discussion
by the very governments which displayed complacency about caste discrimination
at home. India’s government argued that efforts to raise the caste issue were part of
an “external agenda”—echoing what South Africa’s former white minority government
long contended when the international community spoke out against
apartheid.
In Caste Discrimination: A Global Concern,Human Rights Watch challenged the
efforts of certain governments to keep caste discrimination a shameful secret—
excluded even from the World Conference. The report, which documented the
global scope of caste discrimination, cited the language of international law and
intergovernmental human rights bodies that brought caste discrimination—a
form of discrimination by reason of descent—squarely within the current of the
international fight against racism.
Refugees and Migrants
Xenophobia toward migrants, refugees, and asylum seekers became a global
trend over the past decade,while a barrage of new, restrictive policies in industrialized
countries emerged even before the events of September 2001. But the antiterrorism
measures instituted in many countries after the September attacks promised
to further restrict access to asylum determination procedures and to curtail the civil
liberties of migrants.New measures under the antiterrorism rubric threatened further
grave consequences for migrants and refugees—compounded by the strains of
the burgeoning world economic crisis.
In its work to combat discrimination against refugees and migrants, Human
Rights Watch pressed for countries to ratify and implement the International Convention
on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of
Their Families, identify measures to reinforce the international refugee protection
regime, and develop an international monitoring system by which to better detect
and remedy discriminatory treatment of migrants and refugees. (See Refugees,
Asylum Seekers,Migrants, and Internally Displaced Persons.)
Citizenship Rights
We sought to win recognition of the problem of denial or deprivation of citizenship
on racial and related grounds, and the intersection of race and gender in
discriminatory citizenship laws and practices. To this end, we encouraged U.N.
committees created by the treaties on women’s rights and on children’s rights to put
this issue on their agendas, and for the U.N.High Commissioner on Human Rights
to set in motion a study of potentially discriminatory norms by which states determined
who was a citizen or naturalized citizen.We said international measures of
conflict resolution and early warning should address questions of citizenship and
denationalization founded on discriminatory grounds. These issues should be recognized
as major factors in the generation of massive human rights abuse, including
genocide, and armed conflict, and the generation of refugee flows.
In some countries with large populations of “citizens without citizenship,”
where particular ethnic groups were singled out as less than citizens, although they
were not mere aliens, a remedy to this discriminatory practice was within ready
reach even under existing law.Members of Syria’s native Kurdish population who
were denied official Syrian nationality were not permitted to own land, housing, or
a business, or to register a motor vehicle—and their children faced major obstacles
to formal education. Yet the Syrian government’s 2000 report to the U.N. Human
Rights Committee made clear that the nationality law specifically provided for the
granting of citizenship to all Kurdish children born in Syria, irrespective of the legal
status of their parents, if the Syrian government should choose to invoke it. An
important first step against discrimination in citizenship rights was to implement
international norms to combat statelessness.
As an immediate bulwark against the discriminatory denial of nationality, we
encouraged the WCAR to promote the ratification of international agreements on
statelessness, and for children’s rights activists to demand the implementation of
the Convention on the Rights of the Child’s strong safeguards against statelessness.
We urged the Committee on the Rights of the Child to call on states to describe their
safeguards against racial, ethnic, and gender discrimination in citizenship laws and
practices in their regular reports to the committee. Populations with longstanding
claims to nationality in their country of residence whose children remained stateless
required particularly urgent attention. Similarly, we encouraged the Committee
for the Elimination of Racial Discrimination and the Committee on the
Elimination of Discrimination against Women to consider the discriminatory
manner in which race, ethnicity, and national origin intersected with gender in citizenship
and naturalization policies, and request states to address these issues when
reporting to these committees.
Discrimination in Criminal Justice
and Public Administration
Discrimination in the administration of justice—whether in policing, criminal
prosecutions, trials, sentencing, or imprisonment—caused extraordinary harm to
individuals and societies alike.Members of racial, ethnic, and other minorities or
vulnerable groups often faced harassment, arbitrary detention, and abusive treatment
by the law enforcement apparatus and disparate treatment by prosecutors
and the courts.
Police disproportionately targeted members of marginalized groups for arrest in
many countries. Members of these groups also faced disproportionate prosecutions,
unfair trials, and disproportionately severe sentences on criminal charges.
Humiliating treatment, beatings, sexual abuse, and shooting deaths of members of
marginalized groups often contrasted starkly with treatment accorded to others
and members of these groups often had little recourse to legal remedies to abuse.
Ostensibly race- or descent-neutral laws could have a disparate impact on vulnerable
minorities—or even majorities—as a consequence of prosecutorial discretion
or sentencing policies or the nature of the law itself. The resulting impact on
particular descent-based groups could be vastly disproportionate to the actual
involvement of members of these groups in the overall pattern of criminal activity.
For example, although there were more white drug offenders than black in the
United States, blacks constituted 57.6 percent of all drug offenders sent to state
prison. In racial profiling, stop and search provisions were abused to target suspects
on discriminatory grounds: A 1998 study of police stop and search patterns in England
and Wales by the British Home Office found that blacks were 7.5 times more
likely to be stopped and searched than whites. A 1997 Australian study, in turn,
found that Aboriginal people in Australia were 9.2 times more likely to be arrested,
23.7 times more likely to be imprisoned as an adult, and 48 times more likely to be
imprisoned as juveniles than non-Aborigines.
Criminal penalties that were accompanied by temporary or permanent disenfranchisement
further excluded members of groups already facing discriminatory
treatment from participation in political life and accentuated and perpetuated their
economic, social, and political marginalization. In 1998 it was reported that an estimated
3.9 million U.S. citizens were disenfranchised, including over one million
who had fully completed their sentences. This hit black men in particular, with 13
percent—1.4 million—disenfranchised.
The discriminatory effect of public policy and administrative practice often prevented
the enjoyment of fundamental human rights even in the absence of overt
discriminatory intent. This was often most evident in the administration of social
services, education, and public housing to exclude or marginalize members of particular
groups.
The denial of equal access by minorities to education was a major concern in
several regions. In certain countries in Asia, including Nepal, Sri Lanka, and Japan,
children whose parents belonged to lower-caste or shunned, descent-based social
groups faced widespread discrimination in access to education and had markedly
lower literacy rates and school attendance rates than the general population. In
India, children of Dalits who attended school were largely restricted to the worst
government schools,where they faced discriminatory and abusive treatment at the
hands of their teachers and fellow students.
In August, the U.N. Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination
issued “concluding observations” following review of China’s report on its implementation
of the convention.The committee expressed concern about discrimination
in education, particularly in Tibet.
In Europe, Romani children suffered extreme discrimination in their access to
education, through relegation to segregated schools, routine assignment to
“special” facilities intended for children with learning disabilities, or no schooling
at all. In schools that were not segregated, Romani children faced harassment from
students—and sometimes by teachers—as well as racial slurs and lowered expectations,
contributing to a high dropout rate.
In Bosnia and Herzegovina, a Human Rights Watch investigation identified concern
at discrimination in schools—including a discriminatory grade-school curriculum—
as a major impediment to the return of minority displaced families to
their pre-war homes.
A 2001 Human Rights Watch investigation found pervasive and systematic discrimination
against nearly one-fourth of Israel’s 1.6 million schoolchildren—
Palestinian Arab citizens—who were educated in a public school system that was
wholly separate from the Jewish majority. The Israeli government spent less per Palestinian Arab child than per Jewish child, and Arab schools were inferior to Jewish
schools in virtually every respect.Among Palestinian Arabs, the Negev Bedouin
and children in villages denied legal status by the Israeli government fared worst in
every respect. In its 2001 report to the Committee on the Rights of the Child, Israel
acknowledged the gap between Arab and Jewish education, but despite a commitment
to closing the gap it had failed to take necessary steps to equalize the two systems.
(See Children’s Rights.)
Human Rights Watch encouraged the WCAR to give a new impetus for states to
systematically collect and report data on law enforcement and the administration
of justice,with a view to identifying and remedying any discriminatory purpose or
effect; and to monitor the administration of public affairs in such areas as education,
health care, housing, and the enforcement of labor rights,with a view to identifying
and remedying any discriminatory purpose or effect in public policy and
programs.
Reparations
In advance of the World Conference, Human Rights Watch called for governments
to make reparations to counter the most severe continuing effects of slavery,
segregation, racist aspects of colonialism, and other extreme forms of racism in the
past.We said efforts should focus first on groups that continue to suffer the most
severe hardships, with long-term commitments to correct the damage done to the
groups left most seriously disadvantaged.We encouraged the WCAR to adopt proposals
in favor of providing reparations to the descendants of past victims. To this
end we pressed for priority to be given measures to address the social and economic
foundations of today’s victims’ continuing marginalization—through means such
as investment in education, housing, health care, or job training.
Human Rights Watch argued that the descendants of a victim of human rights
abuse should be able to pursue claims of reparations—that the right to reparations
was not extinguished with the death of the victim. Reparations would consist of
compensation, acknowledgment of past abuses, an end to ongoing abuses, and, as
much as possible, restoration of the state of affairs that would have prevailed had
there been no abuses. To establish priorities for reparations,Human Rights Watch
proposed the establishment of national panels as well as one or more international
panels to look at the effect of the slave trade and other international forms of systemic
abuse. These panels would focus on tracing these effects not for particular
individuals but for groups. The panels would serve as a form of truth commission
aiming to determine how a government’s past racist practices had contributed to
contemporary deprivation domestically and across world regions. They would
educate the public, acknowledge responsibility, and propose methods of redress
and making amends.
Relevant Human Rights Watch Reports:
Israel: Second Class: Discrimination Against Palestinian Arab Children in Israel’s
Schools, 12/01
Under Orders: War Crimes in Kosovo, 10/01
Crimes Against Civilians: Abuses by Macedonian Forces in Ljuboten,August 10-12,
2001, 9/01
Caste Discrimination: A Global Concern, 8/01
The New Racism: The Political Manipulation of Ethnicity in Cote D’Ivoire, 8/01
Unequal Protection: The State Response to Violence Crime on south African Farms,
08/01
The War in Aceh, 8/01
Violence and Political Impasse in Papua, 7/01
Hidden in The Home: Abuse of Domestic Workers with Special Visas, 6/01
No Escape: Male Rape in U.S. Prisons, 4/01
The “Dirty War” in Chechnya: Forced Disappearances, Torture, and Summary
Executions, 3/01
Uganda in Eastern DRC: Fueling Political and Ethnic Strife, 3/01
Massacres of Hazaras in Afghanistan, 2/01