Religion and the Human Rights Movement
by Jean-Paul Marthoz and Joseph Saunders
Is there a schism between the human rights movement and religious
communities? Essential disagreements appear increasingly to pit secular
human rights activists against individuals and groups acting from religious
motives. The list of contentious issues is growing: on issues such
as reproductive rights, gay marriage, the fight against HIV/AIDS, and
blasphemy laws, human rights activists and religious groups often find
themselves on opposing sides. As illustrated by the Muslim headscarf
debate in France and Turkey, controversies linked to religion also have
confused many in the human rights movement and even led some
activists to express strong reservations about certain public expressions
of religious conscience.
Western Europe, the most secularized continent in the world, has been
in the eye of the storm. The controversy that hit the European Union
in October 2004 around the proposed appointment to the European
Commission of Italian conservative Catholic Rocco Buttiglione illustrates
some of the issues at stake. Unperturbed by the furor he was
arousing, the candidate for Commissioner on Justice, Freedom, and
Security—who in that function would have been in charge of fighting
discrimination—affirmed in front of bewildered members of the
European Parliament that “homosexuality is a sin” and that “the family
exists to allow women to have children and be protected by their husbands.”
Although he insisted that he would nonetheless uphold the
equality of all citizens, he was invited to withdraw his candidacy by the
Commission’s president-elect.
In November 2004 the religiously inspired murder of Theo Van Gogh,
a well-known Dutch journalist and filmmaker who two months earlier
had released a controversial film on violence against women in Islamic
societies, triggered an infamous cycle of violence, leading to the burning of mosques and Christian churches. These traumatic events in a
country that prides itself for its tolerance placed the issue of religion,
and more particularly Islam, in the center of public controversy. While
many Dutch people of all faiths and communities demonstrated against
revenge attacks and discrimination, one prominent official responded
with a suggestion to revive, in the name of coexistence, a 1932 blasphemy
law.
The Challenge
“Fifty years after its proclamation,” writes Michael Ignatieff, “the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights has become the sacred text of
what Elie Wiesel has called a ‘worldwide secular religion.’”1 The
growth of the human rights movement has given it the confidence to
take on controversial issues and extend the promise of the Universal
Declaration on Human Rights (UDHR) in areas that it had previously
neglected.
This “new frontier,” however, is colliding with the “return of the religious”
in many societies, with what French political scientist Gilles
Kepel has called “God’s Revenge,”2 featuring the reassertion of more
dogmatic or conservative forms of beliefs inside and outside of mainstream
religious denominations.
While it would be inappropriate for the human rights community to
advocate for or against any system of religious belief or ideology and
wrong to judge or interpret the principles of any religion or faith, it
would be equally mistaken for the human rights groups to turn away
from human rights violations or appeals for discrimination made in the
name of religious principle or law.
Defining how to engage with religious communities thus has become
one of the major challenges for the human rights movement. To paraphrase
Ignatieff, human rights cannot truly go global unless it goes deeply local, unless it addresses plural philosophies and beliefs that
sometimes collide with or appear to resist its appeal to universal norms.
If international human rights standards have a claim to universality their
relevance must be demonstrated in all contexts, and especially where
religion determines state behavior.
This essay argues that the human rights movement needs to be able to
provide clearer answers to the hard questions presented by the demands
of believers and by religious organizations seeking direct political influence.
On the one hand, rights activists should more aggressively stand up for
religious freedom and the rights of believers in secular and religious
societies alike; on the other, they should directly oppose pressures from
religious groups that seek to dilute or eliminate rights protections—for
women, sexual minorities, atheists, religious dissenters, and so on—that
such religious groups view as inconsistent with fundamental religious
teachings and deeply held beliefs. Human rights groups should oppose
efforts in the name of religion to impose a moral view on others when
there is no harm to third parties and the only “offense” is in the mind of
the person who feels that the other is acting immorally.3
A Global Phenomenon
Questions of how the human rights movement should engage with religious
communities are particularly difficult because they occur in a
highly volatile context marked by the rise of “fundamentalism,” religious
extremism, the fusion between religion and ethnic identity in
many armed conflicts,4 and the worldwide impact of terrorism in the
name of God and responses to it.
The rolling news flows in the global village have given these phenomena
increased visibility and potency. Attacks against Christians in
Pakistan or against Muslims in India, new incidents of anti-Semitism in Western Europe, and hate crimes against Muslims in the U.S. or
Europe immediately take on a global dimension. The worldwide ripples
of the “headscarf” controversy in France—street demonstrations in
Arab countries, diplomatic disavowal, and even crude pressure through
the abduction in Iraq of two French journalists5—have vividly underscored
the sensitivity of religious issues in the global village.
Religion indeed plays a pervasive and often powerful role in global
affairs. Problems of a religious nature often implicate international
security as much as they do human rights. In a trend reminiscent of
King Louis XIV’s 1649 proclamation declaring French protection of the
Maronite community in Lebanon, or of the 19th century European
powers’ “humanitarian interventions” against the Ottoman Empire to
“protect persecuted Christians,” religious freedom and the fate of religious
minorities have assumed an increasingly prominent place in international
diplomacy.
In 1998, under pressure from Christian groups and representatives of a
number of other faiths, the U.S. Congress passed the International
Religious Freedom Act. The law established an Office of International
Religious Freedom in the State Department and an independent, bipartisan
Commission on International Religious Freedom, and tasked them
with monitoring and reporting on the incidence of religious persecution
around the world. Based on the annual reporting of these bodies, the
U.S. president can take diplomatic and economic measures against
“countries of particular concern,” making one particular right—freedom
of religion—a unique yardstick of foreign relations.
The religious/human rights equation and its role in global politics are
made still more complex due to major differences among democracies
concerning the place of religion in public life. The gap between a “postreligious
Europe” and the United States is particularly significant and
not without consequences for the priorities and approaches of the international
human rights movement. A 2002 survey by the Pew Forum on Religion and Public Life concluded that, among wealthy nations, the
United States stands alone in its embrace of religion. Fifty-nine percent
of the U.S. population surveyed stated that religion played an important
role in their life, against 30 percent in Canada, 33 percent in Great
Britain, 21 percent in Germany, and 11 percent in France.6
The differences extend to the very definition of religion itself. In
France, Belgium, Germany, and Argentina, for example, some religious
groups that are considered legitimate religious denominations in the
United States have been denounced as “sects” or “psychological cults,”
as a threat to the foundations of democratic freedom, and, as a result,
subjected to what the groups see as unwarranted discrimination or
harassment. Such differences, mostly raised within the context of OSCE
(Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe) meetings, have
been approached with great unease by the various components of the
international human rights movement.
History
Some in secular circles would suggest that history has come full circle.
To them, the human rights movement is the product of the
Enlightenment and, as such, part of a determined attempt at reducing
the power of religion over state and society. Today, however, it is resurgent
religious movements that are challenging the place of human
rights.
In some countries, in France in particular, the history of the human
rights movement is intimately linked to laicité (secularism), to the roll
back of the Catholic Church and the separation between church and
state. The Dreyfus affair at the end of the 19th century was the symbol
of this clash and the founding moment for the French League of
Human Rights (Ligue des Droits de l’Homme, LDH). The controversy
around the role of the official Church in supporting Petainism7 during
the Second World War deepened this mutual suspicion. In Spain, the ideological marriage between the Catholic Church and the Franco dictatorship
generally led, until the early sixties, to a chasm between the
democratic opposition and Catholicism.
History, however, also tells another story. In other countries religion
was the prime mover behind campaigns for human rights. The role of
U.S. and English Protestant churches in the anti-slavery campaigns, in
the Congo reform movement,8 and in solidarity with Armenian victims
in the late days of the Ottoman Empire belong to the best chapters of
the history of the human rights movement.9 The “social teachings” of
the Catholic Church in the late 19th century also created a context that
allowed committed Christians to press actively for social justice and
contributed to the development of strong labor unions and mutual help
associations that fought for social and economic rights.
In South Asia, Hinduism was the inspiration of Mahatma Gandhi’s long
march for the liberation of India. Since the occupation of Tibet by
China in 1949-51, a religious figure—the Dalai Lama—has been guiding
the Tibetans’ struggle for freedom, pushing for a democratic, selfgoverning
Tibet “in association with” China.
In the 1950s and 1960s the human rights movement grew in part thanks
to the involvement of leading religious groups and individuals.
Although the Church took a cautionary approach, Catholic intellectuals
(first among them Catholic writer par excellence François Mauriac), journalists,
and activists played a prophetic role in the fight against the use
of torture and “disappearances” by the French army in the Algerian war
of independence, invoking their faith to combat what they considered
brutal attacks against human dignity.
The civil rights movement in the United States was powerfully inspired
by religious figures, among whom Martin Luther King, Jr., stands as an
icon, and was in many cases supported by mainstream Christian and
Jewish denominations.
After the 1964 military coup in Brazil a significant part of the Catholic
Church, centered around Bishop Dom Helder Camara, inspired by the
teachings of the Second Vatican Council (1962-1965) and of mainstream
Protestant denominations, became a vibrant defender of human
rights. Political coups in Bolivia, Chile, and Uruguay in the 1970s and
civil wars in Central America in the 1980s often placed the official
Church, or at least some of its most powerful voices, on the side of the
human rights movement. The Servicio Paz y Justicia founded in 1974 in
Argentina by 1980 Nobel Peace Prize laureate Adolfo Perez Esquivel,
the Vicaria de Solidaridad in Chile, and the Tutela Legal in El Salvador
were focal points of the human rights struggle.
San Salvador Archbishop Oscar Arnulfo Romero’s last sermon in March
1980, with his passionate plea to the army and National Guard to “disobey
an immoral law”—“Brothers, you come from your own people.
You are killing your own brother peasants when any human order to kill
must be subordinate to the law of God which says, ‘Thou shalt not
kill’”—stands out as one of the most powerful documents of the Latin
American human rights struggle.
In the 1980s in the Philippines, the Catholic Church was one of the
major actors in the overthrow of the Marcos dictatorship. In Eastern
Europe, particularly in Poland with its strong Catholic Church and in
East Germany with the Lutheran Church’s support of independent
pacifists and dissidents, religious organizations joined in the fight
against state authoritarianism and repression. In the 1970s, in the wake
of the ratification of the Helsinki Accords,10 Jewish organizations and
individuals in particular played a decisive role in Eastern Europe and
the USSR in the defense of dissidents and fundamental freedoms of
expression, belief, and movement.11
In the 1980s and 1990s, in South Africa, Jews, Christians, and Muslims
fought apartheid, in alliance with secular or even Marxist-inspired organizations such as the South African Communist Party and the
African National Congress.
During all these decades of struggle and “speaking truth to power,” the
international human rights movement was also strongly inspired by religious
figures, like Joe Eldridge, of the Methodist church, director of the
Washington Office on Latin America (WOLA): “My father always said
that we were children of God,” he confided. “My motivation fundamentally
emerges from a religious perspective. Having been given life, I
believe that we are called to do things that edify life.”12
Convergence
In the 1970s and 1980s, religious and human rights groups shared many
objectives, reflecting a common conviction of the universality of the
human rights message and its grounding in the traditions of most religions,
philosophies, and civilizations. Religion-based traditionalism
seemed on the wane and “culturalism,” the black-boxing of cultures as
exclusivist identity-referents,13 was not allowed to tyrannize human
rights.
Conferences sponsored by UNESCO in the early 1990s on the theme
of inter-religious dialogue14 and, to a great extent, the 1993 U.N.-
sponsored World Conference on Human Rights in Vienna—its recognition
of the universal character of human rights—were high points of
this convergence between the human rights movement and mainstream
religious communities. Most in the secular human rights movement
agreed that there was indeed a faith-based commitment to human
rights.
This convergence was also helped by the priorities imposed on the
human rights movement by the brutality of government repression. In
Latin America in particular, civil and political rights were an immediate
question of life and death while issues more likely to separate rights and religious communities were confined to the sidelines: most opted for a
“coexistence of differences” on flash points like sexuality or abortion. In
Mexico, for instance, the bishop of the state of Chiapas, Mgr. Samuel
Ruiz, could join with secular human rights activists on civil and political
rights issues, and even on social justice concerns implicating rights to
health and housing, while retaining his more traditionalist positions on
issues like sexuality and reproductive rights.
Clouds
Some clouds, however, were already looming over this human rights
euphoria. There was always, of course, some underlying tension. As
human rights scholar Louis Henkin has phrased it: “The world of religion
and the world of human rights have not always coexisted comfortably.
Religion, and some particular religions, have not been comfortable
with human rights as an autonomous ideology that is not necessarily
rooted in religion. The human rights ideology, on the other hand, has
resisted the claims of some religions to disregard the claims of other
religions. Some religions have invoked religious dogma to justify distinctions
based on religion, gender, or sexual orientations, distinctions
that may be contrary to the human rights idea.”15
Throughout the “human rights decades,” moreover, churches were not
always unanimous in their human rights commitment and there were
always factions that fought back or hindered the rise of the human
rights movement, sided with military or authoritarian regimes, or were
otherwise complicit in human rights abuse. Most of these factions were
politically and ideologically conservative and they were dogmatically
doctrinaire. They stuck to an interpretation of religious teachings especially
in matters of individual morality and social mores at odds with the
trajectory of the human rights movement. They were seen as adversaries
by all members—secular and religious—of the human rights
movement.
Terrorism in the name of Islam, the Dutch Reformed Church’s support
for the apartheid regime in South Africa, the Argentinean Catholic
hierarchy’s passivity or tacit support for brutal military regimes in the
1970s, the killing of Yitzhak Rabin by a Jewish religious militant, and
the support provided by some right wing evangelical churches to leaders
of Latin American most brutal regimes—like former Guatemalan president
Efrain Rios Montt, an ordained minister of the Gospel
Outreach/Verbo evangelical church—are among the most prominent
examples of the use, or misuse, of religion to justify flagrant human
rights abuses.
Religious “Blowback”
In the 1960s, when secularism was seen by many as inevitable, part of
the unstoppable march of progress, and organized religious communities
appeared to be sidelined as a political force, especially in the
Western world, French writer and minister of Culture André Malraux
challenged that orthodoxy, declaring in oracular fashion that “the twenty-
first century will be either religious or not be” (“le 21e siècle sera
religieux ou ne sera pas”).
Malraux’s view seems to have been confirmed in much of the world
today: Western Europe excepted, religion has made a strong comeback.
“The reemergence of religious discourse,” writes Sara Maitland, “seems
to have caught many of us on the hop: baffled, irritated and uncomprehending.
For over 250 years, Western democratic thinking has argued,
and even fought for, the secularization of the public domain and the
political arena... By the second half of the last century, indeed, one
might have thought the battle was won... What I see instead is a faltering,
a loss of faith, in the whole Enlightenment project.”16
While some have welcomed this development as a necessary counterbalance
to the excesses of materialism and individualism, others have
warned that this religious revival would subvert universal values, sow particularist and divisive attachments, and trigger a broader backlash.
Many people have responded, in short, with the same alarm with which
they greeted Samuel Huntington’s controversial thesis on the lasting
power of and inevitable “clash” between the world’s major civilizations.
The reasons for this religious comeback are manifold. It expresses both
renewed individual quests for meaning in a secularized, materialistic
world and a more collective search for identity in a world engaged in
the uncertainties and insecurities of globalization and diversity.
In some instances, the reemergence of religion also reflects in part the
failure of the states, especially in the developing world, to provide and
guarantee fundamental human rights for the majority of their populations.
As political scientist Vali Nasr has phrased it: “There is a direct
correlation between the scope and nature of religious activism and the
decline of the secular state as a functioning political system and as an
intellectual construct.... In Kemalist Turkey, Pahlavi Iran... secularism
never permeated deep into society... and with little to show in the form
of veritable development, the values that sustained these states came
under attack.”17
The growing political influence of religious communities also has been
linked to the “theologization” of state power. In some countries, ruling
elites have used particular religious interpretations to shore up their
power and maintain the social and political status quo. Saudi Arabia and
Iran are prominent examples.
When religion is merged with the state, human rights suffer. Asma
Jahangir writes that, in Pakistan, “the judicial institutionalization of
Islam has taken a particularly heavy toll on the rights of women and
religious minorities, and critics of discriminatory laws are branded un-
Islamic or traitorous…. The creed of National Islamization has been
used as a stick to beat all emancipatory and human rights movements.”
18
In Uzbekistan, the government has claimed a monopoly on the interpretation
of Islam and has jailed those who diverge from its version of
Islam on charges that such “independent” Muslims are attempting to
subvert or overthrow the constitutional order. Although the government
has used the pretext that such individuals are colluding with terrorism,
in the vast majority of cases the suspects have not been charged
with terrorism or any other form of violence.19
In Egypt, the government—citing the contrary dictates of Islamic law—
has made reservations to both the Convention on the Elimination of All
Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW) and the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), evading
its obligation to protect women’s rights.20
In Nigeria, twelve state governments in the north have added criminal
law to the jurisdiction of Shari’a (Islamic law) courts since 2000,21 raising
a number of serious rights concerns and stirring controversy in a
country where religious divisions run deep and where the federal constitution
specifies that there is no state religion. Shari’a has been in force
for many years in the north, where the majority of the population is
Muslim, but, until 2000, its scope was limited to personal status and
civil law. Human rights concerns arising in application of religious law
in those contexts have been exacerbated by the turn to Shari’a in criminal
law matters.
Human Rights Watch research confirms that Shari’a in Nigeria has
been manipulated for political purposes, and that this politicization of
religion has led to human rights violations.22 Application of Shari’a in
criminal cases in the twelve states has been accompanied by amputation,
floggings, the death penalty, discrimination against women, and systemic
due process failures. Since 2000, at least ten people have been
sentenced to death; dozens have been sentenced to amputation; and
floggings are a regular occurrence in many locations in the north.
These issues were given world wide prominence through the highly publicized cases of two women, Safiya Hussaini and Amina Lawal, who
were condemned by Shari’a courts to death by stoning for alleged adultery.
Although the death sentences eventually were overturned, the
cases highlighted how Shari’a could be used to justify flagrant human
rights violations.
The Threat to Free Speech
Religious authorities have long tried to “discipline” free speech when it
runs counter to religious teachings or dogmas. The paradigm case in
recent years is the Salman Rushdie case. On February 14, 1989, following
the 1988 publication of Rushdie’s book The Satanic Verses, the political
and spiritual leader of Iran, the Ayatollah Khomeini, issued a religious
edict calling on “all zealous Muslims to execute the author of the
book as well as those publishers who were aware of its contents, so that
no one will dare to insult Islam again.” The case illustrates the difficulty
some religious communities have in reconciling their deeply held beliefs
with the right to freedom of expression, which “is applicable not only to
‘information’ or ‘ideas’ that are favorably received or regarded as inoffensive
or as a matter of indifference, but also to those that offend,
shock or disturb the State or any sector of the population.”23
Although the call for murder was rejected by many mainstream Islamic
religious leaders, who condemned it as violating Islamic teachings of
mercy, most of these same leaders did not defend Rushdie’s right to
freedom of expression and asked for the banning of the book. Others, of
course, supported the fatwa.
The Rushdie case demonstrated the resonance of the accusation of blasphemy
inside of Islam. The responses of leaders of other religions,
however, were hardly exemplary. Although they strongly condemned
the call for murder, many expressed some sympathy for the Muslim
world’s indignation, forming what French philosopher Alain
Finkielkraut called “the Holy Alliance of Clergies.”24
The conflict between free speech and religion, indeed, is not limited to
Islam. Two years before the Rushdie case, with far less publicity, an
Austrian court acting on a complaint submitted by the Catholic diocese
of Innsbruck had prohibited the Otto Preminger Institut from showing
the film The Council of Love, based on Oskar Panizza’s controversial (and
allegedly strongly anti-Catholic) theater play. The judges referred to
article 108 of the Austrian Penal Code banning “religious denigration.”
In 1994, to the profound dismay of free speech defenders, the sentence
was endorsed by the European Court of Human Rights, relying on a
provision of the European Convention on the “rights of others.” The
ECHR has tended indeed to show far more deference to state interference
in freedom of expression where the speech has a religious or moral
content than is the case with political or other forms of speech.
The Catholic Church has strongly expressed its hostility toward other
books, plays, and films that it considers “collective defamation.” In
September 2004, Dan Brown’s best selling novel The Da Vinci Code was
banned in Lebanon after complaints from Catholic leaders that it was
“offensive to Christianity.” “There are paragraphs that touch the very
roots of the Christian religion, said the president of Lebanon’s Catholic
Information Center. They say that Jesus Christ had a sexual relationship
with Mary Magdalene... Christianity is not about forgiveness to the
point of insulting Jesus Christ.”25
Political correctness in the name of protecting religious sensitivities can
have a similarly chilling effect on free speech. In response to the murder
of filmmaker Theo van Gogh by a Muslim Dutch citizen of Moroccan
origin, the Dutch justice minister, Piet Hein Donner, proposed enforcing
a 1932 law banning “scornful blasphemy.” In a parliamentary
address said to have “horrified Holland’s free-thinking intelligentsia,”26
the minister said that the law was needed to curb “hateful comments”
that were destabilizing the country. As Brussels Free University professor
Guy Haarscher has written in another context, “Instead of protecting
individuals in their right to adhere to different conceptions of the Good, [a] society [that caters to political correctness] incurs the risk of
depending increasingly on organized groups capable of imposing
hypocrisy and the domination of the most conventional ‘thought.’”27
“Religious Wars”
Religion has been a part of bloody conflicts that have engulfed dozens
of countries in the last fifteen years. In Ireland, Cyprus, the Balkans,
Rwanda, Burma, Sri Lanka, Nigeria, Sudan, Israel/Palestine, the
Philippines (Mindanao), and Indonesia, individuals acting in the name
of religion have played an important role in crystallizing group hatred
and violence.28
Human Rights Watch has insisted that religion is more properly seen as
a tool used by those seeking power than a “root cause” of conflict in
such cases,29 and analysts have pointed out that “despite the perception
that religion is always a complicating factor in disputes, religion also
includes the tools that may be necessary to break the cycle of conflict.”30
Others counter, however, that in some particularly intractable confrontations
“it is the religious factor, not the conflict of interests, that
threatens to prevent a settlement,” leading to the continuation of the
cycle of violence and human rights abuses.
Religion also has been thrown into the maelstrom of terrorism in
national and international contexts, from attacks against abortion clinics
in the United States to religiously justified suicide bombings in Israel.31
After 9/11 in particular, politically motivated “fundamentalist” fervor
and terror seem to go hand in hand on a global scale and immediately
evoke images of suicide bombings, hostage takings, and beheadings.
While such extreme or violent expressions of religious beliefs do not in
themselves create particular dilemmas—mainstream religious groups
typically join rights groups in denouncing such attacks on civilians as
crimes against humanity—they can exacerbate tensions between human rights and religious groups, as has occurred in the abortion debate in
the United States, in Israel following suicide bombings, and between
some rights groups and Islamist organizations after 9/11.
Tensions Today
Many common issues continue to be defended together by secular
human rights groups and religious groups. In Western Europe and in
the United States, the resolute defence of the rights of asylum seekers
and economic refugees by mainstream churches as well as their advocacy
in favor of global justice continue to offer wide spaces for cooperation.
In the global South, in actions complementing the work of secular
NGOs, many religious organizations are moving to the forefront of
social and economic rights by providing social services to the poor as a
response to local government retrenchment and insufficient international
development assistance.
However, on other issues at the crossroads of religious dogma and
human rights ideology, of personal moral conviction and public health,
the points of divergence are growing. The attention given by the secular
human rights movement to issues linked to freedom of speech, gender,
and sexuality and sexual orientation—always inherent in the human
rights ideal, but of growing prominence today—increasingly clashes
with the positions taken by many religious groups. Religious humanitarian
organizations and secular human rights groups can, however, be on
the same wave length when they denounce ethnic cleansing in Darfur
and demonstrate together in front of Sudanese embassies.
The question of women’s reproductive rights is a case in point. As
Georgina Ashworth has summed up the issue: “Religious fundamentalists,
whether in the United States or the Islamic and Hindu worlds, now
constitute enormous political forces ranged against women’s enjoyment
of their human rights, especially their reproductive rights. Not only do
they persecute and make outcasts of proponents of toleration, they also threaten the livelihoods and even the security of anyone courageous
enough to stand up for women’s self determination.”32
Another case in point is the use of condoms in HIV/AIDS prevention.
In the Philippines, the Catholic Church, which, as noted above, played
an important role in ousting Marcos, has become increasingly hostile to
the human rights movement when it advocates for sexual education and
condom distribution in AIDS prevention campaigns. The Philippines
government has relayed these positions by actively impeding measures
that would prevent this deadly disease, chiefly by hampering access to
condoms and to scientifically-based information on HIV/AIDS. The
Bush administration, following the opinions of U.S.-based conservative
religious congregations, has stopped funding the donation of condoms
or other contraceptive supplies to the country, preferring instead programs
emphasizing abstinence and marital fidelity.
These policies clash with international human rights standards. The
International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR),
ratified by the Philippines, obliges state parties to take steps
“necessary for... the prevention, treatment and control of epidemic...
diseases,” including HIV/AIDS, which is deemed to include access to
condoms and complete HIV/AIDS information. The ICCPR establishes
the right to information and all major human rights treaties recognize
the right to life, which is implicated by policies that interfere with
access to life-saving technologies.33
The growing tensions between religious and rights communities also
have led religious leaders at times to subdue their antagonisms and
rivalries to defend common approaches on what they consider shared
tenets of faith. The coalition between the Holy See and the
International Islamic Conference, for example, has been evident in
U.N. conferences on population issues34 and women’s rights.35 This
new prominence of so-called “ethical issues” has created an at times
impious convergence among representatives of some mainstream religions; states that are serious human rights abusers, like Saudi Arabia,
Iran, or Sudan; and, in many cases, the Bush administration.
Working with “Fundamentalists”?
While the human rights movement has an obligation to oppose efforts
aimed at using religion to justify laws and public policies that contravene
rights standards, it is also critical for the movement to recognize
that religious fundamentalism does not always collide with secular
human rights standards. Many fundamentalist movements, for example,
are deeply involved in helping people’s access to food, housing, health
care, and other social services. “Such commitments position many militant
religious movements ambiguously, and positively from a human
rights standpoint, in relation to social and economic human rights.”36
On foreign policy issues, although often displaying selective outrage,
Christian evangelicals have been active in generating support for victims
in conflicts such as those in southern Sudan and Darfur.
These examples challenge the human rights movement to define policies
and strategies on how to associate with groups that are sometimes
part of the same campaigns and sometimes actively hostile to human
rights principles, depending on the issue or the context.
Within significant parts of the secular liberal movement there is a clear
dividing line: on the one hand, those who echo French revolutionary
Danton’s (in)famous phrase, “No liberty for the enemies of liberty” and
want to restrict the civil and political rights (including freedom of
expression, association, and assembly) of members of religious groups
believed to pose a threat to a rights-respecting political order; on the
other hand, those who in the name of freedom of religion and free
speech have chosen to defend, like Voltaire, “the right of every man to
profess, unmolested, what religion he chooses.” While human rights
groups have generally sided with the latter position, some have been tempted to make an exception when it comes to religious movements
seen as intrinsically hostile to the liberal political order.
Terrorism in the name of God has exacerbated these debates. In the
1990s, when violent Islamic movements seemed bent on overthrowing
secular governments in Algeria or Egypt, and more generally after the
terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001 in the United States, October
12, 2002 in Bali, and March 11, 2004 in Spain, the commitment to protect
the rights of everyone, including alleged terrorists, not to be tortured
or “disappeared” has been under heavy attack, even from quarters
usually associated with the human rights community.
Suddenly human rights groups advocating for consistent standards on
human rights are being accused by some secular groups, with whom
they cooperated on press freedom or gender issues, of “being soft” on
religious extremism and of risking sacrificing other rights, especially
women’s rights, and even democracy, by standing up for the rights of
terror suspects. Human rights groups need to respond forcefully that
the choice is not one between, on the one hand, an “anything goes”
approach to terror in which civil liberties are among the first victims
and, on the other, the creation of an archipelago of fundamentalist
Islamic states that systemically violate women’s and other basic rights.
The real challenge is finding ways to preserve basic rights in efforts to
combat terror in order to strengthen the appeal of liberal, rightsrespecting
societies.
The “Headscarf” Battles
The law banning “conspicuous religious signs” in public schools adopted
in France in 2004, as well as the prohibition of headscarves for academics
and students in Turkish public universities, illustrate many of
the tensions described above. In both countries, the battle of the veil
has divided the human rights movement, especially advocates of
women’s rights. How to defend freedom of belief, women’s autonomy, and the right to education without promoting an often politicized agenda
and the undermining of a broader range of rights by religious groups
is indeed a challenging question for the human rights movement.
In France, the debate on “religious conspicuous signs”—coming on the
heels of tense controversies around migration, Islamophobia, anti-
Semitism, and terrorism—has polarized public opinion and cut across
traditional political alignments. The headscarf controversy raises the
crucial issue of the place of Islam in the French Republic. This is not
only because France’s growing Muslim communities are seen as diverging
from the mainstream on thorny questions like religious conversion,
homosexuality, or divorce, but also because their very existence seems to
call into question the long accepted tenet that life in a Western democracy
will increasingly secularize adherents of all faiths.
The intensity of the debate, however, has expressed much more than
hostility toward Islam. Supported by many other denominations and
most significantly by the Catholic Church, the headscarf has been seen
as a direct challenge to the founding principles of the French
Republican model born in the French Revolution and forged through
the merciless church/secular battles of the 19th century that led to the
strict separation between state and religion, the privatization of faith,
and the proclaimed “preeminence of Reason.” The “headscarf issue”
thus has forced French authorities to confront the very nature of the
Republic and to reconsider the concept of laïcité (secularism) and to
ponder over its adequacy and relevance in an increasingly multicultural
society.
In its assessment of the legislation shortly before its passage, Human
Rights Watch concluded that the law infringed the internationally recognized
right to freedom of religion, but identified the need to reconcile
seemingly contradictory concerns. “Human Rights Watch recognizes
the legitimacy of public institutions seeking not to promote any
religion via their conduct or statements, but the French government has taken this a step further by suggesting that the state is undermining secularism
if it allows students to wear religious symbols.” As we concluded:
“[P]rotecting the right of all students to religious freedom does not
undermine secularism in schools. On the contrary, it demonstrates
respect for religious diversity, a position fully consistent with maintaining
the strict separation of public institutions from any particular religious
message.”
The Turkish Case
Some interesting lessons on an issue whose complexity should be duly
recognized by the human rights movement can be gleaned from the less
publicized example of Turkey.37 In that country, women wearing the
headscarf are not permitted to register as university students, enter university
campuses, or enter examination rooms. Those observed wearing
the headscarf in class are warned about their behavior, and if they persist
in wearing it are suspended or expelled.
In recent interviews, many women told Human Rights Watch they were
heartbroken that their hopes for a career in medicine, science, teaching,
or the arts were permanently blighted. Women have also been detained,
humiliated, ill-treated, and prosecuted. The authorities say that the
scarf is a flag of aggressive political Islam that threatens the secular
order of Turkey and the rights and freedoms of other Turkish women,
but most women affected by the ban say that they wear the scarf as an
expression of Islamic religious piety.
Modern Turkey’s legislation on the subject of clothing began with a
1923 decree on dress, signed by Mustafa Kemal Atatürk, founder of the
republic. Those who see themselves as Atatürk’s most faithful heirs seek
to bar women from education because of their choice of dress, but
Atatürk himself took a relaxed position on the headscarf. He was frequently
photographed on public business with his first wife, who covered
her head. He wrote: “The religious covering of women will not cause difficulty.... This simple style [of headcovering] is not in conflict
with the morals and manners of our society.”
Students denied access to education have been unable to secure a remedy
through the Turkish courts. And the June 29, 2004 decision of the
European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR) in Leyla Sahin v. Turkey has
only made matters worse. The court’s judgment reflects the same fears
expressed by those who support the headscarf ban: that recognizing the
rights of devout Muslims threatens the rights of others. But Turkish
society is moving ahead of this zero-sum philosophy of despair—in the
day-to-day tolerance of difference that you can see on the street, and in
the solidarity shown when civil society organizations with a largely
Muslim membership stand up for non-Muslim rights (as Mazlum-Der
has done) and organizations with a largely secular membership stand up
for the right to wear the headscarf (as the Turkish Human Rights
Association has done).
Various political groupings have exploited the headscarf issue in order
to curry support from their respective devout or secular constituencies.
Pinar Ilkkaracan, coordinator of a local non-governmental organization
working on women’s rights, told Human Rights Watch in 2003 that this
is an issue open to easy political manipulation: “We as Women for
Women’s Human Rights (WWHR) are against any attempt that aims at
imposing restrictions and regulations on women’s dress code.
Therefore, WWHR has made a number of statements condemning the
ban on the [headscarf] at the universities, which violates the human
right of female students for education. But this issue is being exploited
by the political parties on both sides of the question…. Men in power
should not use women’s bodies for a battlefield—and that is what is happening
in many parts of the globe.”
It is not a condition of fundamental rights that those who enjoy them
must hold tolerant and liberal opinions, but it is a fact that much of the
resistance to the headscarf is inspired by a fear of what might happen if the tables were turned, and an outright Islamist regime were making the
rules. A fairly widespread suspicion among Turkey’s secular population
is that the religious parties have a master plan of eliminating secularism
by “salami tactics,” and that the headscarf is the first slice. They fear
that tolerance shown on this issue will be followed by a ramping up of
demands, and they quote the proverb, “If you give the devil the little
finger, he will soon take the whole hand.” The alarm felt by those who
see the headscarf as the thin end of a dangerous wedge has been aggravated
by a catalogue of attacks by Islamic extremists directed specifically
at people who have criticized the wearing of the headscarf at universities.
Human rights groups working on the headscarf issue must address these
threats. Human Rights Watch did so in 2004 by calling on Turkish
authorities to acknowledge the long and sorry history of state failure to
protect women from gender-based violence and discrimination, and
commit itself to programs to remedy continuing shortcomings in that
protection. We also recommended that any new legislation on higher
education include provisions to offer reassurance to those who feel their
rights could be put at risk by a change of policy with regard to the
headscarf. Such provisions might be legislative or regulatory safeguards
for the rights of women who choose not to wear the headscarf, as well
as strong public endorsements of women’s freedom to dress according
to their own free choice. But the most important gesture the government
could make would be actively to seek out civil society groups representing
women and gather their views through the broadest possible
consultation before changing the headscarf law.
A convincing consultation would give opponents of the headscarf an
opportunity to express their strong reservations and to suggest safeguards
or undertakings that the government could make to protect society
against the erosion of civil liberties—and in particular, women’s civil
liberties—that the opponents fear would result from a lifting of the
headscarf ban. By listening to the concerns of women from all sides of the argument, the government may be able to break away from the pessimistic
zero-sum game and move toward a genuine pluralism that
allows women to make their own free choice whether to wear the headscarf
or not.
Combating, Convincing, or “Integrating”
The secular human rights movement sometimes sees conservative religious
movements as an artifact of history and itself as contemporary,
ahead on the “infinite road of human progress and modernity.” Some
suggest that it runs the risk, echoing “culturalist” approaches purporting
to establish a hierarchy between societies and philosophies, of seeing
itself as superior and antagonistic to other cultures and norms. Rather
than trying to enshrine the human rights project into different faiths
and cultures, of trying to legitimize human rights norms within religions
and not alongside or against them, human rights activists might
be tempted to dismiss such faiths and cultures as obstacles to economic
or human rights modernity.
Is the “liberal” human rights movement in fact implicitly imperialistic,
striving “to replace existing religious traditions with some of ‘new
faith?’”38 “Secular humanists, like religious believers,” warns Professor
Diane Orentlicher, “must take care lest a worshipful faith in human
sanctity blind them to their own capacity for fallibility. Even a secular
humanism is susceptible to harmful immoderation if unchecked by critical
self scrutiny.”39
Such “arrogance,” where it exists, can reflect a desire to sidestep the
complexities of some issues. The headscarf issue is in this context a
“wake up call” for a human rights movement comfortably embedded,
especially in continental Europe, within secularism; the different facets
of the controversy test its capacity to understand complex societal
processes and individual quests. A woman (re)veiling herself does not
necessarily equate with submission. If based on affirmative and free choice, it can be an expression of liberation and self-assertion. Ignoring
or despising traditional cultures and religious beliefs can cripple the
best-intentioned attempts at promoting political reform and respect for
fundamental human rights.
Similarly the human rights movement must examine why fundamentalism
has been raising expectations in so many parts of the world.
Political authoritarianism, economic prostration, social inequities, cultural
alienation, and unresolved international conflicts all call for
renewed action on civil and political as well as economic, social, and
cultural rights.
The Way Forward
Understanding and engaging does not mean retreating into a more conventional
and consensual mode. Confronted with a growing assertion of
religion in private life, the increased political power of religions, and the
rise or revival of religious conservatism, the human rights community
must step up with a clear message and a distinctive voice. To paraphrase
Edward Saïd, it must be “someone whose place it is publicly to raise
embarrassing questions, to confront orthodoxy and dogma (rather than
to produce them) and whose raison d’être is to represent all those people
and issues that are routinely forgotten or swept under the rug.”40
There is still space for convergence and coalitions between human
rights and religious communities. On some basic freedoms and rights
this is already a reality: most secular human rights groups and religious
groups have united in combating hate crimes and discrimination against
Muslims in the wake of the September 11 attacks and the ensuing war
on terror. Most have reasserted the absolute duty to protect civilians in
armed conflicts.
These alliances should not be sacrificed lightly. In recognition of the
importance of religious conscience for many people, the human rights movement should do more to defend religious freedom. In that spirit
Human Rights Watch has been defending the fundamental rights of
independent Muslims in Uzbekistan, Christians in Iraq, Jews in Iran,
Jehovah’s witnesses in Georgia, and Mennonites in Vietnam. Such commitment
should include the defense of the rights of “fundamentalists,”
i.e., including those who would threaten liberal conceptions of rights if
they were in power, so long as they do not physically attack or otherwise
impinge on the rights of non-believers.
At the same time, however, the human rights movement should not sacrifice
its most valued principles and objectives in order to protect its
good relations with religious communities. Human rights defenders
should not shirk in particular from insisting on a distinction between
private religious morality and religiously motivated public policy that
infringes rights. Public expression and political mobilization of religious
groups or believers on matters of rights are legitimate. When private
religious morality imposes itself on society and threatens to change
public policy in a way detrimental to rights, however, the human rights
movement should speak out and draw the line.
Jean-Paul Marthoz is international media director at Human Rights Watch;
Joseph Saunders is deputy program director.
1 Michael Ignatieff, Human Rights as Politics and Idolatry (Princeton: Princeton
University Press, 2001), p. 53.
2 Gilles Kepel, La Revanche de Dieu. Chrétiens, juifs et musulmans à la reconquête du
monde (Paris: Le Seuil, 1991).
3 As emphasized in the next essay in this volume, defense of the same basic principle
is essential to safeguarding the dignity and humanity of lesbian, gay, bisexual,
and transgender people, whether efforts to restrict their rights are made in the
name of religion or of tradition, culture, or societal values.
4 See Harold R. Isaacs, Idols of the Tribe, Group Identity and Political Change
(Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 1989).
5 The group that abducted Georges Malbrunot, Christian Chesnot, and their
Syrian driver initially sought repeal of the French law on conspicuous religious
signs.
6 “Among Wealthy Nations…U.S. Stands Alone in its Embrace of Religion,” The
Pew Research Center for the People & the Press, December 19, 2002, p. 2.
7 Maréchal Pétain, a former First World War hero, ruled France during the
German occupation. His government, based on an ultra conservative Catholic ideology,
collaborated with the enemy and in the deportation of Jews. Although many
Catholics took part in the Résistance and the Catholic hierarchy protested the
deportations, especially after the July 16 round-up of 12,884 Jews at the Velodrome
d’Hiver, the image of the Church was tainted in many liberal circles.
8 Adam Hochschild, King Leopold’s Ghost (Boston: Houghton Mifflin Co., 1998).
9 Suzanne Moranian, “The Armenian Genocide and American Missionary Relief
Efforts,” in Jay Winter. ed., America and the Armenian Genocide of 1915 (Cambridge
(U.K.): Cambridge University Press, 2004), pp. 185-213.
10 The Helsinki Accords were the result of the final act of the Conference on
Security and Cooperation in Europe held in Helsinki (Finland) in 1975 between
the NATO Countries and the Soviet bloc. The civil rights section of the agreement,
the so-called third basket, committed the participating states to respect
human rights and fundamental freedoms.
11 See Jeri Laber, The Courage of Strangers: Coming of Age with the Human Rights
Movement (New York: Public Affairs, 2002).
12 Margaret E. Keck and Kathryn Sikkink, Activists beyond Borders (Ithaca, New
York: Cornell University Press, 1998), p. 91.
13 Ken Booth, “Three Tyrannies,” in Tim Dunne and Nicholas J. Heeler, eds.,
Human Rights in Global Politics (Cambridge (U.K.): Cambridge University Press,
1999), p. 33.
14 In particular the conference organized by UNESCO on the contribution of religions
to the “culture of peace,” held in Barcelona in December 1994.
15 Louis Henkin, “Human Rights: Ideology and Aspiration, Reality and Prospect,”
in Samantha Power and Graham Allison, eds., Realizing Human Rights: Moving from
Inspiration to Impact, (New York: St. Martin’s Press, 2000), p. 29. Ironically, some
religious groups have resisted freedom of conscience—religious or otherwise—in
some contexts. Prominent examples include refusal to respect the rights to reject
religious orthodoxy, to change one’s religion, to become atheist, or to proselytise.
Such rights are protected by a number of human rights provisions, including article
18 of the UDHR. “Everyone has the right to freedom of thought, conscience and
religion; this right includes freedom to change his religion or belief, and freedom,
either alone or in community with others and in public or private, to manifest his
religion or belief in teaching, practise, worship and observance.”
16 Sara Maitland, “In Place of Enlightenment,” Index on Censorship, April 2004, p. 8.
17 Vali NASR, “Religion and Global Affairs: Secular States and Religious
Oppositions,” SAIS Review, Summer-Fall 1998. Volume XVIII, Number Two, The
Paul H. Nitze School of Advanced International Studies, The John Hopkins
University, Washington, pp. 34-5.
18 Asma Jahangir, “Human Rights in Pakistan: A System in the Making,” in S.
Power and G. Allison, eds., Realizing Human Rights, pp. 168-9.
19Human Rights Watch, “Creating Enemies of the State: Religious Persecution in
Uzbekistan” New York: Human Rights Watch, 2004.
20 Human Rights Watch, “Divorced from Justice: Women’s Unequal Access to
Divorce in Egypt,” December 2004.
21 Human Rights Watch, “‘Political Shari’a’?, Human Rights and Islamic Law in
Northern Nigeria,” September 2004. Human Rights Watch does not advocate for
or against Shari’a per se, or any other system of religious belief or ideology, and
takes no position on what constitutes “proper Shari’a.”
22 Human Rights Watch research in northern Nigeria also revealed patterns of
fundamental human rights violations which are not peculiar to Shari’a but typify
the human rights situation in Nigeria as a whole. For example, systematic torture
by the police, prolonged detention without trial, corruption in the judiciary, political
interference in the course of justice, and impunity for those responsible for
abuses occur not only in the context of Shari’a cases, but are widespread in cases
handled by the parallel common law system.
23 European Court of Human Rights, Handyside against United Kingdom, December
7, 1976.
24 Cited in Le Monde, October 25, 1989.
25 “Da Vinci Code banned in Lebanon,” BBC News online, September 16, 2004.
26 Ambrose Evans-Pritchard, “Blasphemy law revival upsets the Dutch elite,” The
Daily Telegraph, November 18, 2004.
27 Guy Haarscher, La laïcité (Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, Collection
Que sais-je?, 2004), p. 93.
28 Malise Ruthven, Fundamentalism: The Search for Meaning (Oxford (U.K.):
Oxford University Press, 2004), p. 3.
29 Human Rights Watch, Slaughter Among Neighbors: The Political Origins of
Communal Violence, (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1995).
30 “The Power of Religion,” The Fletcher Forum of World Affairs, Winter/Spring
1996, Medford, MA, p. vii.
31 Human Rights Watch, Erased In A Moment: Suicide Bombing Attack Against Israeli
Civilians (New York: Human Rights Watch, 2002).
32 Georgina Ashworth, “The Silencing of Women,” in Tim Dunne and Nicholas J.
Wheeler, eds., Human Rights in Global Politics (Cambridge (UK): Cambridge
University Press, 1999), p. 273.
33 Human Rights Watch, “The Philippines: Unprotected, Sex, Condoms, and the
Human Right to Health,” May 2004.
34 Mark Herstgaard, “The Holy War against Birth Control,” Mother Jones,
March/April 2003.
35 G. Ashworth, “The Silencing of Women,” p. 268.
36 John Kelsay and Sumner B.Twiss, eds., Religion and Human Rights (New York:
The Project on Religion and Human Rights, 1994), p. 27.
37 Much of the discussion of the case of Turkey that follows is a slightly revised
version of text written by Jonathan Sugden, Human Rights Watch Turkey
researcher. It first appeared in “Memorandum to the Turkish Government with Regard
to Academic Freedom in Higher Education, and Access to Higher Education for Women
who Wear the Headscarf,” Human Rights Watch, June 29, 2004.
38 John Kelsay and Sumner B.Twist (Ed), Religion and Human Rights, The Project
on Religion and Human Rights, 1994, New York, p.119.
39 Diane Orentlicher, “Relativism and Religion,” in M. Ignatieff, Human Rights as
Politics and Idolatry (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2001), p.147.
40 Edward Said, Representations of the Intellectual (New York: Pantheon Books,
1994), p. 11.
