 REPUBLIC OF SOUTH AFRICA
 The governing reality of life in the Republic of South
 Africa is apartheid. This system of racial discrimination
 and separation, sometimes called "separate development,"
 institutionalizes white political and economic control.
 Within this racially divided society, the white minority
 enjoys a high standard of living and broad political
 freedoms. The black, colored, and Asian majority suffers
 pervasive discrimination in all areas of life; their basic
 human rights are systematically violated.
 The majority racial groups in South Africa do not share in
 control of this society; they are separated from it and
 each other by the laws of apartheid which prescribe where
 they may live and under what circumstances they may asso-
 ciate with others, whether for civil, political, economic,
 social, or cultural purposes.
 A central pillar of apartheid is the homelands policy.
 The South African Government has designated 13 percent of
 the land area within the Republic as homelands for all
 black South Africans, who constitute 72 percent of the
 population. Each black ethnic group has its own homeland,
 and each black is assigned to one of nine ethnic groups.
 As each group's homeland gains independence from South
 Africa, members of that group automatically lose citizen-
 ship in the Republic of South Africa and gain citizenship
 in the homeland. Three homelands have reached independence
 within the last three years. If and when the remaining
 homelands become independent, South Africa will no longer
 have any black citizens. The United Nations has adopted
 resolutions condemning the homelands policy; no nation
 beyond South Africa has recognized the independence of any
 of the homelands.
 The over 19 million blacks are not considered permanent
 citizens of South Africa but rather temporary sojourners
 who may be permitted in the white areas of South Africa to
 obtain employment. They do not have in these areas the
 political rights or economic rights that are associated with
 citizenship. Many of these black laborers are migrants,
 and most of them are required to live apart from their
 spouses and children for the better part of their working
 lives, punctuated by periodic mandatory visits to the home-
 lands. In contrast, coloreds and Asians are considered
 permanent citizens of South Africa and are afforded more,
 but by no means full, political and economic rights.
 This system of racial distinction and separation has evolved
 from and is dependent upon white monopoly of national
 political power. The constitution of South Africa, as
 amended since the Nationalist Party came to power in 1948,
 denies all persons who are not white the right to vote for
 representatives to the national Parliament. Membership in
 Parliament and all key Government positions are held by
 whites, who represent 16 percent of the total population.
 In South Africa the Parliament is sovereign, and the con-
 stitution recognizes no rights of the individual that are
 protected against legislative infringement. Moreover, the
 
 (181)
 
 
 182
 courts' power to construe or apply legislation has been
 limited by successive grants of virtually unreviewable
 discretion in the executive in many important areas,
 especially limitation of rights and freedoms for "security"
 reasons.
 The leaders of the ruling National Party contend that,
 because of South Africa's ethnic and cultural diversity
 and the present economic and educational disparities
 among its constituent groups, an orderly society can best
 be achieved through separation of the races. A web of
 discriminatory laws and practices has thus been implemented
 over the years, infusing apartheid principles in virtually
 all aspects of life. Important examples include:   (a) the
 Constitution itself; (b) legislation which defined home-
 lands and established the constitutions of the "independent"
 homelands; (c) the Group Areas Act, which defined separate
 residential areas for whites, blacks, coloreds (people of
 mixed racial origins), and Asians (mostly Indians) and
 which has resulted in the forced removal of hundreds of
 thousands; d) the Race Classification Act, which required
 the categorization of every South African into one of the
 four racial groups; (e) the Separate Amenities Act, which
 authorized the exclusive use of public facilities by persons
 belonging to a particular race without the need to provide
 separate facilities for other races; (f) influx and pass
 laws which controlled the movement of blacks into and out
 of "white areas"; (g) the Immorality and Mixed Marriage
 Acts which made sexual relations or marriage between the
 races illegal; (h) job reservation laws, which restricted
 certain occupations to whites.
 Growing opposition, from within and outside the country, to
 this system of racial discrimination has evoked Government
 responses that, in the name of security, severely curtail
 the civil liberties of those persons (of all races) whose
 statements, actions, or associations are viewed as seriously
 challenging the established order. On this basis, the
 Government has enacted security legislation that provides
 the state with extraordinary powers to control persons,
 organizations, and media.
 Two elements, the doctrine of separate development and the
 repression of those who challenge it, define the Government's
 current stance and confine its human rights perspectives.
 In the face of domestic and international criticism, and a
 degree of diplomatic isolation, the Government of South
 Africa defends its policies as a necessary response to
 unique circumstances. Over the past few years, however,
 the Government has begun a gradual relaxation of certain
 petty apartheid measures, including an easing of restrictions
 against multi-racial sports, the removal of apartheid signs
 in post offices and some other public places, and the opening
 of "international class" hotels and certain live theatre
 facilities. Since 1978, the Government has also indicated
 that it no longer considers the phenomenon of urban blacks
 with "residence rights" in "white areas" to be temporary.
 A Government commission in 1979 recommended major changes
 in labor laws affecting blacks. Some of these have been
 implemented but others deferred or rejected.
 
 
 183
 There has been considerable discussion of other changes
 which would end some forms of discrimination and afford
 increased, but not full, participation in the political
 life of the nation to blacks, coloreds, and Asians. In
 addition, the present Government has indicated a willing-
 ness to engage in dialogue with a range of black, colored,
 and Asian leaders, including a number of moderate anti-
 Government figures, but so far little concrete or specific
 has emerged on what fundamental political reforms the
 Government has in mind. Meanwhile, on a daily basis, the
 average black South African perceives very little change
 in existing patterns of discrimination or the denial of
 rights.
 
 
 184
 1.   Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Torture
 South African security laws, while they do not condone
 torture, provide police considerable freedom to arrest
 suspects and question detainees. Detention under section
 six of the Terrorism Act of 1967 permits interrogation of
 a detainee for an indefinite period without charge, and
 without access to family, lawyers, and the press. Other
 statutes are interpreted to allow such interrogation of
 detainees as seems "reasonable to the Government". While
 the South African Government has in the past denied that
 this has led to abuses amounting to torture, at least 52
 persons have died while detained under security law since
 1963, including 24 between March 1976 and mid-July 1978.
 Inquests into deaths in detention, evidence revealed in the
 course of criminal prosecution or civil suits brought by
 families of deceased detainees, press reports, and state-
 ments made by former detainees to organizations such as
 Amnesty International support the view that physical and
 psychological torture of persons detained under South
 African security laws has been common. According to these
 allegations, abuses include beating, electric shocks,
 depriving detainees of food, water, and sleep, forcing them
 to run on stones, extracting teeth with pliers, and long
 periods of interrogation and solitary confinement. In
 several cases, claims of abuse have been settled by substan-
 tial payments. The amount of money paid by the Government--
 usually in out-of-court settlement--for claims arising out
 of assaults on detainees rose from a total of $40,100 for
 39 claims in 1976 to $214,000 for 78 claims in 1978.
 As a result of the strong reaction following the inquest of
 the death in detention of Black Consciousness leader Steve
 Biko, the Minister of Justice appointed in May, 1978, two
 retired justices to visit detainees (not convicted prisoners)
 at any time, to call for medical attention if necessary, and
 to bring matters to the attention of the security police
 and the Justice Minister on a regular basis. The jurists
 assumed their duties on June 1, 1978; although there have
 been complaints from at least one former detainee of incom-
 plete reports by the jurists, significantly there have been
 no known deaths of security detainees since mid-July 1978.
 There were, however, 161 deaths of persons in police custody
 other than those detained under security laws during 1978.
 South Africa's average daily prison population is approxi-
 mately 100,000; prison deaths average about 300 per year,
 80 percent reportedly from natural causes with the remainder
 attributed to assaults by fellow prisoners or "other
 causes."
 b. Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment
 Allegations of mistreatment of persons detained under
 security laws or awaiting trial are described in section
 . a. Prison conditions in South Africa have been criticized
 by such groups as Amnesty International as being unduly
 harsh for political prisoners in particular and
 black   prisoners generally. According to Amnesty Inter-
 national, political prisoners are commonly given the least
 of privileges and receive only limited information from the
 outside world. Political prisoners are not allowed corres-
 pondence courses beyond high school level. Black
 prisoners are said to receive a more limited diet than white
 
 
 185
 prison&rs and are given mats to sleep on rather than beds.
 In his 1978 annual report, the commissioner of prisons
 stated it had been decided "in principle" to grant the same
 basic facilities to prisoners from all racial groups. This
 decision had not been fully implemented at all institutions
 at the time of the report, he said, because sufficient
 funds were not available.
 South African criminal and security laws prescribe that
 whipping may be imposed as a sentence for crimes including
 robbery, rape, assault, theft, and culpable homicide. Males
 up to 30 years of age may be whipped, and the maximum number
 of strokes is seven.
 Capital punishment is relatively common in South Africa.
 In 1977, 90 persons were executed; of these, 63 were
 black,   26 colored, and one white. In 1978, 132 persons
 were executed, of which 105 were black, 26 were
 colored, and one was white. The death penalty is given for
 crimes ranging from robbery under aggravated circumstances
 to murder.
 An unusual punishment in terms of its lack of due process
 in restricting freedom of expression, movement, association
 and assembly, is the banning order. Under the Internal
 Security Act, the Minister of Justice may impose a banning
 order on any person he or she finds to be engaging in activ-
 ities considered'dangerous to the security of the state or
 the maintenance of public order. A banning order usually
 restricts a person to a particular area, prohibits visiting
 certain facilities or attending "gatherings" (defined as
 any group consisting of the banned person and more than one
 other individual), and prevents one's making public state-
 ments or publishing any writings. Banning orders are
 usually imposed for two or five years and may be renewed.
 The Minister is not required to disclose the reasons for
 having issued a banning order. Because the imposition of a
 banning order may be challenged in court only if it can be
 shown that the Minister acted in bad faith or did not
 consider the matter carefully, a banned person is virtually
 without a remedy. According to a South African Government
 Gazette published on July 13, 1979, there were 154 banned
 persons, of whom 39 were white and 115 were from other
 racial groups. Since then, at least three persons have had
 their banning orders lifted and four others are believed
 to have been banned.
 c. Arbitrary Arrest and Imprisonment
 In South African law and practice, detention and/or imprison-
 ment under conditions which could be termed political
 occurs under a number of "security" laws. Such laws
 include the Internal Security Act, the Terrorism Act, the
 General Law Administration ("Sabotage") Act, and the Riotous
 Assemblies Act. At the end of the first nine months of
 1979, the Government acknowledged that of the 317 persons
 arrested under security legislation during 1979 thus far,
 71 were still in detention and had not yet appeared in
 court. There might have been others detained under legis-
 lation providing for indefinite detention (see below). Of
 those persons against whom the South African Government
 has acted under security laws, the 155 banned persons could
 be termed "prisoners of conscience," as their banning
 orders are considered not to be the result of conduct that
 would generally be considered criminal.
 
 
 186
 In the first eleven months of 1979, 78 persons were con-
 victed in trials under security laws, down from 94 convicted
 in 1978 and 144 in 1977. Beyond this, it would be diffi-
 cult to estimate how many persons now imprisoned in South
 African jails are political prisoners, as many have been
 convicted under both criminal and security statutes. In
 June 1978 the then Minister of Justice stated in Parlia-
 ment that 440 people were serving prison sentences under
 the four main security laws.
 Several South African statutes provide for arrest and
 detention for varying lengths of time without reference to
 the courts. The Sabotage Act, Terrorism Act, and Criminal
 Procedure Act of 1977 all provide for arrest without a
 warrant under certain circumstances. A person may be
 detained for 14 days without charge before being brought to
 court under Section 22 of the Sabotage Act, for 180 days
 (which may be renewed) under the Internal Security Act,
 and for an indefinite period of time under Section 6*of the
 Terrorism Act. While detained under these provisions, a
 person does not have access to legal counsel until charged
 or brought to court as a witness. In addition to these
 laws, preventive detention for up to twelve months at a
 time is authorized by the Internal Security Act, though a
 committee consisting of a judge or magistrate and two other
 persons may recommend (but not require) a detainee's
 release. While the principle of habeas corpus has been
 affirmed in South African common law, it is denied by the
 detention provisions of the various security laws.
 d. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The right to trial for criminal offenses is acknowledged in
 South African common law, though it is circumscribed in
 practice by various security law provisions. As noted in
 Section l.b., banned persons are virtually without judicial
 remedies, and security law detainees may not have access to
 the courts for considerable lengths of time or may even be
 held without charge indefinitely.
 In general, all persons except those detained under pro-
 visions mentioned in Section l.c. have the right to counsel.
 If a person cannot pay for his/her own defense, the publicly
 financed legal aid board or variousprivate organizations
 have funds for legal assistance, but these sources do not
 meet more than a small fraction of the total need. In cases
 involving capital offenses, the court may appoint counsel
 without charge.
 Once legal assistance is obtained and paid for, a defendant
 has access to the attorney throughout the course of pro-
 ceedings. Some lawyers who defend persons accused under
 security laws have alleged harassment by the security
 police and Government agencies. Several attorneys who
 defended persons accused in political trials have been
 banned or fled the country.
 Because an individual may be interrogated under security
 law detention without access to counsel, that person may
 admit to actions and charges he/she does not understand.
 These may be used in court. Once brought to trial, this
 individual may not be aware that legal assistance is avail-
 able; in several instances attorneys retained by families
 of detained persons have found out only through the news-
 papers that their client was to be brought to trial.
 
 
 187
 South African law acknowledges the right to bail, but in
 cases involving certain serious crimes or security laws the
 Attorney General may withhold bail. Trial by jury was
 abolished by Parliament in 1969. Protection against
 double jeopardy, recognized in the Criminal Procedure Act
 of 1977 (the comprehensive statute governing South African
 criminal law), is undermined by the "Sabotage" Act and the
 Terrorism Act, which provide that a person may be tried for
 another offense deriving from the same action.
 Security as well as criminal trials are held before regular
 courts, which are generally independent of executive or
 military control. Once charged with crimes under the secu-
 rity laws, political defendants receive formal trial and
 frequently are found not guilty. There have been no recent
 cases of civilians being tried by military courts and no
 *known summary executions.
 e. Invasion of the Home
 Section 25 of the Criminal Procedure Act of 1977 authorizes
 a judge or magistrate to issue a search warrant if there
 are reasonable grounds to believe that "the internal secu-
 rity of the republic or the maintenance of law and order is
 likely to be endangered by or in consequence of any meeting"
 being held in a given place. Under Section 25 a police
 officer may enter, search, and question anyone in a place
 without a warrant if the officer has reason to believe that
 a warrant for such purposes would be issued but that the
 delay caused by first obtaining the warrant would defeat the
 purpose of the search. In addition, the Black Urban Areas
 Consolidation Act allows police entry to homes without a
 warrant if they suspect that a black is illegally
 residing or employed therein.
 2.   Government Policies Relating to the Fulfillment of Such
 Vital Needs as Food, Shelter, Health Care, and
 Education:
 South Africa has in effect a dual economy with a large
 developed sector alongside an undeveloped sector. The
 country's racial divisions are also reflected in its economy.
 The developed sector in terms of employment is composed of
 the white population, most of the Asians and coloreds, and
 a portion of the black population, primarily those
 in urban areas. Those areas set aside as black
 homelands are undeveloped. Between the two sectors is a
 gray area comprising those black workers who only
 partially or intermittently participate in the developed
 sector.
 A private enterprise economic system exists in the country,
 although the Government owns companies in a number of
 fields, and racial restrictions are placed on where and to
 what extent certain businesses may be practiced. Per capita
 GDP is $1,600. Income distribution is skewed with per
 capita black incomes estimated to be only 10-15 percent of
 those of whites.
 Since 1970, average real wages for blacks have been rising
 more rapidly than white wages, but still their wages in
 non-agricultural fields in 1978 averaged $150 a month com-
 pared with $650 for whites. Colored and Asian wage levels
 are somewhat above black wage levels. Black unemployment
 has increased rapidly in recent years as a result of low
 
 
 188
 economic growth, large numbers of unskilled blacks coming
 onto the labor market and increasing capital intensity of
 industry. The actual figure for black unemployment is
 the subject of considerable controversy; a Government sur-
 vey gives a level of 500,000 or 9 percent in early 1979,
 but private estimates range up to 2.2 million (27 percent),
 if underemployed agricultural workers are included.
 The Government's discriminatory racial policies have
 unquestionably played the major role in causing uneven
 distribution of income. Except in the homelands, there are
 a wide variety of legal restrictions that keep blacks and,
 to a certain extent, coloreds and Asians from competing
 freely for jobs and in business. These restrictions include
 influx control into the urban areas, official and unofficial
 job reservation, limitations on the black-to-white ratio
 in the urban area work force, restrictions on black trade
 unions, the areas and types of businesses in which different
 racial groups may engage, and the inability of blacks to
 purchase land outside the homelands. The educational sys-
 tems for blacks, coloreds, and Asians are of a poorer
 quality than the white system. Therefore, they generally
 enter the job market with fewer skills.
 The Government has recently taken steps to eliminate some
 aspects of discrimination in the economic area. These have
 included elimination of most categories of legal job reser-
 vations, recognition of trade union rights for some blacks,
 and the lifting of some restrictions on the operations of
 black, colored, and Asian business. However, most of these
 changes have been hedged with qualifications that seriously
 dilute their impact, and other policies, such as influx
 control, remain unchanged.
 The primary taxation system in South Africa is a progressive
 income tax on individuals and companies. Smaller sources
 of governmental revenue are the retail sales tax and cus-
 toms duties which are regressive. Previously, there was
 one income tax system for whites, coloreds, and Asians and
 another for blacks. The Government announced in early 1979
 that the two systems will be consolidated over a three-year
 period. As a first step, the threshold at which blacks
 begin to pay income tax was raised to $1,440, roughly the
 same as for whites.
 The basic gap between the various racial groups in income
 is also reflected in other areas, such as housing, health
 care, and education. In general, the facilities available
 to whites in these fields are similar to those in developed
 countries, while those available to the other racial groups
 are lower. The great shortage of non-white housing
 being built by the Government in black townships and the
 inability of blacks, coloreds, and Asians to live outside
 certain designated areas are major factors in this shortage.
 This problem is particularly acute in black townships
 where it is not unusual for a four-room block house
 designed for one family to be occupied by twenty or more
 persons. The standard of black housing in rural areas is
 well below that of others living in these areas.
 While there are a number of hospitals for blacks, coloreds,
 and Asians where service is virtually free, the average
 level of health care available is far below that available
 to whites. The ratio of doctors for the white population
 
 
 189
 is one for every 600; for blacks in the homelands, it is
 one in forty thousand. Black infant mortality is far
 greater than that for whites, and malnutrition is
 reportedly serious in many areas of the homelands.
 Even though the level of per-student spending on black
 education has increased fourfold since 1970 (mainly for
 capital construction), it stands at $76 compared with $750
 for whites. The literacy rate for blacks in South Africa
 is estimated at approximately 57 percent, and the rate for
 whites at above 95 percent. Black, colored, and Asian
 teachers in general are less well trained and paid than
 their white counterparts.
 3.   Respect for Civil and Political Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech, Press, Religion, and
 Assembly
 The opposition press in South Africa remains vigorous and
 carries extensive reporting and critical comment on basic
 Government policies, especially in regard to separate
 development and the condition of the various racial com-
 munities. The press was instrumental in exposing the recent
 information scandal, which resulted eventually in the
 resignation of the State President.
 The press operates under certain restrictions, including
 legislation affecting its reporting on police and security
 matters, prison conditions, strategic supplies, nuclear
 matters, and divorce proceedings. More important, the real-
 ity of banning under the security laws is of concern to
 publishers. Newspaper editors and reporters have been
 banned or detained and newspapers closed, as in 1977, when
 the black editor Percy Qoboza was detained and another
 editor, Donald Woods, banned. Bills passed in the 1979
 parliamentary session further curbed press freedom in
 reporting on and criticizing the conduct of the police.
 The new legislation provides a maximum penalty of five
 years and a Rand 10,000 ($12,000) fine for persons who
 publish "any untrue matter" in relation to actions by the
 police force or any individual police officer without having
 "reasonable grounds" for believing that the statement is
 true. Occasionally, Government continues to ban particular
 issues of publications without showing cause. As a result,
 most editors practice self-censorship, a technique which is
 formalized in a newspaper press union's code of conduct.
 The Afrikaans as well as the English-language press has
 vigorously opposed Government efforts to tighten control
 over newspaper reporting. Provisions in the 1979 Advocate
 General Bill which would have limited reporting of Govern-
 ment corruption were dropped earlier this year following a
 vigorous protest from most major newspapers, including
 those which are pro-government.
 Direct Government censorship of all other publications,
 films and public entertainment is authorized by the Publica-
 tions Act of 1974, which does not apply to newspapers. The
 Government-appointed publications committees established by
 the Act may prohibit the distribution or possession of
 publications, films, or other public entertainment that are
 considered obscene or blasphemous, that bring any section
 of the public into ridicule, that harm relations between
 sections of the public, or that are prejudicial to the
 safety of the state. The committees may allow distribution
 of a publication or the holding of an event subject to
 certain restrictions, such as age limits for attendance at
 public events. Decisions of the publications committees may
 be appealed to the Government-appointed Publications Appeal
 
 
 190
 Board but not to the courts. Recent statistics show that
 the ratio of material banned for being "prejudicial to the
 state" has -isen vis-a-vis the banning of material deemed
 pornographic or immoral.
 Members of the parliamentary opposition and public figures
 also challenge Government policies, and meetings and con-
 ferences pass resolutions strongly opposing officials actions
 and highlighting the grievances of the different racial
 communities.
 The right to hold public meetings is observed with regard to
 sporting events, fairs, and meetings of political groups
 other than those banned by the Government but can be cur-
 tailed when officials believe that the public peace might
 be seriously disturbed or the purpose of the meeting is
 deemed politically unacceptable. The Riotous Assemblies
 Act allows a magistrate to prohibit a gathering for a period
 of forty-eight hours, if he/she feels that public safety
 would be seriously threatened by such a gathering. The
 Minister of Justice may prohibit any assembly for any pre-
 scribed length of time to maintain public order or prevent
 a situation which might arouse hostilities between differ-
 ent racial groups. The Internal Security Act empowers the
 Minister of Justice to prohibit any meeting "in order to
 combat the achievement of any of the objectives of communism."
 Both of these acts permit the Justice Minister to "ban"
 certain persons from attending a particular meeting. These
 laws empower Government officials to prohibit outdoor public
 rallies to oppose, even peacefully and non-violently,
 official Government policies.
 Freedom of association is regulated by the complex of laws
 prescribing separate residential areas and public facilities
 for different racial groups. The Government has, during
 1979, announced its intention to move away from "hurtful"
 racial discrimination, while reiterating its belief in
 separate "multi-national" development. Some apartheid
 barriers have been removed throughout the country, with the
 result that persons of all races may associate in a limited
 number of designated "international" hotels, restaurants,
 parks, and other facilities exclusively in prescribed white
 areas.
 Freedom of religion is respected, and religious organizations
 generally have had greater freedom of expression and
 association than political ones. They are not, however,
 immune from the security laws. The Christian Institute,
 along with its Director, Beyers Naude, was among the group
 of organizations banned in October, 1977.
 b. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, and Emigration
 White South Africans, other than banned persons, are generally
 free to move about the country, travel abroad, and emigrate
 to other countries without fear of losing their citizenship.
 The rest of the South African people are subject to severe
 restrictions contained in laws implementing the Government's
 policy of separate development. Persons designated as
 colored or Asian are required by the Group Areas Act to
 reside in areas set aside for these groups and, like blacks,
 may not legally enter facilities reserved for whites,
 unless these facilities have received governmental permission
 
 
 191
 to admit them. In fact, Asians cannot reside in the Orange
 Free State nor legally stay overnight in the province.
 Blacks' residences and travel are regulated by a system of
 "influx control" or "pass laws" which require those over
 sixteen to carry reference books to show that they are
 entitled to be in a given urban area. If they cannot
 document by prior residence, acceptable employment, or
 relation to a legal resident that they are entitled to be
 in a certain area, they czn legally be in an urban area for
 no longer than 72 hours.
 The majority of arrests in South Africa are for violation
 of pass laws (of which there were 272,887 in 1978), and
 these resulted in the removal of 17,383 blacks from urban
 areas in 1977. The prospect of arrest and removal has not
 deterred many blacks from seeking the greater economic
 opportunities available in urban areas. There are believed
 to be several hundred thousand blacks residing in urban
 areas without required documentation.
 Of the more than 200,000 passport applications submitted to
 the Government in 1978, 379 were refused. Among those
 refused were seven persons invited to visit the United
 States under United States Government sponsorship. During
 the same time, 17 passports were withdrawn. Government
 policy requires that all blacks whose homelands become
 independent use passports issued by their respective home-
 lands, although tone is recognized abroad. Many blacks
 refuse invitations to travel abroad to avoid acknowledging
 a non-South African citizenship. Black passport applicants
 are often required to deposit R400 ($480) in event of
 destitution abroad.
 c. Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 Participation in the political process in South Africa is
 strictly separated along racial lines. The Political Inter-
 ference Act of 1968 makes it unlawful for a person of one
 racial group to: join a political party which has members
 from other racial groups; participate in an election cam-
 paign for a person of another racial group; or address a
 group of people, all or most of whom belong to another
 racial group, to promote a political party. Thus, each
 racial group must pursue its political aspirations in
 distinct structures, each of which provides a different
 degree of self-government.
 White South Africans may participate in a parliamentary
 system similar to the British model. While the ruling
 National Party has a substantial majority, three small
 opposition parties, comprising less than 18 percent of all
 seats, are represented in Parliament. They have good
 access to the press, are able to hold public meetings, and
 function as freely as the ruling party.
 South Africans designated as colored or Asian may partici-
 pate in separate councils with strictly circumscribed-
 powers. When colored representation (by whites) in the
 national Parliament was eliminated in 1969, the Colored
 Persons' Representative Council was established. Coloreds
 may elect 40 of the 60 members of the Colored Persons'
 Representative Council (CRC). The CRC has a measure of
 legislative and budgetary authority with regard to colored
 local government, education, community development, and
 
 
 192
 rural settlements, though any bill which it passes must be
 approved by the National Cabinet, which is white. There is
 a corresponding body for Asians, the South African Indian
 Council, which consists of 40 indirectly elected members
 and five appointed members. while the Minister of Indian
 Affairs may delegate some administrative authority to the
 Executive Committee of the Council, it has no legislative
 powers. Both the CRC and the SAIC can advise the appro-
 priate ministries concerning colored and Asian affairs.
 Coloreds and Asians are acknowledged to be South African
 citizens, although still with no political rights in a
 national context. Since 1970, all blacks are considered to
 be citizens of their own homelands or "national states."
 There are considered to be nine black tribal groups in South
 Africa, and each black from birth is assigned citizenship
 in one of the ten homelands on the basis of his tribal
 heritage, language, etc., regardless of where he was born
 or has lived or whether he has ever been in his "place of
 origin."
 As long as their homeland does not declare independence--
 as have the Transkei, Bophuthatswana, and Venda--they remain
 nationals of South Africa. However, when the homeland
 opts for independence, South African nationality is with-
 drawn, leaving the individual simply a citizen of the homeland,
 with only rights in South Africa based on "international"
 agreements. In this manner nearly six million black South
 Africans have already been divested of their former South
 African citizenship.
 In theory, all citizens of the homelands are entitled to
 participate in the homeland political process. In practice,
 the majorities in the legislatures are appointed, opposi-
 tion leaders are often banned or imprisoned, and most real
 decision-making power in the non-independent homelands
 remains in the hands of white civil servants seconded from
 the South African Government. Such rights as the people of
 the homelands have are conferred--and may be withdrawn--
 by the white national Parliament, which establishes
 systems for governance of all South Africans.
 Although all blacks are technically homeland citizens, over
 nine million live in areas designated as white. Basically
 because of employment opportunities, the majority of these
 persons are resident in urban areas; in many cases, their
 families have lived in these areas for generations. The
 Urban Areas Act provides that, on the basis of birth in
 the area or an unbroken period of 10 years' legal employ-
 ment (15 years if interrupted), a black   may be given the
 right to remain permanently in urban areas. These rights
 are not inheritable, and any children born after the
 independence of their respective homeland are considered
 foreigners in South Africa. The Government, however, has
 raised the possibility of some arrangement which could pro-
 vide for the transferral of the 99-year "leasehold rights"
 in township property to dependents.
 Economically, both the independent and non-independent
 homelands are heavily dependent on the Republic for budge-
 tary support as well as employment and imports including
 food. In Venda, a homeland which was granted independence
 in September 1979, South Africa provides 80 percent of the
 state budget, and Venda workers employed in South Africa
 
 
 193
 produce 75 percent of the homeland's income. This economic
 dependence on South Africa translates directly into politi-
 cal dependence. All of the homelands have adopted security
 legislation modeled on South Africa's.
 As noted, the South African Government has appointed com-
 mittees to look into problems of blacks including homeland
 territorial consolidation and the role of the urban black
 within the context of separate development. At present,
 political participation by urban blacks is limited to
 electing community councils for their townships. The
 community councils exercise certain limited responsibilities
 with respect to township administration, but remain finan-
 cially dependent on the Government, and their actions are
 subject to review by the Department of Cooperation and
 Development. Because their role is circumscribed by this
 department and the administration boards which oversee them,
 the community councils are not viewed as legitimate by
 most observers. The 1978 community council elections in
 Soweto drew a voter turnout of six percent of the 60,000
 people registered to vote. Other townships have shown
 larger turnouts, averaging, for example, 45 percent in
 the Durban area.
 Aside from limits deriving from the nature of the political
 structures assigned to blacks, as well as coloreds and
 Asians, the expression of their political aspirations has
 been hindered by the banning of many of their political
 leaders and organizations. The majority of all banned
 persons is black and most of their major black political
 movements, including the African National Congress, the Pan
 Africanist Congress, the South African Students' Organiza-
 tion, and the Black People's Convention, have been pro-
 scribed. Subsequent efforts at political organization have
 almost invariably been stifled by detention and bannings.
 Women in South Africa are discriminated against through
 legislation that circumscribes their civil, political, and
 economic rights and opportunities. Married women are
 regarded as virtual minors before the law in the absence of
 pre-nuptial contracts. The South African Government,
 however, has gazetted a proposed bill which would grant to
 married women legal and property rights within and upon
 the breaking of a legal marriage. Some white women have
 participated fully and actively in politics, the economy,
 education, and most social welfare fields, but they represent
 a minority. A recent three-year study by a Rhodes
 University (South Africa) sociologist claims that women
 earn half the wages of men with the same qualifications and
 that they tend to become nurses and teachers, "professions
 seen as extensions of their domestic role." White males
 have three times as many bachelor's degrees, five times as
 many master's degrees, and ten times as many doctorates
 as women. Opportunities for -the majority of white women
 thus tend to be quite limited within South Africa. Black
 women suffer because as women and as blacks they are
 perpetual minors under the law and legally under male
 guardianship. The Rhodes study cited "influx control" as
 the major constraint on black women and claimed it trapped
 them in homelands and deprived them of employment alterna-
 tives. Despite this, some black women have become prominent
 leaders in their communities and constitute a significant
 proportion of the urban labor force.
 
 
 194
 The South African system of labor relations extends the
 Government's policy of separate development to the labor
 force. Racially mixed unions are discouraged, and, until
 1979, black unions were excluded from the collective
 bargaining process. Racial discrimination in the work-
 place has led to a skills imbalance which impedes further
 economic growth and job creation. This reality caused the
 Government to appoint the Wiehahn Commission to propose
 reforms to the industrial relations system.
 The Wiehahn Commission recommended that all workers be
 entitled to full trade union rights and that all unions be
 allowed to choose between racially mixed and segregated
 membership. Amendments to the Industrial Conciliation Act
 in 1979, however, fell short of the Wiehahn Commission's
 recommendations. The amendments bar the formation of new
 racially mixed unions (although the Minister of Manpower
 Utilization may authorize them "if deemed expedient" based
 on the ratio between members of different racial groups),
 exclude migrant workers from outside South Africa or the
 "independent" homelands from joining registered black
 unions (they are still allowed to join unregistered black
 unions), and give union members of existing industrial
 councils the right to veto membership applications from
 newly registered black unions.
 The impact of these changes on the black labor force as a
 whole has been minimal thus far, as only one percent of
 black workers are unionized (compared with eight percent of
 the white labor force). Of greater importance to black
 workers is the Labor Bureau system, which is responsible for
 placing them in a specific category of employment (miner,
 farm worker, etc.). Once a category is marked in black
 workers' reference books, it is unlikely to be changed.
 4.   Government Attitude and Record Regarding International
 and Non-Governmental Investigations of Alleged
 Violations of Human Rights:
 The South African Government has been critical of complaints
 about its human rights records by United Nations organiza-
 tions and groups such as Amnesty International. It does
 permit representatives of the International Committee of
 the Red Cross to visit the Robben Island maximum security
 prison, where a number of black political prisoners are
 held, on an annual basis. The ICRC's findings are not made
 public, but its discussions with the South African Govern-
 ment have reportedly led to improved conditions at Robben
 Island. ICRC has been refused access to those detained
 incommunicado and without charge.
 Foreign journalists have on occasion been allowed to visit
 South African prisons: In April 1977 a group of 25 report-
 ers, including a number of foreign correspondents, were
 invited to tour the Robben Island facility. The Prisons
 Act, however, has tightly limited investigative journalism
 into prison conditions. Over the years, foreign embassies
 and trial observers sent by independent legal and human
 rights groups have frequently attended important trials.
 Foreign legal experts were allowed to attend the inquest
 into the death of Steve Biko held in November1977. However,
 foreign diplomats have been excluded from those political
 trials which are held in camera. South Africa extends
 little or no cooperation to various United Nations bodies
 investigating its human rights record.
 
 
 195
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: SOUTH AFRICA. REPUBLIC OF
 1977     1978      1979
 I.ECON  ASSIST.-TOTAL...          0.0       0.0      0.0
 LOANS.* ...........0.0                 0.0      0.0
 GRANTSe.............         000       0.0      0.0
 A.AID .................           0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS ......... s..0.0                 0.0      0.0
 GRANTS     T.......     0.0       0.0      0.0
 (SEC.SUPPASSST.)*..          0.0       0.0      0*0
 B.FOOD FOR PEACEEe....           0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS...oooo....          0.0       0.0      0.0
 GRANTSN............          0.0       0.0      00
 TITLE -TOTAL    TA.. L..         0.0      0.0      0.0
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS o...           0.0      0.0      0.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR....           0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE II-TOTALeoe    .            0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.RELIEF.EC.oEV & WFP.           0.0      0.0      0.0
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCYo....          0.0       0.0      0.0
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST.**           0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANSoo.........o.o          0.0       0.0      0.0
 GRANTSo..  T...oo           0.0       0.0      0.0
 CONTR. TO IFIeee*          0.0       0.0      0.0
 PEACE CORPSS..o..          0.0       0.0      0.0
 OTHER...ee.ee  ..e0.0               0.0      0*0
 IIoMIL. ASSIST.-TOTALo..          0.0       00      0.0
 LOANS....      ee* .....     0.0       0.0      0.0
 GRANTSe.....o .....          0.0       0.0      0.0
 A.MAP GRANTS   NT.               0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.CREDIT SALES-FMS.-.           0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.INTL ILEDTRNGe..           0.0       0.0      0.0
 D.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK.            0.0       0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTSo....           0.0       0.0      0.0
 IIIoTOTAL ECON. & NIL..*          0.0       0.0      0.0
 LOANSo......o...         0.0       0.0      0.0
 GRANTS-*T....               0.0       0.0      0.0
 OTHER US LOANS..........          0.0       000     12.2
 EX-IM BANK LOANS*......           0.0      0.0     12.2
 ALL OTHER....o..*.e....           0.0      0.0      00
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTEPNATIONAL AGENCIES-COMMITMENTS
 1977     1978      1979     1946-79
 
 TOTAL ....,,       0.0      0.0      0.0    242.3
 ORD               Oeu      0.0      00    241.8
 IFC                0.0      00      0.0      0.0
 IDA                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 108                0.0      0.0      0.0     0.0
 ADS                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 AFDB               0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 UNDP               0,0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 OTHER-UN           0.0      0.0      0.0      0.5
 EEC                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 
 
 196
