 ROMANIA
 Romania is a constitutional republic with a multiparty parliamentary system. In
 the 1992 presidential election, Ion Iliescu was reelected President with 61 percent
 of the popular vote. In November 1992, President Iliescu's designee for Prime Min-
 ister, economist Nicolae Vacaroiu, won a vote of confidence with a government com-
 posed of technocrats and members of the Party of Social Democracy of Romania
 PDSR), formerly the Democratic National Salvation Front.
 Romania continued to struggle in 1993 with the political, economic, and social
 pressures produced by its transition from a totalitarian state with a centralized
 economy to a democratic system of government with a free market economy. These
 pressures contributed to ethnic tensions, social unrest resulting from rising unem-
 ployment and inflation, and an increase in crime.
 The Ministry of Internal Affairs supervises the police, who are charged with main-
 taining law and order. There were credible reports of police abuse of detainees and
 prisoners in 1993 (see Sections L.a and 1.c). The 1992 law governing the Romanian
 Intelligence Service (SRI) establishes oversight through a parliamentary joint com-
 mittee, created in June 1993. The law allows the SRI to justify otherwise prohibited
 actions on broadly defined national security grounds. There were no substantiated
 reports of human rights abuses by the SRI in 1993, and allegations of surveillance
 or harassment of political activists decreased in 1993.
 The transition to a market economy continued to be painful and slow. However,
 after 4 years of continuing economic decline, there were signs that the rate of de-
 cline had slowed. The process of privatizing small and medium-size state enterprises
 continued on a modest scale. According to government estimates, the private sector
 now contributes between 15 and 25 percent of the gross domestic product and more
 than 40 percent of retail sales. Some 80 percent of arable land is now in the hands
 of private farmers, although the plots average only 3.9 acres, and clear titles have
 been issued to less than a fifth of successful claimants. Unemployment hovers near
 10_percent, with inflation in the range of 300 percent by year's end.
 Romania continued efforts to move from its authoritarian past to a democratic
 system. In a significant move to deal with minority issues and problems, the Gov-
 ernment established a consultative Council for National Minorities to serve as a
 forum for the discussion of minority issues and problems and to make recommenda-
 tions to the Government. Headed by the Secretary General of the Government, the
 Council is composed of representatives from all 16 officially recognized minorities
 and 12 government ministries. It made several recommendations on the resolution
 of specific issues, which remain before the Government for final approval. However,
 on August 31, the Hungarian Democratic Union of Romania (UDMR) withdrew its
 representatives from the Council on the grounds that it had yet to achieve concrete
 results.
 Discrimination against Roma (Gypsies) continued, and there were complaints of
 discrimination against ethnic Hungarians. One instance of mob violence against
 Roma resulted in the deaths of three Roma. The Government quickly condemned
 the violence and took disciplinary actions against police for their passivity. Govern-
 ment money allocated to assist the victims had not yet been disbursed at year's end.
 Societal discrimination and violence against women remain a problem. Press and
 radio continued to operate free of political pressure, but there was concern about
 the independence of state-owned television, the primary broadcast medium.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no reported political or
 other extrajudicial killings in 1993. There were credible accounts of police brutality
 contributing to the death of at least two detainees. A police officer was arrested for
 abusive treatment following the death of a beggar who had been beaten. The Gen-
 eral Prosecutor was investigating the death of an arrestee in Dorohoi who died, os-
 tensibly of heart failure, after a week in police custody.
 b. Disappearance.-No instances of disappearance were reported in 1993.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution prohibits torture and inhuman or degrading punishment or treat-
 ment. However, lelsinki Watch reported in January 1993 that the beating of de-
 taineca during arrest or when first taken to police stations was widespread. Roma-
 nian human rights organizations corroborated these reports. The office of the mili-
 tary prosecutor, responsible for legal oversight of the police, has investigated a num-
 ber of these cases, usually without result. A human rights organization was told by
 
 
 1014
 the prosecutor's office that nearly 20 police officers are awaiting trial for violent
 treatment of detainees.
 Several human rights organizations reported abuses in Romanian prisons includ-
 ing overcrowding and reliance on a cell boss system, which one group termed 'inher-
 ently abusive.' The use of leg irons seems to have continued in some prisons, de-
 spite a 1992 government order banning their use on pretrial detainees.
 There were credible reports that in several instances police beat detainees
 charged with committing homosexual acts, illegal under Article 200 of the Roma-
 nian Penal Code, to force them to confess to this crime. Allegedly fearful of retalia-
 tion, such detainees have not filed charges against police. The Foreign Ministry Of-
 fice of Human Rights contends that allegations of abusive investigations have
 proved baseless.
 The number of instances in which policemen were fined or imprisoned for mis-
 conduct was minimal in 1993, in part due to the failure of military prosecutors to
 conduct thorough investigations (see Section 1.d.).
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-Romanian law forbids the detention of
 anyone by police for more than 24 hours without an arrest order from a prosecutor
 who may order detention for 30 days. Detainees have the right to apply for bail and
 may ask for a hearing before a judge. The case must be heard within 24 hours of
 such a request. (In the absence of a request, however, a person may be held for up
 to 65 days without a court order, and it is clear that many citizens are not ade-
 quately informed of their rights in this regard.) The Government is liable for dam-
 ages to persons held in violation of these provisions.
 The authorities are required to inform an arrestee of the charges. He or she also
 has the right to have an attorney present at all ataes of the legal process, and po-
 lice must notify the defendant of this right, in a anguage the defendant under-
 stands, before obtaining any statement from the arrestee. However, the prosecutor's
 office may delay action on a request for a lawyer for up to 5 days from the date
 of arrest. The local bar association provides attorneys to indigents and is com-
 pensated by the Ministry of Justice. The Government acknowledges that the police
 sometimes failed to inform arrestees of their right to counsel in a timely manner.
 Exile was not used as a means of punishment in 1993.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-The 1992 law on the reorganization of the judici-
 ary, which officially took effect on July 1, 1993 provides for the establishment of
 a four-tiered legal system, including the reestablishment of appellate courts, which
 ceased to exist under Communist rule in 1952. The final recourse is to the Supreme
 Court or, for constitutional matters, to the Constitutional Court, established in
 1992.
 The provisions concerning the reestablishment of appellate courts were not imple-
 mented in 1993 because of insufficient personnel and material resources, according
 to government officials. The shortage of awyerf willing to work for the Justice Min-
 istry and to fill positions in the new courts mandated by the law was exacerbated
 by the fact that private practice is much more lucrative.
 Cases involving military personnel, criminal acts against the State (including
 treason and espionage cases), and acts committed by police (considered to be mili-
 tary personnel) are tried in a three-tiered military court system. This system draws
 criticism from local and international human rights groups, especially regarding in-
 vestigations conducted by the military prosecutor's office against police personnel
 accused of abuses. They claim these investigations are unnecessarily lengthy and
 often purposefully inconclusive.
 Under the Constitution, the Ministry of Justice controls the selection and pro-
 motion of judges. The Constitution and the 1992 law authorize life tenure for judges,
 who are appointed by the President upon recommendation from a panel of judges
 and prosecutors selected by Parliament. The panel, comprised of 10 judges and 5
 prosecutors, together with the Justice Minister, has broad disciplinary authority
 overjudges.
 The Constitutional Court, six of whose members are chosen by Parliament and
 three by the President, has judicial responsibility for constitutional issues, but its
 decisions on the constitutionality of laws may be overridden by a two-thirds vote of
 both chambers of Parliament.
 Under the terms of the 1992 law the courts are independent of the executive
 branch. On July 14, however, 2 weeks after the provisions on accountability went
 into effect, the Minister of Justice relieved the president of the Bucharest municipal
 court, Corneliu Turianu, of his duties, allegedly for "politicizing the judiciary." Al-
 though the terms of the law did not apply to Turianu, since he had not been ap-
 pointed by the President the media and human rights groups criticized this action
 as politically motivated. Some labor unions alleged that the courts tend to side with
 the Government when they rule on the legality of strikes and other labor actions.
 
 
 1015
 The Prosecutor General is appointed by the President and is responsible for the
 administration of the law as well as for criminal prosecutions. The Prosecutor Gen-
 eral, who reports to the Minister of Justice, appomits local prosecutors throughout
 the country. A civilian was named to the post of Prosecutor General in May follow-
 ing a recommendation from the Council of-Europe that members of the armed forces
 not hold this office.
 Defendants benefit from a presumption of innocence. The Criminal Code requires
 that, if a defendant cannot afford legal representation or is otherwise unable to se-
 lect counsel, an attorney will be appointed for him. Either plaintiff or defendant
 may appeal. In practice, these provisions of the law were respected.
 There were no known political prisoners in 1993.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Constitution provides for legal protection against the search of a residence without
 a warrant, but this protection is subordinate to "national security or public order."
 The National Security Law of July 29, 1992, defines national security very broadly
 and lists as threats to national security not only crimes such as terrorism, treason,
 espionage, assassination, and armed insurrection but also totalitarian, racist, and
 anti-Semitic actions or attempts to change the existing national borders. Entry into
 residences without prior authorization from a prosecutor is possible if a threat to
 national security is imminent."
 The Constitution states that the privacy of legal means of communication is invio-
 lable. While the SRI is legally prohibited from engaging in political acts, e.g., mon-
 itoring the communications of a political party, the laws on national security allow
 it to engage in such monitoring on national security grounds. Similarly, aIthough
 the SRI is required to obtain a warrant from a prosecutor to carry out intelligence
 activities involving "threats to national security," it may engage in a wide variety
 of operations, including "technical operations," in order to determine if a situation
 meets the legal definition of a "threat to national security."
 In 1993 there appeared to be little arbitrary interference with individual citizens'
 rights to privacy; however, a few nongovernmental organizations (NGO's) claimed
 to have had their mail opened or their phones tapped. They attributed these alleged
 actions to current or former employees of Romanian intelligence services.
 The Government took some measures to investigate reports of continuing abuses.
 In the summer of 1993, for example, the Prosecutor General's office began an inves-
 tigation of the Hunedoara branch of the SRI for illegal wiretapping. In early 1993
 the mass circulation, sensationalist daily Evenimentul Zilei, claimed it had detected
 the presence of bugging devices in its offices, as well as in the offices of several
 rominent organizations and political parties. Police examined the premises and
 ound no such devices.
 The legacy of abuses carried out by the Communist-era internal intelligence serv-
 ice, the Securitate, heightens sensitivity to potential misconduct by the security
 services . The 1992 law governing the SRI addresses some past abuses. It provides
 for the establishment of a parliamentary joint committee to oversee the SRI, which
 came into being through legislative action on June 17. The committee has the power
 to approve the appointment and tenure of the SRI director as well as to dismiss
 him; however, it does not have full budgetary control over the SRI. In October the
 committee approved the formal appointment of current SRI director Virgil
 Magu reanu. Parliament in joint session debated the annual SRI report. The SRI law
 prohibits the SRI from hiring most former Securitate officers. Parliament turned
 over the old Securitate files to the SRI to be kept within its own archives for 40
 years, after which they will become public. The SRI director controls access to them.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-Article 30 of the Constitution provides for free-
 dom of expression and prohibits censorship. Romanians generally are free to express
 any opinions they wish. However, the same article qualifies freedom of expression
 by prohibiting "defamation of the country." While this provision could be construed
 to restrict criticism of the Government, in practice this did not occur in 1993.
 In 1993 the press was free of state censorship or interference and published a
 wide variety of opinions, although some publishers accused the Government of ma-
 nipulating the price and supply of newsprint to the detriment of opposition news-
 papers. Libel law is vague and potentially subject to abuse, particularly if the full
 Parliament should approve a Senate measure that would provide criminal penalties,
 including jail terms of  from 3 months to 3 years, for published or broadcast "insult
 and calumny."
 The League for the Defense of Human Rights (LADO), a Romanian human rights
 organization, reported that Lucia Hossu-Longin director of a powerful television
 documentary series called "The Memorial of Pain," received death threats from un-
 
 
 1016
 
 known sources. Her work focuses on the abuses of communism, especially on politi-
 cal prisoners and forced collectivization. Critics have called for legal action against
 Hossu-Longin for "inciting national hatred." However, no such action was taken.
 Doina Cornea, an internationally known Romanian human rights monitor, re-
 ceived a summons to report to the Prosecutor General's office in Bucharest on Feb-
 ruary 8 to answer allegations that she had attempted to undermine the State when
 she called on the people to take action against the Government during the Septem-
 ber 1991 miners' incursion into Bucharest. The President and Government publicly
 deplored the issuance of the summons. The Prosecutor General's office represented
 the incident as a mistake, withdrew the summons, and sent a junior prosecutor to
 interview her at her home in Cluj. This visit ended the affair, and no charges were
 brought against her. However, Cornea and others described the original issuance of
 the summons as a warning to all dissidents and as an attempt to intimidate Cornea
 in particular.
 Mihaela Germina Nicolae was accused of shouting obscene slogans at President
 Iliescu when he visited the city of Cluj in June 1992. Charged under Law 61 of
 1991, which makes it an offense to use vulgar or insulting language when referring
 to   public  personalities,  and   also  charged   wit    holding   an   illegal
 counterdemonstration, she was acquitted on both counts.
 Romanian State Television (RTV) remained the only domestic television broad-
 caster with nationwide facilities. Although the Government does not directly control
 RTV, its director, appointed by the President, has been accused of using the facility
 to support the Government and its program. The director resigned under pressure
 on January 10, 1994. The National Union of Theater Professionals protested the di-
 rector's decision to prohibit a television production on the grounds that it cast unfa-
 vorable light on Romania's image abroad. RTV's first channel reaches the entire
 country, while its second extends to about 30 percent of the population. Unlike the
 press or radio, Channel 1 was subject to both subtle and overt political pressures,
 which at times resulted in unbalanced news progams and occasional instances of
 censorship and harassment of reporters. Channel 2 transmits in full each evening
 the nightly news broadcasts of Moldovan television and two Western European net-
 works (in their original languages). Channel 2 also carries approximately 60 hours
 of programming weekly by the independent Romanian SOTI station.
 Pvate broadcasting was in a state of flux, following passage of an audiovisual
 law in 1992. The law created an 11-person National Audiovisual Council (NAC),
 which began issuin licenses to private television and radio broadcasters in Novem-
 ber of that year. &e official criteria for allocating licenses include programming
 quality and diversity and political and cultural pluralism, as well as technical and
 financial standards. The Council was accused of ignoring its own criteria in several
 early decisions (for example, favoring a station that now broadcasts 20 hours of
 CNN daily over those wit a more local focus). By September 1993, the NAC had
 issued more than 40 television licenses, and 14 stations were already broadcasting.
 However, the Ministry of Telecommunications limited private television stations to
 low power and a restricted broadcast range. Most of these use state-owned transmit-
 ters during the off-hours when the public network is not broadcasting. The NAC has
 also granted licenses to about 200 cable companies. An estimated 200,000 private
 satellite dishes capable of picking up foreign broadcasts had been installed by 1993.
 State-owned radio operates three nationwide programs which are considered to be
 the country's most reputable information media. By September 1993, the NAC had
 issued 82 licenses to independent radio stations, of which 29 were already broad-
 casting. The new stations featured mostly popular music, but several also carried
 foreign news bulletins in Romanian.
 Foreign publications are freely imported and distributed, although their high cost
 limits their circulation. Academic liberty, in terms of freedom of expression both
 within and outside the classroom, is respected.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution provides for
 freedom of assembly. In addition, the law on public assembly provides for the right
 of Romanians to assemble peacefully while unarmed and states that meetings must
 not interfere with other economic or social activities. Meetings also may not be held
 near locations such as hospitals, airports, or military installations.
 Organizers of demonstrations must inform local authorities and police before the
 event. The authorities may forbid a public gathering by notifying the organizers in
 writing within 48 hours of receipt of the request to hold it. The law prohibits the
 organization of or participation in a counterdemonstration held at the same time as
 a scheduled public gathering. Sorin Eduard Titei was sentenced to 333 days in *ail
 by a local court for violating this prohibition, but due to legal irregularities Titei
 fded an extraordinary appeal, and a I charges were subsequently dropped.
 
 
 1017
 Public gatherings to espouse Communist, racist, or Fascist ideologies or to commit
 actions contrary to public order or national security are forbidden. Unauthorized
 demonstrations or other violations of this law are punishable by imprisonment and
 fines. Constitutional provisions and laws on free assembly were generally respected
 in 1993.
 Romanians participated in numerous rallies in support of a broad spectrum of or-
 ganizations, including trade unions, opposition parties, and minority groups, in
 1993. Romanians may form associations, including political parties, and may obtain
 legal status for them by proving membership of at least 251 persons.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for religious freedom, and the
 Government does not impede the observance of religious belief.
 There are 15 religions, officially recognized under a 1948 decree, whose clergy
 may receive state financial support. Another 120 faiths and denominations have re-
 ceived licenses from the State Secretariat for Religious Affairs under a 1930's law
 on clubs and associations, entitling them to juridical status as well as to exemptions
 from income and customs taxes. The Romanian Orthodox Church, of which approxi-
 mately 86 percent of the population are at least nominal members, is predominant.
 Approval of new applications for official registration is very slow due to bureaucratic
 problems. An application by the Mormon church was approved in 1993. At year's
 end, Parliament was still considering draft legislation on religion which was first
 introduced in 1990.
 The dispute between the Byzantine-rite Catholic (or Uniate) Church, dissolved by
 the Government in 1948 and restored in 1990, and the Romanian Orthodox Church
 over restitution of the physical assets of the former remained unresolved in 1993.
 The Uniates claimed the State favored the Orthodox Church on the property issues
 in dispute.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Government places no restrictions on travel within Romania, ex-
 cept in the case of certain small areas used for military purposes, nor do Romanian
 citizens who wish to change their places of work or residence face any official bar-
 riers. Romanian law stipulates that Romanian citizens have the right to travel free-
 ly abroad, to emigrate, and to return to Romania. In practice, Romanian citizens
 travel freely both within and outside the country, and the right to emigrate and to
 return is respected.
 In 1993 approximately 30,000 Romanian citizens whose requests for refugee sta-
 tus had been rejected were returned from Germany under the terms of a 1992 bilat-
 eral agreement. According to German government statistics, 40 percent of those re-
 turned ar ethnic Roma. They received little or no resettlement assistance.
 Reintegration is complicated by various types of discrimination against Roma (see
 Section 5).
 In 1991 Romania signed the 1951 Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees
 and the 1967 Protocol but still does not have legislation or an effective program to
 implement the Convention. In 1993 the Government was extremely backlogged in
 its procedures for ensuring asylum applicants even temporary legal status until
 their cases could be processed. Approximately 10 percent of the 1,172 registered asy-
 lum applicants were housed in camps under inadequate conditions, while others
 were let to fend for themselves, as they all awaited decisions from the Romanian
 Commission for Migration. The wait has been over a year in many cases. It appears
 that Romanian officials are just beginning to establish a standard procedure for ref-
 ugee processing.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens have the right to change their government. Despite some allegations of
 fraud and various procedural irregularities,most international observer groups con-
 sidered that the 1992 parliamentary and presidential elections met international
 standards of freedom and fairness. Opposition groups currently have 47 percent of
 the seats in Parliament.
 The Constitution and electoral legislation grant each recognized ethnic minority
 political party one representative in Parliament's Chamber of Deputies, provided
 that the party obtain at least 5 percent of the average number of valid votes needed
 to elect a deputy outright (only some 1,100 votes in the September elections). Par-
 ties representing 13 minority groups elected deputies under this provision in 1992.
 ngarians, represented by the UDMR, obtained 27 seats in the Chamber
 through the normal electoral process. Roma (Gypsies) ar underrprsented in Par-
 liament, partly due to their low turnout and to divisions within the Roma commu-
 nity which work against the consolidation of votes for one candidate.
 
 
 1018
 
 There are no legal restrictions on the participation of women in government or
 politics. However, there are only a few women in Parliament and none in the cur-
 rent Cabinet, a situation that reflects prevailing social attitudes.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Domestic human rights monitoring groups that were formed after December 1989
 include the League for the Defense of Human Rights (LADO) the Pro-Democracy
 Association, local chapters of Helsinki Watch and the Helsinki Committee, the Inde-
 pendent Romanian Society for Human Rights, the Romanian Institute for Human
 Rights, and the Association of Former Political Prisoners. Other groups, including
 political parties and trade unions, also have human rights sections that monitor
 human rights observance.
 These groups and international human rights organizations were able to function
 freely without government interference. International groups were free to meet with
 Romanian human rights organizations and were able to meet with detained and ar-
 rested persons and to visit prisons.
 The Constitution mandates an Office of the People's Advocate, an ombudsman
 with responsibility to "defend the rights and liberties" of Romanians. The People's
 Advocate has no legal authority to redress grievances but, in reports to Parliament,
 may provide recommendations regarding legislation or other measures for the pro-
 tection of the rights and liberties of citizens. Legislation implementing this position
 was not completed by the end of 1993.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution forbids any discrimination on account of race, nationality, ethnic
 origin, lanuage, religion, sex, opinion and political allegiance, wealth, or social
 backgound. It also states that citizens are equal before the law and public authori-
 ties. The Government has frequently stated that its holicy is to guarantee and pro-
 tect the rights of all citizens, regardless of ethnic, cu turaT, or relgious background.
 In practice, however, Roma and other minorities are subject to various forms of ex-
 tralegal discrimination. There are approximately 22 ethnic minority groups in Ro-
 mania, representing 10 to 12 percent of the population.
 Women.-Legally, women are accorded the same rights and privileges as men in
 all areas, including education, access to employment, and wages. However, in a dif-
 ficult economic climate and in a society where traditionally the economic role of
 women has been considered less important than that of men, women are often the
 first to be dismissed from employment. There are few women in positions of impor-
 tance in government or industry. Women's issues receive little attention or resources
 from the Government.
 A few cases of on-the-job sexual harassment were reported in the press. In most
 of these cases, male superiors extorted sexual favors from women as a condition of
 continued employment or with the promise of career advancement. One renowned
 allegation led to the resignation of the Minister of Culture after a Senate committee
 concluded from its investigation that his "confused behavior" during the night in
 question harmed the interests of the Ministry, although the committee did not make
 a determination on the charge of sexual harassment. There is currently no specific
 law to cover sexual harassment, nor is there any organization that defends women's
 rights in this area.
 There is little official initiative on issues affecting women, including family plan-
 ning, crimes against women, and domestic violence. Violent crimes against women
 were reported with increasing frequency during the year. According to Ministry of
 Interior statistics, 1,065 rapes were committed in Romania in 1992, and 670 in the
 first 6 months of 1993. For the most part, women do not report rape. The rape vic-
 tim receives little sympathy from the community. Bringing a case of rape to trial
 is very difficult. The woman's claim that she was raped is not sufficient evidence,
 even if she is able to identify the perpetrator. Witnesses are required.
 There are no statistics available on the incidence of domestic violence, although
 the director of LADO reported that over 60 percent of their cases were brought by
 women who wanted to document beatings for their divorce hearing.
 Children.-The Government has increased its attention to the problem of chil-
 dren, including by establishing a new program for street children and by improving
 conditions for children in institutions. The manpower and resources for these
 projects continue to flow mainly from internationa agencies and nongovernmental
 organizations. Domestic resources for these children remain few. Orphanage condi-
 tions, grossly neglected under the Ceausescu regime, have improve  A   ouncil of
 Europe commission, assigned to evaluate the conditions in Romania's orphanages,
 
 
 1019
 found that conditions in the majority were in line with average Romanian living
 standards and that 15 percent were substandard. The United Nations Children's
 Fund (UNICEF) held several seminars during the year to sensitize Romanians to
 the issue of children's rights, using the United Nations charter on children's rights
 as a standard.
 A new law on the abandonment of children, adopted on July 8, requires orphan-
 age directors to notify child welfare authorities or the local court if an institutional-
 ized child's parents demonstrate an "obvious lack of interest" (not precisely defined)
 in the child for a period of more than 6 months. The court then makes a determina-
 tion as to whether or not the child has been abandoned. If the court finds that the
 child has indeed been abandoned, the child's name is given to the Romanian adop-
 tion committee as a candidate for adoption. Family members have the right to ap-
 peal the court's decision until the child is adopted.
 There was no apparent pattern of societal abuse against children in 1993. Never-
 theless, there were numbers of impoverished and apparently homeless street chil-
 dren in the larger cities. No statistics concerrning this problem are currently avail-
 able. A new department of the Ministry of Youth and Sports was set up to assist
 NGO's already working on this problem, but resources are limited. Romanian youth
 organizations remained concerned about the impact of deteriorating economic condi-
 tions, which contributed to the rise in juvenile delinquency and vandalism.
 National Racial Ethnic Minorities.-The Government created a consultative
 Council for National Minorities in April. Its purpose is to provide a forum for dialog
 between the Government and all official minorities and to make recommendations
 to the Government regarding minority issues. Headed by the Secretary General to
 the Government, the Council is comprised of 60 delegates: 48 representing the 16
 officially recognized minorities and 12 representing various ministries. These 12
 ministries together are entitled to only 1 vote, while each minority also has 1 vote.
 Decisions require a two-thirds majority and may be vetoed by the government rep-
 resentatives or by the representatives of any minority directly affected. If veto
 power is not exercised, Council decisions are referred to the Government for ap-
 proval or disapproval.
 In the area of Romanian-Hungarian ethnic relations, the Council on August 18
 adopted a recommendation to require the use of bilingual or multilingual signs in
 localities where a minority represented more than 10 percent of the population. (The
 Government was given the option of altering the percentage in question to 20 or 30.)
 The Council also adopted a proposal to allow schoolchildren in grades one through
 four to receive instruction in history and geography, in addition to all other subjects,
 in their mother tone and agreed to provide 300 places for ethnic Hungarian-
 teaching students at 1abes-Bolyai University in Cluj. The Minister of Education had
 implemented the third proposal, but as of October the Government had not yet
 acted on the first two, due in part to vociferous public objections (including the
 threatened introduction of a no confidence motion in Parliament) by the nationalist
 parties. On August 31, the delegates of the Hungarian Democratic Union of Roma-
 nia (UDMR) withdrew from the Council, claiming that it had failed to make any
 substantive progress and characterizing it as a "sterile club."
 Roma (Gypsies), estimates of whose numbers in Romania range from 427,000 (ac-
 cording to the 1992 census) to 3 million (according to some Roma representatives),
 continued to suffer many forms of discrimination which the Government is often un-
 able to prevent or unwilling to redress. The Ministry of Education has instituted a
 pilot program to train Roma teachers to provide moth er-tongue instruction to Roma
 children in an effort to keep such children in school.
 Since the revolution of December 1989, a number of incidents have sparked "vigi-
 lante-style" attacks against Roma communities. One such incident in 1993 occurred
 in the village of Hadareni, Mures county, on September 20. An argument broke out
 in the street between a Roma and an ethnic Romanian, culminating in the fatal
 stabbing of the Romanian. The Roma and his brother fled for refuge to a Roma
 home. An angry crowd of villagers forced the two men out of the house and beat
 them fatally. Other Roma houses were set afire, and one other Roma died in the
 flames. Police officers and the fire department intervened late and ineffectively.
 In reaction to this incident, the Government for the first time issued a strong
 statement condemning all such "antisocial" acts and warning that vigilantism was
 intolerable. The Government pledged to punish the guilty, irrespective of ethnicity.
 It acknowledged that Roma faced special problems, promised to develop adequate
 social integration programs, and pledged to use government funds to rebuild the de-
 stroyed homes and care for the displaced children in the meantime. Investigations
 were begun immediately by the police and prosecutor's office. The commander of the
 county police was dismissed, and three noncommissioned officers were transferred
 and punished.
 
 
 1020
 A government decision in November allocated 25 million lei (Romanian currency)
 were allocated toward rebuilding homes, and an emergency medical center was es-
 tablished in a nearby village. However, according to Gypsy and human rights orga-
 nizations, no other relief measures have yet been taken, nor has rebuilding begun.
 Roma organizations have protested in a press conference and several demonstra-
 tions against the Government's lack of responsiveness.
 Several pre-1993 incidents of vigilante violence against the Roma remained unre-
 solved. Investigations by the Ministry of Defense and the military prosecutor's office
 of a July 1992 attack on Roma in a Bucharest city market, allegedly committed by
 a group of masked military policemen, have yet to be completed. The ethnic Federa-
 tion of Roma reported that the military prosecutoer's office is using the excuse that
 the Roma victims were unable to identify their assailants as a motive for not con-
 cluding the investigation. The rebuilding of approximately 20 Roma homes burned
 by Romanian villagees in a 1991 vigilante attack in Valeni Lapusului remains in-
 complete. Houses in the Roma community in Mihail Kogalniceanu near Constanta
 have now been rebuilt following 1990 mob violence.
 Roma continued to face discrimination in workplaces and schools. For example,
 a 1991 International Labor Organization (ILO) commission found that Roma suf-
 fered both direct and indirect discrimination in the workplace and were relegated
 to low-paying, low-status jobs. It also reported that Roma were excluded from edu-
 cational and work opportunities that might lead to higher paying or skilled jobs, and
 such discrimination perpetuated their low status in society. In 1993 the Government
 initiated some job training progms for Roma and began experimental classes in
 the Roma language for Roma children. A June 1993 ILO report concluded that the
 situation had improved somewhat and praised the Government's general responsive-
 ness to the problem. Some Roma leaders charged that the government television
 station was unwilling to broadcast any Roma-oriented educational programs.
 Hungarians, the largest ethnic minority, number 1.6 million, according to the
 1992 census or more than 2.2 million, according to Hungarian estimates. They are
 concentrated in Transylvania. Instruction in the Hungarian language is available in
 primary and secondary schools when there are at least 7 elementary students or 15
 secondary students to form a Hungarian-language class. Some university courses
 are taught in Hungarian in Cluj and Tirgu Mures. Ethnic Hungarians, who were
 unhappy with the constitutional text declaring Romania a "unitary state," fear a
 gradual process of cultural assimilation and seek additional Hungarian-language
 postsecondary instruction and use of Hungarian (rather than Romanian with inter-
 pretation, as is currently provided by law) in the courts.
 In the Transylvanian city of Cluj, Gheorghe Funar, elected mayor in February
 1992 as candidate of the nationalist Party of Romanian National Unity (PUNR),
 continued his anti-Hungarian provocations. He took unsuccessful steps to evict a
 number of publications from their offices, including a Hungarian-language news-
 paper. The central Government, acting through the local prefect (district head), de-
 clared several of Funar's actions null and void, but the municipality continued to
 use local statutes and regulations to harass local Hungarians.
 In July 1992, under pressure from Romanian nationalists, the Stolojan govern-
 ment had removed the ethnic Hungarian prefects of Covasna and Hargita counties,
 the two counties where ethnic Hungarians constitute a clear majority. Following
 antigovernment protests. Stoloian agreed to a compromise arrangement, ap ointing
 coequal prefects, one ethinic Hungarian and one ethnic Romanian, in eac? of the
 counties. This solution proved to be unsatisfactory to representatives of both ethnic
 groups. On Manmh 24, 1993, the Vacaroiu Government, again due to pressure from
 Romanian nationalists, ended the multiethnic arrangement by appointing ethnic Ro-
 manian prefects in each county. The UDMR protested this change vehemently and
 refused the Government's offer to name ethnic Hungarians as deputy prefects.
 The UDMR condemned the Supreme Court's June 7 rejection of an appeal in the
 case of Pal Cseresznyes, an ethnic Hungarian serving a 10-year sentence for at-
 tempted murder as a result of his involvement in the Tirgu Mures incidents of
 March 1990. Cseresznyes participated in the savage beating of an ethnic Romanian,
 which an international journalist captured on film. The UDMR's complaint centered
 on the length of his sentence and on the fact that he was the only one of those
 filmed who was brought to trial. The court maintained that, regardless of the fates
 of the others involved, Cseresznyes had received a fair trial and was guilty as
 charged. Thus it found no legal reason to grant an appeal.
 Religious Minorities.-Physical attacks directed against Jewish persons or institu-
 tions are not known to have occurred in 1993, nor are graves or synagogues known
 to have been desecrated. However, the extreme nationalist press continued its anti-
 Semitic harangues. Both the President and the Prime Minister have publicly con-
 demned anti-Semitism, other types of racism, and xenophobia. The President at-
 
 
 1021
 tended a ceremony to commemorate Holocaust day at the Bucharest synagogue in
 April, the first time a Romanian Head of State has ever attended a Jewish religious
 service.
 People with Disabilities.-Postrevolutionary Romania inherited a legacy of neglect
 of the severely handicapped population, both children and adults. To redress the sit-
 uation, the Government set up special programs for the handicapped, including vo-
 cational training and special schools for handicapped children. In addition handi-
 capped children are now given precedence in foreign adoption placements. The law
 does not mandate accessibility for the disabled.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-Labor legislation, adopted in 1991, guarantees the
 right of workers, except government employees and military and police personnel,
 to associate freely, organize and join labor unions, and engage in collective bargain-
 ing. The right to strike is specifically guaranteed, and several major strikes or dem-
 onstrations occurred in 1993. The primary exceptions are employees in certain criti-
 cal industries involving the public interest, such as defense, health care, transpor-
 tation, and telecommunications, in which there are limitations on the right to strike.
 Most unions took a critical view of labor legislation. They complained, in particu-
 lar, about the legal requirement calling for submission of grievances to government-
 sponsored conciliatin             ing a strike as interfrence in their freedom of
 action. Moreover, trade unions voiced increasing frustration with the judiciarys pro-
 pensity to declare illegal virtually every major strike on which the courts have been
 asked to rule. An ILO Committee of Experts (COE) report in 1992 also registered
 concern that the current laws fall short of ILO standards in several areas, including
 the free election of union representatives, binding arbitration, and financial liability
 of strike organizers. Government officials, especially in the Ministry of Labor and
 Social Protection (MOLSP), recognize these and other deficiencies in labor legisla-
 tion, but the Government has not yet moved to amend the laws.
 In May the country's largest trade union confederations threatened to launch a
 nationwide general strike to protest rapidly rising inflation and falling standards of
 living for their members. The unions sought steep wage hikes to compensate work-
 ers or ontinual economic dislocations accompanyingRomania's transition to a free
 market eonomy. The strike was averted at the lith hour when union and govern-
 ment negotiators agreed to a package of concessions. However, one confederation
 and several smaller labor organizations engaged in sporadic strike activity until
 they negotiated a separate agreement with the Government several days later.
 In August railway locomotive engine drivers launched a week"long, economically
 damaging strike. Union leaders initially defied a Supreme Court ruling to suspend
 the strike for 80 days. At the conclusion of the strike, the National Railway Com-
 pany (CFR) began to fire union leaders around the country and filed suit against
 other top leaders in an effort to recover economic damages. Romania's major trade
 union confederations, along with some political opposition parties and human rights
 groups, interpreted the CFR's harsh actions as union-busting tactics. Tension was
 reduced after the Government fired the CFR president and 10 members of the com-
 pany's board of directors. The CFR then decided to reinstate the fired union leaders,
 although it has not yet done so, and to suspend the suit against others. Prime Min-
 ister Vacaroiu pledged in December that no members would be fired before the
 courts had ruled on their appeals. In an action, pending since 1992 and involving
 the CFR's dismissals of four union leaders accused of leading strikes against the
 company, a neutral commission established by the Government ruled in the union-
 ists' favor.
 The 1991 legislation stipulates that labor unions are independent bodies, free
 from government or political party control. The Government routinely consults with
 unions on labor issues, though it frequently disregards union recommendations. No
 worker may be forced to join or withdraw from a union, and union officials who re-
 sign from elected positions and return to the regular work force are accorded protec-
 tion against employer retaliation.
 The majority of Romania's approximately 10.8-million working people are mem-
 bers of about 18 nationwide trade union confederations and smaller independent
 trade unions. In June two of the nation's largest labor confederations-the National
 Confederation of Free Trade Unions (CNSLR) and Fratia-formally merged into the
 CNSLR-Fratia. The new formation boasts a membership of 3.5 million members,
 representing over half of the unionized work force. Like most membership figures
 in Romania, however, this is probably exaggerated.
 None of the trade union organizations engaged in direct political activity in 1993,
 but in November and December several of the larger confederations organized dem-
 onstrations calling for the resignation of the Vacaroiu Government.
 
 
 1022
 
 Labor unions have the right to affiliate internationally, and representatives of for-
 eign and international organizations freely visit and advise Romanian trade union-
 ists. Alfa Cartel and Fratia are affiliated with the World Confederation of Labor
 (WCL) and the International Confederation of Free Trade Unions (ICFTU), resrc-
 tively. CNSLR was accepted as an ICFTU member in December as a result o its
 merger with Fratia.
 In June the ILO conference noted the steps Romania had begun to take to imple-
 ment the recommendations of an earlier Commission of Inquiry, particularly the es-
 tablishment of a Council for National Minorities, and urged further measures in law
 and practice to eliminate discrimination based on political opinion, religion, race,
 sex, national extraction, and social origin. The workers' member representing Roma-
 nia alleged at the ILO Conference that in some enterprises managed by technocrats
 of the old regime collective agreements were implemented in a discriminatory way
 by the directors, who favored house unions over independent ones and who dis-
 missed members of independent trade unions and women before all others.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-The 1991 legislation permits
 workers tobargain collectively. The lack of any procedure to define which unions
 are recognized by management as negotiating partners did not cause major prob-
 lems in 1993, unions and management generally finding pragmatic accommodations.
 There were sporadic allegations that union leaders are often the first to be laid off.
 Workers who are illegally dismissed have recourse to the courts, which have ordered
 the reinstatement of such employees, including in the CFR case.
 Continued state control over most industrial resources and the absence of inde-
 pendent management representatives complicated collective bargaining efforts. In
 addition to basic wage scales established through collective bargaining, most work-
 ers as well as pensioners receive thrice-yearly increases indexed to prospective price
 increases. In 1993 workers received additional compensation to cushion the eco-
 nomic blows caused by the lifting of official subsidies for basic consumer items in
 May and the introduction of a national value-added tax in July.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The Constitution prohibits forced
 or compulsory labor. The MOLSP effectively enforces this prohibition, and no in-
 stances of such practices were recorded in 1993.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The minimum age for employment
 is 16, although children as young as 14 or 15 may work with the consent of their
 parents or guardians but only "according to their physical development, aptitude,
 and knowledge." Working children under 16 have the right to continue their edu-
 cation, and employers are obliged to assist in this regard. The MOLSP has the au-
 thority to impose fines and close sections of factories to enforce compliance with the
 law. No violations of this policy were documented in 1993, and child labor does not
 appear to be a problem.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-Most wage rates are established through col-
 lective bargaining at the enterprise level but are based on minimum wages for given
 economic sectors and categories of workers set by the Government after negotiations
 with industry representatives and the labor confederations. Minimum wage rates
 are generally observed and enforced. In 1993 the minimum monthly wage (nomi-
 nally about $45 in December) did not keep pace with inflation, and it was criticized
 for not providing a decent standard of living for a worker and family, although basic
 necessities like housing and medical care still are partly subsidized by the Govern-
 ment.
 The Labor Code provides for a standard workweek of 40 hours or 5 days, with
 overtime to be paid for weekend or holiday work or work in excess of 40 hours. The
 Labor Code does not specifically include a requirement for a 24-hour rest period, al-
 though this is implied in the provision for a standard workweek of 5 days. Paid holi-
 days range from 15 to 24 days annually, depending mainly on the employee's length
 of service. Employers are required by law  a additional benefits and allowances
 to workers engaged in particularly dangerous or difficult occupations.
 Some labor organizations ressed for healthier, safer working conditions on behalf
 of their members. The MOLP established safety standards for most industries and
 is responsible for enforcing them. However, it lacks sufficient trained personnel for
 inspection and enforcement, and employers generally ignore its recommendations.
 Though they have the right to refuse dangerous work assignments, in practice work-
 ers seldom invoke it, appearing to value increased pay over a safe and healthful
 work environment. Neithe      Government nor industry, still mostly state owned,
 has the resources necessary to improve significantly health and safety conditions in
 the workplace.
 
 
 1023
