 ROMANIA
 Romania is a centralized unitary state. iThe
 government exercises strict control overicivil and
 political rights and economic decision making.
 While considerable economic advances have been made
 in the last 37 years and the nation has changed from
 an almost entirely agricultural country to one with a
 significant industrial sector, its present per capita
 Sross national product is only slightly more than
 1,900. The government attempts to provide work for
 all citizens and to make available a wide range of
 social services.
 Romania maintains a restrictive emigration policy and
 has strict limitations on political expression and
 religious activities. Generally, Romania has shown
 receptivity to concerns expressed by the
 international community about its human rights
 practices.
 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person,
 Including Freedom froms
 a. Torture
 Torture is prohibited by articles 180-181 of the
 Romanian penal code, which set prison terms for
 beating or any act of violence causing physical
 suffering. Police brutality is reported, however,
 and prisoners are sometimes beaten, verbally
 threatened and are subject to strong psychological
 pressures.
 b. Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 Conditions of confinement are poor. Former prisoners
 report overcrowded, unsanitary conditions of
 imprisonment, poor and inadequate diet, long working
 hours and minimal medical care. Prisoners
 occasionally are kept in relative or complete
 isolation and at times are refused access to their
 familie6 for as much as six months at a time.
 Rehabilitation through work is common in the Romanian
 system of iustico, and the vast majority of prisoners
 in Romania must work while in prison. While work
 labor camps aplear seldom to be used today, the
 so-called forced domicile system is a common form of
 punishment. This may involve work without wages and
 transfer to a workplace far from the prisoner's
 home. Because forced domicile rarely involves
 incarceration, however, it is considered a more
 lenient form of punishment by Romanians.
 Capital punishment exists in Romania. It has been
 imposed four times in murder cases in 1980 and 1981
 and once for an *economic crime" in 1981.
 (856)
 
 
 857
 Reports of the confinement of prisoners and
 dissidents in psychiatric hospitals because of their
 political and religious views persist even though
 there has been no substantiating evidence ofrecent
 cases of this type.
 c. Disappearances
 Disappearances and clandestine detention of persons
 for long periods of time have not been reported.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest and Imprisonment
 Police harassment is a common feature of everyday
 life for those who are politically active beyond the
 limits set by the Communist Party, or who actively
 proselytize for their church. Activists of this type
 are rarely arrested or charged with serious political
 offenses such as those listed under Article 166 or
 167 of the Penal Code (1973). They are usually
 accused of "parasitism" (Presidential Decree
 153/1970) or some other lesser offenses not directly
 relatable to their political or religious
 activities. Political prisoners sentenced under
 Decree 153 are rarely allowed to work outside of
 prison and generally are segregated from normal
 prisoners. Romanian law does not provide for habeas
 corpus, and no effective legal remedy exists for
 persons held without charge. Detention without
 charge for short periods (2-4 days) is not uncommon.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The government may hold trials in camera when it so
 chooses. Defendants are allowed access to counsel
 before their trial, although adeqbate time in which
 to prepare a defense is not always permitted.
 Emergency trials may be used to try and sentence a
 defendant in less than 48 hours.
 f. Invasion of the Home
 The constitution guarantees the inviolability of the
 home. Entry by the authorities without a proper
 judicial warrant is not permitted. There are,
 however, reports of forced entry without a warrant in
 cases involving political and religious dissidents.
 2. Respect for Civil and Political Liberties,
 Including%
 a. Freedom of Speech, Press, Religion and
 Assembly
 Freedom of speech, the press and assembly is sharply
 limited; no one, according to the constitution, may
 use these freedoms "for aims hostile to the socialist
 system." Criticism of corruption and lower level
 administrative inadequacies is permitted so long as
 
 
 858
 it is in conformity with the Communist Party's
 general views, but no independent criticism or
 discussion of changes in basic party policies or of
 high political personalities is permitted.
 All publications are government controlled and
 Western publications are not generally available.
 Some entities, such as religious groups, publish in a
 relatively independent manner, but always within
 guidelines set by the government. Unauthorized
 importation or distribution of religious literature
 has resulted in fines and prison terms.
 The Romanian constitution provides for freedom of
 religion and the government recognizes and provides
 some financial support for fourteen religious
 denominations. The vast majority of Romanians belong
 to the Romanian Orthodox church. Among the
 recognized denominations are Judaism and Islam as
 well as the Latin-Rite Catholics, Baptists,
 Unitarians, and Lutherans. People belonging to these
 recognized denominations may attend religious
 services freely. Adherents to religions other than
 the 14 officially recognized denominatios are not
 permitted to practice their faith in public.
 The department of cults requires permits for churches
 to organize, build or expand. Church buildings built
 or repaired without government permission have been
 closed or on occasion torn down. Smaller religious
 denominations, particularly the Baptists, complain of
 lack of government response to repeated requests for
 building permits, even to allow congregations to
 construct and repair church buildings at their own
 expense.
 There is no rabbinical seminary and rabbis must be
 trained in foreign countries.
 The Eastern-Rite Catholic, or Uniate church, once
 well represented in Transylvania, has never been
 recognized by the Communist government. Its
 activities are proscribed, although the state now
 tends to ignore the fact that some people still
 practice Uniate forms of worship. Many former
 adherents have been absorbed into the Romanian
 Orthodox or the Latin-Rite Catholic churches.
 There are documented reports that some Protestant
 groups, e.g., Baptists, Pentecostalists and Seventh
 Day Adventists, even though recognized by the
 government, have difficulties whenever they seek to
 gain converts outside church buildings or when they
 resist laws which they believe are in conflict with
 their faith. Some of their ministers and members
 have been imprisoned or forced into exile.
 The Communist Party advocates atheism. Consequently,
 Party members who attend religious services are
 unlikely to progress within the Party structure.
 
 
 859
 No large assemblies can be held, or organizations or
 associations formed, without government approval.
 The government discourages unregulated contacts with
 foreigners, and requires such contacts to be reported
 to the authorities.
 b. Freedom of Movement Within the Country,
 Foreign Travel, Emigration and Repatriation
 Romanians may travel freely throughout the country.
 Should they decide to change residence, however, they
 must obtain official approval. Passports for foreign
 travel are difficult to obtain and relatively few
 Romanians are allowed to travel abroad.
 The Romanian government contends that a Romanian does
 not have the right to move permanently from his
 native land. (Emigration is viewed more as a
 privilege granted by the government rather than a
 right.) The government attempts to discourage
 emigration through administrative, social and
 economic constraints, which can often impose a heavy
 burden upon individuals, including loss of job,
 demotions, reductions in salary, and other forms of
 discrimination during the lengthy period when an
 application to emigrate is pending. Leaving or
 attempting to leave the country without official
 permission is a crime.
 The Romanian government permits family reunification
 on an individual case basis and also allows
 emigration on a non-family reunification basis of
 Jews to Israel and ethnic Germans to the Federal
 Republic of Germany. Largely due to emigration, the
 Jewish population of Romania has declined from
 approximately 450,000 people at the close of World
 War II to about 35,000 today, according to the
 Romanian Federation of Jewish Communities.
 Approximately 16,000 ethnic Germans left for the
 Federal Republic of Germany in 1980.
 c. Freedom to Participate in the Political
 Process
 Political power is the monopoly of the Communist
 Party. While no one is barred from consideration for
 party membership (the Romanian Communist Party is
 proportionately the largest in Eastern Europe --
 numbering about three million), rank and file members
 have little influence in the decision-making
 process. Opposition to the Party is prohibited.
 Power is centered at the top and especially in the
 person of the Secretary General, who is also
 President of the Republic. The various ethnic groups
 are present at every level of the Communist Party
 structure.
 
 
 860
 Romanian women participate at all levels of the
 Communist Party and state structure. At present four
 cabinet-level positions out of 56 are held by women.
 Five women are full members of the political
 executive council, the Party's 24-member highest
 decision-making body. Women's representation in the
 central committee of the Communist Party has
 increased to one quarter of the membership. Despite
 recent increases in the number of women occupying
 prominent political positions, the proportion of
 women in the political process reflects Romania's
 historical and social traditions. The government is
 seeking to upgrade the role of women in the society
 with specific policies in the areas of education,
 access to employment and comparable wages. As a
 result, women are employed in virtually all sectors
 of the economy. Equality of educational opportunity
 is also guaranteed.
 The constitution forbids any discrimination on the
 basis of ethnic background and guarantees the use of
 minority languages in books, newspapers, magazines,
 theaters and education, and, when a minority group is
 present in large numbers, the use of its language in
 governmental and economic institutions. The
 government of Romania claims it does not discriminate
 against its minorities.
 Nevertheless, limitations on the free exercise and
 expression by minorities of their cultural heritage
 exist. Government efforts to centralize and to
 economize by combining educational, social and
 cultural activities frequently affect minority groups
 disproportionately. For example the merger of
 schools, theaters or other activities results in the
 reduction of the unique qualities of one particular
 ethnic group or another. The requirement that all
 organizations be approved and regulated by the
 government practically precludes the establishment of
 private organizations dedicated to the preservation
 of ethnic cultural practices.
 Provision of government services for Romania's
 minority groups reflects the limitations referred to
 above. German and Hungarian radio broadcasts are
 carried several hours daily; television in these
 languages is limited respectively to two and three
 hours weekly. German and Hungarian language theaters
 and a Hungarian language opera also exist. Minority
 language newspapers are readily available in
 Bucharest and areas where minority groups are
 concentrated, though fewer papers are permitted to
 publish than in previous decades. The importation of
 all publications, including those in the Hungarian
 and German languages, is strictly controlled. Bi-
 and tri-lingual signs are uncommon even in areas
 where non-Romanian ethnic groups are in the majority,
 except for occasional street signs or those
 identifying schools, museums, churches and monuments.
 
 
 861
 Schools for minority groups may be established
 although more minority group students are required to
 set up a minority language school than are required
 to establish a Romanian language school. School
 consolidations at the primary and secondary level,
 leading to the closing of many ethnic language
 schools, have been viewed by some critics as
 reflecting a policy of discrimination. The one
 solely Hungarian language university ceased to exist
 in that form when it was merged with a Romanian one
 in 1959. It is still possible, however, to study
 many courses in Hungarian and German through the
 university level in parts of the country where there
 are large Hungarian and German ethnic minorities,
 although knowledge of Romanian is required to
 graduate at the university level.
 Trade unions are permitted under article 27 of the
 constitution, but article 29 forbids any association
 with an "anti-democrat or fascist character." One of
 the few attempts to organize workers into independent
 unions, the Free Trade Union Movement of Romanian
 Workers (SLOMR), was begun in 1979 and resulted in
 the imprisonment or forced exile of SLOMR'S leaders.
 No comparable labor movement has been formed since.
 3. Government Attitude and Record Regarding
 International and Non-governmental Investigation of
 Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 The Romanian government responds to some
 international inquiries regarding individuals who.
 have applied for emigrationj it does not fully
 cooperate with inquiries from international groups
 about political prisoners.
 The United States and Romania participated in a
 bilateral human rights discussion in Bucharest in
 February 1980, the first such held in Eastern
 Europe. Another is planned for early 1982.
 4. Economic and Social Circumstances
 Romania is officially designated a developing country
 by the International Bank for Reconstruction and
 Development. With a population of 22.3 million at
 the end of 1980, Romania's per capita GNP was just
 over $1,900 in current prices not adjusted for
 inflation. From a largely agrarian economy, it has
 reached its present semi-industrialized state
 principally by maintaining extremely high rates of
 investment in development and restricting consumer
 consumption. The Romanian Government has pursued a
 policy of holding the growth of consumption below
 that of national income in the interest of
 reinvestment in economic growth.
 Rapid population shifts from rural to urban areas
 since 1948 have contributed to a housing problem in
 
 
 862
 urban areaa. Actual construction of apartments lags
 behind the government's ambitious targets in this
 area. In 1980, the average living space per
 inhabitant was recorded as 9.7 square meters with
 1.41 persons per room. Within the past year the
 government has twice sought to enforce strict
 observance of regulations governing the amount of
 living space allocated to families, but has been
 forced to modify its position in the face of strong
 popular opposition.
 According to Romanian law, all land belongs to the
 state. There are, however, provisions under which
 9.4 percent of the country's agricultural land is
 held by private citizens. In 1980, the latest year
 for which there are figures, 60.6 percent of
 agricultural land was used by agricultural
 cooperatives and 30 percent by state farms. Other
 property, including personal property and housing,
 may be privately owned, although there are a number
 of restrictions on the right to property. Economic
 enterprises are state-owned except for a few small
 service or handicraft shops.
 The Romanian constitution guarantees employment to
 all citizens and equal pay for equal work. Official
 records show full employment. In practice, there is
 chronic underemployment, especially in the
 agricultural sector. At present, workers in industry
 have a 5-1/2 day week of 46 to 48 hours, depending on
 the sector. There are only three official holidays
 per year each observed for two days.. The government
 has called for a 46 hour week by the end of the year
 and a 44 hour week by 1985.
 Romanian law sets a maximum ratio of 1.6 between
 minimum and maximum salaries. Current official
 policy is to reduce this ratio to IS5.5. The average
 net monthly salary of a Romanian worker in 1980 was
 189 dollars at the current official conversion rate.
 This is 36 percent higher than the 139 dollars per
 month earned in 1975. The Romanian authorities
 announced a "real" salary growth (adjusted for
 comparable values) of 29 percent for the same
 period. Officially the effect of inflation for the
 five-year period is calculated at just over 9
 percent, but Western economic observers think that
 the effect of inflation is considerably higher.
 Complicated regulations exist for establishing wages
 of workers in accordance with their professional
 training or skills, seniority, and the difficulty of
 their work. Wages are not the only item of income,
 but the majority of workers in industry presumably
 live on their salaries and state social allocations.
 Special non-monetary perquisites are made available
 to some high-ranking party and state officials, as
 well as to cultural and athletic figures and other
 nationally and internationally prominent individuals.
 
 
 863
 According to-Romanian data, 21.3 percent of total
 budget expenditures in 1975 and 23.5 percent in 1980
 were allocated to education, culture, sports, health,
 social assistance and pensions, family allocations
 and social security.
 The most recent statistics published on average life
 expectancy (the data cover the period 1976-78) show
 the males in Romania could expect to live to 67.42
 years and females to 72.18 years. For 1979, 31.6
 children under one year of age die out of 1000 live
 births. In 1975 there were 9.2 hospital beds
 (excluding maternity beds and sanitaria) per 1000
 inhabitants. For the same years, the number of
 doctors per inhabitant grew from one per 624 to one
 per 593.
 Ten years' education is compulsory and is provided
 without charge by the State. Beginning with the
 third year of secondary.education, examinations are
 required for placement in the limited openings at
 both the secondary and the'university level. Evening
 courses and work-study programs are available to
 students at technical institutes. According to the
 Romanian authorities, illiteracy has been eradicated,
 and the World Bank reports a literacy rate of 98
 percent as of 1976.
 Official Romanian government estimates place the
 average daily food consumption in Romania for 1980 at
 3,240 calories per day, which is 130 percent of
 nutritional requirements. Romanian markets, however,
 have.been plagued by severe shortages of food
 (including meat and dairy products) which have
 intensified because of poor harvests, poor
 distribution and inadequate storage and the
 increasing need to export food for hard currency.
 New measures to punish food hoarding, and a system of
 rationing for. some food items, including bread, were
 put into effect in the autumn of 1981.. The quality
 of foodstuffs and clothing kept for domestic
 consumption is inferior to what is exported for hard
 currency to pay for imports necessary for Romania's
 industry.
 
 
 864
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- UKLltATIONS ANU LOAN AUTHUKIZATIINS
 (U.S.;ISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: kOMANIA
 1979     19b0      1981
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL...         (.       0.0       0.0
 LOANS ............... ..0             0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ............... .   0.7      0.0       0.0
 A.AIO .....        .   ...........  0.7   0.0       0.0
 LOANS ............         0.0      0.0       0.0
 GRANTS .............         0.1      0.0       0.0
 ISEC.SUPP.ASSISTo 1..          G.0      0.0      0.0
 8.FOUO FOR PtACE ......          0.0      0.0       G.0
 LOANS ...............        0.0      0.0       0.0
 GRANTS.........        ....  0.0     0.0       0.0
 TITLE I-TOTAL .........          U.0      0.0       0.0
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS.              0.0      0.0       0.0
 PAY. 1N FOR. CUKR....          0.0      0.0       0.A
 TITL. I I-TUTAL........          0.0      0.0       0.0
 E.RELILF.EC.DEV . WI-P.         0.0      0.0       0.0
 VOL.RELIEF AGENLY.....          0.0      0.0       (.0
 C.OTHER ECON. ASIST...          0.0      0.0       0.0
 LOANS ..............O...    0.0      0.0       0.0
 GRANTS.............. .      0.0      0.0       0.0
 PLACE COKPS ....           0.0      0.0      0.0
 NAKCOTICS .....0.0. .0              0.0      0.0
 OTHER............ .0.0             0.0      0.0
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL...          0.0      0.0       0.0
 LOANS. ..........   ...   .0.0       0.0       O.
 GRANTS .............         0.0      0.0       0.0
 A.MAP GRANTS ..........         0.0      0.0       0.0
 B.CREOIT SALES-FMS ..           0.0      0.0       0.0
 C.INTL MtL.EO TkNl....         0.0      0.0       0.0
 D.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK...          0.0      0.0       0.0
 E.OrHER GRANTS ...             0.0      0.0       G.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. C MIL-            0.7      0.0       0.0
 LOANS...............      .0.0      0.0       0.0
 GRANTS ............-        0.7      0.0       0.0
 OTHER US LOANS ..........       138.3     55.0     120.7
 EX-IM bANK LOANS ......         31.1     30.0     120.7
 ALL OTHER ...     ......   .... 107.2    25.0       0.0
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1979     1980     �1961     1946-81
 TOTAL ........    296.1    3Z5.3    465.0   2006.1
 IBRO              295.0    325.0    "58.0    1987.b
 1P                  0.0      0.0      0.0       0.0
 IDA                0.0       0.0      0.0       0.0
 TD                 0.0      0.0      O.0       0.0
 ADB                 O,0      0.1o     0.0       0.0
 AIDB               0.0      0.0      0.0       0.0
 UNDOP               1.1      0.3      o.0      18.5
 OTHER-UN            0.0      0.0      0.0       0.0
 EEC                 0.0      0.0      0.0       0.0
 
 
