 ROMANIA
 The government formed after the May 1990 election, dominated by
 the National Salvation Front (NSF), remained in office until
 September 1991. At that time, Prime Minister Roman was removed
 in the wake of attacks on government buildings involving
 striking coal miners and others who had come to Bucharest to
 protest against economic reforms that had substantially reduced
 their real income. Though the wage demands of the miners were
 met, the new Government, which is primarily composed of NSF
 reform-wing members but also includes representatives of the
 National Liberal Party, pledged to continue the economic and
 democratic reforms initiated by its predecessor. The NSF-
 dominated Parliament, sitting as a constituent assembly,
 completed work on a new constitution, which was approved by a
 popular referendum on December 8. The new Constitution provides
 for multiparty democracy and guarantees fundamental freedoms.
 Controversy continues to surround the Romanian Intelligence
 Service (SRI). Though the SRI's legal powers are limited to
 investigation and do not include the authority to arrest, there
 has been concern that the SRI engages in political surveillance.
 Laws on the privatization of public enterprises and agriculture
 and encouraging foreign investment were enacted. Most prices
 were freed of government control, and subsidies were reduced.
 These measures led to an increase in consumer products available
 to Romanians but at prices that many cannot afford. The
 dislocations associated with transition to a market economy and
 the collapse of intraregional trade contributed to a fall in
 production and in real incomes.
 Romanians live under a government that generally respects the
 fundamental liberties of the individual. The Government took
 several positive steps in 1991, including replacing a large
 number of judges and prosecutors from the Communist era,
 adopting new laws on worker rights, and dismissing some SRI
 employees. On the other hand, severe discrimination against
 Gypsies, a problem endemic to the region, was in evidence in
 Romania as well. Local authorities in several instances failed
 to respond when Gypsy homes were burned down. The past year
 also saw an increase in strident Romanian nationalism, which
 added to the problems of establishing a modern, pluralist,
 democratic state. Although ethnic Hungarians enjoy broad legal
 and cultural rights, historical tensions between ethnic
 Hungarians and Romanians persisted; anti-Semitism surfaced in
 ultranationalist publications. Extremist groups, espousing
 nationalism and authoritarianism, if reinforced by populist
 discontent with market-oriented economic reforms, could
 constitute a threat to the country's fledgling democratic
 institutions.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section I Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing
 There were no reported political or other extrajudicial
 killings. During civil disturbances created by striking miners
 in Petrosani, Craiova, and Bucharest on September 25-28, at
 least three persons, one of them a police officer, died, and
 over 400 were injured.
 
 
 1219
 ROMANIA
 b. Disappearance
 There were no reported instances of disappearance in 1991.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 The new Constitution prohibits torture and inhuman or degrading
 punishment or treatment. It also prohibits the death penalty.
 There were no reports of the torture of detainees in 1991.
 Romanian law also stipulates that torture or cruel and unusual
 treatment of prisoners is illegal.
 Numeious political figures, journalists, and others were beaten
 by unknown assailants under suspicious circumstances, and
 others, including trade unionists, were subject to anonymous
 threats, including death threats. Police investigation into
 some of the assaults was continuing at year's end. (For police
 beatings of journalists, see Section 2.a.) Beatings in prisons
 and in police detention facilities are common, and leg irons
 and chains are regularly used as punishment in Romanian prisons.
 There have been no reports of a Romanian law enforcement
 official prosecuted for mistreatment of prisoners.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Romanian law forbids police from detaining anyone for more than
 24 hours without an arrest order from a procurator, with the
 exception noted below. Detainees have the right to bail and
 may ask for a hearing before a judge. The case must be heard
 within 24 hours of such a request. In the absence of a request,
 however, a person may be held for up to 65 days without a court
 order. 'The Government is liable for damages to persons held in
 violation of these provisions. In-1991, one person illegally
 detained during the June 1990 events was awarded monetary
 damages.
 An arrestee has the right to be informed of the charges against
 him. He also has the right to have an attorney present at all
 stages of the legal process, and police must inform him of this
 right, in a language that he understands, before obtaining any
 statement from him.
 Romanian authorities may detain a person without approval from
 a procurator under Decree 153/1970 for up to 6 months.
 Detention under this decree does not result in a criminal
 record and may be appealed. It is mainly used for detentions
 of short duration for disorderly conduct.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The judicial system consists of local courts, county courts,
 and a Supreme Court. In addition, the military prosecutor has
 jurisdiction over cases involving military personnel, criminal
 acts against the State (including attacks against military
 bases, police stations, and government buildings, as well as
 treason and espionage cases), and cases involving acts committed
 by police. Such cases are brought before military tribunals.
 The Ministry of Justice controls the selection and promotion of
 judges, and there has been a significant turnover in judicial
 ranks since December 1989. The new Constitution provides life
 tenure for judges, who are to be appointed by the President
 upon recommendation from a panel of judges selected by the
 Parliament. This panel also has disciplinary authority over
 
 
 1220
 ROMANIA
 judges. A Constitutional Court, six of whose members will be
 chosen by Parliament and three by the President, has judicial
 responsibility for constitutional issues. Its decisions on the
 constitutionality of laws may be overridden by a subsequent
 two-thirds vote of both chambers of Parliament.
 The Procurator General, appointed by the President, heads an
 agency responsible for the administration of the law as well as
 for criminal prosecutions. The agency used to be independent
 but, under the new Constitution, is monitored under the
 authority of the Minister of Justice, at least for
 administrative purposes. The Procurator General appoints local
 procurators throughout the country.
 The criminal code requires that a defendant be informed of his
 right to defense counsel. If the defendant cannot afford legal
 representation or is otherwise unable to select counsel, the
 law provides that an attorney will be appointed for him.
 There were no known political prisoners.
 The Constitution created the office of the People's Attorney,
 an ombudsman whose responsibility is to "defend the rights and
 liberties" of Romanians. The People's Attorney does not have
 legal authority to redress grievances but, in reports to
 Parliament, may provide recommendations regarding legislation
 or other measures for the protection of the rights and liberties
 of citizens.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Article 27 of the new Constitution provides legal protection
 against warrantless searches of a residence, but this protection
 is subordinate, under the provisions of law, to "national
 security or public order." Entrances under such conditions
 must be authorized by a magistrate. Article 28 states that the
 secrecy of legal means of communication is inviolable. The law
 on national security, however, as well as the law on the SRI
 under debate at the end of 1991, contain provisions for
 monitoring these areas when deemed necessary for national
 security reasons. Relevant legislation does not clearly define
 the term "national security." In general, the Government does
 not appear to be interfering in the rights of individual
 citizens to privacy so long as they are not perceived as
 threats to the established order. Many allegations of the
 unauthorized monitoring of telephone conversations and written
 correspondence persist in an environment of continuing suspicion
 of the authorities that is a legacy of Communist rule. The
 Government, while acknowledging that some of the allegations
 are true, has not investigated such allegations vigorously or
 taken steps publicly to stop the abuses.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 The new Constitution contains guarantees of freedom of
 expression and prohibitions against censorship of any kind.
 Romanians are generally free to express whatever opinions they
 choose. Romanian courts have found, however, that in some
 cases people were dismissed from their jobs due to their
 political opinions. The courts ordered that these persons be
 reinstated in their former jobs and paid monetary damages.
 
 
 1221
 
 ROMANIA
 The print media publish a wide variety of opinions without
 state censorship or interference. The Government has criticized
 some of the more virulent allegations of the extremist press,
 and one of the most vitriolic pipers, Romania Mare, which often
 publishes anti-Semitic material, suspended operations for a
 month, following criticism of the paper by Prime Minister
 Roman. Several major newspapers went on a temporary strike in
 December to protest rising costs of production and distribution.
 The strike ended following negotiations between the Government
 and journalists on measures to ease the financial problems of
 the print media. There were allegations that the authorities
 manipulated the distribution networks and supply of newsprint
 to the disadvantage of opposition newspapers. Reports indicate
 that the price of newsprint is currently above world levels.
 Romanian Television (RTV) is the sole station with nationwide
 broadcasting capabilities. Though nominally independent, it
 remains under state control. Taken as a whole, RTV's broadcasts
 favor the establishment, and persons representing contrasting
 political viewpoints insist that they do not get a fair hearing.
 In December the Government agreed to broadcast special programs
 during the next year's local electoral campaign and to reserve
 time for all competing political organizations. It also agreed
 to grant more broadcast time to independent television
 stations. These measures were implemented in January.
 On its second channel, which reaches approximately 30 percent
 of the country's population, RTV started regular broadcasts of
 British, Spanish, and French national news programs. In
 February RTV substantially reduced its independent political
 party and minority-language broadcasting on its first channel
 but added some nonpolitical minority programming to the second
 channel and to local broadcasts during nonprime hours. In
 October an independent television studio, SOTI, obtained
 permission to broadcast 4"hours per week on the second channel
 in the late evening, and it began broadcasting in December.
 Some local television stations have begun limited broadcasting,
 using Ministry of Telecommunications facilities during the
 off-hours when RTV is not broadcasting. There are many
 independent radio stations in Romania, including five in
 Bucharest. More stations would like to begin broadcasting, but
 no new licenses are being granted, pending passage of a law 6n'
 radio and television.
 There were several incidents in 1991 in which police beat
 Romanian and foreign journalists, whose press badges were
 displayed, while they were covering public demonstrations. In
 the most serious incident of its kind in January. the Ministry
 of the Interior apologized,to the press corps and reportedly'
 demoted five of its officers in, connection with such beatings.
 The importation and distribution of foreign publications have
 generally not been restricted, but there have been cases of
 customs officials preventing certain Hungarian-language material
 from entering Romania. The Romanian Government has, sought to
 justify these actions based on the law on national security,
 specifically the prohibition on importation of materials with
 an anti-Romanian content.
 The free flow of educational exchanges initiated after the
 revolution continues to increase. More than 20 nonstate
 institutions of higher education have-been opened, but the
 Government has not yet.recognized their degrees.
 
 
 1222
 ROMANIA
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly
 The right to peaceful assembly is provided for by the new
 Constitution and generally respected in practice. Approvals
 for public meetings generally were routinely given under the
 decree laws in effect until September, but a number of
 unauthorized demonstrations were held in Bucharest and other
 cities. Organizers and participants in these unauthorized
 demonstrations were not charged, although the law provided for
 short jail terms or fines for failing to observe the legal
 requirements. Early in the year, several demonstrations, some
 of which involved violence, were forcefully dispersed by the
 authorities.
 In September the Parliament passed Law No. 192 concerning the
 right of Romanians to assemble peacefully. This law states
 that public meetings must be peaceful and unarmed and not
 interfere with other economic or social activities. Such
 meetings may not be held near various locations such as
 hospitals, airports, or military installations. Demonstration
 organizers must provide information about the meeting to the
 local authorities and police before the event. The authorities
 may forbid a public meeting by notifying the organizers in
 writing within 48 hours of the receipt of the request to hold
 such a meeting. Public meetings to espouse Communist, racist,
 or Fascist ideology or to commit actions contrary to public
 order or national security are forbidden. Unauthorized
 demonstrations or other violations of this law are punishable
 by imprisonment and fines. There were no reports, however, of
 any public demonstrations being forbidden under the provisions
 of this law.
 Decree Law 8 of 1989 establishes the right of Romanian citizens
 to form political parties, with the exception of Fascist parties
 or those promoting concepts contrary to public order. There
 have been no reports of political or ethnic organizations denied
 the right to form a party under this law. The current law
 stipulates that all political parties and social organizations
 must prove membership of at least 251 persons in order to be
 granted legal status. It further provides a process for appeal
 to the Supreme Court for any political party denied registration
 rights. There are now over 200 political parties in Romania.
 Political and social organizations are permitted to maintain
 relations with international bodies.
 A parliamentary investigation of the June 1990 violence in
 Bucharest by vigilante miners and others resulted in separate
 reports from government and opposition members of the panel.
 The majority report sought to hold antigovernment demonstrators
 primarily responsible for provoking the violence, while the
 opposition minority attributed the primary responsibility to
 the Government. The majority report also sought to exonerate
 President Iliescu and the Government from their role in
 bringing the miners to Bucharest.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 The Constitution contains guarantees of religious freedom. The
 Government no longer impedes the free observance of religious
 belief. There are 15 recognized denominations and religions in
 Romania. The Romanian Orthodox Church, to which approximately
 80 percent of the population belongs, predominates.
 The state licenses each religious-denomination, a process which
 confers legal status and exemptions from income taxes and
 
 
 1223
 ROMANIA
 customs duties. The ultimate licensing authority will be
 determined according to a new draft law to be submitted to
 Parliament in 1992.
 The dispute among the Uniate Church (also known as the Greek
 Catholic Church), the Government, and the Orthodox Church over
 the physical disposition of Uniate Church assets remains
 unresolved. Approximately 2,000 Uniate properties, including
 almost 1,900 churches, were seized in 1948. Most were
 eventually turned over to the Orthodox Church. The provisional
 government issued a decree in April 1990 stating that all
 Uniate property still retained by the State would be returned
 to that denomination. Government action on returning the 91
 properties to which the Uniates have clear claim has continually
 been deferred, however, although a few properties have been
 turned over informally.
 The question of the Uniates' former churches, now in the hands
 of the Orthodox Church, is more difficult. The Uniates want
 the State to ensure the return of their confiscated assets, but.
 the Government maintains that the two religious groups should
 resolve the question between themselves, without government
 interference. With one exception, the Orthodox hierarchy to
 date has shown a marked unwillingness to return any of the
 churches.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Except for certain small areas reserved for military purposes,
 there are no official restrictions placed on travel within
 Romania, nor are there any official limitations placed on
 Romanian citizens who wish to'change their places of work or
 residence. Travel outside Romania is not restricted. Romanian
 law stipulates that Romanian citizens have the right to travel
 freely abroad. They may also emigrate and return to Romania.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government -
 A new Constitution was approved by the Constituent Assembly on
 November 21 and was adopted after a popular referendum on
 December 8. Until passage of the new Constitution, the Romanian
 people's right and ability peacefully to change their government
 was regulated by a March 1990 decree that provided for the
 direct election of the President and for the election of a
 two-chamber Parliament by proportional voting in 4a electoral
 districts and Bucharest. Under its provisions, all citizens
 over the age of 18 had the right to vote. The President
 appoints the Prime Minister, the members of the Supreme Court,
 and the Procurator General. New national elections were
 required not later than 1 year after parliamentary ratification
 of the.new Constitution. Local elections will take place on
 February 9, 1992, and the Government has proposed national
 elections in the spring of 1992.
 A serious'setback to the democratic process occurred with the
 renewed incursion of coal miners into-Bucharest in September.
 They vehemently protested their deteriorating standard of
 living, assaulted government headquarters, the Presidential
 palace, and the television station, and besieged the Parliament.
 The incursion ended after 3 days of rioting in which at least
 three persons were killed. In its wake, Prime Minister Petre
 Roman and his government were removed from office when President
 Iliescu accepted the miners' demands for their ouster.
 
 
 1224
 
 ROMANIA
 President Iliescu appointed Theodor Stolojan to form a new
 government, which emerged as a coalition of members of the NSF
 and other political parties.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 A number of domestic human rights monitoring groups have been
 established since December 1989. These groups include the
 League for the Defense of Human Rights, the Prodemocracy
 Association, local chapters of Helsinki Watch and the Helsinki
 Committee, the Independent Romanian Society for Human Rights,
 and the Association of Former Political Prisoners. Some
 mainstream groups, including political parties and trade unions,
 also have human rights sections which monitor the human rights
 situation in Romania.
 The Government has permitted international human rights
 organizations to circulate freely in Romania. International
 groups have encountered no impediments in meeting with Romanian
 human rights organizations and have, albeit with delays in some
 instances, been able to meet with arrested persons and to visit
 prisons.
 In 1991 the Government established human rights offices in the
 Ministries of Foreign Affairs, Justice, Reform, and Interior,
 as well as a publicly funded Romanian Institute for Human
 Rights designed to carry out educational and information
 programs on human rights. Parliament has also created a
 commission to review human rights issues and legislation.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 Article 4 of the new Constitution states that Romania is the
 common and indivisible country of all its citizens, without any
 discrimination on account of race, nationality, ethnic origin,
 language, religion, sex, opinion and political allegiance,
 wealth, or social background. Article 16 states that citizens
 are equal before the law and public authorities, without any
 privilege or discrimination, although it then prohibits dual
 citizens from holding any civil or military offices. The
 Government states that its policy is to guarantee and protect
 the rights of all citizens, regardless of ethnic, cultural, or
 religious background. On November 20, it approved a declaration
 on national minorities. Although the Government made the text
 available to foreign embassies, the declaration has been given
 limited domestic publicity.
 There are approximately 22 ethnic minorities in Romania,
 representing about 15 percent of the population. Ethnic groups
 have formed political parties. The largest opposition party
 currently represented in Parliament is the ethnic Hungarian
 party. In the electoral law, the Government set aside seats in
 the Chamber of Deputies to ensure that those minorities that "
 failed to elect members would be represented in Parliament, a
 provision carried over into the new Constitution.
 Gypsies, whose estimated numbers in Romania range from 227,000
 (1977 census) to 2 million or more, continue to suffer many
 forms of discrimination. They tend to receive fewer public
 services, such as public housing or access to potable water,
 than do most Romanian citizens. They are also subjected to
 discriminatory treatment in schools. Almost all elements of
 
 
 1225
 ROMANIA
 Romanian society tend to view Gypsies as thieves and criminals,
 and the extremist press publishes racist articles that blame
 Gypsies for Romania's current economic difficulties.
 A commission-of-inquiry from the International Labor
 Organization found that Gypsies suffered both direct and
 indirect discrimination in the workplace. It also noted that
 Gypsies were directly discriminated against and relegated to
 low-paying, low status jobs. It reported that Gypsies face
 indirect discrimination by exclusion from educational and work
 opportunities that might lead to higher paying or skilled
 jobs. Such discrimination perpetuates the low status Gypsies
 occupy in Romanian society. The Government has initiated some -
 job training programs for Gypsies and begun experimental
 classes in the Romany language for Gypsy children. A half-hour
 weekly television entertainment program designed for the Gypsy
 minority is permitted.
 Violence, including the burning of Gypsy homes, erupted against
 Gypsy communities in several incidents in-1991. Gypsies
 complain that the police often do not respond to attacks on
 Gypsy quarters-and, in fact, sometimes participate in the
 attacks. To date, no non-Gypsy has been arrested in connection
 with these crimes.
 Hungarians, as the largest ethnic minority, number'between 1.7
 and 2.2 million, although there are no reliable statistics.
 Like most Romanian minorities, they are concentrated in
 Transylvania, although more than 200,000 Hungarians reside in
 Bucharest. Instruction in the Hungarian language is available
 in primary and secondary schools when there are at least 7
 elementary students or 15 secondary students to form a
 Hungarian-language class. Some postsecondary educational
 subjects are taught in Hungarian in institutions in Cluj and
 Tirgu Mures. Ethnic Hungarians allege discrimination, however,
 criticizing the requirement that history and geography are to
 be taught only in Romanian. They also criticize the failure of
 the Constitution to guarantee the use of minority languages in
 courts (although it provides for the use of interpreters), its
 general emphasis on Romania as a unitary state, and what they
 assert are inadequate protections for minorities.
 Although the Government has publicly condemned all acts of
 extremism, the chauvinistic element of Romanian society saw an
 increase in its visibility and influence in 1991. This was
 evident in Parliament itself during debates on the Constitution
 and security matters, including the parliamentary report on
 allegations of abuses committed by ethnic Hungarians in Covasna
 and Harghita counties.
 There are only some 20,000 Jews in a total population of 23
 million, but anti-Semitic opinions were rife in 1991. The
 increase in chauvinism was accompanied by a marked increase in
 anti-Semitic articles in the ultranationalist press, often
 directed-at government officials alleged to be of Jewish
 origin.' Government representatives condemned these extremist
 provocations and participated in ceremonies in June marking the
 anniversary of pogroms 'directed against Romanian Jews in 1941.
 In principle, women are accorded the same rights and privileges
 as men, including in the areas of education, access to
 employment, and comparable wages. However, in a difficult
 economic climate, they are usually the first to be dismiissed.
 There is no documented evidence of extensive violence against
 women, including wife beating. The Government, political
 
 
 1226
 ROMANIA
 parties, and the press have shown little interest in the
 subject to date, and women's organizations are only slowly
 becoming active.
 Romania has inherited a legacy of discrimination against the
 country's severely handicapped population, both children and
 adults, as well as children residing in Romania's orphanages.
 The Government has tried to improve conditions in the orphanages
 and has set up special programs for the handicapped, including
 vocational training and special schools for handicapped
 children.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 Parliament enacted several laws in 1991 which revised Communist-
 era labor legislation. Law No. 54/1991 establishes the right
 of workers to organize and join unions, recognizes the legal
 character of labor organizations, and imposes criminal penalties
 for interference with these rights. According to this law,
 trade unions are independent bodies, free from government or
 political party control, with the right to be consulted on
 labor issues. No worker can be forced to join or withdraw from
 a union, and union officials who resign from elected positions
 and return to the regular work force are accorded protection
 against employer retaliation.
 Article 40 of the new Constitution guarantees employees the
 right to strike, but permits Parliament to establish conditions
 and limitations. Law No. 15/1991 prescribes procedures for the
 settlement of labor disputes. It specifically guarantees
 workers the right to petition employers to resolve labor-
 related grievances and to engage in strikes if workers and
 management fail to reach agreement. The law denies the right
 to strike to certain categories of personnel employed in the
 Ministries of National Defense, Interior, and Justice, as well
 as in the Parliament, national defense enterprises, and those
 involved in the production and distribution of energy. The law
 limits the right to strike of workers employed in the health,
 sanitation, education, telecommunications, and transportation
 sectors. Workers in the latter category may strike but only if
 they retain at least one-third of the normal work force on duty
 to maintain public services. The right to strike was frequently
 exercised in 1991 in a wide variety of sectors, including by
 workers involved in health, education, and transportation.
 There appear to be no serious impediments to the right of trade
 unions to associate freely or to engage in strikes or other
 labor actions to press their demands.
 The overwhelming majority of Romania's approximately 10 million
 working people are members of about 13 nationwide trade union
 confederations and smaller independent trade unions. The
 largest is the National Confederation of Free Trade Unions
 (CNSLR), which succeeded the former Communist-controlled
 General Confederation of Trade Unions (UGSR). For the most
 part, unions conduct their activities independent of government
 or political party control.
 Trade unions are free to affiliate internationally, and
 representatives of foreign and international organizations
 freely visit and advise Romanian trade unionists.
 
 
 1227
 ROMANIA
 In May the governing body of the International Labor
 Organization (ILO) issued its report on alleged employment
 discrimination against Romania's ethnic minorities. The report
 distinguished between laws and r~gulations in effect both
 before and after the filing of the complaint on June 26, 1989.
 Nevertheless, the report concluded that discrimination against
 Romania's ethnic minorities continues, especially'against '
 Gypsies and Hungarians, despite the elimination of Communist-
 era laws and regulations~which had institutionalized such
 discrimination.
 b. The Right-to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 Law No. 13/1991 establishes the collective bargaining agreement
 as a legally recognized contract, which is the basis for setting
 working conditions, wages, and other obligations of employers
 and workers. The right to bargain collectively is also
 enshrined in Article 38 of the Constitution. In addition to
 basic wage scales established through collective bargaining,
 workers and pensioners receive thrice-yearly increases indexed
 to prospective price increases as a result of government
 decision 579/1991, issued in September- The amount of the
 indexed increases is determined through government-trade union
 negotiations.
 There are no export processing zones in Romania.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 There is currently no law that prohibits forced or compulsory
 labor. Article 39 of the Constitution prohibits such labor but
 excludes members of the military, convicts, and those working
 during declared national emergencies from the definition of
 forced labor.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 The Government states that it respects ILO conventions
 concerning the employment of children. According to Decree-Law
 147 of 1990, the minimum age for employment is 16, although
 children as young as 14 or 15 may work with the consent of their
 parents or guardians and only "according to their physical
 development, aptitude, and knowledge." Working children under
 16 have the right to continue their education, and employers are
 obliged to assist in this regard. The Ministry of Labor and
 Social Protection (MOLSP) has the authority to impose fines and
 close sections of factories to enforce compliance with the law.
 No violations of this policy have been documented by the media
 or the MOLSP, and child labor does not appear to be a problem.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 Most wage scales are established through collective bargaining.
 However, minimum wages, which are promulgated by government
 decisions, vary and are set according to a complex scale by
 profession, taking into account experience and time on the
 job. Minimum wage rates are generally observed and enforced.
 Real incomes have declined as wages failed to keep pace with
 spiraling inflation despite indexation to prices. Most trade
 unionists do not believe that minimum wage scales in 1991
 provided a decent standard of living for Romanian workers.
 Basic necessities like housing and medical care are still
 heavily subsidized by the Government, but rising prices for
 food and energy consume the majority of the average worker's
 income. It is becoming increasingly difficult for workers at
 
 
 1228
 ROMANIA
 the lower end of the wage scale, in particular, to provide for
 their families without additional means of support.
 The 1985 Labor Code remains the basic document concerning
 working conditions, although it has been modified since the
 1989 revolution. The normal workweek is 40 hours or 5 days
 with overtime paid for weekend work or work in excess of 40
 hours. Paid holidays range from 15 to 24 days annually. Law
 31/1991 establishes special benefits and allowances for workers
 engaged in particularly dangerous or difficult occupations.
 The Labor Code promises workers a safe working environment.
 The MOLSP has established safety standards for most industries
 arid is responsible for enforcing them. Some labor organizations
 also press for healthier, safer working conditions on behalf of
 their members. Enforcement is not good, however. The MOLSP
 lacks trained personnel for inspection and enforcement, and
 employers generally ignore their suggestions. Neither the
 Government nor industry, which remains almost entirely state-
 owned, have the resources necessary to improve health and
 safety conditions in the workplace.
 
 
 1229
