 ROMANIA
 Romania is a highly centralized Communist state in which
 Nicolae Ceausescu, Secretary General of the Romanian Communist
 Party, is also President of the Republic, Chairman of the
 Council of State, and Chairman of the Romanian Defense
 Council. Directly and through the Government, the party seeks
 to control every significant aspect of the country's life.
 The powerful Department of State Security, organizationally
 under the Ministry of Internal Affairs, has among its major-
 functions providing security for the leadership and
 suppressing dissent and opposition of any kind.
 Romania's stringent austerity program intensified during 1988,
 producing effects prejudicial to the physical and
 psychological well-being of the Romanian people. The policy
 of rapid repayment of Romania' foreign.debt through maximizing
 exports and restricting imports resulted in serious shortages
 of food and household energy and caused a scarcity of such
 essential items as medicines. Many basic food items were
 rationed and were hard to obtain. State-enforced austerity
 also prompted increased efforts by Romanians to emigrate, both
 legally and illegally.
 Human rights continued to be widely restricted in 1988.
 Constant vigilance and harassment by security forces have
 stifled the public expression of dissident views and the
 formation of opposition groups which might question party
 policy. Evidence exists that psychiatric treatment continued
 to be used as a form of punishment for political or religious
 activism. Members of the Hungarian ethnic minority in
 Transylvania continued to object to government policies which,
 they claim, erode their ethnic identity. The Government
 maintained that it does not discriminate against minority
 groups.
 Plans for "systematization" of Romania's agricultural sector,
 aimed at improving rural living standards and economic
 efficiency by eliminating half of Romania's 13,000 villages
 and relocating their inhabitants to more central locations,
 have aroused great concern both within and outside Romania.
 Urban "systematization", especially in Bucharest, has abruptly
 displaced persons from their homes and resulted in the
 demolition of many historic houses, churches, and other
 buildings. Those relocated appeared to have no formal or
 effective means of influencing or protesting their forced
 resettlement.
 The practice of religion, although widespread and growing, is
 constrained through government controls over religious
 leaders, literature, and building construction. In several
 cases, the Government failed to grant permission for the
 expansion or renovation of existing church structures.
 Despite the Baptist General Union's request for another 5,000
 Protestant Bibles, the Government did not grant approval for a
 second printing.
 In January a total amnesty was declared for all prisoners with
 sentences of 10 years or less, while sentences over 10 years
 were reduced. Some political prisoners were released,
 including those convicted of purely political offenses as well
 as those convicted of common crimes.
 Although Romania renounced U.S. most-favored-nation trade
 status which was tied to its performance on emigration, it
 
 
 1169
 ROMANIA
 pledged to continue permitting emigration in cases involving
 family reunification. In 1988, however, emigration approvals
 for family reunification of U.S.-qualified persons were 17
 percent lower than in 1987. Contrary to an agreement reached
 with the United States in 1985, Romanian authorities
 frequently denied jobs, housing, schooling, medical care, and
 other social necessities to those who had applied to emigrate,
 even before they received U.S. entry documents. The Romanian
 Government denies this is a general policy.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 There were no substantiated claims of political killings
 during 1988. However, there were several reports that as many
 as 15 demonstrators arrested following the November 1987
 disturbances in Brasov had died while in custody as a result
 of maltreatment at the hands of the authorities. Several
 strike leaders reportedly died under suspicious circumstances
 after having been released from custody.
 b. Disappearance
 There were some reports of politically motivated temporary
 disappearances. Families and friends of persons arrested on
 political charges are frequently left unaware of their arrest,
 their circumstances, and their location for long periods of
 time.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 There were numerous reports that persons are mistreated while
 in Romanian prisons or police custody and that police
 authorities act brutally to obtain information. Romanian
 authorities also use physical and mental degradation to
 intimidate those caught or suspected of wrongdoing. Persons
 detained for questioning are often held incommunicado and kept
 for long periods without sleep, food, or access to toilet
 facilities. Those caught attempting to leave the country
 illegally, for example, are subject to physical and mental
 harassment, often prior to being given only relatively light
 sentences if they are first offenders. Reliable witnesses
 also report incidents in which police administered severe
 beatings to persons arrested for minor infractions. Workers
 arrested after the 1987 demonstrations in Brasov reportedly
 suffered physical and psychological torture.
 Although Amnesty International (AI) in 1R87 reported a decline
 in the abuse of psychiatric treatment as a form of punishment,
 other sources assert that the practice continues, inter alia,
 through the administration of drugs to prisoners. Some
 persons accused of acting against the Socialist order are
 committed to psychiatric institutions as a form of punishment.
 Religious activist Nestor Popescu remained interned in a
 psychiatric institution throughout 1988. He was arrested for
 creating a disturbance in August 1987 while seeking to speak
 with an official at a Western embassy.
 The most common complaints about mistreatment in prison cite
 long periods of isolation, excessive use of force by guards,
 
 
 1170
 ROMANIA
 badly ventilated and poorly heated cells, insufficient and
 poorly prepared food, difficult working conditions, and
 segregation of prisoners deemed "dangerous to the State"
 because of their religious beliefs or for other reasons.
 Political prisoners who do not cooperate with their jailers
 are often treated with great cruelty. They are generally kept
 apart from other offenders and restricted to their cells.
 Prison guards are said to engage in abusive behavior and
 allow, and in some cases even encourage, favored prisoners to
 punish those less favored. While many political prisoners are
 kept in local jails and released when authorities believe
 their behavior has been corrected, those who are not
 cooperative are kept for longer periods of time. Most persons
 convicted of political crimes, such as propaganda against the
 State, are kept in special sections of designated prisons
 where a particularly harsh regime is enforced. Some prisoners
 claim they have been denied medical treatment; the evidence
 suggests that medical care in prisons is poor at best. There
 are no reports that police or prison guards have been
 disciplined for abusing those detained or imprisoned.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Romanian law provides for either a judge or a prosecutor to
 issue an arrest warrant. Once arrested, a person may be held
 without trial for up to 1 month before a hearing, but the
 prosecutor may obtain an extension for an additional 3
 months. After this, the court may order further extensions in
 30-day increments. There is no limit set by law on the total
 length of time a person may be held prior to trial. There is
 no provision for bail.
 The law also provides for preventive detention. Persons
 detained for investigation often are held incommunicado. They
 are detained for varying periods of time, sometimes as long a
 several days, and then released without charge. Such
 arbitrary detention may be repeated several times, and the
 person may be called back repeatedly and threatened with
 further harassment or punishment. This treatment is
 particularly common for religious activists and former
 political prisoners. Exile was not used as a form of
 punishment. Among several political activists currently
 subject to forced domicile are Doina Cornea, after granting an
 interview to a Western journalist in 1987, and Gheorghe
 Nastasescu, a former political prisoner, whose signature
 appeared on a letter criticizing Romania to a Western
 journalist. Several critics of the regime who have spoken to
 Western journalists remained under strict surveillance and
 have been interrogated by the police several times.
 At least two political activists were detained on charges of
 having committed common crimes when they attempted to exercise
 their basic right to freedom of movement within Romania. In
 both cases, they were subsequently released, although they
 were threatened by the security forces, and one of them was
 severely beaten while in detention. There were no reports in
 1988 of such cases coming to trial, although there were
 unconfirmed reports at year's end that evidence of a
 conspiracy of opposition activists was being sought or
 concocted as a basis for judicial action.
 With regard to forced or compulsory labor, see Section 6.c.
 
 
 1171
 ROMANIA
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The judiciary is limited to "defending the Socialist order and
 personal rights, educating citizens to the respect of the
 law," and applying sanctions to reeducate lawbreakers and
 prevent further infractions. No court has the authority to
 review the constitutionality of the laws. Theoretically,
 judges are independent and subject only to the law. The
 outcomes of politically sensitive cases, however, appear
 predetermined and at times contradict evidence offered during
 the trial.
 Most trials are held in public, though secret trials are
 common where state security is involved and may also be
 permitted in certain other instances. The law states that a
 trial may be held in secret if a public trial would be
 contrary to the interests of the State, Socialist morals, or
 the dignity of the individual. Some former prisoners have
 reported they were tried in secret by military courts on
 essentially political charges. Detailed sentences or records
 of trials for political crimes are generally not available,
 even to the accused.
 The ability of an accused person to conduct his or her defense
 effectively can be severely limited, especially in politically
 sensitive cases. Acquittals in such cases are extremely
 rare. The law generally requires that a defendant be
 represented by counsel, although some observers claim that
 defendants do not always have an opportunity to consult with
 their attorneys before trial. Although in theory a defendant
 has the right to choose his or her attorney, this right is
 severely restricted in practice and the defendant may be
 assigned a court-appointed attorney. The role of
 state-appointed attorneys appears to be that of apologizing
 for defendants' offenses. Privately hired attorneys will
 often refuse to accept political cases. When defendants
 pursue their right to appeal, they sometimes receive longer
 prison terms from the higher courts, thus discouraging
 defendants from exercising this right.
 Many criminal laws are open-ended enough to ensure that
 persons coming under official scrutiny may be charged with
 some offense. Examples of typical charges are "defaming the
 Socialist order" for speaking frankly to a foreigner;
 "disturbing the peace" or "illegal assembly" for private
 prayer meetings in the home; "social parasitism" if unemployed
 but technically guilty of no other offense, and "distributing
 literature without a license"--a felony--if caught attempting
 to transport or hand out free Bibles.
 In January a broad amnesty was declared on the occasion of
 President Ceausescu's 70th birthday. Prisoners with sentences
 of 10 years or less were released; sentences over 10 years
 were halved, and life sentences were reduced to 20 years.
 Previous amnesties have not extended to persons convicted of
 political crimes, but the January amnesty made no distinction
 between political and nonpolitical crimes. Among the
 political prisoners released in January were Gheorghe
 Nastasescu and Ion Bugan, both convicted of political
 propaganda. There have been no reports of former political
 prisoners released in January being rearrested and retried.
 Several cases under investigation at the time of the amnesty,
 including that of Baptist activist lawyer Nelu Prodan on
 charges of accepting bribes, were dropped.
 
 
 1172
 ROMANIA
 It is impossible to estimate accurately the number of political
 prisoners. Although many political prisoners were released in
 the January amnesty, there are estimates that as many as 30
 persons remain incarcerated for political crimes. If the
 estimate includes those with apparent political motivation
 tried for common crimes and those convicted of attempting to
 leave the country illegally, the number could be as high as
 1,000.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Romanian laws and regulations governing the security apparatus
 sanction a high degree of interference with the individual and
 the family. Through intimidation and promises of material
 advantages, the powerful security apparatus has developed an
 extensive informer system among the population.
 Deliberate and arbitrary interference with privacy, home, and
 correspondence is a frequent occurrence. Searches are made of
 private homes, persons, and personal effects without search
 warrants or probable cause that a crime may have been
 committed. Militiamen at checkpoints located on roads leading
 out of cities and at major highway intersections in the
 countryside randomly stop and search vehicles as a matter of
 course.
 Violation of the privacy of the person also arises from the
 aggressive and intrusive campaign to promote population
 growth. Abortion and all forms of birth control are illegal.
 Pregnancy tests and physical examinations continue to be
 required of female workers on a regular basis to ensure that
 pregnancies are discovered and carried to term.
 Complaints about interference with both domestic and
 international correspondence continue. Letters to or from
 persons of interest to the authorities often never arrive at
 their destination. On other occasions, people have been
 questioned about statements made in letters sent abroad but
 never received by the addressees. The Government has the
 capability to monitor domestic and international telephone
 calls and appears to do so regularly.
 In 1988 there was considerable concern, both within Romania
 and internationally, over renewed emphasis on a program of
 rural and urban redevelopment known as "systematization." The
 program has been formally under discussion for some-time, but
 according to the newly announced plans, half of the country's
 13,000 villages would be eliminated and their inhabitants
 relocated in larger, redeveloped villages. The Goverrunent's
 stated aim is to equalize rural and urban living standards and
 to release land for large-scale collective agriculture.
 Although rural systematization has thus far been implemented
 only in a few areas near Bucharest, both the villages to be
 eliminated and the future agroindustrial centers are scattered
 throughout Romania and are populated by citizens of Romanian,
 Hungarian, German, Serbian, and other ethnic backgrounds.
 Village residents affected by systematization have been
 compelled on short notice to vacate their traditional
 dwellings, which were subsequently demolished, and relocated
 in semiurbanized apartment blocks, many of which--at least
 initially--lacked running water and sanitary facilities.
 These apartment blocks also offer much reduced opportunity for
 private gardening and livestock shelter and more difficult
 access to pasturage.
 
 
 1173
 ROMANIA
 Urban systematization has been extensively implemented in
 Bucharest and provincial cities. Whole neighborhoods have
 been torn down with a minimum of prior notification to
 residents and eventually replaced by broad avenues or new
 apartment blocks. Many historic buildings, including
 churches, have been destroyed in the process. The Government
 has stated that no one has been or will be forced from his or
 her home by systematization and that the program will be
 implemented gradually. However, criticism has centered on the
 arbitrary way in which the program has been implemented, as
 there is no apparent mechanism to bring the population into
 the planning process or allow persons to appeal the
 Government's resettlement decisions. In addition,
 compensation paid by the Government to those relocated as a
 result of systematization has been, in most cases, inadequate
 to replace housing and other possessions lost in the move.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 These freedoms are severely restricted. Public expression of
 viewpoints at variance with official policy is almost always
 severely punished. While the Constitution provides for
 freedom of speech and press, it prohibits their use for any
 purpose "hostile to the Socialist system and the interests of
 the working people," as defined by the State and party.
 Similarly, the penal code prohibits "propaganda with a Fascist
 (as defined by the State) character delivered in public by any
 means.. .or.. .the undertaking of any action for the changing of
 the Socialist system.... " It also prohibits acts "which would
 result in a danger to state security." These offenses are
 punishable by prison terms of up to 15 years. A 1971 law
 prohibits citizens from.giving interviews to foreign press
 representatives which "defame Socialist reality." A staff
 writer for the literary journal Luceafarul, Aurel Dragos
 Munteanu, was fired on November 10 because of his contacts
 with foreigners and his resignation from the Communist Party.
 He lost the appeal of his dismissal to the Romanian Writers
 Union. Three French journalists were expelled from Romania,
 one in September and two in November, for contacting
 dissidents.
 The Government seeks to control the domestic dissemination of
 information in a variety of ways. Although official
 censorship was abolished some years ago, all media are state
 owned, rigidly controlled, and used primarily as vehicles for
 government and party propaganda. Government control of all
 necessary materials, such as newsprint, further limits the
 ability of the press to act independently. Publications from
 the West or from other Communist countries are not generally
 available, although foreign cultural centers and libraries are
 open to the public and are allowed to distribute limited
 quantities of Western periodicals with government approval.
 The unauthorized importation or distribution of foreign
 publications is forbidden. In 1988 there were frequent
 reports of confiscations at the border of foreign-source
 materials, especially religious matter. Tourists from the
 West regularly reported that customs officials confiscated
 video and audio cassettes. Romanian libraries carefully
 control access to "restricted" materials, such as prewar
 historical texts. For live theater, official boards must
 approve all new productions before the opening performance.
 Serial numbers and type-face samples of all typewriters must
 
 
 1174
 ROMANIA
 be registered with the authorities, and the use of duplicating
 machines is strictly regulated. Western and Soviet radio
 broadcasts in the Romanian language are not jammed and are a
 major source of both foreign and domestic news for the
 Romanian people.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 The Government attempts to control all group activity and does
 not permit organizations independent of government or party
 influence. "Formation of a group" is a punishable offense
 applicable to groups as small as three persons. Peaceful
 assembly and association without permission are usually
 short-lived and may bring severe penalities to those
 involved. Citizens are required to obtain permission in
 advance to attend functions held by non-Romanians. Secret
 decrees promulgated late in 1985 (never officially published
 and often not obeyed) further discourage contacts with
 foreigners and strengthen the requirement that all such
 contacts be reported to the authorities within 24 hours. In
 particular, Romanian writers, scientists, and professionals
 are reportedly forbidden to speak with their foreign
 counterparts without government permission.
 For a discussion of freedom of association as it applies to
 labor unions, see Section 6.a.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 The Constitution provides for freedom of conscience, and the
 penal code prescribes a penalty of up to 6 months'
 imprisonment or a fine for anyone who impedes or disrupts any
 recognized religious sect. However, the Communist Party
 officially promotes atheism, and the Government exercises
 broad control over religious practice by enforcing legislation
 on the licensing of clergy; the importation, printing, and
 distribution of religious materials; the admission of new
 students to seminaries; and the issuance of church building
 permits. These powers are often used arbitrarily, especially
 against groups that arouse official concern. Although many
 Romanians fear that open exercise of their beliefs inhibits
 chances of social or professional advancement, the practice of
 religion remains active throughout the country and at all
 levels of society.
 Government restrictions are applied more severely to groups
 whose beliefs, in the Government's view, inspire "antisocial"
 or "antigovernment" behavior. Several of these religious
 groups, such as the Nazarenes and Jehovah's Witnesses, are not
 officially recognized by the Romanian authorities. Recognized
 religions have a state charter and receive certain benefits
 from the Government. Unrecognized religions receive no state
 support, and their memebrs risk being prosecuted for holding
 unauthorized meetings. In 1988 there were no reports of
 significant restrictions on meetings held by these groups.
 However, local and national newspapers carried critical
 articles alleging that, outside Romania, some of these sects
 are involved in intelligence gathering for foreign
 intelligence agencies or in drug trafficking.
 There are 14 recognized religions, by far the largest being
 the Romanian Orthodox Church, to which about 80 percent of the
 population nominally belongs. The Government has taken active
 measures to suppress a revival movement within the Romanian
 Orthodox Church known as "the Lord's army." Members of this
 
 
 1175
 ROMANIA
 movement often meet in small groups for prayer and Bible
 study, and they report being fined for holding illegal
 meetings. They also report being subject to other harassment,
 such as loss of jobs or surveillance.
 The Government remains in disagreement on a number of issues
 with the Roman Catholic Church, most of whose members are
 ethnic Hungarians. The Church technically remains without a
 government-approved charter but it enjoys de facto recognition
 and operates as if it were fully recognized. The Government
 does not recognize the Uniate Church, also known as the
 Catholic Church of the Byzantine Rite. This branch of the
 Catholic Church was outlawed in 1948, and many of its leaders
 were imprisoned. Despite its unrecognized status, there
 remain adherents to this faith throughout the country.
 The rapid growth of evangelical denominations has led to
 pressures for more religious training, more printing of
 religious materials, and the expansion and construction of
 more churches. Conflicts between evangelical groups and the
 authorities have arisen frequently, and the Government's
 response at times has been harsh. Activists who are vocal are
 kept under surveillance and often are subject to loss of jobs
 and social benefits, police intimidation or arrest, and, in
 some cases, beatings.
 The January amnesty led to the release of several religious
 activists. Victor Opris, retried and reimprisoned in 1987
 after being released in the 1986 amnesty, was freed in 1988.
 Bribery charges against Baptist activist lawyer Nelu Prodan,
 who was arrested and held for 2 weeks in 1987, were dropped
 under the provisions of the amnesty. However, Prodan and his
 wife, also a lawyer. were effectively prevented from
 practicing their profession. Ilie Neamtu, an elder of the
 Ploiesti Evangelical Brethren Church, who had been waiting
 several years for passport approval, Elisei Rusu and Cornel
 Mich, who had served prison terms for distributing Bibles, and
 the Prodans were among those religious activists who received
 emigration approval during 1988.
 Many religious denominations are able to publish a newspaper
 or newsletter on a regular basis. They are also permitted
 from time to time to publish other religious materials,
 although usually in small quantities. The Orthodox Church was
 permitted to print several editions of the Bible, including a
 special edition to commemorate the tricentennial anniversary
 of the printing of the first Bible in Romania. Negotiations
 since 1987 between the Government and the Baptist Church for
 the printing of 5,000 Protestant Bibles have still not been
 completed. The shortage of religious materials overall has
 led some Romanians to risk severe penalties for smuggling
 Bibles and other religious literature. Eight people were
 reportedly arrested in September for the unauthorized
 distribution of Bibles.
 Religious groups continue to be concerned over the
 maintenance, repair, and construction of church buildings.
 Extensive urban renewal projects undertaken in Bucharest and
 other cities continue to threaten churches of various faiths.
 The Government has often been slow to approve the purchase or
 construction of replacement buildings for congregations
 affected by urban renewal. The Government has not approved
 any of the sites proposed by the large Seventh-Day Adventist
 Church in Bucharest to replace the one demolished in August
 1986, and the congregation continues to meet in a temporary,
 
 
 1176
 ROMANIA
 tent-like structure inadequate to its needs. The national
 headquarters of the Seventh-Day Adventist denomination was
 demolished during urban renewal efforts in 1988. The
 denomination was allowed to purchase and renovate a building
 to replace its offices, and it has purchased a building to
 replace the seminary which was part of the headquarters
 complex. The church attached to the demolished headquarters
 building is also scheduled for demolition, although the
 authorities have said it will not be destroyed until a
 replacement is located. A suitable replacement has been
 located, but the purchase has not been completed.
 Any repair or addition to a church building requires a
 building permit approved by both the local city council and
 the Government's Department of Religious Affairs. Church
 members state there are unreasonable delays in obtaining these
 approvals. A church may be demolished, or the congregation
 fined large sums, .for infractions of the building codes. In
 past years, churches of various denominations have been
 demolished or threatened with demolition under these
 regulations. Demolition of the Pentecostal Church in Bistrita
 was halted, but approval for its renovation and expansion to
 accommodate the growing congregation, which has been sought
 for several years, was not given. The congregation's attempt
 to undertake an unauthorized renovation was halted by local
 authorities. For over a year, the congregation has met in its
 partially demolished building pending action on the church's
 building permit request. There has been no progress in
 negotiations for the renovation of the Oradea Second Baptist
 Church. By the end of 1988, permission to build a new church
 had not been granted.
 Seminary admissions remain extremely limited. In 1988 the
 Seventh-Day Adventists were allowed only three new students.
 Admissions for the Baptists and Pentecostals are similarly
 restricted. In the past, the Seventh-Day Adventists had been
 permitted an average of 40 per year. The church's current
 need is estimated at 10 new students per year. Official
 figures published in 1987 indicate that there were 830
 Romanian Orthodox seminarians pursuing 5-year courses at the
 church's six seminaries at that time. An additional 504
 students attended 2-year university-level theological
 institutues that year.
 There is an active Jewish community organization which
 provides religious education to its members and enjoys
 relatively unrestricted freedom of emigration. Jewish leaders
 are able to travel freely outside Romania. Jewish leaders
 emphasize that, due to the level of emigration to Israel
 permitted by the Government, their numbers are declining, and
 they are permitted to maintain enough synagogues to meet their
 needs.
 Leaders of religious denominations generally receive
 permission to travel abroad on official business without
 difficulty. Most visitors to Romanian churches were permitted
 to attend church services and travel around the country
 without interference. However, Romanian laws restricting
 contact with foreigners have been interpreted for some
 denominations as prohibiting foreign visitors from preaching
 to or addressing congregations in Romania.
 
 
 1177
 ROMANIA
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Except for certain very limited military or other restricted
 areas (access prohibited) and border areas (access limited to
 residents of the areas and those with economic need to travel
 there), there are no official restrictions placed on travel
 within Romania. Most foreigners, including Western diplomats,
 may travel freely but often are kept under surveillance.
 The right of a citizen to change his place of residence is
 restricted (see Section l.f. concerning involuntary change of
 residence under "systematization"). All citizens are required
 to have residence permits and may not legally move from one
 town to another, or between districts within a city, without
 official permission. Implementation of residence permit
 regulations and antiunemployment laws has had the effect of
 diluting the ethnic mixture of the population in parts of the
 country with a heavy concentration of ethnic minorities,
 especially Hungarians. Workers are technically free to change
 jobs, although antiunemployment laws and governmental controls
 may limit this freedom in practice.
 Travel outside Romania is treated as a privilege, frequently
 withheld arbitrarily, even for those who can "guarantee" their
 return by leaving a close family member behind. Employees
 must generally obtain the approval of their "workers'
 committee" to apply for tourist passports. Older persons
 wishing to visit their children residing abroad usually have
 fewer problems. In 1988 the number of tourist visas issued to
 Romanians for travel to the United States significantly
 increased over 1987.
 In principle, the Government continues to oppose emigration
 for any purpose but family reunification and seeks to
 discourage those wishing to emigrate. The waiting period for
 Romanian emigration approval is still long. Successful
 applications generally take between 1 and 5 years, but some
 have not been approved after even much longer periods. The
 authorities sometimes refuse arbitrarily to accept emigration
 applications from some Romanians. Romanians who apply for
 emigration or who hold emigration approval are frequently
 harassed and suffer discrimination. Many persons reported
 losing jobs, housing, and schooling, despite a 1985
 understanding between the United States and Romanian
 Governments designed to reduce these hardships. A Romanian
 applying for an emigration passport may choose to renounce his
 or her Romanian citizenship. However, in some cases, passport
 authorities appear to require such renunciation, while other
 emigrants retain their Romanian citizenship.
 In February Romania renounced most-favored-nation trade status
 which was tied to Romania's emigration performance by U.S.
 trade legislation. The Government pledged to continue
 approving emigration applications for the purpose of family
 reunification. However, Romanian approvals for emigration in
 this category were 17 percent lower than in 1987. The
 Government continued to allow significant numbers of citizens
 to emigrate to Israel and the Federal Republic of Germany.
 A Romanian citizen who emigrates abroad must obtain the
 .approval of his Government before he or she may resume
 residence in.Romania. Such approval is not always granted.
 Due to the harsh living conditions in Romania and restrictions
 on emigration, several thousand Romanians each year request
 
 
 1178
 ROMANIA
 refugee status while abroad or flee illegally to Yugoslavia or
 Hungary. A growing number of Romanians (estimates range from
 13,000-20,000), mainly ethnic Hungarians, sought refuge in
 Hungary during 1988.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Although the Constitution assures the right of Romanians to
 change their government and leaders, in practice citizens are
 unable to change the system of government or the political
 leadership. The Romanian Communist Party, led by the
 President and a few advisers, rules the country. No actual or
 potential alternatives to this rigidly centralized control are
 apparent, and no meaningful opposition exists or would be
 tolerated. Public criticism of the President, the Government,
 the party, and the state leadership is rigorously suppressed.
 Officially, the Communist Party comprises about 16 percent of
 the total population of the country. Women officially
 represent 35 percent of the general membership. Minorities
 are represented in proportion to their numbers within the
 general population, but less so at the highest levels.
 National parliamentary elections by secret ballot are held
 every 5 years. For about 60 percent of the positions, there
 are two candidates, both of whom are chosen by the Front for
 Democracy and Social Unity, a large organization whose
 president is Nicolae Ceausescu. Over 75 percent of its
 officers are members of the Communist Party's Central
 Committee. The Grand National Assembly approves the
 President's decisions by unanimous vote.
 The chief party executive for each city, county, or enterprise
 is also the chief civil executive. Internal party elections
 were held for the Communist Party leadership late in 1984.
 Although these preceded the national general election by
 several months, those chosen for senior party posts the
 previous fall were universally "elected" to the corresponding
 government or enterprise posts the following spring. In
 November 1987, elections for city councils were held
 throughout the country; 80 percent of the seats being sought
 were contested by two or more candidates. Policy differences
 among the candidates were negligible.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights.
 There are no human rights monitoring organizations operating
 in Romania. No outside groups have been permitted to visit
 Romania to investigate alleged violations of human rights.
 The Government has not commented officially on reports issued
 by governmental or nongovernmental organizations such as the
 Council of Europe, AI, or Freedom House, all of which have
 been harshly critical. Romania continues officially to
 proclaim that discussion and examination of its human rights
 situation is "unwarranted interference in domestic affairs,"
 despite its professed support for human rights standards
 embodied in the United Nations Charter and the Final Act of
 the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe. Human
 rights issues were discussed in 1988 in diplomatic exchanges
 between the U.S. and Romanian Governments. In December four
 representatives from the International Society for Human
 Rights were expelled from Romania less than 24 hours after
 
 
 1179
 RO ANIA
 entering the country. The Government claimed the group's
 activities were not consistent with their tourist visa status.
 In 1988 the Romanian Government continued to prevent a
 Romanian citizen, Dumitru Mazilu, from carrying out his
 responsibilities as special rapporteur to the United Nations
 Human Rights Commission, a position to which he had been named
 in 1985. Romanian representatives stated Mazilu was too ill
 to prepare his report; Mazilu wrote U.N. officials that it was
 only the actions of his Government that impeded him. Mazilu
 has been cut off from all contact with the United Nations. In
 early 1988, Liviu Bota was permitted to travel to Geneva and
 resumed his duties as a U.N. civil servant. The Romanian
 Government had prevented him from doing so since 1985.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion.
 Language, or Social Status
 According to official figures, about 12 percent (2.7 million)
 of Romania's 23 million citizens are members of ethnic
 minorities, including Hungarians, Germans, Gypsies, and many
 smaller groups. According to the Government, ethnic
 Hungarians make up the largest group with some 1.7 million
 members. The Government takes its figures from a 1977 census
 based on self-declaration. Some Hungarian sources claim the
 true figure for the ethnic Hungarian population is over 2
 million.
 Most minority groups are concentrated in Transylvania, the
 central and northwestern part of Romania. In recent years,
 opportunities for minorities to have periodicals, theaters,
 and schools in their native language have been eroded. The
 ability of members of minority groups to visit friends and
 relatives in neighboring countries is limited, as it is for
 all citizens. Minority groups protest that government
 controls and restrictions constitute discrimination. Many
 observers contend that the Government is pursuing a program of
 "Romanianization" in order gradually to absorb the minority
 groups into a unified Romanian culture. The Government denies
 discriminating against minority cultures.
 There are no longer any television or radio broadcasts in the
 Hungarian language. Most Hungarian-language theaters now have
 a Romanian-language section. Hungarian- and German-language
 newspapers continue to be printed.  in the field of education,
 primary schooling remains available in Hungarian, German, and
 even in the native language of tiny minorities such as Czechs
 in western Romania, although opportunities are shrinking. The
 number of ethnic Hungarian children being educated in
 Hungarian has declined significantly. Several German-language
 high schools still operate, although they face declining
 enrollment of native German speakers because of emigration.
 Hungarian-language sections in high schools have reportedly
 replaced what were formerly entirely Hungarian-language high
 schools. Except in a few faculties, students can no longer
 take university entrance examinations in minority languages,
 and opportunities for university study in Hungarian have also
 decreased. Babes-Bolyai University in Cluj, formerly a
 Hungarian-language institution, has increased its intake of
 ethnic Romanian students over the years and made Romanian the
 language of instruction in most subjects. Some ethnic
 Hungarians claim that the decision of the Romanian Government
 to close the Hungarian consulate in Cluj in June 1988 deprived
 them of an important resource for maintaining their separate
 cultural identity.
 
 
 1180
 ROMANIA
 Ethnic Hungarians point to other government policies they
 believe are designed to erode their cultural identity.
 Numerous persons teport that they are no longer permitted to
 register the birth of their children using Hungarian first
 names which have no Romanian equivalents. All publications,
 including those in the languages of minority groups, must use
 the Romanian place names, not their Hungarian or German
 equivalent. Members of the Hungarian minority claim that the
 Government uses its controls over residence permits,
 employment, and study opportunities to dilute the
 concentration of the Hungarian population in its traditional
 centers. The Government maintains that demographic changes in
 Transylvania are natural and result in part from increased
 industrialization which has drawn ethnic Romanian workers into
 urban areas formerly inhabited predominantly by ethnic
 Hungarians. Economic conditions for all ethnic groups in
 Romania are difficult, and conditions for Hungarians do not
 appear worse than for ethnic Romanians. Although it does
 appear that ethnic Hungarians are often given jobs in ,
 non-Hungarian-speaking areas, allegations that the Government
 pursues a conscious policy of job discrimination are difficult
 to substantiate.
 Women are constitutionally accorded the same rights and
 privileges as men. The Government seeks to upgrade the role
 of women in society with specific policies in the areas of
 education, access to employment, and comparable wages. As a
 result, women are employed in virtually all sectors of the
 economy, and there is equal opportunity in education, but at
 the senior levels of responsibility and authority, they appear
 in far smaller numbers. The higher ranks of the party are
 occupied predominantly by male Romanians.
 Section 6 Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 According to the labor code, the primary function of the trade
 unions is to "mobilize the masses for the fulfillment of the
 Communist Party's program." Trade unions independent of the
 party are prohibited, and workers do not have the right to
 form their own associations, elect representatives, or
 affiliate with international organizations except through the
 official unions. The official trade unions, grouped in the
 General Confederation of Romanian Trade Unions (UGSR), receive
 all necessary government support for their activities.
 Membership in the official trade unions is compulsory to the
 extent that all workers are required to pay monthly dues.
 More extensive participation does not appear to be enforced,
 and there does not appear to be discrimination against those
 who do not participate beyond paying monthly dues. Attempts
 to form independent groups or unions are quickly and
 powerfully suppressed. The UGSR is affiliated with the
 Soviet-controlled World Federation of Trade Unions.
 Romania's labor code is silent on the right to strike, except
 to elaborate procedures by which the union leadership is
 required to mediate disputes between the workers and
 management, with recourse to the courts when the dispute
 cannot be settled. In practice, sanctions available to the
 party and the union make it unlikely that such disputes will
 reach the courts. Workers who have been dismissed from their
 jobs may sometimes take their case to civil court. In the
 past, the Government's reaction to actual strikes, or to
 advocacy of the worker's right to strike, has been harsh
 
 
 1181
 ROMANIA
 repression. Brutal suppression of the miners' strikes in the
 late 1970's led to an investigation by the International Labor
 Organization (ILO). Inadequate responses, failure to respond
 further to charges, and refusal to accept a direct-contact
 mission led the ILO to find Romania substantially in violation
 of generally accepted labor standards.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 Workers do not have the right to organize or bargain
 collectively. While they nominally have a direct voice in the
 management of the workplace through the unions that all must
 join, in most factories the union's chief executive is also
 the senior party official, and a primary function of the
 unions is to channel party doctrine and directives to the
 workers. Unions also dispense social benefits, such as
 vacations at union-owned hotels (for which the member pays
 only a fraction of the real cost), low-interest loans, and
 access to cultural, educational, and other leisure
 activities.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 The labor code stipulates that each citizen over the age of 16
 has the right and the duty to work. Unemployment is a crime
 ("social parasitism"). With certain exceptions, such as
 housewives, full-time students, and private farmers, any
 unemployed able-bodied citizen must report to a government
 employment bureau for job placement. A 1976 law states that
 persons who refuse to take up gainful employment may be fined
 or assigned to positions in the construction, agricultural, or
 other sectors of the economy where they are required to
 complete 1 year of service. Since 1985 the committee of
 experts of the ILO has observed that these provisions of
 Romanian law appear to constitute forced labor in that they
 are an obligation to work under the menace of penalties. In
 the 1988 ILO Conference Committee on the Application of
 Conventions and Recommendations, the Romanian Government took
 the position that these laws served to encourage able-bodied
 citizens to contribute productively to society and that the
 sanctions provided for by law had never been applied.
 However, persons are frequently convicted for "social
 parasitism" under a 1968 law which provides imprisonment as a
 sanction for persons not gainfully employed. Some observers
 allege that the Government assigns persons to particularly
 dangerous or unpleasant jobs in a punitive or discriminatory
 manner.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 There is no specific minimum employment age, although Romanian
 law requires schooling to age 16. According to the employment
 code, children over 16 not enrolled in full-time schooling are
 expected to work. Youths 14 years of age may be employed in
 temporary jobs, and youths of 15 may be employed in industrial
 work, so long as the employer provides continuing educational
 opportunities and shows that the work being performed is
 "appropriate for the age and condition" of the employee. In
 such cases, the law limits work to 6 hours per day. Children
 from age 11 may work in the fields or in other "patriotic
 work," usually as part of a school or other group activity.
 
 
 1182
 ROMANIA
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 The Constitution provides for an 8-hour workday (or a 6-hour
 day for arduous occupations), a 24-hour rest period each week,
 paid vacations, and the "right to leisure." Labor law
 elaborates these promises but allows employers to override
 them "if conditions warrant." In 1988 there were widespread
 reports of workers required to perform extra, uncompensated
 labor to make up for lagging production or for official
 holidays. The institution of unrealistic production and sales
 quotas and penalties in the form of salary deductions for
 failure to meet them has increased worker dissatisfaction.
 Workers reported that wages and salaries were cut even though
 production shortfalls were often due to the lack of raw
 materials or insufficient electrical energy. No mechanism
 exists by which the workers can protest such arbitrary
 reductions in pay. Worker demonstrations in Brasov in
 November 1987 to protest pay cuts and poor living conditions
 were swiftly suppressed.
 In 1988 wage increases were approved for all workers starting
 with those at the lowest end of the wage scale. Even before
 considering deductions generally imposed for production
 shortfalls, the increases will probably not keep pace with
 inflation. The new monthly minimum wage is equivalent to $220
 at the official exchange rate. As a result of the
 Government's drastic austerity program, chronic shortages of
 foodstuffs and energy make it difficult to maintain an
 adequate standard of living at average wage levels.
 The labor code theoretically ensures Romanian workers a safe
 environment. The Ministry of Labor has established safety
 standards for most industries and is responsible for enforcing
 these standards. In practice, however, observers report that
 conditions in many factories present substantial health and
 safety hazards. Although management is reportedly aware of
 these deficiencies in most cases, government emphasis on
 meeting production goals takes precedence over safety and
 health factors in light of the party leadership's insistence
 on rapidly paying off the foreign debt and on pursuing
 industrial and economic development at all cost. A
 government-run institute devoted to worker safety and health
 has existed since 1968. It is relatively small and does not
 appear capable of challenging unrealistic government
 production targets or eliminating hazardous working
 conditions, but it does ameliorate extreme conditions in some
 factories (workers receive supplementary benefits in some
 hazardous occupations). In 1988 Romania announced to the ILO
 that it would provide a report in accordance with Convention
 No. 81 on Labor Inspection. Since ratifying the Convention in
 1973, Romania had not sent a single inspection report to the
 ILO.
 
 
 1183
