ROMANIA
The Report on Romania is an excellent critique of Romania's harsh human rights practices. The fact that it is considerably stronger than the 1981 Report apparently reflects the tension that has arisen in U.S. - Romanian relations during 1982, not a severe worsening of the repression in Romania, which was equally severe back in 1981 when the U.S. government was seeking to encourage Romania's seemingly independent foreign policy. Though the U.S. government has tended to "go easy" on Romania in the past, mainly through trade benefits granted to Romania as a "most favored nation," it should be pointed out - with due credit to the Reagan Administration - that relations have faltered with Romania in 1982, not over foreign policy disappointments as much as over Romania's mistreatment of its own citizens.
Comparisons between the 1981 and 1982 Reports are of interest in showing the difference that a shift in tone can make while dealing with essentially the same facts. A few examples will suffice.
1. Whereas the opening sentence of the 1981 Report describes Romania as "a centralized unitary state," the 1982 Report describes Romania in its opening sentence as "a highly centralized communist state."
-88-
2.	The 1981 Report states: "Generally, Romania has shown receptivity to concerns expressed by the international community about its human rights practices." The Report for 1982 says: "The official Romanian response, thus far, to international concerns regarding Romania's human rights practices generally has been limited to action on individual cases."
3.	The section entitled "Arbitrary Arrest and
Imprisonment," in 1981 reads:
Police harassment is a common feature of everyday life for those who are politically active beyond the limits set by the Communist Party, or who actively proselytize for their church. Activists of this type are rarely arrested or charged with serious political offenses such as those listed under Article 166 or 167 of the Penal Code (1973).
Compare these sentences with those that appear in the 1982 Report:
Police harassment and threats are a common feature of life in Romania, especially for those who are politically or religiously active beyond the narrow limits permitted by the Communist Party and the Government. Such activists are often subjected to arbitrary arrest, long periods of interrogation, confinement without charge, and occasionally even physical abuse.
Comparisons between the 1981 and 1982 Reports, however, should not be allowed to obscure the fact that this year's report is a very good one indeed, especially in its
-89-
description of police harassment, and in its mentioning the Goma-Tanase assassination attempt in Paris, the persecution of religious believers in Romania the suppression of the Hungarian minority in Romania, the repression of the SLOMR trade union movement and the case of Father Calciu, the omission of which from the 1981 Report was criticized in our Critique last year.
The Report gives an accurate description of the newly imposed education tax in Romania "which had not been fully implemented by the end of 1982." This must now be updated, however: according to The New York Times of February 13, 1983, the education tax is now being implemented, much to the consternation of the U.S. State Department which had warned Romania in no uncertain terms that it would lose its "most favored nation" status if the tax were to be implemented. It might also be worth mentioning that Romania has submitted a resolution to the UN General Assembly on preventing the "exodus of educated persons from the developing countries."
-90-
