 ROMANIA
 Romania is a constitutional democracy with a multiary bicameral parliamen-
 tary system, a head of government (prime minister), a directly elected head of state
 (president), and a separate judiciary. Despite a recent reorganization of the judicial
 system, the executive branch exercises influence over the judiciary.
 The Ministry of Internal Affairs supervises the police. The national police have
 primary responsibility for security, but the Government may call on the army and
 border guard to assist the police to maintain internal order. The Romanian Intel-
 ligence Service (SRI) carries out internal intelligence functions. Elected civilian au-
 thorities exercise full control over the security forces, many of whose senior officials
 were replaced by the Government in 1997. Some police officers committed serious
 human rights abuses.
 Romania is a middle-income developing country in transition from a centrally
 planned to a market economy. In 1996 the private sector accounted for about 52 per-
 cent of gross domestic product (GDP) and employed 53.5 percent of the work force,
 primarily in agriculture and services. Although privatization is under way, heavy
 industry still consists largely of state-owned enterprises. The economy is expected
 to contract by 2 to 3 percent in 1997. The GDP for 1997 is projected to be about
 $1,500 per capita. Exports rose over 56 percent from 1993 to 1996 but were expected
 to show minimal growth this year. Inflation was down to 56.9 percent in 1996 but
 rose to about 130 percent by year's end as the marketplace rather than the Govern-
 ment began to determine the price of goods.
 The Government generally respected the human rights of its citizens; however,
 several serious prob ems remained. Police continued to beat detainees. The Govern-
 ment investigated police officers suspected of abuse and indicted officers accused of
 criminal activities in military courts. However, investigations of police abuses are
 generally lengthy and indeterminate, and rarely result in prosecutions or punish-
 ment. Poor prison conditions led to hunger strikes and violent protests in February.
 The judiciary remains subject to executive branch influence, although it was reorga-
 nized and is increasingly independent. Discrimination and violence against women
 remained serious problems. A large number of impoverished and apparently home-
 less children continued to roam the streets of large cities. Government and societal
 harassment of religious minorities was a problem Discrimination and violence
 against Roma continued.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing-There were no reports of political or
 other extrajudicial killings.
 In March Amnesty International issued a report questioning the use of firearms
 by police against unarmed petty criminal suspects in 11 incidents between 1995 and
 1997. Three fatalities resulted, and only two police officers have been indicted.
 In 1996 Gabriel Carabulea died after 3 days in police custody, during which he
 reportedly was severely beaten. After initially ruling that there were no grounds for
 an indictment of the police, the military prosecutoer's office reopened its investiga-
 tion, which is ongoing.
 According to the Government, the chief of police in Valcele was indicted in June
 for the illegal use of his weapon in the 1996 killing of Mircea-Muresul Mosor, a Rom
 from Comani who was shot and killed while in police custody. A trial was pending
 at year's end. The Military Prosecutor's Office during the year reopened the inves-
 tigation into the case of Istvan Kiss, an ethnic Hungarian allegedly beaten to death
 by police in 1995.
 In several earlier cases of deaths in custody or deaths reportedly due to police
 brutality, investigations and trials are still dragging on, years later.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution prohibits torture and inhuman or degrading punishment or treat-
 ment, and these prohibitions were generally respected in practice. Nevertheless,
 there were credible reports that police continued to beat detainees.
 In Piatra Neamt in February police reportedly beat Ion Bursuc. In Berceni police
 arrested and allegedly beat loana Enuta in May. These cases remain under inves-
 tigation.
 In January the United Nations Special Rapporteur on Torture and other Cruel,
 Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment reported that he had received al-
 legations of torture and mistreatment during detention, usually at police stations.
 Police officers allegedly often used force during interrogations to obtain confessions.
 
 
 1238
 
 Adrian Sarbu and Mihai Alexandrescu complained that they were beaten by a
 group of nine policemen on December 11, 1996, after a verbal dispute. Two police-
 men were identified and arrest warrants were sworn out against them. The 1996
 beatings of engineer Apostolescu and his nephew, Mihai Damian, and Constantin
 Balasa are also under investigation but have not yet been resolved.
 Judicial cases involving military personnel and the police are tried in military
 courts. Local and international human ihts groups criticize this system, claiming
 that the military prosecutor's investigations are unnecessarily lengthy and often
 purposefully inconclusive and that the militay courts sometime block proper inves-
 tigation of alleged police abuses.
 Prison conditions are poor, facilities are overcrowded and unhealthy, and medical
 assistance is meager. Human rights organizations continued to report abuse of pris-
 oners by other prisoners and prison authorities. Prisons continued to use the "cell
 boss" system, in which some prisoners are designated to be in semiofficial charge
 of other prisoners. In February, following hunger strikes and other-sometimes vio-
 lent-protest actions started by inmates in nine cities to publicize their plight, both
 private and public television stations covered the state of prison conditions: over-
 crowding, lice, and bedbugs, visible particulate matter in the drinking water (at
 Jilava A=, and inadequate shower and toilet facilities. In another instance, pris-
 oners became ill after eating food that had been contaminated with rat feces. The
 single penitentiary hospital suffers from overcrowding and too few doctors. The Gov-
 ernment responded to the hunger strikes and protests by granting early parole to
 elderly, pregnant, juvenile, and first-time or minor offenders and accelerating con-
 struction of new prisons to relieve overcrowding.
 The Government permits visits by human rights monitors, and several nongovern-
 mental organizations (NGO's) made such visits.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The law forbids the detention of anyone
 for more than 24 hours without an arrest order from a prosecutor, who may order
 detention for up to 30 days. Authorities generally respected this provision in prac-
 tice. Detainees have the right to apply for bail and may ask for a hearing before
 a judge. Such a request must be granted within 24 hours. In the absence of a re-
 quest, however, the authorities may hold a person for up to 65 days without a court
 order.
 Police often do not inform citizens of their rights. The law requires the authorities
 to inform arrestees of the charges against them and of their right to an attorney
 at all stages of the legal process. Police must notify defendants of this right in a
 language they understand before obtaining a statement. However, the prosecutor's
 office may delay action on a request for a lawyer for up to 5 days from the date
 of arrest.
 Under the law, minors detained by polie and placed under guard in a Center for
 the Protection of Minors are not considered by judicial authorities to be in detention
 or under arrest. Since the Penal Code does not apply to minors in these centers
 until their cases are referred to a prosecutor, police are permitted to question them
 without restrictions and may hold those suspected of criminal offenses in such cen-
 ters for up to 30 days. This law appears to be in conflict with the Constitution, and
 both Amnesty International and local human rights groups have called on the Gov-
 ernment to change it.
 There were no political detainees in 1997, although a number of officials associ-
 ated with the former government who were investigated on charges of corruption
 publicly complained that they had been targeted on political grounds.
 Exile was not used as a means of punishment.
 e. Denial of Fair Public TriaL.-Under the terms of a 1992 law, the judicial branch
 is independent of other government branches. A 1997 revision of this law provides
 that members of the Superior Council of the Magistrature, which controls the selec-
 tion, promotion, transfer, and sanctioning of judges, be appointed by the justice min-
 ister.
 The 1992 law reestablished a four-tier legal system, including appellate courts,
 which had ceased to exist under Communist rule. Defendants have final recourse
 to the Supreme Court or, for constitutional matters, to the Constitutional Court es-
 tablished in 1992. A new law reorganizing the judicial system has divided the Pros-
 ecutor General's Office into 16 local offices paralleling the appeals court structure
 and established one office at the Supreme Court; the law also curtailed certain pow-
 ers of the prosecutor general, including the right to overturn court decisions and
 move cases over intervening appeals courts to the Supreme Court.
 The law provides for fair public trial and a presumption of innocence. The Penal
 Code requires that an attorney be appointed for a defendant who cannot afford legal
 representation or is otherwise unable to select counsel. In practice, the local bar as-
 sociation provides attorneys to indigents and is compensated by the Ministry of Jus-
 
 
 1239
 tice. Either a plaintiff or defendant may appeal. These provisions of the law are re-
 spected in practice. The law provides that confessions extracted as a result of police
 brutality may be withdrawn by the accused when brought before the court.
 With the aim of protecting citizens against abuses or capricious acts of public offi-
 cials, a law establishing an Ombudsman's Office was promulgated in Ma.
 There were no reports of political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Constitution provides for protection against the search of a residence without a war-
 rant, but thia protection is subordinate to "national security or public order." The
 1992 National Security Law defines national security very broadly and lists as
 threats not only crimes such as terrorism, treason, espionage, assassination, and
 armed insurrection, but also totalitarian, racist, and anti-Semitic actions, or at-
 tempts to change the existing national borders. Security officials may enter resi-
 dences without proper authorization from a prosecutor if they deem a threat to na-
 tional security to be "imminent."
 The Constitution states that the privacy of legal means of communication is invio-
 lable; thus, the Romanian Intelligence Service is legally prohibited from engaging
 in political acts (for example, wiretapping on behalf of the government for political
 reasons). However, the law allows security services to engage in such monitoring on
 national security grounds ater obtaining authorization.
 Similarly, although the law requires the SRI to obtain a warrant from a prosecu-
 tor to carry out intelligence activities involving "threats to national security,' it may
 engage in a wide variety of operations, including "technical operations," to deter-
 mine if a situation meets the legal definition of a that to national security.
 In 1997 there were no confirmed instances of interference with individual citizens'
 right to privacy by the authorities. Mail continued to be opened, but the authorities
 place the blame or this on postal workers and freight handlers looking for money
 or other valuables. Protestant church groups also continued to complain of opened
 correspondence, although there were no reports of telephone tapping.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-Although the Constitution provides for freedom
 of expression and prohibits censorship, it limits the bounds of free expression by
 prohibiting "defamation of the country." The Government respected the constitu.
 tional provisions in practice. An updated Penal Code passed by Parliament in 1996
 rectified many of the shortcomings of the former Communist-era code. However, the
 new version has been criticized by human rights organizations and professional
 journalists for retaining jail terms for those convicted of libel or slander, including
 journalists.
 In March an appeals court overturned a lower court's conviction of journalists
 Tana Ardeleanu and Sorin Rosca Stanescu for seditious libel. The two were con-
 victed in 1996 for alleging in the daily Ziua that former President Ion Iliescu had
 ties to the Soviet KGB intelligence service. Several lesser-known cases involving
 journalists and penal code provisions for libel were also tried.
 The independent media continued to grow. Several hundred daily and weekly
 newspapers are published. Several private television stations broadcast nationwide,
 with the largest reaching approximately 20 percent of the rural and 80 percent of
 the urban market. As of September, 59 private television stations and 140 private
 radio stations were broadcasting. A sizable number of households are wired for
 cable, giving significant portions of the population access to beth private and foreign
 broadcasts. While Romanian State Television (RTV) and Radio Romania remained
 the only national broadcasters capable of reaching the bulk of the rural population,
 independent stations continued to enlarge their coverage throughout the country by
 over-the-air transmission, cable, and satellite.
 The 1994 law establishing a parliamentary-appointed board of directors for RTV
 had not been implemented by year's end, and RTV continued to be run by an in-
 terim director. Opposition politicians charged that the Government has illegally ap-
 pointed senior RTV officials sympathetic to government views, ignoring regulations
 that did not permit such nominations to take place without parliamentary consent.
 Foreign news publications may be imported and distributed freely, but high costs
 limit their circulation.
 Academic freedom is respected.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution provides for
 freedom of assembly, and the Government respected this right in practice. The law
 on public assembly provides for the right of citizens to assemble peacefully while
 unarmed but states that meetings must not interfere with other economic or social
 activities and may not be held near locations such as hospitals, airports, or military
 installations. Organizers of demonstrations must inform local authorities and police
 
 
 1240
 
 before the event. Authorities may forbid a public gathering by notifyingthe organiz-
 ers in writing within 48 hours of receipt of the request. The la  prohibits the orga-
 nization of, or participation in, a counterdemonstration held at the same time as a
 scheduled public gathering.
 The law forbids public gatherings to espouse Communist, racist, or Fascist
 ideologies, or to commit actions contrary to public order or national security. It pun-
 ishes unauthorized demonstrations or other violations by imprisonment and fines.
 The Constitution provides for freedom of association, and the Government re-
 spects this right in practice. Political parties obtain legal status if they have at least
 10,000 members. (The minimum membership required was increased in 1996 in
 order to reduce the number of small parties.) Associations may obtain legal status
 with proof of only 251 members.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for religious freedom, and the
 Government generally does not impede the observance of religious belief. However,
 several Protestant denominations, Jehovah's Witnesses the most prominent among
 them, continued to make credible allegations that low-level government officials and
 Romanian Orthodox clergy harassed them and impeded their efforts at proselytizing
 and worship.
 Under the provisions of 1948 and 1989 decrees, the Government recognizes 15 re-
 ligions; only the clergy of these recognized religions are eligible to receive state fi-
 nancial support. The State Secretariat for Religious Affairs has licensed 385 other
 faiths, organizations, and foundations as religious associations under two 1924 laws
 on juridical entities, thereby entitling them to juridical status as well as to exemp-
 tions from income and customs taxes. However, religious associations may not build
 churches or other buildings designated as houses of worship and are not permitted
 to perform rites of baptism, marriage or burial. The Romanian Orthodox Church,
 to which approximately 86 percent of the population nominally adheres, predomi-
 nates. The official registration of religious associations is extremely slow because of
 bureaucratic delays; in this regard, the State Secretariat for Religious Affairs has
 been criticized by smaller religious groups for its obstructionist tactics in favor of
 the Romanian Orthodox Church.
 The Catholic Church of the Byzantine Rite, or Greek Catholic Church, also en-
 countered difficulties with the Remanian Orthodox Church and the State Secretar-
 iat for Religious Affairs. The Greek Catholic Church was illegally disbanded by the
 Communists in 1948 and forced to merge with the Romanian Orthodox Church. The
 latter received most of the former's properties, including over 2,000 churches and
 other facilities. In 1997 Greek Catholics continued their struggle to regain their
 former properties, but a bill passed in the Senate that would have restored some
 Greek Catholic churches to their original owners was defeated in the Chamber of
 Deputies due to strong opposition from the Orthodox Church. The Secretary of State
 for Religious Affairs spoke on behalf of the Orthodox Church before the Senate, d-
 spite the nonpartisan government position he occupies.
 In May the Government restored to the Jewish community six properties that had
 been seized under the Communist regime.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Government places no restrictions on travel within the country ex-
 cept in the case of certain small areas reserved for military purposes. Citizens who
 wish to change their place of work or residence do not face any official barriers. The
 law stipulates that citizens have the right to travel abroad freely, to emigrate, and
 to return. In practice, citizens freely exercise these rights.
 In 1991 Remania signed the 1951 U.N. Convention Relating to the Status of Refu-
 gees and its 1967 Protocol, and in 1996 a refugee law was passed, providing imple-
 menting legislation. The new law established a Refugee Office in the Interior Min-
 istry to receive, process, and house asylum seekers.
 The Government cooperates with the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees
 (UNHCR) and other humanitarian organizations in assisting refugees but was R-
 viding temporary accommodations to only seven asylum seekers as of June 30. Te
 issue of irst asylum did not arise in 1997.
 As of August 31, a total of 900 refugees and asylum seekers depended on the
 UNHCR for their subsistence, including food, accommodations, clothing, medical as-
 sistance, and language or vocational training.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 The Constitution provides citizens with the right to change their government
 through periodic and free elections held on the basis of universal suffrage.
 
 
 1241
 The Government respected legislation passed in 1996 that prohibited government-
 appointed prefects from dismissing elected mayors and local council members for al-
 leged abuses of authority prior to a binding legal ruling on the charges.
 In the wake of the democratic general elections of November 1996, the govern-
 ment coalition formed by the Romanian Democratic Convention (CDR) and the
 Union of Social Democrats (USD) joined forces with the Hungarian Democratic
 Union of Romania(UDMR). These parties, along with a number of smaller constitu-
 ent parties make up the governing coalition.
 There are no legal restrictions on the participation of women in government or
 politics, but societal attitudes are a significant impediment. Women hold only 5.9
 percent of the seats in Parliament and no ministerial positions.
 The Constitution and electoral legislation grant each recognized ethnic minority
 one representative in the Chamber of Deputies, provided that the minority's politi-
 cal organization obtains at least 5 percent of the average number of valid votes
 needed to elect a deputy outright (1,784 votes in the 1996 elections). Organizations
 representing 15 minority groups elted deuties under this prvision in 1996. Eth-
 nic Hunganans, represented by the UD    , obtained parliamentary representation
 through the normal electoral process. Roma are underrepresented in Parliament be-
 cause of low Roma voter turnout and internal divisions that worked against the con-
 solidation of votes for one candidate, organization, or party. They have not increased
 their parliamentary representation beyond the one seat provided through the Con-
 stitution and electoral legislation.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Domestic human rights monitoring groups include the Romanian Helsinki Com-
 mittee (APADOR-CH), the independent Romanian Society for Human Rights
 (SIRDO), the League for the Defense of Human Rights (LADO), the Romanian Insti-
 tute For Human Rights, and several issue-specific groups such as the Young Gen-
 eration of Roma and the Center for Crisis Intervention and Study, also a Romani
 NGO. Other groups, such as political parties and trade unions, continued to main-
 tain sections monitoring the observance of human rights.
 These groups, as well as international human rights organizations, functioned
 freely without government interference. However, local NGO's have experienced un-
 even cooperation from the General Inspectorate of Police, which is responsible for
 investigating police abuses.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution forbids discrimination based on race, nationality, ethnic origin,
 language, religion, sex, opinion and political allegiance, wealth, or social back-
 ground. In practice, however, the Government does not effectively enforce these pro-
 visions, andwomen, Roma, and other minorities are subject to various forms of ex-
 tralegal discrimination. Homosexuals are reportedly the victims of widespread police
 brutality.
 Women.-Violence against women, including rape, continued to be a serious prob-
 lem. Both human rights groups and women's rights organizations credibly reported
 that domestic violence is common. There are no support facilities for victims, and
 media coverage is virtually nonexistent. According to government statistics, 1,372
 rapes were reported during the year (613 were reported for the first 6 months of
 1996). Prosecution of rape is difficult because it requires both a medical certificate
 and a witness, and a rapist will not be punished if he marries the victim. There
 is no specific legislation dealing with spousal abuse or rape, and successful prosecu-
 tion of spousal rape is almost impossible. Police are often reluctant to intervene in
 instances of domestic violence.
 Both the Constitution and international conventions signed by Romania grant
 women and men equal rights. In practice, however, the Government does not ade-
 quately enforce these provisions, nor do the authorities focus attention or resources
 on women s issues.
 Few resources are available for women experiencing economic discrimination. De-
 s ite existing laws and educational equality, women have a higher rate of unem-
 loyment than men, occupy few influential positions in the private sector, and earn
 lower average wages. In 1996 the Government created a department in the Ministry
 of Labor and Social Protection to advance women's concerns and family policies.
 This department organizes programs for women, proposes new laws, monitors legis-
 lation for sexual bias, and targets resources to train women for skilledprofessions-
 especially in rural areas-and to address problems of single mothers. However, the
 Department has had little impact to date.
 
 
 1242
 Children.-The Government administers health care and public education pro-
 grams for children, despite scarce domestic resources. International agencies and
 NG0's supplement government programs in these areas.
 There was no perceptible pattern of abuse against children. Nevertheless, large
 numbers of impoverished and apparently homeless, but not necessarily orphaned,
 children roamed the streets of the larger cities. The Government does not have sta-
 tistics defining the scope of the problem. NGO's working with children remained
 particularly concerned about the number of minors detained in jail and prison.
 These NGO's continued to seek alternative solutions, such as parole for juveniles.
 Because time served while awaiting trial counts as part of the prison sentence but
 does not count towards time to be served in a juvenile detention center, some mi-
 nors actually requested prison sentences.
 The sexual exploitation of children continued to attract press attention, and the
 police staged a few high-publicity arrests of foreign pedophiles, but other issues,
 such as adequate legislation to protect children, received less attention. The law
 does not expressly outlaw pedophilia; instead, pedophiles are charged with rape, cor-
 poral harm, and sexual corruption.
 People With Disabilities.-Difficult economic conditions and serious budgetary con-
 straints contributed to very difficult living conditions for those with physical or men-
 tal disabilities. Many disabled people cannot make use of government-provided
 transportation discounts because public transport does not have facilitated access.
 Accessibility for the disabled to buildings and public transportation is not mandated
 by law.
 Religious Minorities.-Most mainstream politicians have publicly condemned anti-
 Semitism, racism, and xenophobia. However, the fringe press continued to publish
 anti-Semitic harangues.
 The Romanian Orthodox Church has attacked the "aggressive proselytism" of
 Protestant and neo-Protestant groups and harassed members of such religious mi-
 norities. Ten Baptists were beaten on March 9 by a crowd led by Romanian Ortho-
 dox priests in the village of Ruginoasa. The Romanian Orthodox Church expressed
 its disapproval of the Orthodox priests' violent behavior and the Baptists' pros-
 elytism, but took no serious disciplinary action against its priests. Local police did
 not intervene.
 National/Racial/Ethnic Minorities.-The Government created a Consultative
 Council for National Minorities in 1993 to monitor specific problems of persons be-
 longing to ethnic minorities, to establish contacts with minority groups, to submit
 proposals for draft legislation and administrative measures, to maintain permanent
 links with local authorities, and to investigate complaints. This Council was up-
 graded to a government department with ministerial status after the November
 1996 general elections and renamed the Department for the Protection of National
 Minorities (DPNM). The new minister is an ethnic Hungarian parliamentarian from
 the UDMR.
 Ethnic Hungarians, numbering more than 1.6 million, constitute the largest and
 most vocal minority, and the UDMR holds 36 seats in the Parliament. There was
 no violence in 1997 associated with ethnic Hungarian issues, despite the vitriolic re-
 sponse of nationalist politicians to the opening of a Hungarian consulate in the
 Transylvanian city of Cluj in July. Many of the issues addressed in the Romanian-
 Hungarian Treaty of 1996 were implemented. There has also been progress on eco-
 nomic issues, the mutual acceptance of degrees, the scheduling of high-level visits,
 and infrastructure improvements such as border crossings.
 In June the Government issued an ordinance modifying the 1995 Education Law.
 Students may now take all university entry exams in the language in which they
 were taught at school and may pursue vocational studies through the post-hig
 school level in their maternal language. In July the Government amended the 1995
 education law with a decree that expanded minority-language education in a num-
 ber of areas. The amendment met with strong opposition from within parties in the
 governing coalition, as well as from opposition nationalist parties. The Senate voted
 in December to curtail the provisions of the decree, but the Chamber of Deputies
 did not act on the change by year's end.
 The Romani population, estimated at approximately 2 million persons, continues
 to be subject to societal discrimination, harassment, beatings, and violence. In Janu-
 ary following a dispute in a bar in the village of Tanganu, villagers ransacked the
 houses of several Romani families. In January 3 men suspected of leading a mob
 that murdered 3 Roma men and destroyed 17 Romani homes in September 1993
 were arrested. This case and others involving Romani deaths and destruction of
 Romani property were still under investigation by prosecutors or review by the
 courts at the end of August.
 
 
 1243
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-All workers except public employees have the right
 to associate freely, engage in collective bargaining, and form and join labor unions
 without previous authorization. Limitations on the right to strike apply only to in-
 dustries that the Government considers critical to the public interest. No workers
 may be forced to join or withdraw from a union, and union officials who resign from
 elected positions and return to the regular work force are protected against em-
 ployer retaliation. The majority of workers are members ofabout 18 nationwide
 trade union confederations and smaller independent trade unions.
 Union members complain that unions must submit grievances to government-
 sponsored conciliation before initiating a strike and are frustrated with the courts'
 propensity to declare illegal the majority of strikes on which they have been asked
 to rule. Past studies have indicated that the labor legislation adopted in 1991 falls
 short of International Labor Organization (IL) standards in several areas, includ-
 ing free election of union representatives, binding arbitration, and financial liability
 of strike organizers. Although the 1991 legislation is supportive of collective bar-
 gaining as an institution, the contracts that result are not always enforceable in a
 consistent manner.
 Unions representing divergent sectors of the economy carried out strikes in 1997.
 The new Government has not followed up on a 1995 ILO recommendation to the
 previous government to rescind all measures taken against suspended union leaders
 involved in a 1993 strike by railway locomotive engineers. Only 2 of 10 engineers
 fired in 1993 were offered their jobs back; most of the others were offered retirement
 pensions. The union leaders, who defied a Supreme Court ruling to suspend the
 strike for 170 days, were fired by the national railway company when the strike
 ended.
 The 1991 legislation stipulates that labor unions should be free from government
 or political party control, a provision that the Government has honored in practice.
 Unions are free to engage in political activity and have done so.
 In the spring, the Government issued a decree providing stipends for those laid
 off as a result of economic restructuring. In August Prime Minister Ciorbea ordered
 the closure of a number of loss-making, state-owned enterprises, which employed
 roughly 30,000 workers. At the same time, the Government increased benefits under
 the decree, providing for payments worth up to 20 months' salary, depending upon
 a worker's seniority and what he proposed to do with the payment. It also provided
 for the retraining of laid-off workers.
 Labor unions may freely form or join federations and affiliate with international
 bodies. The National Confederation of Trade Unions-Fratia and the National Union
 Bloc are affiliated with the International Confederation of Free Trade Unions and
 the European Trade Union Confederation. The Confederation of Democratic Trade
 Unions of Romania is affiliated with the World Labor Confederation. Representa-
 tives of foreign and international organizations freely visit and advise Romanian
 trade unionists.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-Workers have the right to
 bargain collectively under the 1991 legislation, but collective bargaining efforts are
 complicated by continued state control of most industrial enterprises and the ab-
 sence of independent management representatives. Basic wage scales for employees
 of state-owned enterprises are established through collective bargaining with the
 State (see Section 6.e. below).
 Labor legislation is applied uniformly throughout the country, including in the
 four free trade zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The Constitution prohibits forced
 or compulsory labor, including that performed by children. The Ministry of Labor
 and Social Protection generally enforces this prohibition.
 d. Status of Child Labor Practices and Minimum Age for Employment.-The Con-
 stitution prohibits forced and bonded child labor, and the Government generally en-
 forces this provision (see Section 6.c.). The minimum age for employment is 15
 years, but children as young as age 14 may work with the consent of their parents
 or guardians, although only "according to their physical development, aptitude, and
 knowledge." Working children under the age of 16 have the right to continue their
 education, and the law obliges employers to assist in this regard. The Ministry of
 Labor and Social Protection has the authority to impose fines and close sections of
 factories to ensure compliance with the law, which it enforces effectively.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-Most wage rates are established through col-
 lective bargaining at the enterprise level. However, they are based on minimum
 wages for given economic sectors and categories of workers that the government sets
 after negotiations with industry representatives and the labor confederations. Mini-
 mum wage rates are generally observed and enforced. In 1997 the minimum month-
 
 
 1244
 ly wage of $30.00 (250,000 Lei) did not keep pace with inflation and did not provide
 a decent standard of living for a worker and family. Prices for utility services were
 fully liberalized in February, leading to dramatic increases in the cost of water and
 heating. However, lists of basic foodstuffs and pharmaceuticals are still subject to
 price ceilings. Housing is no longer subsidized.
 The Labor Code provides for a standard workweek of 40 hours or 5 days, with
 overtime to be paid for weekend or holiday work or work in excess of 40 hours. It
 also includes a requirement for a 24-hour rest period in the workweek, although
 most workers receive 2 days off. Paid holidays range from 18 to 24 days annually,
 depending on the employee's length of service. The law requires employers to pay
 additional benefits and allowances to workers engaged in particularly dangerous or
 difficult occupations.
 Some labor organizations press for healthier, safer working conditions on behalf
 of their members. The Ministry of Labor and Social Protection has established safe-
 ty standards for most industries and is responsible for enforcing them. However, it
 lacks sufficient trained personnel for inspection and enforcement, and employers
 often ignore its recommendations. Although they have the right to refuse dangerous
 work assignments, workers seldom invoke it in practice, appearing to value in-
 creased pay over a safe work environment. Neither the Government nor industry,
 which is still mostly state owned, has the resources necessary to improve signifi-
 cantly health and safety conditions in the workplace.
