ROMANIA
The State Department's report presents a generally accurate view of human rights conditions in Romania during 1991. The report notes improvements in a number of areas, while it underscores significant abuses that warrant a high degree of international concern. The report also contains important shortcomings, which taken together understate the gravity of human rights issues in Romania.
The report correctly points to the events of late September 1991, stating that "a serious setback to the democratic process occurred with the renewed incursion of coal miners into Bucharest. ..." Its description of the three days of rioting, including that miners and others assaulted government headquarters, the Presidential palace and the national television station and besieged Parliament, depicts the severity of the September events. The fact that Prime Minister Roman and his government were removed when President Illiescu accepted the rioters' demands is an important point noted in the report. Bringing down the governing cabinet in response to mob violence set a dangerous precedent. The report should have noted that this action is inconsistent with the spirit of Paragraph 7.9 of the 1989 Document of the Copenhagen Meeting of the Conference on the Human Dimension of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe (Copenhagen Document).
The report states that at least three persons were killed during the September events and that over 400 persons were injured. Casualties are appropriately noted in the section on political and other extrajudicial killing, while broader treatment is given in its discussion of respect for political rights.
The description of the September events, however, omits important background information and fails to offer an analysis of those events in the context of a continuing climate of suspicion and intolerance in Romania. While improvements were made in 1991 on this front, these factors continued to undermine security of the person for large segments of the Romanian population.
294
Romania
The report fails to mention that the September events marked the fourth incursion of miners into Bucharest during 1990-1991. Each time mob violence was used for political ends. Miners and their companions attacked the offices of opposition political parties and groups on January 29 and February 19, 1990. The third incursion resulted in the extreme violence of June 14-15, 1990. The fact that the authorities did not vigorously prosecute persons for these 1990 actions helped create a sense that the miners could carry out mob violence with impunity. The lack of prosecution concerning mob violence in various forms also casts a shadow over the Romanian government's commitment to its obligations to ensure human rights and fundamental freedoms under international human rights agreements to which Romania is a party, such as the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR).
The report raises a concern that the Romanian Intelligence Service (SRI) engages in political surveillance. It fails, however, to mention evidence indicating that elements of Securitate, the former regime's secret police, continue surveillance and intimidation and that such elements play a role in mob violence as well as in ultranationalist activity, which the report indicates could pose a threat to Romanian's democratic institutions. The government's failure to adequately inform the public about the status of former Securitate agents or to investigate abuses of the former regime has contributed to the climate of suspicion in Romania.
The report points to beatings by unknown assailants under suspicious circumstances carried out against political figures and journalists. It also notes threats against such persons and trade unionists. The report, however, does not mention threats against international human rights activists, nor does it draw conclusions concerning the apparent political nature of such actions and their contribution to Romania's climate of suspicion and intolerance.
In a similar vein, the report fails to note that arbitrary arrests are not uncommon. It also does not discuss credible allegations of excessive force used by police against demonstrators in Bucharest on January 11-15, April 22 and during the September 25-28 events. Further, although
295
Romania
the report mentions Decree No. 153/1970, like last year's report, it fails to point out that the Decree's vague provisions for detention of up to six months do not meet minimum guarantees for due process required by international standards. Decree No. 153/1970 leaves open possibilities for wide-spread abuses and undermines Romania's efforts at law reform.
The report presents a discussion of serious human rights violations in 1991 against several of Romania's minority populations. The offenses were particularly harsh against Gypsies, ethnic Hungarians and Jews. Offenses also affected members of the Romanian Greek (Uniate) Catholic Church. In its introduction, the report appropriately notes tensions between ethnic Romanians and ethnic Hungarians, discrimination and violence against Gypsies and alarming anti-Semitism. This correctly emphasizes the importance of human rights abuses against Romania's minorities and highlights these issues of international concern.
The report acknowledges several incidents where Gypsy homes were burned. It notes that police often did not respond and sometimes even participated in the attacks. The report, however, fails to give sufficient detail to portray adequately the violence against Romania's Gypsy population, nor does it draw any inferences from the lack of official action to protect Gypsies.
From late 1990 through late 1991, there were no less than 20 incidents of mob violence against Gypsies in which Gypsies were beaten, more than 100 Gypsy homes were destroyed and as many as five persons died. The report states that at the end of 1991 no person had been arrested for anti-Gypsy violence. It did not point out that several Gypsies were arrested and tried for violent crimes which preceded the anti-Gypsy attacks. The report should have drawn an inference from these facts that justice is not always administered impartially in Romania.
The report correctly notes that tensions between ethnic Romanians and ethnic Hungarians is a matter of serious concern. It appropriately points to increased visibility of chauvinistic, anti-ethnic Hungarian elements, even in parliamentary debate. The events of March 1990 in Tirgu Mures, in which five persons were killed, 269 hospitalized
296
Romania
and over 100 others treated for injuries, illustrates the explosive nature of anti-ethnic Hungarian chauvinism. The report, however, omits any reference to the government's failure to adequately investigate and prosecute those responsible for the violence in Tirgu Mures. It also does not present any analysis of the connection between ultranationalist activity and tendencies represented in Parliament. Without such analysis, the report's reference to the threat posed by extremist groups to democratic institutions rings hollow.
The report highlights the alarming rise of anti-Semitism in ultranationalist publications and notes that several government representatives condemned such actions. It fails to note, however, that Romania Mare, one of the newspapers which consistently carries anti-Semitic propaganda, was awarded a prize by the Minister of Interior in 1991. The report does not mention that Chief Rabbi, Moses Rosen, who is the main spokesperson for Romania's Jewish population, called for a prohibition against anti-Semitic actions under Romania's laws proscribing incitement to racial hatred. It also fails to note anti-Semitic actions included desecration of Jewish cemeteries and synagogues.
Intolerance also reached members of the Romanian Greek (Uniate) Catholic Church. The report provides an accurate synopsis of the dispute among the Uniate Church, the government and the Romanian Orthodox Church regarding the return of Uniate properties seized by the state in 1948. It fails to mention, however, that a denigration campaign has been waged against the Uniates in certain media, including the national television, nor does it mention reported incidents of Uniate clergy and believers being molested, threatened and having their homes attacked. Omission of such information as well as attacks upon Jewish cemeteries and synagogues fails to convey how intolerance has also undermined freedom of religion.
Moreover, the report should have noted that government inaction to protect minorities, including failure to prosecute local authorities who participated in attacks upon Gypsies, runs contrary to Romania's obligations under the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, especially Articles 2.1(a), 4, 5(a)-(b)
297
Romania
and 6, as well as to Romania's commitments under Paragraph 40 of the Copenhagen Document.
The State Department's approach to human rights issues facing women in Romania improved considerably over last year's report. The current report notes that in principle women and men are entitled to equal rights and privileges. The report shows that this, however, is not true in practice. It notes that in the face of economic problems women usually are the first dismissed from employment. Women were particularly affected by the 1991 decline in Romania's living standard. Food shortages had an obvious effect on those with primary responsibility for raising families.
Shortages of medicine and health equipment undoubtedly exacerbated the conditions of numerous women suffering from reproductive-tract infections, a vast portion of which result from drastic actions women were forced to take in the face of state coercion to reproduce imposed upon them by the Ceausescu regime. The report should have pointed out that the legacy of that regime's assaults against women's rights to privacy, family, health, security of the person and life, which were inseparable from Ceausescu's pro-natalist policies, will not be overcome until effective government action is taken to assure adequate medical treatment and a full range of family planning choices.
The report notes that there is no documented evidence of extensive violence against women, including wife beating. It also notes that the government, political parties and press showed little interest in this issue in 1991. Appropriately, the report does not infer that lack of documented evidence or lack of interest points to the non-existence of extensive violence against women. In fact, there is no reason to assume that domestic violence against women is any less common in Romania than in other countries.
The State Department should have drawn an inference from all of these facts that Romania did not adequately meet its obligations to promote and ensure the human rights of women under agreements such as the ICCPR, the International Covenant on Economic, Social and
298
Romania
Cultural Rights, the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women and Paragraph 40 of the Document of the Moscow Meeting of the Conference on the Human Dimension of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe (Moscow Document), each of which applies to Romania.
The report notes guarantees under the new Constitution for freedom of expression and prohibitions against censorship. It also discusses de facto problems in this area. Important background information is omitted, however, leading to an understatement of problems relating to freedom of expression, including press freedoms. The report points to several incidents in 1991 when domestic and foreign journalists were beaten by police. In one series of incidents, more than 20 journalists were beaten by police between January 11-13, 1991. The report notes the government apology and demotion of five officers as a consequence of the January incidents. It also notes that journalists were among those beaten by unknown assailants under suspicious circumstances and among those subjected to anonymous threats, including death threats. These facts should have been described in the context of the violent attacks upon independent and opposition press during the miners' rampage of June 14-15, 1990, and the government's continuing failure to prosecute those responsible.
The report states that the print media published opinions without censorship or interference. There were, however, some incidents of censorship and attempted censorship in Romania during 1991. On January 9, in response to pressure from anti-communist demonstrators organized by the Timisoara Federation of Free Trade Unions in Timis County, the local Prefect, an official appointed by the national government, banned publication of the Renasterea Banateana newspaper. After television reports, a large number of the newspaper's supporters assembled and petitioned the Prefect to lift the ban. The paper resumed publication on January 11. In addition, in March employees at Adevarul, the major newspaper traditionally supportive of the ruling National Salvation Front (NSF), reported attempts to censor it and to prevent it from assuming a more independent posture.
299
Romania
The report notes allegations concerning manipulation of the distribution networks and the supply of newsprint to the disadvantage of newspapers that do not favor the government or the NSF. It also notes that in Romania newsprint is selling above world prices. The report, however, fails to mention that there is a virtual state monopoly over the paper supply. The high price and restricted supply negatively affected Romania's book publishers as well as newspapers.
The report acknowledges allegations that newspapers which are traditionally close to the government and the NSF enjoy better distribution than certain independent and opposition papers. The report should have noted that such allegations include irregular distribution of subscriptions to independent and opposition newspapers, in part because the state's postal employees sometimes refuse to process these subscriptions. It was also alleged in 1991 that some local authorities prevented such newspapers from being distributed even on newsstands outside major cities.
The report notes that Romanian Television, the only nationwide broadcaster in the country, remained under effective state control in 1991. It correctly indicates that Romanian Television was a center of concern regarding freedom of expression and related rights addressed by Article 19 of the ICCPR. Soon after the Ceausescu regime fell, Romanian Television's policies and practices became a target for protest against censorship and abuses of the right of free expression. Such protests recurred, sometimes dramatically, during 1990.
As early as February 1991, Romanian Television canceled its "Viewpoints" program, which gave broadcast access to the opposition, its "Before the Nation" program, which allowed the President and Prime Minister to appear monthly, and reduced its three hours of Hungarian and two hours of German language programs by transferring half of their allotted air-time to the geographically limited second channel, which does not reach large portions of Romania's minority populations. The cuts were criticized as attempts to curtail both free expression and minority rights.
300
Romania
The report notes that viewpoints differing with those of the government did not always get a fair hearing on Romanian Television. The State Department should have noted that the opposition and representatives of ethnic and religious minorities accused Romanian Television of often presenting them in an unfavorable light, which fanned conflicts between such groupings and the general population. The government permitted the Romanian Society for the Foundation of an Independent National Television Company (SOTI) to begin broadcasts on the second channel in December, permitted broadcast of several foreign news programs on the second channel and continued to allow several local stations to broadcast after hours. There are still significant restrictions, however, on freedom of expression in television broadcasting.
The report points to a number of important reforms in Romanian law and mentions Romania's new Constitution no less than 12 times. The adoption of a modern Constitution and the strides taken in law reform are highly significant parts of progress Romania made in the human rights field during 1991. More than 35 legislative enactments affecting human rights passed into law between late 1990 and late 1991. The Constitution of Romania, approved by referendum on December 8, 1991, contains important human rights protections.
The report, however, fails to note important weaknesses in the constitutional provisions and concentrates upon de jure improvements while it does not adequately address serious de facto human rights problems in several areas affected by law reform.
The report provides a generally balanced analysis of the new Constitution and recent legislation affecting arbitrary interference with privacy, family, home and correspondence. It correctly notes national security provisions which diminish protections of these rights. The report, however, states that citizens' privacy rights appear secure "so long as they are not perceived as threats to the established order." While this may illustrate the scope of rights abuses, the rights of citizens who dissent must not be subverted under broad and ill-defined national
301
Romania
security provisions. Tiie report presents an internal inconsistency in this respect.
The report notes several significant advances in law reform affecting criminal procedures, but, as mentioned above, its discussion of excessive use of force by police is not adequate. The report acknowledges that it was not uncommon for persons to be mistreated at the time of arrest and during pretrial detention. It fails, however, to indicate that minimum due process guarantees enacted in 1990 and 1991 were not always met. Detainees, for example, sometimes were not informed of their right to be represented by counsel and sometimes were subjected to ill-treatment aimed at forcing confessions during interrogations.
The report also fails to adequately discuss prison conditions. Overcrowding, shortage of bunks, poor ventilation, inadequate health and sanitary conditions and failure to separate pretrial detainees from convicted persons all contribute to poor conditions in Romania's prisons. Prison wardens to a large extent are the same persons who held these positions under the Ceausescu regime and do not always treat prisoners with the respect for human dignity called for by international standards. The report notes that beatings and use of chains and leg irons are employed as punishment in prisons. From these facts the State Department should have inferred that Romania is not meeting its obligations under Articles 7, 9, 10 and 14 of the ICCPR nor the provisions of the United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners, particularly Rules 8, 9, 31 and 33.
The report fails to address serious concerns regarding limitations upon freedom of expression in Romania's new Constitution and attempted legal reforms. Article 30 of the Constitution guarantees freedom of expression as inviolable, prohibits censorship of every kind and states that no publication may be suppressed. These guarantees are substantial. They are qualified significantly, however, by the last two paragraphs of the article. Paragraph 7 provides that the law shall prohibit, among other things, "defamation of the country." This provision could be construed to restrict criticism of the government.
302
Romania
Paragraph 8 provides that civil liability for published information will be born by the author, editor, producer, owner and organizer, all as provided by law. It states separately that press violations will be specified by law. Such qualifications create the potential for restricting free expression, especially if Romania's draft press laws are taken into account.
In early March 1991, the government introduced a draft press law to criminalize slander and denigration of state authorities, the army and the police. The draft law provided for stiff fines and a sentence of up to six months in prison. The draft law was withdrawn by mid-March, following negotiations between the government and journalists' organizations. Act No. 61, On the Punishment of Acts Contrary to the Standards of Society, Public Peace and Order, passed September 27, also contains provisions that could restrict free expression. Article 2 of this act prohibits, among other things, making threats likely to arouse indignation of the public or to insult its honor or that of public institutions.
The report fails to note certain constitutional shortcomings affecting ethnic minorities. Article 6 of the new Constitution provides for rights to develop minority, ethnic, cultural, linguistic and religious identity, and it affirms the principle of equality and nondiscrimination. Article 59 provides parliamentary representation for minorities that do not win seats in elections. Article 59, however, contains a troubling provision that citizens of an ethnic minority may be represented by only one organization. Article 127 provides that judicial proceedings must be conducted in Romanian. This may create a hardship in locations where a national minority constitutes a majority of the population. Article 127's restriction on use of minority languages is more striking in light of the government order in September requiring that history and geography classes must be taught in Romanian, even in minority-language schools.
The report also omits reference to positive aspects of the new Constitution, such as Article ll's pledge to fulfill Romania's treaty commitments in good faith and its incorporation of ratified treaties into
303
Romania
domestic law. Article 20 provides that constitutional provisions are to be interpreted and applied in accordance with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. It also gives priority to "international regulations" when they conflict with domestic laws affecting fundamental human rights. The provisions of Articles 55 through 57, providing for an ombudsman or People's Attorney, are also positive.
The State Department could not realistically address all aspects of the new Constitution nor all elements of Romanian legal reform. The report's failure to present an analysis of the Constitution's strengths and shortcomings regarding human rights, however, is disappointing.
304
