 ROMANIA
 Romania is a highly centralized Communist state in which the
 Romanian Communist Party, led since 1965 by the country's
 President, Nicolae Ceausescu, directs every significant aspect
 of the country's life. As a practical matter, local officials
 have varying degrees of latitude in the implementation of
 policy at the local level as well as room for abuse of power
 in violation of an array of Constitutional rights.
 In the area of human rights, major discrepancies persist
 between Romania's Constitution, laws, public pronouncements,
 and international commitments on the one hand, and the civil
 liberties and human rights actually allowed by the regime on
 the other. Almost all aspects of life proceed within narrow
 bounds defined by authority without regard to constitutional
 and legal guarantees, although practices vary as a result of
 individual circumstances and attitudes of local officials.
 Political dissent is not tolerated; any appearance of
 deviation from the party's policies is actively repressed.
 Psychological and, to a lesser extent, physical intimidation
 by the ubiquitous security apparatus and other state organs is
 effective in securing conformity, although the costs in terms
 of individual liberties, creativity, and overall economic
 efficiency are apparent.
 Although the Government officially maintains its "principled
 opposition' to emigration, it has allowed increasing numbers of
 departures, mainly under the rubric of "family reunification.'
 Nearly 19,000 Romanians departed for the Federal Republic of
 Germany, the United States, and Israel in 1984. While
 Romania's numerical performance on emigration has greatly
 improved, serious problems remain in respect to procedures.
 Departures--whether for purposes of emigration, family
 reunification, or binational marriage--are strongly
 discouraged by complicated, slow-moving procedures and
 coercive tactics. Potential emigrants often wait several
 years after applying before receiving exit permits. During
 this period, dismissals from job or school, eviction from
 housing, denial of access to medical treatment, and other
 sanctions are common. Notwithstanding constitutional
 guarantees, the regime closely controls religious activities.
 Despite having subscribed to international agreements on human
 rights, the Romanian Government maintains the view that the
 country's human rights situation is a purely internal matter.
 With significant exceptions, however, the Government has
 facilitated private and semi-official factfinding visits, and
 has shown a willingness to discuss an increasing range of
 human rights issues.
 Romania has made measured economic progress over the past four
 decades, evolving from a largely agricultural country to one
 with significant industrial resources. However, economic
 setbacks contributed to difficulties in meeting foreign debt
 payments in 1981-82. Drastic austerity measures have since
 significantly reduced the country's foreign debt, but at the
 cost of hardships for consumers brought about by severe
 cutbacks in supplies of electricity, fuel, and gasoline,
 reductions in imports of food supplies, drugs, and medical and
 other necessities. Rationing of many basic foodstuffs remains
 in force, although supplies appear to have stabilized somewhat
 in late 1984.
 
 
 10'8
 ROMANIA
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 In mid-1984 there were persistent reports that an ethnic
 Hungarian Roman Catholic priest, Father Geza Palfi, had died
 as a result of injuries suffered during repeated beatings
 while he was in the custody of the Romanian secret police,
 allegedly for delivering a sermon critical of the Government.
 The reports were officially denied by the Romanian
 authorities, which maintain that Father Palfi died of cancer
 in April 1984 after having been hospitalized since autumn
 1983. They deny that he had been incarcerated, beaten, or
 physically abused.
 b. Disappearance
 There have been no substantiated reports of politically
 motivated disappearances in 1984, although family and friends
 of persons arrested on political charges are frequently long
 left unaware of their circumstances and whereabouts.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 There have been numerous reports of cruel and degrading
 treatment in Romanian prisons in 1984. The most common
 complaints concern cells which are badly ventilated and poorly
 heated, bad food in extremely small quantities, difficult
 working conditions, long periods of isolation, little or no
 reading materials, overcrowding, and segregation of persons
 deemed *dangerous to the state' because of their religious
 beliefs. Furthermore, persons convicted of political crimes
 are not allowed to work but are forced to spend their
 sentences within the confines of the prison, thus forgoing the
 possibility of reducing their sentences through work outside
 the prison. Acts of violence perpetrated by police
 authoritiesaattempting to obtain information are commonly
 reported. Persons apprehended for illegally trying to cross
 the border often complain of cruel treatment, including
 beatings, inflicted during police custody. Persons detained
 for questioning are often kept for long periods without sleep,
 food, or toilet facilities.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 As a result of the thousands of arbitrary searches of homes,
 cars, and other belongings (Section l.f. below), numerous
 persons are detained every year for varying periods while
 investigations are carried out. There is no provision for
 habeas corpus, and persons have been kept for upwards of
 several days without being allowed to communicate with family
 or a lawyer. Most detainees are held for only a few hours and
 allowed to return to their homes before being reinterrogated
 on succeeding days.
 Detention by the.security police continues to be reported more
 often than arrests, particularly by political and religious
 dissidents. Individuals are usually summoned or taken to local
 local security offices where they are interrogated--often under
 
 
 1079
 ROMANIA
 rigorous conditions--and warned of penalties for their actions,
 with release after varying periods, frequently 2-4 days.
 Although exile is not officially used as punishment, there
 have been unconfirmed reports that members of the large Gypsy
 minority have been escorted by police to the Romanian-Yugoslav
 border and told to leave the country immediately or face a
 prison sentence.
 A form of "forced travel' has been used on occasion against
 Romania's religious activists to impede contacts between
 foreign religious rights activists and Romanian religious
 activists. On several occasions, the security police have
 moved Romanian activists from their domiciles for the duration
 of visits to the country by foreigners believed to be critical
 of the regime's record on religious rights.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 There are numerous allegations that trials are fixed and
 decisions are reached before the evidence is heard. An
 indicted person is considered guilty until proven innocent.
 The majority of the trials in routine civil and criminal cases
 are open to the public and appear to follow legally prescribed
 procedures. By law, trials may also be held behind closed
 doors. Diplomats and other foreigners have had difficulty in
 attending public trials with high local or international
 interest.
 The judiciary is not independent of the Communist Party and
 the Government, and defense attorneys, especially in political
 cases, are often not permitted to provide a full and proper
 defense for their clients.
 It is impossible accurately to estimate the number of political
 prisoners in Romania. Including persons arrested and
 convicted on charges such as *parasitism' (i.e., not having
 visible legal means of support), illegal economic activities,
 trying to cross the borders of the country illegally, and
 demonstrating without permission or protesting against the
 social order, the number is at least several thousand.
 According to unconfirmed reports from one prison in the border
 city of Timisoara, more than 1,500 people in that facility are
 serving sentences for trying illegally to cross the frontier.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Romanian laws and regulations governing the security apparatus
 sanction an extremely high degree of interference with the
 individual. However, the push for total control and
 supervision is mitigated in daily life by the uneven
 application of regulations, which varies considerably from one
 locality to another, and by extensive corruption and bribery
 within the system.
 Deliberate and arbitrary interference with the privacy of the
 family, home, and correspondence is a frequent occurrence.
 Searches are made of automobiles, apartments, private homes,
 persons, and personal effects, without search warrants or
 justification by the authorities that a crime may have been
 committed. Militia checkpoints are located on most roads
 leading out of the cities and at all major highway
 
 40-387 0 - 85 - 69
 
 
 1080
 ROMANIA
 intersections in the countryside. Militiamen arbitrarily stop
 and search vehicles. There have been many reports of persons
 stopped on tram cars and city buses who have been asked for
 identity documents and have had shopping bags and personal
 belongings checked by the authorities.
 The authorities often enter homes on the pretext of looking
 for building code violations, excessive consumption of
 electricity (60 watt bulbs maximum), illegal use of electrical
 appliances, etc. These searches also allow the authorities to
 look for other items such as forbidden books and publications,
 religious materials, or any evidence of 'wrongdoing.'
 Rent codes in the cities tend to encourage another form of
 invasion of privacy: if an apartment tenant cannot afford to
 pay the exorbitant premium rental rate for any space in excess
 of the official 18-square meter maximum per person, the city
 housing authority may lease part of the dwelling to someone
 else without consulting the tenant.
 Invasion of family privacy frequently takes place in the
 schools, where the children are asked about their parents'
 ideas, topics of evening discussions, visitors, etc. This
 information has reportedly been used against the parents when
 it has served the interest of the authorities. In addition,
 there are reports that the Communist Party has applied
 pressure on parents at their workplaces in order to influence
 the activities of their children.
 Violation of privacy of the person has also become common as a
 result of the current anti-abortion campaign. Reports have
 been received of female workers forced to undergo monthly or
 bimonthly pregnancy tests and physical examinations to insure
 that an abortion has not taken place.
 Complaints about interference with both domestic and
 international correspondence are common. Letters to or from
 persons considered 'of interest' often simply never arrive at
 their destination. People have reportedly been questioned by
 the security police about topics discussed in letters which
 were delivered seemingly unopened. On other occasions, people
 have been questioned about statements made in letters sent
 abroad but never received by the addressee.
 International telephone calls are monitored closely.
 Interruptions are common. Telephone conversations of Romanian
 religious and political dissidents are particularly
 monitored. Their calls are frequently cut off, and they are
 often interrogated by security police regarding telephone
 conversations. On occasion, the telephones of these persons
 are out of order while foreign visitors are in Romania and are
 restored to service upon the foreigner's departure.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Freedom of speech and press is severely restricted in Romania,
 despite a full range of constitutional guarantees. Opposition
 to established policies is not permitted, and perceived
 challenges to the system are usually dealt with harshly.
 The Government and party control all information disseminated
 to the public. The government-owned mass media practice
 
 
 1081
 ROMANIA
 self-censorship. For live theater, censorship boards approve
 all new productions before the opening performance. All
 typewriters must be registered with the local police, and
 usage of duplicating machines is strictly regulated in an
 effort to prevent the establishment of an independent
 underground press.
 Western publications are not available to the general public,
 and unauthorized import and distribution of such materials is
 forbidden. Foreign broadcasts in the Romanian language are
 not jammed, however, and serve as the major source of domestic
 and foreign news for the Romanian people.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 The Government attempts to control all group activity in the
 country. No organization independent of government or party
 influence is allowed to exist. Assembly and association
 without permission are usually short-lived and may have severe
 repercussions for those involved. Citizens are strongly
 discouraged from making contact with foreigners, and the law
 requires that all such contacts be reported to the authorities
 within 24 hours.
 Free trade unions are not permitted. Membership in
 government-controlled unions is mandatory for workers in every
 economic sector. Union meetings deal with problems such as
 work safety, productivity, fulfillment of the production plan
 of the enterprise, vacation schedules, procurement of sports
 and cultural tickets, approval of loans to members (union dues
 are used to provide low-interest, long-term loans to members
 supposedly on a non-partisan basis), and other
 non-controversial topics. New government laws and regulations
 are read to the membership, generally without discussion, and
 highlights of recent political happenings are brought up.
 Topics such as wages, reduction of the workweek, and
 additional holidays are not discussed.
 During the 1984 deliberations of the International Labor
 Organization's (ILO) Committee on the Application of
 Conventions and Recommendations, Romanian labor practices were
 criticized on two points: First, members of the Committee
 recalled that the ILO Committee of Experts, in 1981, raised the
 issue that Romanian trade unions are not free to determine
 their constitutions, activities, or programs since they had to
 follow the dictates of one central administration. Second, the
 unions were used mainly to 'mobilize the masses for the
 accomplishment of the party program and policy.' No change in
 either policy was perceived in-the interim. The Committee
 recommended that the Government consider the possibility of
 receiving a direct contacts mission from the ILO to help
 resolve these issues.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 The exercise of freedom of religion is greatly limited despite
 constitutional guarantees. The Communist Party advocates
 atheism, and religious activism by state officials and party
 members is strongly discouraged.
 The Government, through the Department of Cults, recognizes
 and financially supports 14 officially sanctioned faiths and
 denominations including Romanian Orthodox (the largest), Roman
 Catholic, Lutheran, Calvinist, Unitarian, Baptist,
 
 
 1082
 ROMANIA
 Pentecostal, Seventh-Day Adventist, Jewish, and Muslim. The
 Department is responsible for closely monitoring all religious
 groups, licensing clergymen, paying their salaries, and
 overseeing retirement benefits, and serves as the official
 liaison between the Government and church groups. It must
 also approve all requests for new church construction, new
 clergymen, religious publications, and foreign travel by
 church representatives.
 During 1984, fewer cases of harassment were reported, although
 the persecution of members of denominations not recognized by
 the State, such as Jehovah's Witnesses, Mormons, Christian
 Scientists, and Romanian Uniates continues. Individuals are
 still fined and imprisoned for religious practices. Early in
 1984, a Baptist minister was arrested and fined for possession
 and distribution of unauthorized materials (religious
 publications brought into the country from abroad without the
 necessary official permission). In addition, Pentecostals
 reported that many persons were fined for worshiping in private
 homes and unauthorized places. The Romanian Orthodox priest,
 Father Gheorghe Calciu, imprisoned since 1979 for sermons
 critical of the Romanian Government, was released in August
 1984. However, there is continuing concern that he is being
 confined-under house arrest or may be removed from Bucharest
 to prevent contact with human rights activists from abroad.
 In a potentially positive move, the Department of Cults has
 promised additional places in religious seminaries to several
 faiths, including the Baptists, the Calvinists, and the
 Unitarians, though no results are yet apparent.
 The construction and remodeling of churches of certain
 denominations remains a problem. A Pentecostal church in the
 city of Cluj-Napoca was demolished early in 1984 because of
 the unauthorized remodeling of the interior. The country's
 largest Baptist church, located in the center of the city of
 Oradea, has been ordered demolished, ostensibly due to the
 redevelopment of the area where it is located. On the other
 hand, the Department of Cults has approved the construction of
 more new churches in several cities and villages around the
 country than in recent years.
 Bibles and other religious texts are still in short supply in
 Romania, and their importation is strictly regulated. Promises
 have been received from the Department of Cults for a common
 edition of the Bible to be printed in the near future for the
 Baptists, Pentecostals, Seventh-Day Adventists, and Lutherans.
 The number of copies to be printed remains a point of
 contention.
 A few Catholic clergy recently have been permitted to travel
 abroad for training and consultations.
 Anti-Semitic literary works which appeared at the end of 1983
 were removed from book shops in April 1984. One 19th century
 play of an anti-Semitic nature was republished late in the
 year, but President Ceausescu denounced anti-Semitism in his
 November 19 report to the Communist Party's 13th Congress.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 There are no official restrictions placed on travel within
 Romania, with the exceptions of restricted military areas
 
 
 1083
 ROMANIA
 (access prohibited) and border areas (access is carefully
 limited to residents of the areas and those with economic need
 to travel there). For fuel conservation reasons, a national
 ban on driving on alternate Sundays based on license numbers
 reduces the amount of weekend traffic.
 There have been reports of persons forbidden by the
 authorities from traveling to attend certain functions such as
 religious gatherings, funerals, and international events,
 because these were not perceived to be in the Government's
 interest.
 The right of a citizen to change place of residence is
 extremely restricted. Admission of new residents to the
 larger Romanian cities is legally restricted to persons able
 to obtain both housing and employment: since each is
 contingent on assurances of the other, official sponsorship
 for any relocation to the larger cities is effectively
 required. Residence in smaller Romanian cities is easier to
 obtain than in Bucharest and the larger cities.
 Travel outside of Romania, especially outside of the Eastern
 European countries, is a rare privilege. Those who are
 allowed to travel abroad are usually individuals who hold
 relatively senior positions in the party or Government, or
 those who have been able to convince the authorities of their
 intent to return, usually by leaving close family members
 behind. Another group to receive passports are older parents
 traveling to visit children resident abroad.
 The Government does not accept as a right the permanent
 departure of citizens from Romania. In October 1984,
 President Ceausescu said it is the duty of all citizens to
 stay and build a better society for themselves and for their
 children. Those who do express a desire to emigrate continue
 to face a wide variety of punitive discouragements. Some
 prospective emigrants continue to wait years before they are
 issued emigration passports. Once a passport is issued, the
 intended emigrant is no longer allowed to work, own property,
 send children to school, receive public medical benefits,
 pensions, or rationed items, or benefit from any other
 state-subsidized service.
 Many persons leaving Romania for reasons other than family
 reunification are forced to renounce their citizenship. This
 action precludes individuals from repatriation in the future.
 There have been cases reported during the past year of persons
 who have returned to take up residence in Romania without
 incident. Others, who have been turned over to the Romanian
 authorities after leaving the country illegally, have faced
 immediate trials and prison sentences for the offense.
 Though official policy discourages emigration, 1984 saw an
 upturn in the total numbers of persons allowed to leave Romania
 for Israel, the Federal Republic of Germany, and the United
 States. Nearly 19,000 left in 1984. In addition, the waiting-
 time for passports was generally shorter than in the past.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 The individual citizen has almost no voice in shaping public
 policy or choosing public officials, since government at all
 
 
 1084
 ROMANIA
 levels is dominated by the Communist Party, control of which
 is concentrated in the hands of the President, his wife, and
 key figures around them. The views of the rank-and-file party
 membership or the citizenry at large have little apparent
 impact on the autocratic, centralized decisionmaking process.
 Representatives to national and local legislative bodies are
 selected through periodic general elections. Candidates for
 public office are chosen by a mass organization, the Front for
 Socialist Democracy and Unity, which is controlled by the
 Communist Party; the public has no voice in the nominating
 process. Voting is mandatory and enforced by fines.
 The Communist Party is Eastern Europe's largest in per capita
 terms, comprising more than 13.5 percent of the total
 population. At least for much of the rank and file, there is
 little ideological commitment to the principles of
 Marxism-Leninism. Party membership is typically accepted out
 of fear of economic and other sanctions in case of refusal or,
 conversely, the conviction that joining the party will broaden
 professional or educational opportunities, insure tenure, or
 lead to salary increases and other benefits such as better
 housing. The comparatively small group of professional party
 activists undergoes an intensive, progressive indoctrination
 process as its members rise through the ranks. However, even
 in this elite group, evidence of corrupt practices suggests
 that many of those who direct the party are motivated less by
 ideology than by the desire for power, prestige, and
 perquisites. While women and minorities are represented
 proportionally in the Romanian Communist Party, their
 influence--especially of the minority representatives--seems
 to have diminished.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Non-governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 Although Romania professes support for the human rights
 provisions of the Helsinki Accords, the United Nations
 Charter, and other documents dealing with human rights, it
 continues to insist that the lot of its own citizens is an
 internal matter not subject to international discussion or
 examination, and to charge critics with seeking to tarnish
 Romania's image for self-serving ends.
 In February 1984, however, the United States and Romania held
 the latest in a series of government-to-government Human
 Rights Roundtable discussions, a forum for exchange of views
 on religious freedom, civil and political rights, educational
 and cultural possibilities for minority groups, the role of
 trade unions, and economic and social rights, among other
 subjects. Romania has been the only Eastern European country
 to hold such talks with the United States.
 A recent report by the Council of Europe on the situation of
 Romania's large ethnic Hungarian minority was highly critical.
 Also early in 1984, in response to criticism from the U.S.
 Commission on Security and Cooperation in Europe, the Romanian
 Government issued invitations to the Commission to visit
 Romania and "see for themselves.' The Commission was unable
 to accept prior to the annual U.S. Government review of
 Romania's most-favored-nation trading status. Following the
 conclusion of this review, which resulted in renewed
 
 
 1085
 ROMANIA
 most-favored-nation status for Romania, the Commission has
 sought several times without success to take up the Romanian
 invitation, according to its report.
 Amnesty International's 1984 report (covering 1983) expressed
 concern about the imprisonment of prisoners of conscience,
 allegations of mistreatment following arrest on political
 charges, and instances in which defendants on political
 charges were not accorded fair trials. Amnesty also noted
 harsh prison conditions and the increasing use of the death
 penalty. Freedom House rates Romania *not free."
 ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND CULTURAL SITUATION
 The World Bank designates Romania as a developing country.
 Based on a population of 22.7 million and the current official
 rate of exchange, per capita gross national product was $2,558
 in 1982, according to the World Bank. From a largely agrarian
 economy--at one time a major supplier of grain to Central
 Europe--Romania reached its present semi-industrialized state
 by maintaining extremely high rates of industrial investment
 financed by earnings of agriculture and the petroleum industry
 and also by foreign borrowing and restricting consumption. In
 1984, the national economy continued to confront rising costs,
 energy shortages, and stringent efforts by the Government to
 reduce the country's foreign debt as quickly as possible.
 Both agriculture and industry have suffered noticeably during
 1984 from lack of needed imports.
 According to Romanian law, all land belongs to the state. In
 1980, 60.6 percent of agricultural land were used by
 cooperatives, 30 percent by state-owned farm enterprises, and
 9.4 percent by private citizens. Other property, including
 personal property and housing, may be privately owned, although
 there are a number of restrictions on the right to property.
 In early 1984, the Government placed controls over production
 on private plots as well. Businesses are state- owned, except
 for small service or handicraft shops.
 The Constitution guarantees employment to all citizens and
 equal pay for equal work. Unemployment is a crime ('social
 parasitism'). Official statistics show full employment, though
 in reality chronic underemployment exists, especially in
 agriculture and depressed industrial sectors, and
 *featherbedding' is common. A new wage scheme adopted in 1984
 sets pay as a function of plan fulfillment, a practice which
 has led in several instances to thinner pay envelopes as
 factories, short of needed inputs, failed to meet their
 targets.
 Romania provides free medical care for all its citizens.
 According to 1984 statistics, average Romanian life expectancy
 is 71.6 years. In 1984, infant mortality was 27 per 1,000
 live births. Romanian statistics claimed 9.3 hospital beds
 per 1,000 inhabitants, and one physician per 507 inhabitants
 in 1984. Ten years of education is compulsory and provided
 without charge by the state. Beginning with the third year of
 secondary school, examinations are required for placement in
 the limited openings at both the secondary and university
 levels. Evening courses and work-study programs are available
 to students at technical institutes.
 An official Romanian government estimate in July 1982 reported
 an average per capita intake of 3,300 calories. The
 
 
 1086
 ROMANIA
 Government's report called for a reduction to 2,800-3,000
 calories per day by 1985. This program has not been officially
 enacted, despite the adoption in summer 1984 by the national
 legislature of the proposed "scientific diet.' Foreign sales
 of foodstuffs to earn hard currency and the new scientific
 diet have led some to predict the likelihood of dietary
 deficiencies for the elderly, the housebound, and workers in
 rural factories dependent on badly-supplied local foodstores.
 Rationing of basic foodstuffs continues, varying in
 application from county to county, with bread rationing
 reportedly having been introduced in some counties earlier in
 1984. As of the third quarter of 1984, the consumer's
 situation in Romania was relatively better than in 1983.
 Over the past two decades, the Government has made a
 determined effort and invested large sums to provide adequate
 housing for its urban population. As a result, new apartment
 block developments abound throughout the country, and the
 practice of several families sharing apartments, kitchens, and
 toilets--common only a few years ago--is disappearing.
 In Romania, women are constitutionally guaranteed the same
 rights and privileges as men. The Government has been seeking
 to upgrade the role of women in the society with specific
 policies in the areas of education, access to employment, and
 compardble wages. As a result, women are employed in
 virtually all sectors of the economy, and there is equal
 opportunity in education, but at the senior levels of
 responsibility and authority they appear in far smaller
 numbers. Many women are still found in the most menial jobs,
 such as agricultural stoop labor, street cleaning, and snow
 removal. Because of the anti-abortion campaign, many women
 must undergo periodic pregnancy tests to insure that an
 abortion has not occurred
 According to official Romanian figures, the country's
 population includes about 2.7 million members of ethnic
 minorities, of whom 1.7 million are ethnic Hungarians or
 Magyars. Hungarian emigre sources, however, generally
 estimate the Magyar population at 2-2.5 million. Hungarians,
 Germans, Gypsies, and members of many smaller groups
 constitute about 12 percent of the total population. The
 Constitution forbids any discrimination on the basis of ethnic
 background. Although the Government claims it does not
 discriminate against the minorities, there nonetheless are
 limitations on minority groups' free expression of their
 cultural heritage. Government efforts to centralize and to
 economize by combining educational, social, and cultural
 activities frequently affect minority groups
 disproportionately and are often interpreted as the
 "Romanianization" of these groups. For example, the mergers
 of schools, theaters, or other such institutions often result
 in the loss of the minority ethnic groups' characteristics as
 the institutions become predominantly Romanian. This movement
 is viewed, particularly by ethnic Hungarians, as part of a
 policy of cultural extinction. Moreover, strict government
 control of private organizations which might be dedicated to
 the preservation of ethnic cultural practices, as well as
 government limitations on minority language newspapers and
 radio and television broadcasts, are also seen by members of
 the minorities as discriminatory.
 
 
 1087
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: ROMANIA
 1982     1983     1984
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL...         0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS .............. .... 0.0       0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 A.AID ....   ............. ..... 0.0     0.0      0.0
 LOANS ..............   ... 0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 (SEC.SUPP.ASSIST.)...         0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.FOOD FOR PEACE .......        0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS ..............   ... 0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE I-TOTAL ..........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS .....        0.0      0.0      0.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR .....        0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE II-TOTAL .........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.RELIEF.EC.DEV & WFP.         0.0      0.0      0.0
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY .....        0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST...         0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS .............. .... 0.0       0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 PEACE CORPS ......        0.0      0.0      0.0
 NARCOTICS ........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 OTHER ............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL...         0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS .............. .... 0.0       0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 A.MAP GRANTS ..........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.CREDIT FINANCING ....        0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.INTL MIL.ED.TRNG ....        0.0      0.0      0.0
 O.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK...         0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS ........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. & MIL...         0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS .............. ....  0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ............      .. 0.0      0.0      0.0
 OTHER US LOANS ..........        0.0     28.4      0.0
 EX-IM BANK LOANS .......        0.0      0.0      0.0
 ALL OTHER .............. .... 0.0      28.4      0.0
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1982     1983     1984     1946-84
 TOTAL ........   322.9      2.0      0.0   1809.9
 IBRO             321.5      0.0      0.0   1788.0
 IFC                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 IDA                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 IOB                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 ADS                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 AFOB               0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 UNOP               1.4      2.0      0.0     21.9
 OTHER-UN           0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 EEC                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 
 
 1088
