Romania
The State Department's report presents a generally accurate and balanced characterization of human rights conditions in Romania during 1992. There are, however, important shortcomings in the report's description of Romania's human rights problems, which leave a more optimistic impression of the situation than is warranted.
As a general matter, the State Department's reference in the introduction to the Romanian government's expressed willingness to comply with "Western" human rights norms injects the notion of cultural relativism instead of a clear commitment to the universality of human rights.
The report appropriately notes significant advances in Romania's human rights conditions during the year. It points to the February local elections and the September presidential and parliamentary elections, which were conducted in an atmosphere substantially improved over the May 1990 elections. It reports that incidents of mass violence which marked 1990 and 1991 did not transpire in 1992. In addition, it describes important legal reforms enacted during the year.
The report also appropriately points to pivotal human rights problems of continuing concern, including: discrimination and ethnic tensions; government acts and omissions that perpetuate an atmosphere of suspicion; lack of adequate protections in practice for prisoners and detainees; pressures on freedom of the press; and economic problems leading to social unrest. The report fails to describe sever-
al important problems with sufficient detail to accurately convey the gravity of the issues involved. It omits a number of important facts and incidents. It also frequently fails to draw appropriate inferences and conclusions, and it sometimes concentrates on law reforms without noting actual practice that ignores the reforms.
The report correctly emphasizes that, despite irregularities and allegations of electoral abuses, the results of both the February nation-wide elections for local offices and the September elections for the presidency and the national legislature were accepted by the Romanian people and the international community as depicting the will of the electorate. In addition, the elections demonstrated a general improvement in the exercise of internationally recognized civil and political rights as compared to the 1990 elections. For example: there was a marked decrease in election related violence and intimidation which undermined the freedoms of association and assembly in the 1990 elections; opposition political parties enjoyed improved access to broadcast media and generally were more free to build and spread their messages by exercising freedom of expression; and domestic election observers were allowed to operate in the February 1992 elections in accordance with the spirit of Paragraph 8 of the Copenhagen Document of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe (Copenhagen Document).
While the report mentions that there were problems affecting domestic observers in the September elections, it should
312
Romania
have pointed out that it took concerted efforts by both domestic and international organizations to secure any role for domestic observers in the September voting. The participation of more than 7,000 Romanian observers in each of the 1992 elections represented a significant step by Romanian nongovernmental organizations in monitoring the exercise of electoral rights secured by Article 21 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and Article 25 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), both of which apply to Romania. The attempts by certain elements in Parliament to block the efforts of the Pro-Democracy Association, the League for the Defense of Human Rights (LADO), the Independent Romanian Society for the Protection of Human Rights (SIRDO), and the Association of Former Political Prisoners to mobilize election monitors for the September elections illustrated that the Romanian government's willingness to implement its commitments under the Copenhagen Document is less than absolute.
The report understates the importance of the February elections, in which the then governing party (the National Salvation Front) lost the mayor's post in seven of the country's 11 largest cities and carried less than 34% of the local council seats. This represented the first time that the governing party was confronted with sharing power. The report also should have noted that power at the local level is largely concentrated in the hands of prefects appointed by the central government rather than with elected local councils and mayors. Whether the central government will respond in good faith to the population's exercise of electoral rights will be tested by how it and
the prefects treat policy initiatives of the local elected officials.
The report notes that the results of the September parliamentary elections gave President lliescu's party (now the Democratic National Salvation Front or DNSF) only about 28% of the parliamentary vote. This resulted in the formation of a minority government of technocrats and DNSF ministers. The report should have emphasized that in such circumstances the government could be removed rather easily by a parliamentary vote of no confidence. This indicates a potential for political instability in the coming period, especially in light of Romania's deteriorating economy, marked by continuing declines in gross domestic product as well as industrial production and continuing increases in inflation and unemployment. The four violent incursions of thousands of coal miners and others into the capital during 1990 and 1991 illustrate the potential threat to human rights posed by unstable political and economic conditions in Romania.
The report addresses the February 12 Law on the Organization and Operation of the Romanian Intelligence Service (SRI). It points to the law's provisions for parliamentary oversight of SRI as well as loopholes in the law, including the lack of parliamentary budget controls and broad provisions allowing SRI to justify otherwise prohibited activities - including engaging in political acts -- simply by claiming national security concerns. The report further notes that "national security" is defined very broadly by the July 29, 1991 National Security Law. In light of the concern expressed in last year's report that SRI engaged in politically
313
Romania
motivated surveillance, the report should have drawn an inference that the broad latitude provided in the laws on SRI and on national security do not sufficiently discourage or inhibit SRI from conducting politically motivated activities in the future.
The report adeptly states that: "The legacy of abuses carried out by the Com-munist-era intelligence service, Securi-tate, continued to haunt Romanian society in 1992." The report also points out that unauthorized monitoring of telephone communications and correspondence "persisted in an atmosphere of suspicion." It should have noted concerns that such activities are committed by former employees or collaborators of Securitate, which may still be operating in the country. The report failed to address the lack of tangible headway in investigating and prosecuting grave human rights abuses perpetrated prior to Romania's popular uprising of December 1989. The report also failed to note the relatively small number of prosecutions for human rights violations that occurred during the December 1989 events.
The report does state that Securi-tate's files were turned over to SRI and are not available to the public without the approval of the SRI director, with certain exceptions, for 40 years. The report, however, fails to note that the government still has not provided the Romanian public with an adequate accounting of what happened to former Securitate operatives. It also does not mention the demand from human rights organizations for a "trial of communism," which would be inseparable from prosecuting those responsible for grave human rights abuses
under the former regime.
The report omits any mention of 1992's "files war," concerning Securitate files leaked to the press in apparent attempts to discredit certain critics of the government. SRI disclaimed responsibility for the leaks, which added to the sense that Securitate operatives may still be functioning. The report should have drawn the conclusion that inaction by the Romanian government in investigating and holding accountable those responsible for the abuses of the past regime and its failure to account adequately for the disposition of Securitate operatives each reinforces a sense that human rights violations may still be carried out with impunity.
The report notes that incidents of intimidation and harassment of journalists and political activists were not effectively addressed by the government. It fails to state, however, that the government has also failed to effectively address incidents of mass violence by the miners and others in Bucharest during 1990-1991 as well as violence against ethnic minorities. The report should have noted that such inaction further adds to the sense that human rights may be violated with impunity. Moreover, it should have added that failure to investigate and to prosecute human rights violations, past and present, demonstrates that Romania is not yet fulfilling its commitments under international law, including under Article 2 of the ICCPR, to ensure human rights and fundamental freedoms to all individuals under its jurisdiction.
The report presents a good description of law reforms in 1992 on restructur-
314
Romania
ing the court system as well as reforms affecting criminal procedures applicable to pretrial detainees and convicted prisoners. It should also have pointed out that the military prosecutor continues to exercise sole competence for bringing actions concerning police abuse. The report should have noted calls to place the police under civilian jurisdiction and to remove their military status.
The report understates abuses affecting detainees and ignores serious de facto problems in these areas. This is disappointing in light of the reports issued by Helsinki Watch entitled Prison Conditions in Romania (June 1992) and Lockups in Romania (January 1993). The United Nations Human Rights Commission's Special Rapporteur for Romania noted significant problems affecting prisoners and pretrial detainees in his 1992 report, which makes the State Department's characterizations all the more disappointing. In addition, the United Nations Committee Against Torture, during Romania's 1992 appearance before the Committee, noted the considerable de jure advances made by the Romanian government but questioned Romania's representatives about abuses of detainees and prisoners.
The State Department report cites allegations of a "small number" of detainees being beaten while in police custody. The Helsinki Watch lockups report found, however, that: "According to human rights lawyers and arrestees, the most systematic mistreatment of arrestees occurs at police stations immediately following their arrests. Virtually all of the 86 inmates whom Helsinki Watch interviewed in depth reported having been beaten during police interrogations before
arriving at the lockups." Lockups in Romania are jails that primarily house pretrial detainees.
The Helsinki Watch report also found that Romania's safeguards against physical abuse of detainees at police stations and in the lockups "have virtually no practical effect." In addition, it found violations of the UN Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners concerning: use of isolation and instruments of restraint as punishment; deprivation of visits, packages from home and correspondence; denial of effective communications with lawyers; lack of proper ventilation; chronic overcrowding; and lack of outdoor exercise and standards for personal hygiene, which in combination place pressures on pretrial detainees that effectively deny them the presumption of innocence.
Helsinki Watch's report on prison conditions found, among other abuses, that physical restraints are used as punishment and that prisoners are subjected to degrading treatment such as having their heads shaved and being forced to stand with their faces against the wall in the presence of prison officials or visitors, even though these practices are officially banned. These are blatant violations of the UN Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners. The State Department should have noted troubling allegations of abuses affecting detainees and prisoners and should have stated directly that the Romanian government has not met its obligations under United Nations standards and international treaty obligations, including under the ICCPR and the Convention Against Torture, and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treat-
315
Romania
ment or Punishment, to effectively prevent such practices and to hold accountable police and detention officials who perpetrate such abuses.
Equally disappointing is the report's statement that "in practice" the Penal Code requirement that defendants be informed of their right to defense counsel is respected. As noted in the UN Special Rapporteur's 1992 report and in the Helsinki Watch reports, there is a widespread failure of police to inform detainees of their due process rights, including their right to be represented by legal counsel. In practice, substantial evidence indicates that the police systematically disregard informing detainees of their right to counsel. Moreover, it appears that often detainees are not informed of their right to legal counsel until periods of up to several months have passed. The report should have noted the differences between de jure reforms and de facto practices in this regard and noted that in practice the Romanian government is not yet ensuring defendants the minimum guarantees required by Articles 9 and 14 of the ICCPR.
The report presents an incisive description of freedom of expression in Romania during the year. It gives a balanced and concise analysis of some of the strengths and weaknesses of the 1991 Constitution's Article 30 and presents specific examples where freedom of expression was violated. The report also describes the negative effects of economic conditions on the printed press and book publishers.
The report notes the creation of the National Audio Visual Council (NAC) and
the controversy over its failure to award local television operating licenses to existing local television stations that criticized the government. Recognizing that state television (RTV) remains the sole nationwide TV broadcaster, politically motivated denials of licenses to such local broadcast groups would silence freedom of expression protected by Article 19 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and Article 19 of the ICCPR. The report correctly implies that the NAC's compromise of frequency-sharing should be implemented to allow such local broadcasting to continue.
The report provides a relatively accurate description of the role of the NAC, the Parliament and the Central Elections Bureau in allocating political party and candidate broadcast time to disseminate election campaign messages. The report's characterization of broadcast news coverage of the election campaigns as "careful and restrained" and its statement that most observers concluded "bias was not significant" paint too positive a picture of RTV's campaign coverage. International election observers at both the February and September elections expressed concern about bias in RTV's selection of stories and tone of coverage which favored President lliescu and his party. While television campaign news coverage improved over that of the May 1990 elections, the report should have reached a conclusion that biased coverage hindered the full and free exercise of electoral rights in the 1 992 elections.
Further, the report should have noted that although the Law on the Broadcast Media of May 21 contains provisions against censorship of any kind, it also
316
Romania
proscribes defamation of the country and the nation. This law also prohibits publication of classified information which might damage national security. These provisions have been criticized as providing an easy basis for silencing government opposition. Concern also has been raised over the appointment to the NAC of persons considered partisan toward the DNSF -- a point highlighted by the allegations of political motivations in the denial of licenses to local broadcasting groups. In addition, while the printed press operated free of direct censorship in Romania, the new draft law on the printed press, taken up in the parliament in June, was dropped largely due to criticism concerning its restrictions on press freedoms. When these points are considered together with intimidation and attacks against journalists, including those noted in the report, it becomes clear that freedom of expression in the media is still not adequately secure in Romania.
The report presents a forceful description of human rights abuses affecting Romania's ethnic and religious minorities. Important background information and factual analysis, however, is omitted which is necessary to depict the gravity of the threat to human rights posed by inter-ethnic tensions in the country. The report notes that the Tirgu Mures municipal court disqualified, on spurious legal grounds, the mayoral candidate of the Hungarian Democratic Union of Romania (UDMR), an ethnic-Hungarian political organization. The report should have pointed out that this action was reminiscent of the politically motivated disqualifications of candidates in Tirgu Mures in the May 1990 elections and reflects the intense inter-ethnic stress that led in
March 1990 to large-scale violence in Tirgu Mures.
The report notes that the ultra-nationalist organization, Vatra Roman-easca, along with the Mures Electoral Commission, maneuvered to postpone the special Tirgu Mures mayoral election. It should also have stated that these organizations as well as the Romanian National Unity Party (PUNR), which was founded by Vatra Romaneasca members, and others joined these efforts, including attempts to block the UDMR from offering a mayoral candidate in that election. The report noted that ultimately the UDMR's candidate won on May 24 with approximately 57% of the vote. The report should have pointed out that ethnic Hungarians, who are a minority in the city, were joined by ethnic Romanians to produce the UDMR victory. The ultranation-alist candidate of the Democratic Mures Alliance (originally the Vatra Romaneasca Alliance) received almost 40% of the vote, indicating the seriousness of inter-ethnic divisions in Tirgu Mures.
The report should have addressed human rights concerns resulting from the substantial electoral showings of ultra-nationalist parties, PUNR and the Party of Greater Romania (PRM), which was formed by the originators of the ultra-nationalist weekly publication, Romania Mare. The report states that the PUNR candidate, Gheorghe Funar, was elected mayor of Cluj, Transylvania's capital. Funar also was the PUNR candidate for president in the September elections, where he received 10.87% of the vote. Together PUNR and PRM received more than 11 % of the vote in September's parliamentary elections. If the votes for
317
Romania
the Socialist Labor Party (PSM), successor to the Ceausescu-era Romanian Communist Party, which also advanced ultra-nationalist candidates, and its electoral alliance are included, the nationalists almost reached 15% of the parliamentary vote. That vote produced a significant ultranationalist presence in parliament, which is bolstered by certain elements in the mainstream parties. Moreover, President lliescu received the bulk of his additional ballots in the 1992 run-off elections from the voters who originally backed Funar's candidacy.
The report's description of transgressions against internationally recognized human rights committed by the mayor of Cluj, Gheorghe Funar, points to the significance of the inroads made by ultra-nationalists. The report notes that Funar prevented the convening of an April conference on local administration, which was organized by the UDMR and a Dutch foundation. A few days later, on April 28, Funar issued a decree that anyone wishing to organize a meeting must notify the mayor's office three days in advance and identify the organizers and participants as well as the meeting's place, purpose and duration. Funar also blocked the Soros Foundation for an Open Society from holding a meeting in Cluj until observers from the mayor's office were allowed to attend. In June he banned a UDMR protest rally, and in December he banned another protest rally by ethnic Hungarians and their supporters. The report noted that Romanian and international human rights groups protested these actions as infringing the right to peaceful assembly. This right is protected by Article 21 of the ICCPR, Article 36 of Romania's 1991 Constitution and Law
No. 60/1991 concerning assemblies on private property.
As the report notes, Funar's actions also infringed the freedom of expression, especially in using the Hungarian language. The report did not mention that in May Funar banned a Hungarian-language cable television station in Cluj because he was concerned that it would be used by Hungarian separatists to send secret messages. As the report noted, he also banned the use of Hungarian and bilingual signs in public places, including business and street signs. The report failed to mention that businesses were fined for displaying Hungarian language signs. Although the Cluj county court ruled that the fines were illegal, Funar continued attempts to impose the ban in disregard of the court's decision. This points to a weakness in the present system, which appears to allow local officials to commit abuses with impunity. The report also should have noted that the PUNR mayor in Baia Mare followed Funar's lead and banned signs in languages other than Romanian and meetings that did not have prior approval.
The report also notes the removal of two ethnic Hungarian prefects from Tran-sylvanian counties in 1992 as a result of pressures from ultranationalists, and it points to vandalism of predominately ethnic Hungarian churches in Satu Mare as further evidence of ethnic tensions. The report, however, failed to mention that police actions shortly after the February elections also added to ethnic tensions. Predominantly ethnic-Hungarian churches and private residences were searched by police in two villages near Cluj and one near Gheorgheni, under the
318
Romania
pretext of attempting to find hoarded food and weapons. When considered together, the numerous incidents that transpired in 1992 demonstrate the continuing explosive potential of inter-ethnic tensions. The report should have drawn an inference that the Romanian government should take affirmative steps to meet its treaty obligations to ensure that minorities are free to enjoy rights and freedoms protected under the ICCPR and the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination.
The report's description of the various forms of discrimination faced by Gypsies (Roma) in Romania is incisive. The report draws on the findings of the International Labor Organization (ILO) concerning systematic discrimination against Roma. The report should have noted the ILO's finding that direct discrimination against Roma is probably aggravated by defamatory campaigns in the mass media treating Roma as scapegoats, who are responsible for the ills of Romanian society. The report appropriately notes the vigilante-style attacks against Roma communities since December 1989. Rather than stating that there have been "several" of these attacks during this period, the report should have noted that there have been more than two dozen, including at least four during 1992, with a total of more than 200 homes destroyed. Such background information is important for a proper perspective on the report's recognition that charges were brought against perpetrators of one of the more violent attacks as well as the government's efforts to investigate two others. The report also notes that no particular resettlement assistance is being provided to Roma and
others, who are being repatriated from Germany under an agreement between the two countries. The report should have stated that refugee associations viewed the agreement as a discriminatory measure against Roma who make up 60% to 70% of the Romanians being repatriated.
The report's description of human rights conditions facing women in Romania, though rather scant, continued to improve this year. The report notes that there are few women in the Parliament and none in the governing Cabinet. In fact, women are not as well represented in the political hierarchy as they were under the Ceausescu regime. The report also notes that women are usually the first to be dismissed from employment during economic downturns and in the face of "traditional" views of women's roles in society, as is the circumstance in Romania. Official statistics bear out that women make up a disproportionately large number of the registered jobless. The report correctly states that: "There is little official initiative on issues affecting women, including family planning, crimes against women, and domestic violence." This formulation appropriately implies that violence against women, including domestic violence, is no less a problem in Romania than in other countries.
The lack of family planning education and alternatives to abortion as a means of contraception poses an increased health risk to Romanian women. This is particularly true in the face of Romania's deteriorating economic conditions which increase the difficulties of providing for children. At present, the rate of abortions
319
Romania
to live births in Romania is three to one, with many women compelled to seek repetitive abortions. In addition, a large number of women continue to suffer from chronic reproductive tract infections, largely resulting from drastic actions they were forced to take to avoid the coerced reproduction policies of the Ceausescu regime. The report should have drawn an inference from these conditions that Romania is not taking adequate steps to promote and ensure the human rights of women as required by its treaty obligations specified in the ICCPR, the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, and the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women.
320
