 ROMAN IA
 Romania is a highly centralized Communist state. The Communist
 Party, led since 1965 by Romania's current President, Nicolae
 Ceausescu, directs every significant aspect of life in the
 country.
 In the area of human rights, there are major discrepancies
 between Romanian law and the nation's international commitments
 on the one hand and the Government's internal practices on the
 other. Despite a full range of constitutional guarantees, all
 liberties may be exercised only within the narrow limits
 established by the party and state. Political dissent and
 deviation from the party's policies are not tolerated. The use
 of intimidation, and, to a lesser extent, physical pressure to
 discourage such activities persists. The population is
 convinced of the omnipotence, capriciousness, and
 relentlessness of the Government's extensive security apparatus.
 The Government actively discourages emigration but generally
 allows more of its citizens to emigrate, mainly for family
 reunification, than does any other Eastern European country.
 Emigrants often wait for years and experience harassment or
 other difficulties before being allowed to leave. The
 Government also exercises close supervision over religious and
 cultural activities. The official Romanian response to
 international expressions of concern regarding Romania's human
 rights practices generally has been limited to favorable action
 in some individual cases.
 Romania, with an annual per capita gross national product of
 approximately $2,100, has made considerable economic progress
 over the last four decades, evolving from a largely
 agricultural country to one with a significant industrial
 sector. However, Romania has suffered serious economic
 setbacks in recent years, and in the last three years the
 standard of living has declined. Since 1982, Romania has
 rescheduled much of its foreign debt and is now repaying both
 interest and principal on that debt.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Unlawful or Arbitrary Deprivation of Life
 There are occasional allegations but no documented cases of
 officially-inspired, unlawful or arbitrary deprivations of life.
 b. Disappearance
 There have been several uncorroborated reports of
 politically-motivated disappearances this year, mainly from
 among the ethnic Hungarians of Transylvania. Moreover, a
 number of disappearance cases from the past remain unresolved
 (see Section 4).
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 A number of incidents of torture in Romanian prisons, some of
 which have been confirmed by the individuals involved, have
 been reported. Conditions of confinement in Romania remain
 poor, with overcrowding, substandard sanitary facilities,
 (1079)
 
 30-231 0 - 84 - 69
 
 
 1080
 inadequate diets, long working hours, minimal health care and
 long periods of isolation a common and increasing phenomenon.
 The Government's practice of "forced domicile" remains in
 effect, although there were fewer cases reported this year than
 in the past. "Forced domicile," which rarely involves
 incarceration and is generally considered a more lenient form
 of punishment than imprisonment, may require work without wages
 and transfer to a workplace far from the convict's home. The
 Government continues the practice of using psychiatric
 hospitals to impose unnecessary medical treatment upon
 political and religious dissidents and other disaffected
 persons.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention or Exile
 Detention by the security forces continues to be reported more
 often than arrest, particularly by religious and political
 dissidents. Individuals are usually summoned or taken to local
 security offices where they are interrogated, warned of the
 penalties for their actions, and after varying intervals,
 released. The individual may undergo long periods of
 questioning under rigorous conditions and occasionally suffer
 physical abuse. There is no legal provision for habeas corpus
 or the presence of a lawyer. Detention without charge for
 short periods (2-4 days) is common, and there is no effective
 legal remedy for those held without charge.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The judiciary, like all other elements of the Romanian
 Government and society, is subordinate to the party and the
 Government. By law, trials may be held behind closed doors, a
 practice often employed in the cases of those considered likely
 to draw national or international attention, and may be begun
 and completed within 48hours. Defense attorneys often are
 given inadequate information and little time to prepare their
 defenses or are provided the information too late to make use
 of it. Government officials have gone to great lengths to
 prevent diplomats and other foreigners from attending "public"
 trials. The vast majority of criminal and civil trials which
 do not have political overtones appear, on the whole, to follow
 the procedures established under Romanian law.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Dissent against government-established norms is met with harsh
 reprisal. The security forces pressure people to inform on
 neighbors, family, and friends, which tends to inhibit parents
 from teaching their cultural, ethnic and religious heritage to
 their children. Written correspondence and telephone calls,
 particularly those involving people outside of the country, are
 subject to monitoring. Membership in the Romanian Communist
 Party, although not officially required, is a prerequisite to
 promotion beyond the junior levels in many fields and is
 important to job security.
 Despite the constitutional guarantee of the inviolability of
 the home, there continue to be reports of forced entry without
 warrants. Burglaries of homes after official warnings are
 still being reported, particularly by political and religious
 dissidents. There also has been an increase in the number of
 reports from foreign visitors to Romania that their hotel rooms
 and effects have been searched without authorization.
 
 
 1081
 Verbal threats, psychological coercion, and physical abuse by
 the Government's security forces remain common occurrences.
 There has been an increase in the number of reports of official
 harassment of citizens who maintain contact with foreigners and
 also of foreigners visiting Romania. Many such incidents
 involving foreigners have taken place at the country's
 borders. Others have resulted from the close surveillance
 given to some foreign visitors in Romania. In the cases
 reported, the foreigner is often detained, interrogated, and
 may be warned against contact with Romanian citizens. The
 Romanians involved are often harassed and mistreated by the
 officials for some time after the incident.
 The Government continues the practice of discharging people
 from their jobs for religious, political, or social
 non-conformity and later arresting them for "parasitism" (not
 having a job).
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 The Government and party effectively direct the information
 disseminated to the public, since they own and control the mass
 media. To control further the flow of printed material, the
 Government imposed a regulation in March requiring that all
 citizens register their typewriters with the local police and
 obtain permission from the police to keep typewriters already
 in their possession or to purchase new ones. The regulation
 also severely restricts the ownership and use of duplicating
 machines and related materials.
 Western and most other foreign publications are rarely
 available to the public, and unauthorized importation and
 distribution of such printed matter is forbidden. Substantial
 fines and prison sentences have been levied against those found
 guilty of this offense, particularly in cases involving Bibles
 and other religious materials.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Assembly and association without official permission are
 usually short-lived and can have severe repercussions for those
 involved. The Government attempts to control all group
 activity in the country. No organization independent of
 Government or party influence is permitted to exist. Citizens
 are strongly discouraged from making contact with foreigners,
 and the law requires that all such contacts be reported to
 authorities within 24 hours.
 Free trade unions are not allowed to exist. Unions, like all
 other organizations, are an adjunct of the Government and the
 Communist Party and serve as an instrument of control over the
 work force. An independent trade union movement, the Free
 Trade Union of Romanian Workers, was established briefly in
 1979 before being suppressed. Its leaders have been imprisoned
 or placed under police surveillance, while some have been
 exiled abroad. Local incidents of labor unrest, including
 attempts to conduct strikes, have been quickly and sharply
 repressed since that time.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Freedom of religion is limited in Romania, despite
 constitutional guarantees; both the party and state advocate
 
 
 1082
 
 atheism. Participation in religious activities by the populace
 is strongly discouraged in general and forbidden to party and
 most state officials. The Government, nevertheless, does
 recognize and financially support fourteen denominations and
 faiths, including Romanian Orthodox, Roman Catholic, Lutheran,
 Calvinist, Unitarian, Baptist, Pentecostal, Seventh Day
 Adventist, Jewish and Muslim congregations or groups.
 The Constitution states that the mode of operation and
 functioning of religious denominations shall be regulated by
 law. A government organization, the Department of Cults,
 monitors the activities of the recognized faiths and pays the
 salaries of their clergymen. The religiously active, even
 those belonging to recognized denominations, are often subject
 to arbitrary detention, demotions, firings, loss of salary,
 ostracism, and other forms of harassment because of their
 religious activities. Those who openly oppose government
 regulation of and restrictions on religious activities, notably
 some congregations of the evangelical Christian denominations,
 are singled out for particularly harsh treatment. Penalties
 for ignoring or violating regulations are severe.
 Church buildings have been demolished for exceeding the
 dimensions stipulated in building permits by as little as one
 meter and for other minor infractions. Families have been
 evicted from their homes for holding religious meetings or
 services without permission. Failure by the Government to
 respond to requests for permits to build, repair, and modernize
 church buildings is a common complaint of many of the smaller
 churches. Religious groups often are frustrated by
 bureaucratic double-dealing, such as the granting of permission
 by one government office for the renovation of a building to be
 used as a church, followed by the refusal of another office to
 give approval once the old building has been torn down.
 Government mistreatment of nonconformist members of recognized
 religions is exceeded only by that directed at members of
 nonrecognized faiths. Such denominations in Romania include
 the Jehovah's Witnesses, Mormons, Christian Scientists and the
 once-large Romanian Uniate (Greek or Romanian Rite Catholic)
 Church. While those belonging to recognized denominations are
 permitted by law to attend services freely, members of
 nonrecognized faiths enjoy no such right. Despite Government
 efforts to the contrary, membership in some denominations,
 particularly certain evangelical ones, is growing.
 Under the Romanian Constitution, seminaries and other schools
 for the training of clergy and other religious workers are the
 only religious educational establishments permitted. While the
 numbers of churches, priests and seminary students of the
 Romanian Orthodox Church, by far the largest church in Romania,
 appear to be remaining constant, the seminary of the
 Pentecostal Church, which four years ago had 15 students,
 currently has six. The Baptist Church, which has 174 pastors
 for its 1,013 churches, now has five students in its seminary,
 and no new students have been admitted for two years. The
 number of the country's clergymen is rapidly declining,
 particularly among the smaller faiths. This is in part because
 fewer students are being allowed to enter seminaries despite
 the emigration and retirement of many pastors.
 
 
 1083
 In the second half of 1983, a number of articles with
 anti-Semitic passages appeared in Romanian publications. These
 publications, like all others in Romania, are
 Government-controlled.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel,
 Emigration and Repatriation
 Officially, there are no restrictions on travel within Romania,
 so long as it does not involve a change of residence.
 Occasionally, the Government places restrictions on specific
 individuals, particularly religious or political activists, to
 prevent their meeting with fellow citizens or foreigners
 visiting Romania.
 Travel outside of Romania, particularly outside of Eastern
 Europe, is extremely limited, since very few tourist passports
 are issued. Those who are allowed to travel usually hold
 relatively senior positions in the party or Government or else
 have convinced the Government of their intent to return,
 generally by leaving immediate family members behind. Because
 of defections, Government scrutiny of prospective travelers,
 official and tourist, has been tightened substantially recently.
 The Romanian Government strongly opposes emigration and does
 not accept as a right the permanent departure of citizens from
 the country. Those who express a desire to emigrate are
 encouraged to change their minds by a wide variety of punitive
 measures, including loss of job or salary, demotion, arbitrary
 transfer to worksites far from home, and loss of housing.
 Intending emigrants often must wait for years before receiving
 passports. Others are told in advance that they will never be
 permitted to leave. During their wait, many have been detained
 and interrogated regarding their sympathies and contacts
 abroad. The Government began implementing a decree in February
 1983 requiring intending emigrants to repay the state in
 convertible currency the cost of their education beyond the
 tenth-grade level, purportedly to discourage the drain of
 needed academic and technical manpower. Because Romanian
 citizens are not permitted to have convertible currency, the
 money to pay this "education tax" had to be furnished from
 abroad. However, following strong international criticism of
 the decree, the Government ceased implementation of the
 "education tax" in June 1983, and there is no evidence that the
 tax has been levied since then.
 The Govern-ent permits some emigration for family reunification
 purposes and in certain "humanitarian" cases. According to
 official Romanian figures, the number of emigration applicants
 approved each year has doubled since 1972 and approached 20,000
 in 1982. The emigration of Jews to Israel and of ethnic
 Germans to the Federal Republic of Germany, largely for family
 reunification, is allowed. Approximately 1,300 and 14,000
 people left for Israel and the Federal Republic of Germany
 respectively in 1983. Moreover, there is evidence that
 Romania's performance improved somewhat in the second half over
 the first half of 1983 in cases involving emigration to the
 United States, particularly in the higher numbers of approvals
 and the shorter processing time for exit applications.
 
 
 1084
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 The Government is dominated by the leaders of the Communist
 Party of Romania. Over 13 percent of Romania's population are
 party members. Power in the party is concentrated at the top,
 especially in its General Secretary, Nicolae Ceausescu, who is
 also President of the country. The views of the general
 membership have little impact on party decision making. No
 alternative or opposition to the existing system is tolerated.
 Although representatives to the national legislature, the Grand
 National Assembly, and to several other national and local
 political bodies are selected by general election, all
 candidates are proposed by the party through the Front of
 Socialist Democracy and Unity, which it controls and through
 which party directives are conveyed to the populace. The vast
 majority of candidates nominated are party members and voters
 are not offered a choice of policies. Voters have only a
 single slate from which to choose and voter participation is
 mandatory. The Government's security apparatus is responsible
 for insuring the full participation of the adult population in
 elections.
 Few persons, if any, who are nominated for party membership
 fail to be admitted. Entry into the activist corps which runs
 the party locally, however, is selective and requires
 ideological commitment. While women and the ethnic minorities
 are proportionately represented on the general level, their
 influence at the policy level is slight.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Non-governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 The Romanian Government regards its treatment of its citizens
 as an internal matter and not a subject for international
 discussion. In its 1983 report, Amnesty International noted
 its concern about those arrested for attempts to leave Romania
 illegally, those imprisoned for religious dissent, the use of
 psychiatric hospitals to hold political dissenters, the lack of
 fair trial procedures, and poor prison conditions. Amnesty
 International has also continued to seek the release of Father
 Gheorghe Calciu-Dumitreasa, sentenced for "conspiracy" in the
 founding of the Free Trade Union of Romanian Workers in 1979.
 The Government does not respond to inquiries regarding the
 conditions of Father Calciu's imprisonment. Freedom House
 rates Romania "not free."
 The World Confederation of Labor in Brussels filed a complaint
 in July 1981 with the International Labor Organization's (ILO)
 Committee on Freedom of Association, requesting an ILO
 investigation into the arrest of members of the Free Trade
 Union of Romanian Workers, the whereabouts of the union's
 leadership, and the alleged forced transfer of 3,000 miners in
 connection with the 1977 Jiu Valley strike. During 1982, the
 ILO reported that it did not have sufficient information to
 answer the Confederation's request, and that it was asking the
 Romanian Government for further information on the questions
 raised by the Confederation.  The Government did not provide
 satisfactory replies in 1983, and in May the Confederation
 submitted further allegations.
 
 
 1085
 ECONOMIC, SOCIAL AND CULTURAL SITUATION
 The World Bank designates Romania as a developing country.
 Based on a population of 22.5 million and the current rate of
 exchange, per capita national income was $2,050 in 1982.
 Starting after World War II as a largely agrarian economy,
 Romania reached its present semi-industrialized state by
 maintaining extremely high rates of industrial investment,
 financed partly with foreign borrowing, and by restricting
 consumption. By 1982, when the national economy was faced with
 rising costs, energy shortages, and the requirement to pay
 large foreign debts, there was a move away from the previous
 pattern of rapid industrialization to a markedly lower rate of
 investment and increased attention to agriculture.
 The Romanian Constitution guarantees employment to all citizens
 and equal pay for equal work. Official records show full
 employment. In practice, chronic underemployment exists,
 especially in agriculture and depressed industrial sectors.
 World Bank 1980 statistics place average Romanian life
 expectancy at 71.1 years. In 1983, infant mortality was 28.5
 per 1,000 live births. Romanian statistics indicated that
 there were 9.3 hospital beds per 1,000 inhabitants and one
 doctor per 538 inhabitants in 1981.
 For 10 years, education is compulsory and provided without
 charge by the state. In 1979, according to the World Bank, the
 school enrollment rate stood at 98 percent. Beginning with the
 third year of secondary school, students compete through
 examinations for placement in the limited openings at both the
 secondary and the university levels. Evening courses and
 work-study programs are available at technical institutes. The
 World Bank reported a literacy rate of 98 percent as of 1976.
 In Romania, women are constitutionally guaranteed the same
 rights and privileges as men. The Government has been seeking
 to upgrade the role of women in the society with specific
 policies in the areas of education, access to employment and
 comparable wages. As a result, women are employed in virtually
 all sectors of the economy and there is equal opportunity in
 education, but at the senior levels of responsibility and
 authority they appear in far smaller numbers. Many women are
 to be found in the most menial jobs, such as agricultural stoop
 labor, street cleaning, and snow removal.
 According to official Romanian figures, the country's
 population includes about 2.7 million members of ethnic
 minorities, of whom 1.7 million are ethnic Hungarians or
 Magyars (Hungarian emigre sources, however, generally estimate
 the Magyar population at 2-2.5 million). Hungarians, Germans,
 Gypsies and members of many smaller groups constitute about 12
 percent of the total population. The Romanian Constitution
 forbids any discrimination on the basis of ethnic background.
 While the Government claims it does not discriminate against
 the minorities, there nonetheless are limitations on minority
 groups' free expression of their cultural heritage. Government
 efforts to centralize and to economize by combining
 educational, social, and cultural activities frequently affect
 minority groups disproportionately and are often interpreted as
 the "Romanianization" of these groups. For example, the
 mergers of schools, theaters, or other such institutions often
 result in the loss of the minority ethnic groups'
 characteristics as the institutions become predominantly
 Romanian. This movement is viewed, particularly by ethnic
 Hungarians, as part of a policy of cultural extinction.
 
 
 1086
 Moreover, strict Government control of private organizations
 which might be dedicated to the preservation of ethnic cultural
 practices, as well as goverment limitations on minority
 language newspapers and radio and television broadcasts, are
 also seen by members of the minorities as discriminatory.
 An official Romanian Government estimate in 1982 placed the
 average daily caloric intake in Romania at 3,300 calories. The
 Government's report called for a reduction of that rate to
 2,800-3,000 calories per day by 1985. In 1977, the World Bank
 estimated Romanian calorie supply at 130 percent of the
 required level. Romanian food markets are plagued with
 shortages, especially of protein sources such as meat, eggs,
 dairy, and grain products. This raises the question of
 nutritional deficiencies, particularly for the elderly and
 homebound, who are also disadvantaged by long food lines for
 many essential foods. Shortages have intensified in recent
 years because of several poor harvests, faulty distribution and
 inadequate storage, and the emphasis on food exports. Certain
 items are rationed but this varies from region to region. The
 quality of foodstuffs and clothing kept for domestic
 consumption is inferior to what is exported for hard currency.
 
 
 1087
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: ROMANIA,
 1981     1982     1983
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL...         0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS .................     0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................    0.0       0.0      0.0
 A.AID  ....  ..................  0.0     0.0      0.0
 LOANS ................     0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................     0.0      0.0      0.0
 (SEC.SUPP.ASSIST.)...         0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.FOD FOR PEACE .......        0.0       0.0      0.0
 LOANS .................     0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................     0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE  I.TOTAL ..........        0,0      0.0      0,0
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS .....        0.0       0.0      0.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR .....        0.0       0.0      0.0
 TITLE  II-TOTAL .........        0.0      0.0.     0.0
 E.RELIEF.EC.DEV A WFP.         0.0       0.0      0.0
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY .....         0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST...          0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS ................     0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................     0.0      0.0      0.0
 PEACE CORPS ......        0.0       0.0      0.0
 NARCOTICS ........        0.0       0.0      0.0
 OTHER ............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL...         0.0       0.0      0.0
 LOANS .................     0.0      0.0       0.0
 GRANTS ................     0.0      0.0      0.0
 A.MAP  GRANTS ..........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.CREDIT FINANCING ....        0.0       0.0      0.0
 C.INTL MIL.ED.TRNG ....         0.0      0.0      0.0
 D.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK...          0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER  GRANTS ........        0.0      0.0      0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. &,MIL...         0.0       0.0      0.0
 LOANS .................     0.0       0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............        0.0       0.0      0.0
 OTHER  US  LOANS ..........     120.7      0.0     28.4
 EX-IM  BANK  LOANS .......     120.7      0.0      0.0
 ALL  OTHER ........ .......      0.0      0.0     28.4
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1981     1982     1983     1946-83
 TOTAL ........   360.0    322.9       0.0   1807.9
 IORD             360.0    321.5      0.0    1788.0
 IFC                0.0      0.0      0.0       0.0
 IDA                0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 ID6                0.0      0.0      0.0       0.0
 AD5                0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 AFDB               0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 UNOP               0.0       1.4      0.0     19.9
 OTHER-UN           0.0       0.0      0.0      0.0
 EEC                0.0      0.0       0.0      0.0
 
 
