ROMANIA
Consistent with the State Department's 1988 report on human rights in Romania, the 1989 report is accurate, comprehensive, thorough and aptly addresses the physical, mental and emotional abuses perpetrated by the Ceausescu government upon the citizens of Romania.
The introduction is a well-written, concise statement of the momentous changes that took place in Romania during December 1989 and highlights the human rights abuses prior to the December events while the remainder of the report entitled "Respect for Human Rights" is a detailed account of numerous human rights inf ringements.
However, as in 1988, the report suffers from lack of specificity, likely due to the extreme difficulty experienced by State Department personnel in gathering information about human rights conditions in Romania. Certain well-publicized instances, however, should have been included. For example, it should have been noted that for the first time in five years the United Nations Commission on Human Rights recommended in February 1989 that a new special rapporteur be appointed to investigate Romania's human rights situation. The Romanian delegate made it clear that the special rapporteur would most likely not be permitted into the country.
While the report addresses the operations of the Securitate, the country's ruthlessly efficient, cruel and seemingly omnipresent security apparatus, it fails to capture the all-pervasive fear and hatred it engendered among Romanians.
Moreover, the report also fails to highlight the treatment of two of Romania's best known dissidents: Laszlo Tokes, the ethnic Hungarian pastor of the Reformed Church in Timisoara, whose actions sparked the December revolt, and Doina Cornea, a university professor from Cluj who severely criticized the Ceausescu government for its "systematization" policy. This policy was designed to repress the minority Hungarian culture, religion and language. Both individuals had been beaten, subjected to repeated death threats and put under surveillance by the Securitate.
The report correctly describes the lack of freedom of religion, but states that "religious denominations were able to publish a newspaper or newsletter on a regular basis" and that "[IJeaders of religious denominations generally received permission to travel abroad
185
Romania
on official business without difficulty." The report fails to describe, however, the meticulous censorship of these published materials and the fact that certain church leaders were free to travel because they were members of the Communist Party and served to further the government's policies in the West.
With the overthrow of the Ceausescu government only at year's end, the report necessarily focuses on the human rights record of the Ceausescu regime. Changes introduced by the National Salvation Front (NSF) after the fall of Ceausescu are highlighted. However, the report expresses premature confidence in the NSF by stating that "the next annual report is likely to include a significantly different assessment of human rights practices."
While the NSF has indeed promptly implemented a number of impressive changes, the report seems to dismiss, as insignificant, the fact "that members (or former members) of the Communist Party appear to be dominant in the NSF." The real power of the new government clearly lies with the executive committee, headed by the new President, Ion Iliescu, all of whose 11 members are or were members of the Communist Party. Thus, Romania remains governed by a group of people who are tainted in varying degrees by their affiliation with the former regime and the State Department should be more cautious in its assessments.
The need for such caution is illustrated by the fact that former Securitate members still work in government agencies and that the NSF espouses some practices that were all too prevalent under Nicolae Ceausescu. For example, the report states that "the authorities had the capability to monitor domestic and international telephone calls, and under Ceausescu's rule, appeared to do so regularly. Under the NSF, the practice of monitoring calls appears to have been abandoned." We have received several reports, however, that calls continue to be monitored.
186