 ROMANIA
 A popular referendum on December 8, 1991, approved a Constitution that estab-
 lished Romania as a constitutional republic with a multiparty parliamentary sys-
 tem. Romania was governed by a caretaker coalition government headed by the po-
 litically neutral Pnme Minister Theodor Stolojan until parliamentary and presi-
 dential elections were held on September 27, 1992. These elections, considered to
 have been free and fair despite a large number of procedural problems, produced
 a fragmented Parliament. The Democratic National Salvation Front (DNSF) won a
 small oluralitv with 28 Dercent of the oonular vote and 34 oercent of the seats. In
 
 
 877
 the Presidential runoff election on October 11, Ion Iliescu was reelected President
 with 61 percent of the popular vote. On November 19, President Iliescu's designee
 for Prime Minister, the economist Nicolae Vacaroiu, won a vote of confidence with
 a Government composed of technocrats and members of the DNSF.
 Romania continued to struggle in 1992 with the political, economic, and social
 pressures produced by its transition from a totalitarian state with a centralized
 economy to a democratic system of government and a free market economy. These
 pressures contributed to ethnic tensions, social unrest resulting from unemployment
 and inflation, and an increase in crime.
 A new law governing the Romanian Intelligence Service (SRI) went into effect on
 February 24. It provides a framework for subordinating the intelligence apparatus
 to the rule of law, by establishing parliamentary oversight through a parliamentary
 joint committee which would approve the appointment of any new SRI director, and
 have the right to dismiss the director on its own initiative. However, the law also
 contains loopholes, such as the-lack of budgetary control by Parliament and a provi.
 sion allowing the SRI to justify otherwise prohibited actions on national security
 grounds. Total military expenditures for 1989, the last year for which the U.S. Arms
 Control and Disarmament Agency conducted a detailed analysis, were nearly $15.5
 billion. Future expenditures can be expected to decrease as the Government contin-
 ues to reduce its military force levels.
 The economy is in a slow transition from a centrally controlled model to a free
 market system. The Government continues to emphasize its commitment to eco-
 nomic reform and the establishment of a free market economy. Parliament enacted
 laws on the privatization of state-owned enterprises and agriculture and on foreign
 investment. The Government freed most prices, reduced subsidies, deregulated the
 exchange rate of the Romanian currency, and expanded the access of businesspeople
 and ordinary citizens to hard currency.
 Respect for human rights continued to improve in 1992, particularly with regard
 to institutionalizing democratic principles and respect for human rights in Roma-
 nia's legal system and the conduct of generally free and fair elections. There was
 continued improvement in the area of freedom of speech and of print and broadcast
 media. There were instances, however, of attempted or actual discrimination against
 Gypsies and ethnic Hungarians. Allegations of surveillance and occasionally of in-
 timidation and harassment of journalists and political activists, a significant prob-
 lem in 1991, decreased. The Government did not effectively address these allega-
 tions, but generally expressed willingness to comply with Western human rights
 norms.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no reported political or
 other extrajudicial killings.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reported instances of disappearance in 1992.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-
 The Constitution prohibits torture and inhuman or degrading punishment or treat-
 ment, and these prohibitions were generally respected in practice.
 A Romanian human rights organization alleged that a small number of detainees
 were beaten while in police custody. Government investigations were inconclusive.
 There is no indication that the Government sanctions such mistreatment.
 Several international groups found problems in Romanian prisons, such as over-
 crowding, including sharing of beds; reliance upon a cell boss system, which one
 group deemed "inherently abusive"; and the use of leg irons. The Government, react-
 ing to criticism, discontinued the use of leg irons.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, Exile.-Romanian law forbids police from detaining
 anyone for more than 24 hours without an arrest order from a procurator. Detainees
 have the right to bail and may ask for a hearing before a judge. The case must be
 heard within 24 hours of such a request. (In the absence of a request, however, a
 erson may be held for up to 65 days without a court order.) The Government is
 liable for damages to persons held in violation of these provisions.
 An arrestee has the right to be informed of the charges. He or she also has the
 right to have an attorney present at all stages of the legalprocess, and police must
 inform the defendant of this right, in a language the de en ant understands, before
 obtaining any statement from the arrestee. However, the prosecutor's office can
 delay action on a request for a lawyer for up to 5 days from the date of arrest. The
 local bar association provides attorneys to indigents and is compensated by the Min-
 istry of Justice.
 
 
 878
 In September 1991, Parliament passed a new public order law, replacing the high-
 ly criticized Decree 153/1970 that allowed for detention for up to 6 months without
 normal judicial procedures. The new law governing public order provides for fines
 for minor infractions and imprisonment of up to 6 months only for more serious of-
 fenses. In addition, the law stipulates that these sentences may be challenged in
 court. While there were no substantiated reports of arbitrary arrest or detention in
 1992, local human rights organizations were at year's end investigating a small
 number of possible instances. Exile was not used as a means of punishment.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Tria.-Parliament passed a law in 1992 to reorganize the
 judicial system. The new law provides for the establishment of a four-tiered legal
 system, including the reestablishment of appellate courts, which ceased to exist
 under Communist rule in 1952. Either plaintiff or defendant can appeal. The final
 recourse is to the Supreme Court or, for constitutional matters, to the Constitutional
 Court, which was established in 1992.
 Cases involving military personnel, criminal acts against the State (including
 treason and espionage cases), and cases involving acts committed by police (consid-
 ered to be military personnel) are tried in a three-tiered military court system.
 Under the Constitution, the Ministry of Justice controls the selection and pro-
 motion of judges. The Constitution authorizes life tenure for judges appointed by the
 President upon recommendation from a panel of judges and prosecutors selected by
 Parliament. This panel, and the Justice Minister, have broad disciplinary authority
 over judges. The judiciary appears to be generally independent of the executive
 branch. The Constitutional Court, six of whose members are chosen by Parliament
 and three by the President, has judicial responsibility for constitutional issues, but
 its decisions on the constitutionality of laws may be overridden by a two-thirds vote
 of both chambers of Parliament.
 The Procurator General is appointed by the President and is responsible for the
 administration of the law as well as for criminal prosecutions. The Procurator Gen-
 eral, who reports to the Minister of Justice, appoints local procurators throughout
 the country.
 Defendants have a presumption of innocence. The Criminal Code requires that a
 defendant be informed of his right to defense counsel. If the defendant cannot afford
 legal representation or is otherwise unable to select counsel, an attorney will be ap-
 pointed for him. In practice, these provisions of the law were respected.
 The Constitution created the office of the People's Advocate, an ombudsman
 whose responsibility is to "defend the rights and liberties" of Romanians. The Peo-
 ple's Advocate does not have legal authority to redress grievances but, in reports
 to Parliament, may provide recommendations regarding legislation or other meas-
 ures for the protection of the rights and liberties of citizens. A People's Advocate
 had not yet been appointed in 1992.
 There were no known political prisoners in 1992.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 new Constitution provides for legal protection against the search of a residence
 without a warrant, but this protection is subordinate to "national security or public
 order." The National Security Law of July 29, 1991, defines national security very
 broadly, and lists as threats to national security not only crimes such as terrorism,
 treason, espionage, assassination and armed insurrection, but also totalitarian, rac-
 ist, and anti-Semitic actions or attempts to change the existing borders. Entry into
 residences without prior authorization from a prosecutor is possible if a threat to
 national security is "imminent." The Constitution states that the privacy of legal
 means of communications is inviolable. The law on national security and the law
 on the SRI, however, contain provisions for monitoring communications when
 deemed necessary by the SRI for national security reasons.
 During the year, there appeared to be no interference with the rights of individual
 citizens to privacy so Iong as they were not perceived as threats to national security
 or the established order. In practice, credible allegations of unauthorized monitoring
 of telephone conversations and written correspondence persisted in an environment
 of continuing suspicion. The Government acknowledged that there were abuses in
 the past and investigated some specific cases but took few steps to investigate re-
 ports of continuing abuses.
 The legacy of abuses carried out by the Communist-era intelligence service,
 Securitate, continued to haunt Romanian society in 1992. The new law governing
 the SRI addresses some of these past abuses. It provides for the establishment of
 a parliamentary joint committee to oversee the SRI and enables Parliament to es-
 tablish rules for that committee and, most importantly, to force the SRI to comply
 with its rules through parliamentary control over the appointment and tenure of the
 SRI director. The law prohibits the hiring by the SRI of most former Securitate offi-
 cers. The old Securitate files were turned over to the SRI which will keen them
 
 
 879
 within its own archives for 40 years, after which they will become public. Access
 is controlled by the SRI director.
 While the law prohibits the SRI from engagin in  litical acts, an exception to
 this restriction permits such actions in order to defend national security. Similarly,
 although the SRI is required to obtain a warrant from a prosecutor to carry out in-
 telligence activities involving "threats to national security," the SRI can engage in
 a wide variety of operations, including "technical operations," in order to determine
 if a situation meets the legal definition of a 'threat to national security."
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-Article 30 of the Constitution provides for free-
 doma of expression and prohibits censorship, and Romanians generally are free to ex-
 press any opinions they wish. However, the same article qualifies the protection by
 prohibiting "defamation of the country"; this provision could be construed to restrict
 criticisms of the Government. �
 The vice president of the Association of Free Psychiatrists received threats for
 having publicized cases of psychiatric abuse, but the identity of the perpetrators was
 never discovered.
 In 1992 the press was free of state censorship or interference and published a
 wide variety of opinions. The small but loud ultranationalist press increased its ex-
 tremist diatribes against Jews, Hungarians, and Gypsies.
 The League for the Defense of Human Rights (LADO), a Romanian human rights
 organization, reported a complaint from a publication called Nu ("No") involving sev-
 eral journalists who allegedly received written and telephone threats as a result of
 their reporting on toxic waste dumping in Sibiu county.
 Economic conditions-the price of paper and other materials, the shortage of mod-
 em printing equipment, and lack of purchasing power by consumers--constituted a
 practical constraint on publishers of periodicals as well as books. Some publishers
 have accused the Government of manipulating the price and supply of newsprint to
 the detriment of opposition newspapers.
 Broadcasting was in a state of flux, following passage of an audiovisual law in
 the summer of 1992. The law created an 11-person National Audiovisual Council
 (NAC), which began issuing licenses to private television and radio broadcasters in
 November. The official criteria for allocating licenses included programming quality
 and diversity, and political and cultural pluralism, as well as technical andfinancial
 standards.
 Romanian state television (RTV) remained the only domestic television broad-
 caster with nationwide facilities. RTV's first channel reaches the entire country,
 while its second extends to about 30 percent of the population. Channel Two trans-
 mits in full each evening in the original languages the nightly news broadcasts of
 Moldovan television and three Western European networks. Satellite dishes capable
 of picking up foreign broadcasts increased in popularity, expanding the choices
 available to Romanian consumers. There were no government restrictions on pur-
 chase or use of such receiver dishes.
 About a dozen local, independent television stations have been operating under
 provisional licenses. Some of them formed the Association of Private Local Tele-
 vision Stations of Romania to create a framework for sharing production, equip-
 ment, advertising, and know-how among the affiliates. In December when better fi-
 nanced new commercial ventures beat out some of these stations for NAC licenses,
 opposition press and parliamentary groups accused the NAC of bowing to political
 pressure and discriminating against pro-opposition stations. The NAC compromised
 in subsequent rulings, directing frequency sharing by various stations, a solution
 which, if applied, would allow the independent stations to continue operations.
 State-owned radio operates three nationwide programs which were increasingly
 considered reputable. Independent radio stations also competed for audiences (and
 advertising income) during 1992. The new stations featured mostly popular music,
 but several also carried foreign news bulletins.
 Broadcast coverage of the 1992 local, parliamentary, and presidential elections
 was governed by fairness rules laid down by Parliament, the Central Election Bu-
 reau, and the NAC. Time was allocated to political parties on the basis of clear, pub-
 lished guidelines and was enforced by nonpartisan bodies. State broadcasters were
 careful and restrained in their news coverage, in order to avoid a repetition of the
 bias charges made in the 1990 campaign. Despite some complaints, most observers
 concluded that bias was not significant. The 12 local television stations played an
 important role in the local elections by presenting balanced coverage of the cam-
 paigns.
 
 
 There were several allegations of unprovoked assaults on journalists, though far
 fewer than in previous years. The Minister of the Interior investigated several re-
 ported incidents, without uncovering political motives.
 Foreign publications, including from Hungary, are freely imported and distrib-
 uted. A small number of Hungarian publications were reportedly refused entry on
 national security grounds.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly.-The Constitution provides for freedom of as-
 sembly. In addition, the law on public assembly provides for the right of Romanians
 to assemble peacefully while unarmed, and states that meetings must not interfere
 with other economic or social activities. Meetings may not be held near locations
 such as hospitals, airports, or military installations. Organizers of demonstrations
 must inform local authorities and police before the event. The authorities may forbid
 a public gathering by notifying organizers in writing within 48 hours of receipt of
 the request to hold it.
 Public gatherings to espouse Communist, racist, or Fascist ideologies or to commit
 actions contrary to public order or national security are forbidden. Unauthorized
 demonstrations or other violations of this law are punishable by imprisonment and
 fines. Constitutional provisions and laws on free assembly were enerally respected
 in 1992, except in the city of Cluj in Transylvania. In April the Mayor of Cluj,
 Gheorghe Funar, prohibited the Hungarian Democratic Union of Romania (UDMR)
 and other gr.ups from holding a conference on local administration and issued a de-
 cision requiring organizers to provide 3 days' notice to the Mayor's office of the par-
 ticipants, purose, place, and duration of future assemblies. In June Mayor Funar
 cancclcd a public assembly organized by the UDMR to protest the draft law on edu-
 cation. In December he banned a rally to protest a controversial plaque restored to
 the statue of King Matthias Corvinus. An alternative protest took place without in-
 cident. Romanian and international human rights groups protested these actions as
 being contrary to both constitutional guarantees and international agreements en-
 suring the rights of assembly and free speech.
 Romanians participated in numerous political rallies in support of a broad spec-
 trum of candidates during the recent parliamentary and presidential campaigns.
 Romanians may form associations, including political parties, and may obtain
 legal status for them by proving membership of at least 251 persons.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for religious freedom, and the
 Government does not impede the observance of religious belief. The clergy of legally
 established faiths can receive state financial support. Some 130 faiths and denomi-
 nations are officially registered. The Romanian Orthodox Church, to which approxi-
 mately 80 percent of the population at least nominally belongs, is predominant. Ap-
 proval of applications for registration is now generally unproblematic, but an appli-
 cation by the Mormon Church is still pending.
 The dispute between the Byzantine Rite Catholic (or Uniate) Church, dissolved by
 the Government in 1948 and restored in 1990, and the Romanian Orthodox Church
 over restitution of the physical assets of the former remained unresolved. The provi-
 sional government in April 1990 decreed that all Uniate property still retained by
 the State would be returned to the Church. A church-government commission estab-
 lished by the end of 1990 a list of 91 properties to which the Uniates had clear
 claim. The Government has continually deferred the official restoration of the prop-
 erties on this list, although it turned over a few properties informally.
 The Uniates asked the Government to compel the return of Uniate churches now
 used by the Orthodox Church, but the Government maintains that the two religious
 groups should resolve the question between themselves. With one exception, the Or-
 thodox hierarchy to date has refused to return any of the Uniate churches. A recent
 government decision provided for the return of unoccupied buildings to the Uniates
 but did not provide an immediate solution to the problem of the disputed churches.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-No official restrictions are placed on travel within Romania, except in
 the case of certain small areas used for military purposes, nor do Romanian citizens
 who wish to change their places of work or residence face any official limitations.
 Romanian law stipulates that Romanian citizens have the right to travel freely
 abroad. They may also emigrate and return to Romania. In practice, Romanian citi-
 zens travel freely both within and outside the country, and the right to emigrate
 and to return is respected.
 On September 24, Romania and Germany signed a bilateral agreement to facili-
 tate the repatriation of approximately 30,000 Romanians whose requests for refugee
 status had been rejected by German authorities. The majority are Gypsies. The re-
 turnees began arriving around mid-November, and received no particular resettle-
 ment assistance. Reintegration is complicated by various types of discrimination
 avainst Gvnsies (see Section 5).
 
 
 881
 Prior to Romania's 1991 signing of the 1951 Convention Relating to the Status
 of Refugees and the 1967 Protocol the few refugees in Romania were recognized as
 being under the mandate of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
 (tNHCR). Romania does not have an effective program to implement the Conven-
 tion. The Government has not taken preparatory steps, such as issuing identifying
 documentation or providing for work, education, and health care benelits for refu-
 gees. At present, refugees are housed in camps in inadequate conditions while
 awaiting decisions regarding their fate from the Romanian Commission for Migra-
 tion. It appears that Romanian officials have no standard procedure for refugee
 processing.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens have the right to change their government. Despite allegations of fraud
 and a range of procedural irregularities most observers felt that the outcome of the
 September 27 parliamentay and presidential elections and October 11 presidential
 runoff reflected the popular will, as shaped by a free and open campaign which in-
 cluded media access for all major parties. Reported irregularities included the large
 number of invalidated ballots in the parliamentary voting, and a high percentage
 of votrswho voted on special registers outside the district in which they were reg-
 istered. There were also problems of access by domestic election observers, particu-
 larly to the ballot materials needed to conduct a parallel vote count.
 The low level of civic education and complexity of the ballot (which featured over
 80 parties, many with similar names and symbols), seem to explain most instances
 of invalidated ballots. Poor training of election officials and lack of ag d proce-
 dures by local election committees were responsible for other procedura violations.
 The political parties that alleged fraud did not establish direct evidence of deliberate
 abuses, and most international observer groups concluded that the elections met
 international standards of freedom and fairness.
 The February 1992 local elections, likewise organized by Prime Minister Stolojan's
 multiparty coalition, were also regarded as generally free and fair. International
 and local observers were present in significant numbers on both occasions.
 The Constitution and electoral legislation grant each recognized minority political
 party one representative in Parliament's Chamber of Deputies, provided that the
 party obtains at least 5 percent of the average number of valid votes nationwide
 needed to elect a deputy outright (only some 1,100 votes in the September elections).
 Parties representing 13 minority groups elected deputies under this provision. The
 Hungarians, represented by the UDMR, obtained 27 seats in the Chamber through
 the normal electoral process. Gypsies are underrepresented in Parliament, partly
 due to low Gypsy voter turnout and divisions within the Gypsy community.
 There are no restrictions, in law or in practice, on the participation of women in
 government or politics. There are a few women in Parliament but none in the cur-
 rent Cabinet.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Domestic human rights monitoring grou s which were formed after December
 1989 include the League for the Defense of HIuman Rights (LADO), the Pro-Democ-
 rac Association, local chapters of Helsinki Watch and the Helsinki Committee, the
 Independent Romanian Society for Human Rights, and the Association of Former
 Political Prisoners. Other groups, including political parties and trade unions, also
 have human rights sections that monitor the observance of human rights.
 These groups and international human rights organizations were able to function
 freely without government interference. International groups were free to meet with
 Romanian human rights organizations and, albeit with delays in some instances,
 were able to meet with detained and arrested persons and to visit prisons.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Language, or Social Status
 Article 4 of the Constituttin forbids discrimination on account of race, nationality,
 ethnic origin, language, religion, sex, opinion and political allegiance, wealth, or so-
 cial background. In practice, Gypsies and other minorities suffer various forms of
 discrimination. There are approximately 22 ethnic minority groups in Romania, rep-
 resenting 10 to 12 percent of the population.
 Gypsies, estimates of whose nu mers in Romania range from 427,000 (according
 to the 1992 census) to 3 million (according to some Gypsies), continued to suffer
 many forms of unofficial discrimination which the Government is often unable to
 prevent or unwilling to redress. Gypsies continued to face discrimination in work-
 places and schools. For example, a 1991 International Labor Organization (ILO)
 commission found that Romanian Gypsies suffered both direct and indirect discrimi-
 
 
 882
 nation in the workplace. The commission found that Gypsies were relegated to low-
 paying, low-statas jobs. It also reported that Gypsies were excluded from edu-
 cational and work opportunities that might lead to higher paying or skilled jobs and
 such discrimination perpetuated their low status in society. The Government initi-
 ated some job training programs for Gypsies and began experimental classes in the
 Roanian I     a   or Gypsy children. However, a June 1992 ILO update showed
 that the situation nad not cnanged appreciably.
 Since the revolution in Deem~lber 1989, several incidents have sparked "vigilante
 style" attacks against Gypsy communities. In July an off-duty military policeman in
 Bucharest was beaten, al     by Gypsies, and subsequently hospitalized. Several
 days later, a group of masked military policemen were reported to have indiscrimi-
 nately attacked Gypsies in a city market in retaliation. Local police officers inter-
 vened to protect the Gypsies some of whom were injured. Several victims filed com-
 plaints, and the Ministry of befense and the procurator's office began investigations
 which were not completed by year's end.
 A government offer to rebuild approximately 20 Gypsy homes that were burned
 by Romanian villagers in a 1991 vigilante attack in Valeni Lapusului ran into local
 opposition- and legal difficulties. According to the Procurator General's Office in Bu-
 charest, seven of the Gypsies who originally filed complaints never reported to the
 police station to help police identify their assailants. Gypsy leaders were willing to
 drp charges against villagers accused of arson and destruction of property in return
 for monetary compensation for the Gypsies' homes. The local prosecutor agreed to
 theprposlbut ongoing negotiations between the Gypsies and the local villagers
 have not been concluded. Meanwhile, the local procurator's office determined that
 the Gypsy homes had been built illegally on land belonging to an agricultural coop-
 erative. The original private owner ied a claim under the and reform law, and the
 land was returned to him. The Gypsy victims of the violence still live in a makeshift;
 camp in miserable conditions.
 The State is prosecuting 12 Romanians for 1990 mob violence against Gypsies in
 Mihail Kogalniceanu near Constants. With help from the Government, a Gypsy or-
 ganization, a   French social worker, the Gypsy settlement is being rebult.
 Hungarians, the largest ethnic minority, number 1.6 million (according to the
 1992 census) to more than 2.2 million (Hungarian estimates). They are concentrated
 in Transylvania, although more than 200,000 ethnic Hungarians reside in Bucha-
 rest. Instruction in the Hungarian language is avalable in primary and seco ndary
 schools when there are at least 7 elementary students or 165secondsry students to
 form a Hungarian-langua e class. Some university courses are taught in Hungarian
 in Cluj and Tirgu Mures.Ethnic Hungarians, who were unhappy with the constitu-
 tional text declaring Romania a "unitary state," fear a gradual process of cultural
 assimilation, and seek additional Hungarian-language postsecondary instruction
 and use of Hungarian (rather than Romanian with interpretation) in court.
 Local nationalists sometimes interpret laws in a manner that discriminates
 against the ethnic Hungarian minority. The UDMR candidate for mayor of Tirgu
 Mure s w  disqualified by the Tirgu Mure  municipal court on January 23 as being
 morally unfit for office, and the verdict was Upheld in the appeals court on what
 observers considered to be political rather than judicial grunds. After several
 months of delays cause          orts on the part of Vatra Romaneasa, an
 ultranationalist organization, and the Mures Electoral Commission itself to prevent
 the participation of the UDMR in the mayoru election, local elections in Tirgu
 Mures occurred on May 24, and a new UDMR candidate won with approximately
 57 percent of the vote.
 In the Transylvanian city of Cluj, Gheorghe Funar, elected mayor in February
 1992 as candidate of the nationalist Party of Romanian National Unity, banned
 Hungarian-language signs in public p laces, attempted (unsuccessfully) to evict eth-
 nic Hungarian youth organizations from par of their quarters under the iretext
 that they occupied more than the legally permissible amount of space, and engi-
 neered the removal (now under appeal) of the principal of one of the Hungaran-
 language high schools. He also refused a permit for a scheduled conference of ethnic
 Hungarian and Dutch youth in the city (see Section 2.b.). The central Government,
 acting through the local prefect (district head), declared several of Funar's actions
 null and void, but the municipality continues to use local statutes and regulations
 to harass local Hungarians. Funar ran for President in September, winning about
 10 percent of the vote. He was elected president of his party after it garnered seats
 in both houses of the new Parliament
 There were two incidents of vandalism against predominantly ethnic Hungarian
 churches in Satu Mare that appeared to be a result of ethnic tensions in the region.
 In the two Transylvanian districts where ethnic Hungarians form a clear majority
 of the Kogulation. Hargita and Covasna. the Government's removal of the ethnic
 
 
 Hungarian prefects in July, allegedly under pressure from Romanian nationalists,
 caused antigovernment protests. The Prime Minister compromised by appointing co-
 equal prefects and deputy prefects, one Hungarian and one Romanian, in each dis-
 trict, and the protests subsided.
 There were no reports of physical attacks directed against Jewish individuals or
 institutions or desecrations of $raves or synagogues in 1992. Both the President and
 the Prime Minister have publicly condemned anti-Semitism, other types of racism,
 and xenophobia.
 In principle, women are accorded the same rights and privileges as men in all
 areas, including education, access to employment, and wages. However, in a difficult
 economic climate and in a society where traditional views of women predominate
 women are usually the first to be dismissed from employment. There is little official
 initiative on issues affecting women, including family planning, crimes against
 women, and domestic violence.
 Postrevolution Romania inherited a legacy of neglect of its severely handicapped
 population, both children and adults. To redress the situation, the Government set
 up special programs for the handicapped, including vocational training and special
 schools for handicapped children. In addition, handicapped children are now given
 precedence in foreign adoption placements. Orphanage conditions, similarly ne-
 glected, have improved, partly as a result of massive infusions of foreign assistance.
 These problems are also diminishing following the revocation of the Ceausescu re-
 gime's prohibition of birth control and abortion.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-Current labor legislation adopted in 1991, guaran-
 tees the right of workers, except public employees and military and police personnel,
 to associate freely, organize and join labor unions, and engage in collective bargain-
 ing. The right to strike is specifically guaranteed, and several major strikes or dem-
 onstrations occurred in 1992. The primary exceptions are employees in certain criti-
 cal industries involving the public interest, such as defense, health care, transpor-
 tation, and telecommunications, in which there are limitations on the right to strike.
 Some unions continue to complain that legal requirements calling for the submis-
 sion of grievances to government-sponsored conciliation prior to initiating a strike
 interferes with their freedom of action. The ILO Committee of Experts (COE) in
 1992 noted that three basic acts adopted by Parliament in 1991, as well as the new
 Constitution and the repeal of previous legislative provisions, change the general
 orientation of the industrial relations system, establish trade union pluralism and
 the independence of the trade union movement, and recognize the right to strike.
 However, it also registered concern that the current laws fall short of I Z standards
 in several areas, including the free election of union representatives, binding arbi-
 tration and financial liability of strike organizers. A Bucharest court ruled that a
 nationwide railway strike in May was illegal because the union was not recognized
 as a legitimate bargaining partner. The national railway company subsequently dis-
 missed the union's eaders, prompting four of them to engage in a month-long hun-
 ger strike, which ended only after the Government agreed to establish a neutral
 commission to investigate allegations of antiunion activity by management. The
 commission issued a preliminary decision favoring the union, but management ap-
 pealed. The issue was still pending at the end of 1992.
 The 1991 legislation stipulates that labor unions are independent bodies, free
 from government or political party control, with the right to be consulted on labor
 issues. No worker may be forced to join or withdraw from a union, and union offi-
 cials who resign from elected positions and return to the regular work force are ac-
 corded protection against employer retaliation.
 In September the three largest labor confederations-the National Confederation
 of Free Trade Unions (CNSLR), successor to the official Communist labor organiza-
 tion, Alfa Cartel, and Fratia--endorsed a labor-based political party, the Convention
 for Social Solidarity (CSS), and many of its members, including the CNSLR presi-
 dent, competed (unsuccessfully) for parliamentary seats in the September general
 elections. These unions engaged freely in nationwide street demonstrations to sup-
 port the CSS and to press  mands for greater protection of workers' well-being, es-
 pecially increased unemployment benefits and job requalification training. The over-
 whelming majority of Romania's approximately 10.8 million working people are
 members of about 10 nationwide trade union confederations and smaller independ-
 ent trade unions. The largest is the CNSLR. The year also saw the merger of sev-
 eral smaller confederations into larger organizations.
 Labor unions have the right to affiliate internationally, and representatives of for-
 eign and international organizations freely visit and advise Romanian trade union-
 ists. Alfa Cartel and Fratia are affiliated with the World Confederation of Labor
 
 
 (WCL) and the International Confederation of Free Trade Unions (ICFTU), respec-
 tively.
 In June the ILO issued a report on Romanian compliance with ILO conventions.
 Although it noted with satisfaction changes in the Labor Code prohibiting discrimi-
 nation on the basis of political connections or social origin, it underscored the need
 to increase measures to ensure a tolerant and discrimination-free workplace for the
 country's ethnic minorities, particularly Gypsies (see Section 6).
 b.The Right to Organize and Bargain Uollectively.-The 1991 legislation permits
 workers to organize lnt unions and to bargain collectively. There is no clear proce-
 dure to define which unions are recognized by management as negotiating partners,
 but with the exception of the railway workers' strke, this lacuna did not cause
 major problems in 1992. Continued state control over most industrial resources and
 the absence of independent management representatives cornplcates collective bar-
 gaining efforts. In addition to basic wage scales established through collective bar-
 gaining, most workers as well as pensioners receive thrice-yearly increases indexed
 to prospective price increases. The amount of the indexed increases is determined
 through gvernment/trade union negotiations. There are no export processing zones.
 c.fPohibition of Forced or Corpulsory Labor.-The Constitution prohibits forced
 or cornpulsory labor, and it was not practiced.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Chidren-The minimum age for employment
 Sis 16, although children as young as 14 or 16 may work with the consent of their
 parents or guardians but only "according to their physical development, aptitude,
 and knowledge." Working children under 16 have the right to continue their edu-
 cation, and employers are obliged to assist in this regard. The Ministry of Labor and
 Social Protection (MOLSP) has the authority to impose res and close sections of
 factories to enforce compliance with the law. No via ations of this policy were docu-
 mented by the media or the MOLSP in 1992, and child labor does not appear to
 be a problem.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-Most wage scales are established through col-
 lective bargaining at the enterprise level, but based on minimum wages for given
 economic sectors and categories of workers set by the Government after negotiations
 with industry representatives and the labor confederations. Minimum wage rates
 arc generally observed and enforced. In 1992 the minimum wage did not keep pace
 with inflation, and it is criticized for not providing a decent standard of living for
 a worker and his family although basic necessities like housing and medical care
 still are partly subsidized by the Government.
 The Labor Code provides for a standard workweek of 40 hours or 5 days, with
 overtime to be paid for weekend or holiday work or work in excess of 40 hours. Paid
 holidays range from 15 to 24 days annually depending mainly on the employee's
 length of service. Employers are required by law to pay additional benefits and al-
 lowances to workers engaged in particularly dangerous or difficult occupations.
 Some labor organizations press for healthier, safer working conditions on behalf
 of their members. The MOLSP establishes safety standards for most industries and
 is responsible for enforcing them. However, the MOLSP lacks sufficient trained per-
 sonnel for inspection and enforcement, and employers generally ignore its rec-
 ommendations. In general, workers are not committed to occupational safety and
 health and appear to value increased pay over a safe and healthful work environ-
 ment. Neither the Government nor industry, still mostly state-owned, has the re-
 sources necessary to improve health and safety conditions in the workplace.
