 ROMANIA
 Romania is a constitutional republic with a multiparty system and a directly
 elected president as chief of state. In the 1992 presidential election, Ion Iliescu was
 reelected President with 61 percent of the popular vote. The majority government
 coalition led by the Party of Social Democracy of Romania (PDSR) and headed by
 Prime Minister Nicolae Vacaroiu held power from the 1992 parliamentary elections
 until October 1995 when the PDSR severed links with two extremist parliamentary
 allies and became a minority Government. The Government has withstood four no
 confidence votes since 1992, despite the fact that the PDSR holds just 34 percent
 of the parliamentary seats.
 The Ministry of Internal Affairs supervises the police. The national police have
 primary responsibility for internal security, but in times of internal disorder the
 Government may call on the army and the border guard to assist the police with
 security. The police have become increasingly cognizant of human rights, although
 reports of abuse were not uncommon.
 Romania is a middle-income developing country that is making a gradual transi-
 tion from socialism to a market economy. In 1995 the private sector accounted for
 about 45 percent of gross domestic product (GDP) and employed more than half of
 the country's work force, primarily in agriculture and services. Government owner-
 ship remains dominant in industry, where 86 percent of output is produced by state-
 owned enterprises. Growth continues to accelerate and in 1995 reached 6.9 percent.
 GDP was about $35 billion in 1995 (or about $1,550 per capita). Implementation of
 a tough stabilization plan has reduced inflation from 290 percent in 1993 to 62 per-
 cent in 1994 and to 27.5 percent in 1995. To continue the momentum, the Govern-
 ment has instituted a mass privatization program which will privatize 3,900 state
 enterprises through a modified voucher system. Although unemployment was a rel-
 atively low 8.8 percent in November, it is expected to rise somewhat as privatiza-
 tion-induced restructuring begins to take effect.
 The Government generally respected the rights of its citizens, although several se-
 rious problems remain. The police continued to beat detainees frequently without
 effective action by the Government to punish abusers. Prison conditions remained
 poor. The judicial system was subject to executive branch influence. Government ap-
 pointed prefects dismissed democratically elected mayors without due process. Dis-
 crimination and societal violence against Roma continued, generally with impunity
 for those responsible, and and violence against women remained a serious problem.
 
 
 983
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no reports of political
 killings.
 On January 23 in Satu-Mare, three policemen arrested Istvan Kiss in his house.
 They told him that he had to witness a trial but instead took him to a police sta-
 tion. Two hours later Kiss was found severely injured in a street and died on the
 way to a hospital. The case was still under investigation by the military prosecutor
 at year's end. The case of a railway police officer charged in 1993 with abuse leading
 to the death of a beggar is still not resolved. The prison sentence of two police offi-
 cers charged with torture and murder in a 1992 case was reduced to 10 years on
 appeal. The trial of two secret service officers accused of murdering three citizens
 in 1991 continued at year's end.
 b. Disappearance.--mThere were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punshment.-
 The Constitution prohibits torture and inhuman or degrading punishment or treat-
 ment, and these prohibitions were generally respected in practice. However, police
 frequently used excessive force during arrest and beat detainees. The military pros-
 ecutor's office is charged with legal oversight of the police, an arrangement that
 human rights organizations believe inhibits prosecution or discipline of police mis-
 conduct (see Section i.e.).
 Prison conditions are poor, facilities are overcrowded and unhealthy, and medical
 assistance is meager. Credible reports indicated that beatings have occurred. Pris-
 ons continued to use the "cell boss' system in which some prisoners are designated
 to be in semiofficial charge of others.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The law forbids detention for more than
 24 hours without an arrest order from a prosecutor, who may order an extension
 for up to 30 more days. The law requires the authorities to inform a detainee of
 the charges and of the right to an attorney at all stages of the legal process; police
 must notify the defendant of this right in a language the defendant understands be-
 fore obtaining any statement. Detainees have the right to apply for bail and ma
 ask for a hearing before a judge, and this must be granted within 24 hours of suc
 a request. In the absence of a request, the authorities may hold a person for up to
 65 days without a court order. However, police often do not inform citizens of teir
 rights. Moreover, the prosecutor's office may delay action on a request for a lawyer
 for up to 5 days from the date of arrest. In practice, the local bar association pro-
 vides attorneys to indigents and is compensated by the Ministry of Justice.
 Exile was not used as a means of punishment.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-Undr the terms of a 1992 law, the judicial branch
 is independent of other government branches. However, 5 of the 15 members of the
 Superior Council of the  a  trature, which controls the selection, promotion, trans-
 fer, and sanctioning of judges, are prosecutors subordinate to a presidentially ap-
 pointed Prosecutor General, and all Council members are nominated by Parliament.
 Certain labor unions have alleged that the courts side with the Government in rul-
 ing on the legality of strikes and other labor actions. They charge that no court has
 ever ruled in favor of the workers in a labor action against a government entity.
 Although the judicial system continued to be at times subject to executive branch
 influence, it demonstrated increasing independence.
 The 1992 law reestablished a four-tier legal system, including appellate courts,
 which had ceased to exist under Communist rule in 1952. Defendants have final re-
 course to the Supreme Court or, for constitutional matters, to the Constitutional
 Court established in 1992.
 Cases involving military personnel and the police (who fall under the jurisdiction
 of the military prosecutor) and criminal acts aginst the State (including treason
 and espionage cases) are tried in a three-tier military court system. Local and inter-
 national human rights groups criticize this system, especially investigations con-
 ducted by the military prosecutor's office against police personnel accused of abuses.
 These critics claim that these investigations are unnecessarily lengthy and often
 purposefully inconclusive, and that the military courts sometimes block proper in-
 vestigation of police abuses.
 The law provides for fair public trial, and defendants benefit from a presumption
 of innocence. The Criminal Code requires that an attorney be appointed for a de-
 fendant who cannot afford legal representation or is otherwise unable to select coun-
 sel. Either a plaintiff or defendant ma appeal. These provisions of the law are re-
 spected in practice. The law provides that confessions extracted as a result of police
 brutality may be withdrawn by the accused when brought before the court.
 There were no reports of political prisoners.
 
 
 984
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy. Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Constitution provides for legal protection against the search of a residence without
 a warrant, but this protection is subordinate to "national security or public order."
 The 1992 National Security Law defines national security very broadly and lists as
 threats to national security not only crimes such as terrorism, treason, espionage,
 assassination, and armed insurrection, but also totalitarian, racist, and anti-Semitic
 actions or attempts to change the existing national borders. Security officials may
 enter residences without proper authorization from a prosecutor if they deem a
 threat to national security "imminent."
 The Constitution further states that the privacy of legal means of communication
 is inviolable; thus, the Romanian Intelligence Service (SRI) is legally prohibited
 from engag      in political acts (e.g., monitoring the communications of a political
 party). However, the laws on national security allow securit services to engage in
 such monitoring on national security grounds. Similarly, although the law requires
 the SRI to obtain a warrant from a prosecutor to carry out intelligence activities
 involving "threats to national security," it may engage in a wide variety of oper-
 ations, including "technical operations," to determine if a situation meets the legal
 definition of a "threat to national security."
 In 1995 arbitrary interference with citizens' right to privacy was rare. However,
 both citizens and foreign diplomats credibly reported opened mail, personal surveil-
 lance, and harassment. The official response to such complaints was that the SRI
 was not involved and that unreconstructed a      ts of the Securitate-the Com-
 munist-era internal intelligence service-or independent individuals were respon-
 sible.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-Although the Constitution provides for freedom
 of expression and prohibits censorship, it limits the bounds of free expression by
 prohibiting "defamation of the country." Amendments to the Penal Code contemplat-
 ing even tougher penalties for press and media violations were rejected by the Par-
 liament.
 The case against journalist Nicolae Andrei, charged in 1994 with slander, was in-
 active at year's end. The trial of two journalists from the proopposition daily Ziua
 began in the fall and continued at year's end, as both sides delayed the process with
 procedural objections and rulings. At the defendants' request, the court appointed
 a new judge in December, and the next court session was scheduled for January.
 The two are charged, under the existing Penal Code, with defaming the Presidency
 by alleging that President Iliescu was a Soviet spy. The trial's outcome will set a
 precedent, as the Ziua journalists are the first well-known journalists to be pros-
 ecuted under the Penal Code restrictions against defaming a state institution. While
 no charges were brought against journalists during the year, in smaller towns local
 administrators still occasionally try to exercise control over the press by bringing
 charges of calumny against local reporters.
 Chronic shortages of newsprint continued, although they caused no cessation of
 publication. The Government began a major effort to modernize the country's single
 newsprint plant. As a result, the plant was closed for several days in December,
 when it was announced that it will be closed for further modernization and repairs
 from January to March 1996. During the interregnum, newspapers will be forced
 to rely on imported newsprint supplies which are more expensive. The state news-
 paper distributor Rodipet remains the only large organization capable of delivering
 newspapers and magazines to smaller cities and towns nationwide. A few publica-
 tions, however, undertake their own distribution outside Bucharest, using alter-
 native, private means. Foreign news publications may be imported and distributed,
 but high costs limit their circulation.
 The independent electronic media continued to grow, although the frequencies
 under which they operate limit their audience. During most of the year, Romanian
 State Television (RTV) and Radio Romania were the only national broadcasters.
 However, new regulations passed in December provide for private television broad-
 casting, and by year's end one private channel had begun national broadcasting. It
 claims coverage of some 35 percent of the country and expects to reach 55 percent
 by the end of 1996.
 The 1994 administrative law that established boards of directors, appointed by
 Parliament, for   both   state  television  (RTV)  and   state  radio  remained
 unimplemented until December when Parliament finally nominated four candidates
 to fill the long-vacant positions. The delay allowed Parliament somewhat greater
 control over state television than it would have had if the board had been oper-
 ational.
 
 
 985
 Private broadcasting expanded rapidly. As of December, 34 independent television
 stations and 103 radio stations were operating. Citizens throughout the country
 have growing access to domestic and foreign broadcasts through the expansion of
 cable t'elevion throughout the country.
 In June the parliamentary commission responsible for overseeing the Romanian
 Intelligence Service (SRI) decided to investigate a June 21 incident in which SRI
 agents were accused of filming two journalists in Bucharest. One of the journalists
 earlier wrote several articles accusing President lliescu of having been a Soviet
 agent in his youth. In a June 27 appearance before the oversight commission, the
 SRI director claimed that the SRI agents had been on a counterespionage mission,
 had only accidentally filmed the journalists, and had been suspended from duty for
 lack of professionalism. The case remained in the courts at years end.
 Academic freedom is respected both inside and outside the classroom.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution provides for
 freedom of assembly, and the Government generally respected_ constitutional provi-
 sions and laws on free assembly in practice. The law on public assembly provides
 for the right of citizens to assemble peacefully while unarmed but states that meet-
 ings must not interfere with other economic or social activities and may not be held
 near locations such as hospitals, airports, or military installations. Organizers of
 demonstrations must inform local authorities and police before the events. The au-
 thorities may forbid a public gathering by notifying the organizers in writing within
 48 hours of receipt of the request. The law prohibits the organization of, or partici-
 pation in, a counterdemonstration held at the same time as a scheduled public gath-
 ering.
 The law forbids public gatherings to espouse Communist, racist, or Fascist
 ideologies or to commit actions contrary to public order or national security. It pun-
 ishes unauthorized demonstrations or other violations by imprisonment and fines.
 Constitutional provisions and laws on free assembly were generally respected.
 Citizens may form associations, including political parties, andmay obtain legal
 status for them by proving membership of at least 251fpersons.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides or religious freedom, and the
 Government does not generally impede the observance of religious belief. However,
 several Protestant denominations made credible allegations that low-level govern-
 ment officials harassed them and impeded their efforts at proselytism and worship,
 including refusal to grant long-term visas to foreign missionaries.
 A 1948 decree officially recognizes 15 religions whose clergy may receive state fi-
 nancial support. The State Secretariat for Religious Affairs has licensed more than
 300 faiths and organizations and foundations under two 1924 laws on juridical enti-
 ties, entitling them to juridical status as well as to exemptions from income and cus-
 toms taxes. The official registration of faiths and organizations is extremely slow be-
 cause of bureaucratic delays. Approximately 86 percent of the population nominally
 adheres to the Romanian Orthodox Church.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Government places no restrictions on travel within Romania, ex-
 cept in the case of certain small areas used for military purposes. Citizens who wish
 to change their places of work or residence do not face any official barriers. The law
 stipulates that citizens have the right to travel abroad freely, to emigrate, and to
 return. In practice, citizens freely exercise these rights.
 In 1991 Romania signed the 1951 Convention and the 1967 Protocol Relating to
 the Status of Refugees but still does not have implementing legislation. In its ab-
 sence, the Government cooperates with the United Nations HighCommissioner for
 Refugees (UNHCR) and has established committees headed by the Ministry of Labor
 and Social Protection to deal with refugee and migration issues. In the first 6
 months of 1995, 240 persons filed asylum applications. Of the 60,000 to 80,000 ille-
 gal migrants transiting from third world countries to Western Europe through Ro-
 mania, approximately 1,600 were registered as asylum seekers, of which 70 were
 recognized as refugees.
 As of July 31, a total of 445 refugees and asylum seekers depended on UNHCR's
 direct assistance for subsistence, including food, accommodation, clothing, medical
 assistance, and lanuage or vocational training. Another 300 to 400 asylum seekers
 relied on the UNHCR for legal assistance, social counseling, and translation serv-
 ices. Only about 15 refugees and asylum seekers are housed in the single govern-
 ment refugee camp.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 The Constitution provides citizens with the right to change their government
 through periodic and free elections held on the basis of universal suffrage, and they
 
 
 986
 have exercised this right. However, between 1992 and September 1995, government
 appointed prefects dismissed for various alleged abuses 133 freely elected mayors-
 116 of whom belonged to the opposition parties or were independent-prior to bind-
 ing legal ruling on the charges. In addition, prefects peremptorily removed a large
 number of local council members from office.
 There are no legal restrictions on the participation of women in government or
 politics, but societal attitudes constitute a significant impediment. Women hold 2.9
 percent of the seats in Parliament, have no cabinet positions, and number only 1.1
 percent of the mayors.
 The Constitution and electoral legislation grant each recognized ethnic minority
 one representative in Parliament's Chamber of Deputies, provided that the minori-
 ty's political organization obtains at least 5 percent of the average number of valid
 votes needed to elect a deputy outright (only some 1,100 votes in the 1992 elections).
 Organizations representing 13 minority group~s elected deputies under this provision
 in 1992. The ethnic Hungarians, represented by the Hungarian Democratic Union
 of Romania (UDMR), obtained 27 seats in the Chamber of Deputies and 12 seats
 in the Senate through the normal electoral precess. Roma are underrepresented in
 Parliament due to low Roma turnout at the polls and internal divisions which
 worked against the consolidation of votes for one Roma candidate, organization, or
 party. They have not increased parliamentary representation beyond the one seat
 provided them through the Constitution and electoral legislation.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Domestic human rights monitoring groups include the Romanian Helsinki Com-
 mittee, the independent Romanian Society for Human Rights, the League for the
 Defense of Human Rights, the Romanian Institute for Human Rights, and several
 issue-specific groups such as the Young Generation of Roma and the Center for Cri-
 sis Intervention and Study, also a Roma NGO. Other groups, such as political par-
 ties and trade unions, continued to have sections monitoring observance of human
 rights.
 These groups, as well as international human rights organizations, functioned
 freely without government interference and visited prisoners and detainees. How-
 ever, the authorities have not been cooperative with all human rights groups. The
 General Inspectorate of the police in the Ministry of Interior has frozen its relations
 with the Romanian Helsinki Committee since January 1994, when RTV aired a
 prime time 2-hour critical documentary prepared by the Committee. During a semi-
 nar on tolerance organized by the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Eu-
 rope (OSCE) and held in Bucharest, government officials refused to allow a Turkish
 NGO which had attended previous seminars organized by the OSCE to participate
 in the meeting.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution forbids discrimination based on race, nationality, ethnic origin,
 language religion, sex, opinion and political allegiance, wealth, or social back-
 ground. In practice, however, the Government does not effectively enforce these pro-
 visions, and women, Roma, and other minorities are subject to various forms of ex-
 tralegal discrimination.
 Women.-Violence against women, particularly rape, continued to be a serious
 problem. A study released in January by an American NGO, Minnesota Advocates
 for Human Rights, concluded that domestic violence is a pervasive problem which
 the Government has done little to address. There are no crisis centers, shelters, or
 hot lines for female victims, and media coverage is virtually nonexistent.
 According to Ministry of Interior statistics, 706 women were raped in the first 7
 months of 1995, with 12 resulting in the death of the victim. In practice, rape goes
 unpunished due to the difficulty of prosecution in view of the legal requirement for
 botha medical certificate and a witness.
 Both the Constitution and international conventions which Romania has adopted
 grant women and men equal rights. In practice, however, the Government does not
 enforce these provisions, nor do the authorities focus attention or resources on wom-
 en's issues. The rate of unemployment for women is significantly higher than for
 men, and women occupy few influential positions in the private sector. There are
 few recourses for women experiencing economic discrimination.
 Children.-The Government's system of health care and public education benefits
 children, but there are no programs for children with special needs. Most resources
 for children still flow mainly from international agencies and NGO's.
 
 
 987
 There was no perceptible pattern of societal abuse of children. Nevertheless, large
 numbers of impoverished and apparently homeless but not necessarily orphaned
 children roamed the streets of the larger cities. No government statistics are avail-
 able defining the scope of the problem, but deteriorating economic conditions con-
 tributed to increased juvenile delinquency and vandalism. Some NGO's cited special
 concern about the number of minors detained in jail and prison and were seeking
 alternative solutions, such as parole for juveniles.
 People With Disabilities.-Difficult economic conditions and serious budgetary con-
 straints contributed to very difficult living conditions for those who suffer physical
 or mental disabilities. Many disabled people cannot make use of government-pro-
 vided transportation discounts because public transport does not have facilitated ac-
 cess. Accessibility for the disabled, including to buildings and parking, is not man-
 dated by law.
 Religious Minorities.-More than 200 graves in a Jewish cemetery were vandal-
 ized over an extended period by minors. There was no evidence of anti-Semitic signs
 or graffiti. The parents of the minors charged with the vandalism were fined. The
 extreme wing of the nationalist press continued its anti-Semitic harangues, to the
 discomfiture of the remaining Jewish population of less than 15,000. President
 liescu has publicly condemned anti-Semitism, other types of racism, and xeno-
 phobia.
 NationallRacial/Ethnic Minorities.-Ethnic Hungarians constitute the largest
 and most vocal minority. The UDMR-the ethnic Hungarian political party-holds
 39 seats in Parliament. There was no violence in 1995 associated with ethnic Hun-
 garian problems despite extremist rhetoric from the Party of Romanian National
 Unity the resumption of archaeological excavations near the statue of Hungarian
 King Mateus Corvinus in Cluj, and other provocative acts by nationalist extremists.
 A highly controversial Law on Education was adopted in June. Although the law
 was deemed by the OSCE High Commissioner for National Minorities to be in line
 with European and international standards, it rescinds the rights of Hungarians to
 take university entrance examinations in Hungarian for those subjects not taught
 in Hungarian. It also dictates that certain vocational schools use only Romanian,
 which some Hungarians charge will disadvantage Hungarian ethnic citizens who
 work in these areas. However, implementation of the law has been postponed until
 1997, and the Government has accepted OSCE review of the implementation proc-
 ess.
 Roma continued to be subjected to acts of discrimination, harassment, beatings,
 and violence. The trial of the arsonists of 13 Romani homes in Hardeni in 1993 is
 still pending. The trial of the persons who torched 11 Romani homes in Racsa in
 May 1994 continues; the victims received apartments from the Government in Satu
 Mare and have not returned to Racsa. In January a conflict in the village of Bacu
 degenerated into violence, with Romanians shooting at two Roma, beating several
 others, and setting fire to three Romani houses. One woman suffered injuries so se-
 vere that she required amputation of a leg. The police have identified and arrested
 the arsonists.
 Without consulting Romani groups, government authorities adopted an official
 designation for the  vma which was considered highly derogatory by some Roma.
 This arbitrary decision was strongly criticized by some Roma as well as several
 OSCE member states.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Assomiation.-oThe law provides that all workers excet pubic em-
 ployees, police, and military personnel have the right to associate freely, to engage
 in collective bargaining, and to form and join labor unions without previous author-
 ization. No worker may be forced to join or withdraw from a union, and union offi-
 cials who resign from elected positions and return to the regular work force are pro-
 tected against employer retaliation. The majority of workers are members of about
 18 nationwide trade union confederations and smaller independent trade unions.
 The law stipulates that labor unions should be free from government or political
 party control, and the Government has honored this in practice. Unions are free to
 en ge in political activity and have done so.
 There are legal limitations on the right to strike only in industries such as de-
 fense, health care, transportation, and telecommunications, which the Government
 considers critical to the public interest. However, union members complain that
 unions must submit grievances to government-sponsored conciliation before initiat-
 ing a strike and are frustrated with the courts' propensity to declare illegal the
 major strikes on which they were asked to rule. Past studies have indicated that
 labor legislation adpted in 1991 falls short of International Labor Organization
 
 
 988
 (RDO) standards in several areas, including free election of union representatives,
 binding arbitration, and financial liability of strike organizers.
 In 1995 the ILO Committee on Freedom of Association asked the ILO governing
 body to approve its recommendation that the Government amend restrictive provi-
 sions on the right to strike. The recommendation resulted from the conclusion of an
 August 1993 strike launched by railway locomotive engineers, when the national
 railway company fired six union leaders. The 110 committee also asked the govern-
 ing body to approve its recommendation that the Government reinstate the sus-
 pended labor leaders. Unions representing divergent sectors of the economy carried
 out strikes, or threatened to strike, throughout 1995.
 Labor unions may freely form or join federations and affiliate with international
 bodies. The National Confederation of Trade Unions-Fratia (CNSLR-Fratia) and the
 National Union Bloc are affiliated with the International Confederation of Free
 Trade Unions (ICFTUJ). Alfa Cartel is affiliated with the World Labor Confederation.
 Representatives of foreign and international organizations freely visit and advise
 Romanian trade unionists.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectiuely.-Workers have the right to
 bargain collectively under the 1991 legislation, but collective bargaining efforts are
 limited by continued state control over most industrial enterprises and the absence
 of independent management representatives. Basic wage scales for employees of
 state-owned enterprises are established through collective bargaining with the State
 (see Section 6.e.). According to ICFTLs 1995 survey of violations, difficulties arose
 in the collective bargaining arena in the areas of unilateral employer changes to
 contracts, refusal of authorities to register collective agreements, and prevention of
 union organizing by some companies, among others. In July the Government signed
 a tripartite collective bargaining agreement with CNSLR-FRATIA and the National
 Union of Romanian Employees. The other major labor confederations refused to sign
 because they questioned the agreement's terms and the negotiating process. In No-
 vember CNSLR-FRATIA accused the Government of failing to comply with the pro-
 visions of the agreement. The law bars antiunion discrimination by employers.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The Constitution prohibits forced
 or compulsory labor. The Ministry of Labor and Social Protection (MOISP) effec-
 tively enforces this prohibition.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The minimum age for employment
 is 16 years, but children as young as age 14 or 15 may work with the consent of
 their parents or guardians although only "according to their physical development,
 aptitude, and knowledge." Working children under age 16 have the right to continue
 their education, and the law obliges employers to assist in this regaid. Child labor
 is not a problem, and children do not work illegally routinely. The MOLSP has the
 authority to impose fines and close sections of factories to enforce compliance with
 the law, which it enforces effectively.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-Most wage rates are established through col-
 lective bargaining at the enterprise level. However, they are based on minimum
 wages for given economic sectors and categories of workers which the Government
 sets after negotiations with industry representatives and the labor confederations.
 Minimum wage rates are generally observed and enforced. In addition, workers and
 pensioners receive salary increases indexed to price increases several times a year.
 In 1995 the minimum monthly wage, nominally $33 (L 85,000) in December, did not
 keep pace with inflation and did not provide a decent standard of living for a worker
 and family. The Government still partly subsidizes basic necessities such as milk,
 bread, housing, and medical care.
 The Labor ode provides for a standard workweek of 40 hours or 5 days, with
 overtime to be paid for weekend or holiday work or work in excess of 40 hours. It
 also includes a requirement for a 24-hour rest period in the workweek, although
 most workers receive 2 days off. Paid holidays range from 18 to 24 days annually;
 depending mainly on the employee's length of service. The law requires employers
 to pay additional benefits and allowances to workers engaged in particularly dan-
 gerous or difficult occupations.
 Some labor organizations press for healthier, safer working conditions on behalf
 of their members. The MOLSP has established safety standards for most industries
 and is responsible for enforcing them. However, it lacks sufficient trained personnel
 for inspection and enforcement, and employers generally ignore its recommenda-
 tions. Although they have the right to refuse dangerous work assignments, workers
 seldom invoke it in practice, appearing to value increased pay over a safe and
 healthful work environment. Neither the Government nor industry, still mostly
 state owned, has the resources necessary to improve health and safety conditions
 significantly.
 
 
 989
