 ROMANIA
 After 24 years of highly centralized and personal rule,
 Nicolae Ceausescu, President of the Socialist Republic of
 Romania and Secretary General of the Romanian Communist Party,
 was overthrown on December 22 by a spontaneous popular revolt,
 and a group of reform Communists, dissidents, intellectuals,
 students, and army generals called the National Salvation
 Front (NSF) took power. Ceausescu and his wife, Elena, the
 second most powerful figure in the country, were tried and
 convicted of genocide and other crimes by a secret military
 court and were executed on December 25. A provisional
 government formed by members of the NSF renamed the country
 Romania, declared its goal to be a pluralistic democracy, and
 called for free elections in April 1990.
 Under Ceausescu, the powerful Department of State Security,
 known as the Securitate (organizationally under the Ministry
 of Internal Affairs), had among its major functions providing
 protection for the leadership and suppression of dissent and
 opposition of any kind. The NSF decreed the dissolution of
 the security services, which even after Ceausescu's death
 continued to battle the army and engage in acts of terror
 against the population.
 The State controls all means of production. Only vestiges of
 private enterprise exist. In April the Government announced
 that it had paid off Romania's foreign debt, but there was no
 change in the stringent austerity program which has caused
 great hardship for the population. Shortages of consumer
 goods, rationed but often unavailable basic foodstuffs,
 rationed electricity, periodic lpck of cooking gas, and
 breakdown of heating facilities characterized daily life. One
 of the NSF's first actions was to cancel the restrictions on
 heating and electricity and to divert food stocks reserved for
 export sale to domestic consumption.
 Human rights were tightly circumscribed under Ceausescu's
 rule, and their observance in 1989 showed no improvement prior
 to the December revolution. Major problems included physical
 and mental abuse of prisoners, arbitrary arrest and detention,
 lack of fair trials', pervasive interference with privacy,
 family, home, and correspondence, and oppressive restrictions
 on freedom of speech, press, assembly, and association and
 worker rights, strict controls on religious activities, and
 denial of the right of citizens to change their government.
 Constant harassment by security forces stifled the expression
 of views different from those of the leadership. At least two
 secret trials of dissidents or of those related to dissidents
 occurred in 1989. Among'the NSF's early decisions were those
 permitting the formation of political paities, freedom of
 speech, the press, assembly, association, and religion, and
 authorizing the release of all political prisoners. The NSF
 has also renounced the Communist Party's leading- role in the
 State. At year's end, however, there was concern about the
 ability of other groups to mount effective opposition to the
 reform Communists and dissident members of Ceausescu's old
 regime that continued to lead the NSF. Ceausescu's severe
 repression so stifled dissent that there was no organized
 dissident activity to form a base of opposition.
 Members of the Hungarian ethnic minority in Transylvania
 continued in 1989 to object to government policies which, they
 claim, erode their ethnic identity. The NSF promised full
 rights and equality for the members of all ethnic minorities.
 
 
 1229
 ROMANIA
 Rural "systematization," or the restructuring of rural Rgmania
 to eliminate half of Romania's 13,000 villages and movejtheir
 inhabitants to regional "agroindustrial" centers, made little
 headway in 1989., The systematization of urban areas,
 including Bucharest, which had abruptly displaced thousands of
 people from their homes and had destroyed many historic
 buildings, homes, and churches, attracted international
 criticism. The NSF disavowed both programs.
 The Government under Ceausescu tightly controlled religious
 practice. It did not approve longstanding applications for
 church builaing permits or for expansion and renovation of
 church prdmi~ds, nor did it authorize a second printing of
 5,000 Bibles which it had promised in 1988 to the Baptist
 Unicon. At year's end, Christmas services were broadcast in
 Romania for the first time in more than 40 years, and the NSF
 undertook to end restrictions against'religious freedom.
 The Government approved more"emigration applications of
 Romanian citizens to the United States than in 1989 or 1988,
 but the authorities, contrary to the 1'985,bilateral agreement,
 frequently denied jobs, housing, schooling, and medical care
 to those who dpplied for emigration, even before they had
 received U.S. entry documents. The NSF announced that it
 would permit freedom of travel, and simplify the issuance of
 passports.
 The following report primarily describes the human rights
 situation as it existed before December 22 when Ceausescu was
 overthrown; Some of the institutions and practices that led
 to widespread human rights abuses apparently were being changed
 at year's end, and the next annual report is likely to include
 a significantly different assessment of human rights practices.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect'for the integrity of the Person,  ncluding
 Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing
 In their futile effort to crush antigovernment demonstrations
 in Timisoara, Bucharest, Snd other cities in mid-December,
 security forces loyal to Ceausescu indiscriminately killed
 hundreds, perhaps thousands, of unarmed civilians.
 Under Ceausescu's rule, allegations continued to be made that
 some prisbners are mistreated to the point of causing their
 death. There'are also credible reports that several priests
 who allegedly' showed too much independence were beaten and one
 was killed in incidents which the Government attributedto
 common criminals. No'suspects had been arrested by year's end.
 b. Disappearance
 Under Ctausescu's rule,'there were some politically motivated
 temporary disappearances in 1989 but no confirmed, unresolved
 cases. Family and friends of persons arrested on political
 charges were frequently left unaware of their arrest, their
 circumstances, and their location for long periods of time.
 
 
 1230
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 There were numerous reports during Ceausescu's rule that
 persons were mistreated while in Romanian prisons or police
 custody and that police authorities acted brutally to obtain
 information. Romanian authorities also used physical and
 mental degradation to intimidate those suspected of
 wrongdoing. Persons detained for questioning were often held
 incommunicado and kept for long periods without sleep, food,
 or access to toilet facilities. Those caught attempting to
 leave the country illegally, for example, were reportedly
 subject to physical and mental harassment, prior to being
 tried and sentenced. Reliable witnesses also reported
 incidents in which police administered severe beatings to
 persons arrested for minor infractions.
 The most common complaints about mistreatment cited long
 periods of isolation, excessive use of force by guards, cells
 which are badly ventilated and poorly heated, bad food in
 inadequate quantities, difficult working conditions, and
 segregation of prisoners deemed "dangerous to the State"
 because of their religious beliefs or for other reasons.
 Political prisoners who did not cooperate with their jailers
 reportedly were treated with great cruelty. They were
 generally kept apart from other offenders and restricted to
 their cells. Prison guards are said to have engaged in
 abusive behavior and allowed, and in some cases even
 encouraged, favored prisoners to punish those less favored.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, Exile
 Romanian law provides for either a judge or a prosecutor to
 issue an arrest warrant. Once arrested, a person may be-held
 without trial for up to 1 month before a hearing, but the
 prosecutor may obtain an extension for an additional
 3 months. Thereafter the court may order further extensions
 in 30-day increments. There is no limit set by law on the
 total length of time a person may be held prior to trial.
 Thene is no provision for bail, although those accused of
 ininor- or nonviolent offenses can be set free on their own
 recognizance at the judge's discretion.
 The law also provides for preventive detention. During
 Ceausescu's-rule, persons detained for investigation often
 were-held incommunicado. They were detained for varying
 periods of time, sometimes as long as several days, and then
 released without charge. Such arbitrary detention could be
 repeated several times, and the person could be called back
 repeatedly and threatened with further harassment or
 .punishment.
 During Ceausescu's rule, four persons were arbitrarily
 detained when they attempted to exercise their basic right to
 freedom of movement within Romania. One activist pastor was
 called in for questioning by police in order to make him miss
 a U.S. Embassy reception. Three other persons were detained
 (one on a charge of speeding to prevent their attendance at a
 trial, and one of the three missed his-own sentencing. This
 treatment was particularly common for religious activists and
 former political prisoners.
 The Ceausescu regime did not use.exile as a form of punishment.
 In many instances, it compelled persons to change their
 
 
 1231
 ROMANiIA
 residence and employment. This action effectively constituted
 internal exile and was accompanied by extrajudicial house
 arrest or forced domicile. In the case of such house arrest,
 the detainee was severely restricted in his movements, and
 contact with others, especially foreigners, was either
 partially or completely shut off.
 With regard to forced or compulsory labor, see Section 6.c.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The judiciary is constitutionally charged with defending the
 Socialist order and educating citizens to respect the law. No
 court has the authority to review the constitutionality of the
 laws. Theoretically, judges are independent and subject only
 to the law, but the outcomes~of politically sensitive cases
 during Ceausescu's rule often appeared predetermined and at
 times contradicted evidence offered during the trial.
 Most trials were held in public, though secret trials were
 common where state security was involved and could also be
 permitted in certain other cases. The law states that a trial
 may be held in secret if a public trial would be contrary to
 the interests of the State, Socialist morals, or the dignity
 of the iqdividual. Under Ceausescu's rule, some former
 prisoners reported they were tried in secret by military
 courts on essentially political charges. Detailed sentences
 or records of trials for political crimes were generally not
 available, even to the accused.- Four journalists who
 attempted to print an antigovernment manifesto were apparently
 tried in secret, convicted, and punished, and after release
 kept from all foreign contact. A Foreign Ministry official,
 who was arrested in January and charged with espionage, was
 tried and convicted in a secret trial before a military
 court. After Ceausescu's overthrow, he was released.
 In one trial of a religious dissident prosecuted on charges of
 theft of state property, the author-;ties excluded all
 observers from the first session and tried to pack the court
 and exclude supporters of the defendants at the second session.
 The ability of an accused person to defend himself or herself
 effectively was severely limited during Ceausescu's rule,
 especially in politically sensitive cases. The law in most
 cases requires that a defendant be represented by counsel,
 although some sources claimed that defendants did not always
 have an opportunity to consult with their attorneys before
 trial. The court may appoint an attorney to represent the
 defendant. In theory, a defendant has the right to choose
 another attorney, but in practice this right was severely
 restricted  Privately hired, attorneys often refused to accept
 political cases. Acquittals in such cases were rare, and when
 defendants pursued their right to appeal, they sometimes
 received longer prison terms from the higher courts.
 Many criminal laws are so worded that the authorities could
 charge persons coming under official scrutiny with some kind
 of offense. Examples of typical charges were "defaming the
 Socialist order" for speaking frankly to a foreigner;
 "disturbing the peace" or "illegal assembly" for private
 prayer meetings in the home; "social parasitism" if unemployed
 but technically guilty of no other offense; and "distributing
 literature without a license"--a felony--if caught attempting
 to transport or hand out free Bibles.
 
 
 1232
 The authorities frequently used "punishment'at the workplace"
 as an alternative to incarceration. Those prosecuted and
 convicted for nonpolitical crimes, including most prosecutions
 motivated by the campaign against religion, were sometimes
 released from prison to forced labor, which allowed them to
 serve their sentence at their usual job, with lesser
 compensation, and live at home.
 Prior to Ceausescu's overthrow, the number of political
 prisoners, including those convicted of trying to leave the
 country illegally and those tried with apparent political
 motivation for common crimes, was estimated at about 1,000.
 The NSF authorized the release of all political prisoners. On
 Christmas Day, Ceausescu and his wife, Elena, were tried by a
 secret military court and sentenced to death. The secret and
 summary nature of the proceedings did not accord with
 international norms of fair trial. Subsequent to the
 execution of Ceausescu and his wife on December 25, the NSF
 abolished the death penalty.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Under Ceausescu's rule, Romanian laws and regulations
 governing, the security apparatus sanctioned a high degree of
 interference with the individual and the family, which was
 somewhat mitigated by uneven enforcement, official corruption,
 and limitations on resources. Through intimidation and
 promises of material advantages, the security apparatus
 developed an extensive network of informers.
 Deliberate and arbitrary interference with the privacy of the
 family, home, and correspondence was frequent. Searches were
 made of private homes, persons, and personal effects without
 search warrants or probable cause that a crime may have been
 committed. The authorities occasionally entered homes on the
 pretext of looking for building code violations, excessive
 consumption of electricity, illegal use of electrical
 applicances, etc. These searches facilitated the discovery of
 forbidden books and publications, religious materials, or any
 other evidence of "wrongdoing." Militiamen at checkpoints
 located on roads leading out of cities and at major highway
 intersections in the countryside randomly stopped and searched
 vehicles as a matter of course.
 Until Ceausescu's overthrow, there was continued concern about
 the long-range plan to "systematize" or restructure rural
 Romania by eliminating approxim3tely 6,000-7,000 of the some
 13,000 Romanian villages and concentrating the population in
 over 500 towns to be redeveloped as "agroindustrial centers."
 There was also international concern and criticism over urban
 'systematization," especially in Bucharest where entire
 neighborhoods were torn down with a minimum of prior
 notification to residents, and many historic buildings,
 including churches, were destroyed. The NSF disavowed both
 programs.
 The authorities had the capability to monitor domestic and
 international telephone calls and, under Ceausescu's rule,
 appeared to do so regularly. Under the NSF, the practice of
 monitoring calls appears to have been abandoned.
 Romania's official policy during Ceausescu's regime was to
 encourage a higher birthrate, and it was considered the duty
 of every Romanian woman to produce five children. In order to
 
 
 1233
 prevent abortion, the authorities could compel a woman to show
 a doctor's certification'as to whether she was'pregnant or
 not. The NSF'restored the right of a woman to choose whether
 to have an abortion or to carry the baby to term.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. 'Freedom of Speech and Press
 Under Ceausescu's rule, these freedoms, while recognized in
 principle, were severely restricted. Public expression'of
 viewpoints at'variance with official policy was almost always
 severely punished. While the Constitution provides for
 freedom of speech and press, it prohibits their use for any
 purpose'hhostile to the Socialist system," as defined by the
 State and party. Similarly, the penal'code prohibits
 "propaganda with a Fascist character," any action aimed at
 changing the Socialist system, and acts endangering state
 security. These offenses are punishable by prison terms of up
 to 15 years. A 1971 law prohibits citizens from giving
 interviews to foreign media which "defame Socialist reality."
 Under-.Ceausescu's rule, all media were state owned, rigidly
 controlled, and 'uaed primarily as vehicles for governmeht and
 party-propaganda. 'Goverhment control of all necessary "
 materials, such aS newsprint, further limited the ability of
 the press to act independently.
 The unauthorized importation or distribution of foreign
 publications-was forbidden. In 1989 there were frequent
 reports of confiscations of foreign,�including religious,
 materials at the border. Publications from the West or from
 other Communist countries were not generally availablt,
 alth6ugh foreign- cultural centers and libraries'whi4h are'open
 to the public were allowed to distribute limited quanttitieg of
 Westekn periodicals with governdient apptoval. Romanian'
 libraries-carefully coitrolled access to'"restiicted"
 materials,.such-as-prewar historical'teits -For live theater,
 official boards had to approve all new productions-before the
 opening-performance -Serial numbers and type-face samples of
 all typewriters had to be registered with the authorities, and
 the use'6dfduplicating machinbs'was strictly regulated.
 Western radio-broadcasts inthe Roianian language were not
 jammedand*were a major source of both foreign and domdstic
 news for the Romanian people. -A~ademic freedom did not'
 exist.. Academics, writers, "and  journalists who dissented from
 officially sanctioned views were dismissed from their
 respedtive institutions.-         .
 Tfe'NSF restored-'freedom of speech afid'the press. While it
 controlled the national televfsion and'"radio stations and
 ,their output of information, it did not ifiteikere with the
 establishment of independent newspapers.
 .b.' Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 Under Ceausescu's rule, the Government attempted to control
 all group activity,"and its permission was required for
 holding public meetings and forming associationq. Peaceful
 assembly and association without permission were usually
 short-lived and-could bring severe penalties to those
 involved. "Formation of.a group" was'a punishable offense
 -applicable to groups as small as-three persons.
 
 
 1234
 
 Citizens were required to obtain permission in advance to
 attend functions hosted by non-Romanians. Secret decrees
 promulgated late in 1985 and never officially published
 further discouraged ~contacts with foreigners and strengthened
 the requirement that all such contacts be reported to the
 authorities within 24 hours. In particular, Romanian writers,
 scientists, and professionals were reportedly forbidden to
 speak with their foreign counterparts. without government
 permission.
 The NSF has not interfered in any activities by independent
 interest groups. Political parties are in the process of
 being established with the NSF's consent.
 For a discussion of freedom of association as it applies to
 labor unions see Section 6.a.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 The Constitution provides for freedom of conscience, and the
 penal code prescribes a penalty of up to 6 months'
 imprisonment or a fine for anyone who impedes or disrupts any
 recognized religious sect.: However, the Communist Party under
 Ceausescu's leadership officially promoted atheism, and the
 Government exercised broad control over religious practice.
 Although many Romanians feared that open exercise of their
 beliefs damaged their chances of social or professional
 advancement, religious practice remained very active.
 There are 14 recognized religions, by far the largest being
 the Romanian Orthodox Church, to which about 80 percent of the
 population belongs. During Ceausescu's regime, most other
 denominations were of the opinion that the Orthodox Church
 received favored treatment from the Government, especially in
 the realm-o f-finances and education. The Government
 subsidized clerical salaries (which some denominations did not
 accept)., issued Licenses to preach, controlled permits for
 church -cnstruction or xenovation, severely limited the number
 of new-admissions-to seminaries, and controlled the
 importation and printing of religious materials, including
 Bibles. Government restrictions were usually directed against
 groups whose beliefs, in the Government's view, inspired
 "antisocial, or "antigovernment" behavior. Several of these
 were unrecognized religious groups, such as the Nazarenes and
 Jehovah's Witnesses. In 1989 there were no reports of
 significant restrictions on meetings held by these groups.
 The Ceausescu regime remained in disagreement with the Roman
 Catholic Church, a majority of whose members are ethnic
 Hungarians, on a number of issues, and- the Church technically
 remained without a government-approved charter. However, the
 church enjoyed de facto recognition and operated as if it were
 fully recognized.
 The Government under Ceausescu did not recognize the Uniate
 Church, also known as the Catholic Church of the Byzantine
 Rite. This denomination was outlawed in 1948, and many of its
 leaders were imprisoned. Despite its unrecognized status,
 there remain adherents to this faith throughout the country.
 The Government also took active measures to suppress a revival
 movement within the Romanian Orthodox Church known as "The
 Lord's Army." Members of this group often met in small
 gatherings for prayer and Bible study, and they reported being
 fined for holding illegal assemblies. They also reported
 
 
 1235
 ROAIA
 being subject to other harassment, such as loss of jobs or
 surveillance.
 The rapid growth of evangelical denominations has led to
 pressures for more religious training, more printing of
 religious materials, and the expansion and construction of
 more churches. Conflicts between evangelical groups and the
 authorities arose frequently, and the Government's response
 was at times harsh. Activists who were vocal were kept under
 surveillance and often were subject to loss of jobs and social
 benefits, police intimidation or arrest, and in some cases,
 beatings.
 Many religious denominations were able to publish a newspaper'
 or newsletter- n a regular basis. They were also permitted
 from time to time to publish other religous materials,
 although usually in small quantities. A second printing of
 5,000 Protestant Bibles, under negotiation since 1987 between
 the Government and the Baptist Church, has still not taken
 place. The shortage of religious materials overall led some
 Romanians to risk severe penalties for smuggling Bibles and
 other religious literature..
 Religious groups continued to be concerned over issues of
 maintenance, repair, and construction of church buildings.
 Eztensiye urban renewal projects, undertaken in Bucharest and
 other cities, continued to threaten churches of various
 faiths. The Government was often slow to approve the purchase
 Or construction of replacement buildings for the affected
 congregations, for example, the. second Baptist Church in
 Oradea. There -is still no replacement for the large
 Seventh-Day Adventist Church in Bucharest, demolished in
 August 1985, although the denomination recently purchased a
 .site. The congregation continues to meet in a temporary,
 tent-like structure inadequate to its needs. A. replacement
 was finally found for the seminary demolished in 1988, and
 classes -began. in the fall of 1989.
 Any repair or addition to a church building requires a
 building permit.approved by both the local city council and
 the Government's Department of-Religious Affairs. Church
 members state there were unreasonable delays in obtaining
 these approvals. A church could be demolished, or the
 congregation fined large sums, for infractions of the building
 codes. In past years, churches of. various denominations were
 demolished 9o threatened with demolition under these
 rjegulations.. The Comanest-i Baptist Church was demolished in
 May, and four members of the church building committee were
 tried and'convicted of theft of construction materials. The.
 congrfegation was finally allowed to resume services in
 December in a private home but did not receive authorization
 to remodel the house to suit their needs. Their pastor was
 still not allowed to officiate at their services.
 There 1s1an active Jewish community organization which
 provideh religious education to its members and enjoys
 relatively unrestricted.freedom of emigration. Jewish leaders
 emphasize that, due to the level of jemigration to Israel
 permitted by the Romanian Government, their numbers are
 declining, and they are permitted to maintain enough
 synagogues to meet their needs.
 Leaders of religious denominations generally received
 permission to travel abroad on official business without
 difficulty. Eoreign visitors preached occasionally in
 
 
 1236
 ROMANIA
 Romanian churches. There were three reported cases in 1989 of
 unofficially invited clergymen who were either told or asked
 to leave Romania by the authorities after their visits to
 Romanian churches.
 After the NSF took power, the Romanian Orthodox Church had its
 Christmas service broadcast over nationwide television. The
 NSF plans to eliminate restrictions on religious freedom.
 d. Freedom of-Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Except for certain very limited military or other restricted
 areas (access prohibited) and border areas (access limited to
 residents of the areas and those with economic need to travel
 there), there are no official restrictions placed on travel
 within Romania. Most foreigners, including Western diplomats,
 are permitted to travel freely but often were kept under
 surveillance.
 The right of citizens to change their place of residence is
 restricted. All citizens are required to have residence
 permits and may not legally move from one town to another, or
 between districts within a city, without official permission.
 Workers are technically free to change jobs-, although
 antiunemployment laws and governmental controls may limit this
 freedom in practice.
 Under Ceausescu's rule, travel outside Romania was treated as
 a privilege, frequently arbitrarily withheld, even for those
 who could "guarantee' their return by leaving a close family
 member behind. Employees generally had to obtain the approval
 of their "workers' committee" to apply for tourist passports.
 The NSF announced freedom of travel for all Romanians and the
 issuance of passports without delay.
 In principle, the Government under Ceausescu continued to
 oppose emigration for any purpose but family reunification and
 sought to discourage those wishing to emigrate. The
 authorities sometimes refused arbitrarily to accept emigration
 applications from some Romanians. Romanians who applied for
 emigration or who held emigration approval were frequently
 harassed and discriminated against.
 In February 1988, Romania renounced U.S. most-favored-nation
 tariff status, which was tied to Romania's emigration
 performance by U.S. trade legislation. The Government pledged
 -to continue approving emigration applications for the purpose
 of family reunification, and the rate of approvals for
 emigration to the United States during 1989 was higher than
 either in 1987 or 1988-.
 A Romanian citizen who emigrates abroad must obtain the
 approval of the Government before resuming residence in
 Romania. Such approval was not always granted by the
 Ceausescu regime, but the NSF stated it would permit the
 repatriation of Romanians who had emigrated or sought asylum
 abroad. Several political exiles returned to Romania without
 incident by year's end.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Although the Constitution assures the right of Romanians to
 change their government and leaders, in practice they were
 
 
 1237
 unable to exercise this right under Ceausescu's rule. The
 Romanian Communist Party, led by.Ceausescu, his wife, and a
 few advisers, ruled the-country, tolerating no opposition and
 suppressing public criticism and dissent from their policies.
 Officially, the Communist Party comprised about 16 percent of
 the total population or about one-third of the adult
 population. The Grand National Assembly (parliament) met for
 two short sessions every year and approved the President's
 decisions by unanimous.vote. There is universal, compulsory
 suffrage for those over the age of 18.
 Street demonstrations protesting Ceausescu's rule erupted in
 Timisoara in western Romania on December 17. Despite the
 intervention of-the army and security forces, which caused
 many deaths, the protests continued in Timisoara and spread to
 other cities. Army units in many instances refused to fire on
 demonstrators,-.jining them instead. In Bucharest, thousands
 of people attending a large public meeting on December 21
 shouted down Ceausescu instead of applauding him, and the
 security forces attempted unsuccessfully to suppress the
 protests by force, causing many casualties.' When Ceausescu
 fled the city on December 22, a group of reform-minded
 Communists, dissidents, intellectuals, students, and generals
 assumed authority, calling'itself the National Salvation Front.
 The NSF, numbering 29 members at first and expanding to 145
 members later, rgles by decree through an-11-member executive
 committee.. It promised free elections in April 1990 in which
 all political parties may participate. With the overthrow of
 Ceausescu and his execution, and the arrest of all members of
 the party's Political Executive Committee, the C6mmunist Party
 was deprived of its leading roAe in the State, but members (or
 former members) of thdeCommunist Party appear to be dominant
 in the NSF.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights.
 There are no human rights monitoring organizations operating
 in Romania. No'outside groups were permitted to visit Romania
 to investigate alleged violation.of human rights during
 Ceausescu'ls rule. ,.The Government under Ceausescu did not
 comment officially on reports issued by governmental or
 nongovernmental organizations such as the Council of Europe,
 Amnesty International, or Freedom House, all of which were
 harshly critical.
 Romania continued officially to proclaim that discussion and
 .xamination of its human rights situation was "unwarranted
 interference in:.domestic affairs," despite its.professed
 support for human rights standards embodied in the United
 Nations Charter and the Final Act of the Conference on
 Security and Cooperation in Europe (CSCE).
 After Romania signed the Vienna Concluding Document Of the
 CSCE, it announced that it did not consider itself bound by
 those parts of the document related to the human dimension
 (humpan, rights), which it had tried but failed to amend.
 Romania consistently refused to respond to 'ny request related
 to human-rights. The NSF has pledged that Romania will
 fpitlifully observe its CSCE human rights commitments.
 
 
 1238
 The November 14-17 session of the International Labor
 Organization (ILO) Governing Body establishedca commission of
 inquiry to look into a complaint against Romania for
 employment discrimination @aainst ethnic minorities. The
 Government rejected the dedision as null and void, despite
 reminders of Romania's obligation as an ILO member to
 cooperate. The complaint refers to employment discrimination
 against the Hungarian minority.
 In 1989 the Government sought to prevent a Romanian citizen,
 Dumitru Mazilu, from carrying out his responsibilities as
 special rapporteur to the U.N. Human Rights Commission, a
 position to which he had been named in 1985. Romanian
 representatives stated that Mazilu was too ill to prepare his
 report; Mazilu wrote U.N. officials that it was only the
 actions of his Government that impeded him. In spite of
 attempts to cut Mazilu off from all contact with the United
 Nations, he was somehow able to transmit his report, which was
 published in August. The Romanian authorities then
 intensified their surveillance and ,ha-rassment of Mazilu and
 his family and blocked efforts by foreign diplowats to gain
 access to him. After "Ceausescu's overthrow, Mazilu became
 First Vice Chairman of the NSF.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status.
 According to off-icial figures, about 12 percent (2.7 million)
 of Ramanials23.million citizens,-are members-of ethnic
 minorities,-Including.Hungarians; Germans, Gypsies, and many
 smaller groups. Based -on a 1977-census utilizing
 sself-declaration, the Government under Ceausescu stated that
 ethnic Hungarians make up the largest minority withi some 1.7
 million members. Some Hungarian sources claim the true figure
 for the ethnic Hungarian population is over 2 million.
 Most minority groups are concentrated-in Transylvania, the
 central and northwestern part of Romania. In recent years,
 Ceausescu's regime reduced the opportunities for minorities to
 have periodicals, theaters, and schools in their native
 language. The.abklityfof members of minority groups to-visit
 friends and relatives-in neighboring countries was limited.
 Minority agroups protested that government controls and
 restrictions-constituted discrimination. Many observers
 maintained the-Govexnment under Ceausescu was pursuing a
 program of."Romenianization" in-order gradually to absorb the
 minority groups into a unified Romanian culture. The
 Government denied-discriminating against .mincrity cultures.
 There are no longer any television or nadio broadcasts in the
 Hungarian language. Most Hungaran-languag-.%theaters now have
 a Romanian-language section. Hungarian- -and German-language
 newspapers continue to be printed.
 In the field of education, primary schooling is still
 available in Hungarian and German, and eventin the native
 language of tUnyrminorities, such as Czechs in western
 Romania, although opportunities -are shrinking. Under
 Ceausescu's rule, the number of ethnic-Hungarian children
 being educated in Hungarian declined significantly.- Several
 German-language high schools still operate, although they face
 declining enrollment of native German speakers because of the
 emigration of members of the ethnic German community. Several
 sources report that Hungarian-language sections in high
 schools have replaced what were formerly entirely Hungarian-
 
 
 1289
 ROMNIA
 language high schools. Except in a few departmehts, students
 can no longer take university entrance examinations in
 minority languages, and opportunities for university study in
 Hungarian have also decreased.- Babes-Bolyai University in
 Cluj, formerly two universities, one conducting its courses in
 the Romanian language, the other in Hungarian, has increased
 its intake -of ethnic Romanian students over the years and made
 Romanian the language of instruction in most subjects. All
 publications, including those in the languages of minority
 groups, must use the Romanian place names, not the Hungarian
 or German equivalents.
 Ethnic Hungarians point to other government policies under
 Ceausescu they believe were designed to erode their cultural*
 idefitity. Under a 1989 regulation, parents were no longer
 permitted to give their children Hungarian names which do not
 have Romanian equivalents. Members of the Hungarian minority
 claim that the Government used its controls over residence
 permits, employment, and study opportunities to dilute the
 concentration of the Hungarian population in its traditional
 centers. The Government maintained that demographic changes
 in Transylvania are natural and result in part from increased
 industrialization which has drawn ethnic Romanian workers into
 urban areas formerly inhabited- predominantly by ethnic
 Hungarians.
 Women are constitutionally accorded the same rights and
 privileges as men. The Government under- Ceausescu sought to
 upgrade the role of'women in society with specific policies in
 the'areas of education, access to employment, and cbmparable
 wages.
 There is no information available on the extent to which
 violence against women, including wife beating, may occur.
 The Government during Ceausescu's rule gave no indication
 through the controlled press or through legislation that it
 perceived a problem, and neither the Communist-controlled
 women's organization nor independent human rights activists
 addressed this subject.
 Section 6 Wurker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 Although the Constitution stipulqtes the right to join a
 union, the labor code states that the primary function of the
 trade unions is tb "mobilize the-masses for the fulfillment of
 the Communist Party's program," and trade unions independent
 of the party were prohibited. Romania's single trade union
 system is imposed by law. The Labor Code entrusts the
 party-controlled General Confederatibn of Trade Unions (UGSR)
 with dxclusive'responsibility to represent the workers before
 the Government. Under Ceausescu's rule, workers did not have
 the right to form their own associations, elect
 representatives, or affiliate with international organizations
 except'through the official unions. Attempts to form
 independent groups or unions were quickly suppressed.
 Romania's labor code is silent on the right to strike, except
 to elaborate procedures by which the union leadership is
 required to mediate disputes between the workers and
 management, with recourse to the courts when the dispute
 cannot be settled. In practice, sanctions available to the
 party and the union made it unlikely that such disputes would
 reach the courts or be settled in a manner favorable to the
 
 
 1240
 ROMA&NIA
 worker rather than to the Government. Individual workers who
 have been dismissed from their jobs may sometimes take their
 case to civil court. Under Ceausescu's rule, the Government's
 reaction to actual strikes, or to advocacy of the worker's
 right to strike, was harsh repression. Worker demonstrations
 in Brasov in 1987 were swiftly suppressed by the Government.
 There were no confirmed reports of strikes or protests since
 then--until the dramatic wave of political protests in
 December 1989.
 In 1987 Romania lost its eligibility for the U.S. Generalized
 System of Preferences (GSP) tariff treatment after the U.S.
 Government found that Romania was not taking steps to afford
 its workers internationalally recognized worker rights.
 In 1989 the International Confederation of Free Trade Unions
 (ICFTU) lodged a complaint in the ILO alleging that the
 Government resorted to acts of reprisal and repression
 (discriminatory measures, imprisonment, violence, dismissals,
 and demotions, as well as forced labor) against individuals
 who attempted to form trade unions outside the official labor
 central or who participated in protest movements or strikes.
 The ICFTU cited the June 1988 arrest of 34 workers from an
 armaments factory who had met to discuss the creation of an
 independent union. It also charged that between 50 and 80
 workers had been reported missing since the demonstrations
 which took place in Brasov in November 1987 and that several
 dozen workers were still under detention in 1989 despite an
 amnesty decreed in 1988. These charges were extensively aired
 by several ILO supervisory bodies in 1989. In addition, the
 ILO's Governing. Body, in November 1989, established a
 Commission of Inquiry to look into another complaint against
 Romania for employment discrimination against ethnic
 minorities.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 Workers do not have the right to organize or bargain
 collectively. Wages are set in Romania by central planning
 boards. While workers nominally have a direct voice in the
 management of the workplace through the unions that all must'
 join, in most factories during Ceausescu's regime the union's
 chief executive was also the senior party official, and a
 primary function of the unions was to channel party doctrine
 and directives to the workers. Unions also dispensed social
 benefits, such as vacations at union-owned hotels (for which
 the member pays only a fraction of the real cost),
 low-interest loans, and access to cultural, educational, and
 other leisure activities.
 The institution of unrealistic production and sales quotas
 during Ceausescu's rule and penalties irr the form of salary
 deductions for failure to meet them increased worker
 dissatisfaction. No mechanism existed by which the workers
 could protest such arbitrary reductions in pay. The worker
 demonstrations in Brasov in 1987, which were suppressed by the
 Government, were called to protests pay cuts and poor living
 conditions.
 There are no export processing zones in Romania.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 The labor code stipulates that each citizen over the age of 16
 has the right and the duty to work. Unemployment is a crime
 
 
 1241
 ("social parasitism"). With certain exceptions, such as
 housewives, full-time students, and private farmers, any
 unemployed able-bodied citizen must report to a government
 employment bureau for placement in a job. A 1976 law states
 that persons who refuse to take up gainful employment may be
 fined or assigned to positions in the construction,
 agricultural, or other sectors of the economy where they are
 required to complete 1 year of service.
 Since 1985 the Committee of Experts of the ILO has observed
 that these provisions of Romanian law appear to constitute
 forced labor in that they are an obligation to work under the
 menace of penalties. At the 1988 ILO Conference of the
 Committee on the Application of Conventions and
 Recommendations, the Romanian Government took the position
 that these laws served to encourage able-bodied citizens to
 contribute productively to society and that the sanctions
 provided for by law had never been applied. Other sources
 note, however, that individuals were frequently convicted for
 "social parasitism" under a 1968 law which provides
 imprisonment as a sanction for persons not gainfully employed.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 There is no specific minimum employment age, although Romanian
 law requires schooling to age 16. According to the employment
 code, children over 16 not enrolled in full-time schooling are
 expected to work. Youths 14 years of age may be employed in
 temporary jobs, and youths of 15 may be employed in industrial
 work, so long as the employer provides continuing educational
 opportunities and shows that the work being performed is
 "appropriate for the age and condition" of the employee. In
 such cases, the law limits work to 6 hours per day. Children
 from age 11 may work in the fields or in other "patriotic
 labor," usually as part of a school or other group activity.
 b. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 The Constitution provides for an 8-hour workday (a 6-hour day
 for arduous occupations}, a 24-hour rest period each week,
 paid vacations, and the "right to leisure." The monthly
 minimum wage is equivalent to-$220 at the official exchange
 rate. It is diffocult if not impossible to maintain an
 adequate standard of living at average wage levels. Labor law
 elaborates further on these standards but allows employers to
 override them "if conditions warrant." In 1989 there were
 widespread reports of workers required to perform extra,
 uncompensated labor to make up for lagging production or for
 official holidays. Workers also reported that wages and
 salaries were cut when an enterprise failed to meet its
 production quota, even though production shortfalls were often
 due to the lack of raw materials or insufficient electric
 power.
 The labor code promises Romanian workers a safe environment,
 and the Ministry of Labor has established safety standards for
 most industries and is responsible for enforcing them. In
 practice, however, observers report that conditions in many
 factories present substantial health and safety hazards.
 Unions theoretically also have a responsibility to protect
 worker health and safety. Although management and unions are
 reportedly aware of these deficiencies in most cases, the
 Ceausescu regime's emphasis on meeting production goals took
 precedence over safety and health factors in light of
 Ceausescu's insistence on rapidly paying off the foreign debt
 
 
 1242
 and on pursuing industrial and economic development at all
 cost. A government-run institute devoted to worker safety and
 health concerns has existed since 1968. It is relatively
 small and does not appear capable of challenging unrealistic
 government production targets or eliminating hazardous working
 conditions, but it does work to ameliorate extreme conditions
 in some factories (workers receive supplementary benefits in
 some hazardous occupations).
 
 
 1243
