 ROMANIA
 Romania is a centralized unitary state. The government
 exercises strict authoritarian control over civil and
 political rights and economic decision making. At the
 same time, since the early 1960's , while remaining a
 member of the Warsaw Pact, Romania has asserted a policy
 of independence from the Soviet Union in such areas as
 foreign policy and diversified foreign trade.
 While considerable economic advances have been made in the
 last 36 years and the nation has changed from an almost
 entirely agricultural country to one with a significant
 industrial sector, its present per capita gross national
 product is $1883. The government attempts to provide work
 for all citizens and to make available a wide range of
 social services. Romania maintains a tight emigration
 policy and has strict limitations on political expression
 and religious activities outside officially designated
 church buildings.
 Romania generally has shown receptivity to concerns
 expressed by the international community about its human
 rights practices.
 1.    Respect for the Integrity of the Person, including
 Freedom from:
 a.    Torture
 Torture is prohibited by Articles 180-183 of the Romanian
 penal code, which set prison terms for beating or any act
 of violence causing physical suffering. Police brutality
 is reported with regularity, however. Amnesty
 international's report for 1980 claims that political
 prisoners frequently are beaten, verbally threatened and
 are subject to strong psychological pressures.
 b.    Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 Conditions of confinement are poor for all prisoners.
 Former prisoners report overcrowded unsanitary conditions
 of imprisonment, poor and inadequate diet, long working
 hours and minimal medical care. Prisoners occasionally
 are kept in relative or complete isolation and at times
 are refused access to their families.
 Rehabilitation through work is common in the Romanian
 system of justice, and the vast majority of prisoners in
 Romania must work while in prison. While work labor camps
 appear to be seldom used today, the so-called forced domi-
 cile system is a common form of punishment. This
 generally involves work without wages and transfer to a
 workplace far from the prisoner's home. As forced domi-
 cile rarely involves incarceration, it is considered a
 more lenient form of punishment by Romanians.
 Capital punishment exists in Romania. It has not been
 applied to political crimes for many years. It has been
 imposed once in the past five years (in a murder case in
 1980.)
 Reports of confinement of prisoners and dissidents in
 psychiatric hospitals persist even though substantiating
 evidence of recent cases is virtually impossible to obtain.
 
 
 867
 c.    Disappearances
 Disappearances and clandestine detention of persons do not
 occur in Romania.
 d.    Arbitrary Arrest and Imprisonment
 Police harassment is a common feature of everyday life for
 those who are politically active beyond the limits set by
 the Communist Party, or who press for an active, expanding
 church. Activists of this type, however, are rarely
 arrested and charged with a serious political offense,
 such as those listed under Article 166 or 167 of the Penal
 Code (1973) but are usually accused of "parasitism"
 (Presidential Decree 153/1970). Reports that Decree 153
 is used to provide an additional means of recruiting
 seasonal work forces and mobilizing workers to carry out
 unpleasant economic projects appear to be without
 foundation. Prisoners sentenced for political offenses
 under Decree 153 or for more serious.political acts rarely
 are allowed to work outside of the prison and generally
 are segregated from normal prisoners.
 There have also been reports that on~occasion people are
 confined for prolonged periods without charge. There is
 no habeas corpus in Romania, and no effective legal remedy
 for such persons exists.
 e.    Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The government can hold trials in camera when it so
 chooses. Defendants are allowed access to counsel at some
 time before their trial. There are reports, however, that
 occasionally inadequate time is given in which to prepare
 a defense. Emergency trial procedures may be used to
 arrest, try and sentence a defendant in less than 48 hours.
 f.    Invasion of the Home
 The constitution guarantees the inviolability of the
 home. A person's dwelling can be entered by the
 authorities, provided the required judicial warrant has
 been authorized. There are reports of forced entry
 without a warrent in cases involving political dissidents.
 2.    Government Policies Relating to the Fulfillment of
 Such Vital Needs as Food, Shelter, Health Care and Education
 Romania is officially designated a developing country by
 the International Bank for Reconstruction and
 Development. With a population of 22,135,000 at the end
 of 1979, Romania's per capita national income (or net
 material product) was $1,883 in current prices not
 adjusted for inflation. The country has sustained
 economic growth rates among the highest-in the world for
 the past three decades. From a backward, largely agrarian
 economy, it has reached its present semi-industrialized
 state principally by maintaining extremely high rates of
 investment in development and restricting consumption.
 The Romanian government has pursued a policy of holding
 the growth of consumption below that of national income in
 the interest of reinvestment in economic growth.
 
 
 868
 Romania's population growth has varied between 0.5 and 1.0
 percent over the last five years. The'government
 encourages population growth and restricts the sale of
 contraceptives. The population shift from rural to urban
 areas has been dramatic in the period since World War II.
 In 1948, only 23.4 percent of the population lived in
 urban areas as compared to 50 percent at the end of 1979.
 This rapid migration of the population from rural areas to
 cities has contributed to a housing problem in urban
 areas. Actual construction of apartments has tended to
 lag somewhat behind the government's ambitious targets in
 this area. In 1980, the average living space per
 inhabitant was recorded as 9.7 square meters with 1.41
 persons per room. The authorities intend to construct 1.1
 million new dwellings in the 1981-85 period, with one
 million of them to be built in urban areas (a fifth in
 Bucharest alone). Plans to permit the state to assign
 tenants to homeowners with excess space were dropped in
 response to popular disapproval of the proposal.
 According to Romanian law, all land belongs to the state.
 There are, however, provisions for the use of limited
 quantities of agricultural land by private citizens and
 for the legal inheritance of the right to use such land.
 Romanian data show that 9.4 percent of all agricultural
 land was held by individual farmers as of 1978. In the
 same year, 60.6 percent of agricultural land was used by
 agricultural cooperatives and 30 percent by state farms.
 There have been only minor modifications in this pattern
 of land distribution since the mid-1960's.
 Other property, including personal property and housing,
 may be privately owned, although there are a number of
 restrictions on the right to property. Economic
 enterprises are state-owned except for a few small service
 or handicraft shops which can be owned or run by private
 citizens.
 The Romanian constitution provides guarantees of
 employment to all citizens and of equal pay for equal
 work. Official records show full employment. In
 practice, there is chronic under-employment, especially in
 the agricultural sector. At present, workers in industry
 have a work week of 46 to 48 hours, depending on the
 sector. The new five-year plan projects a 44-hour work
 week by 1985.
 Romanian law sets a maximum ratio of 1:6 between minimum
 and maximum salaries. Current official policy is to
 reduce this ratio to 1:5.5. The average net monthly
 salary of a Romanian worker in 1980 was 189 dollars at the
 current official conversion rate, as compared-to a salary
 of some 133 dollars per month using the same conversion
 rate in 1975. This would represent a 42.1 percent growth
 in the average salary over the 1975-80 period. The
 Romanian authorities have projected a "real" salary growth
 (adjusted for comparable values) of some 30 to 32 percent
 for the same period. Officially, the effect of inflation
 for the five-year period is calculated at only some 6
 percent, but Western economic observers think that the
 effect of inflation is considerably higher.
 
 
 869
 Complicated regulations exist for establishing the wages
 of workers in accordance with their professional training
 or skills, seniority, and the difficulty of their work.
 Wages are not the only item of income, but the majority of
 workers in industry presumably live on their salaries, and
 state social allocations. Special non-monetary
 perquisites are made available to some high ranking party
 and state officials, as well as to cultural and athletic
 figures and other nationally and internationally prominent
 individuals.
 According to Romanian data, 21.3 percent of total budget
 expenditures in 1975 and 23.5 percent in 1980 were
 allocated to education, culture, sport, health, social
 assistance and pensions, family allocations and social
 security.
 The most recent statistics published on average life
 expectancy (the data covers the period 1976-78) show the
 males in Romania could expect to live to 67.42 years and
 females to 72.18 years. For 1977, 31.2 children under one
 year of age die out of 1000 live births. In 1975 there
 were 9.2 hospital beds (excluding maternity beds and
 sanitaria) per 1000 inhabitants. For the same years, the
 number of doctors per inhabitant grew from one per 624 to
 one per 593.
 Ten years education is compulsory and is provided without
 charge by the state. When parents' incomes are below a
 specified minimum, the state provides scholarships.
 Beginning with the third year of secondary education,
 examinations are required for placement in the limited
 openings at both the secondary and the university level.
 Evening courses and work-study programs are available to
 students at technical institutes. According to the
 Romanian authorities, illiteracy has been eradicated.
 Adequate quantities of food and clothing are normally
 available to the Romanian citizen, although the Romanian
 market is plagued by intermittent shortages of basic
 consumer items, including meat. According to official
 estimates, the average daily food consumption in Romania
 in 1980 was 3,240 calories.  The quality of foodstuffs
 and clothing kept for domestic consumption is inferior to
 what Romania exports to earn hard currency to pay for
 imports needed by its industry. Among non-food items, the
 following consumer durables were expected to be available
 per 1000 inhabitants as of 1980: radios 247;
 televisions 203; refrigerators 157 and private
 automobiles 28.
 3.    Respect for Civil and Political Liberties, Including:
 a.    Freedom of Speech, Press, Religion and Assembly
 Freedom of speech, the press and assembly is sharply
 limited; no one, according to the constitution, may use
 these freedoms "for aims hostile to the socialist
 system." Criticism of corruption and lower level
 administrative inadequacies is permitted so long as it is
 in conformity with the Communist Party's general view, but
 no independent criticism or discussion of changes in basic
 
 
 870
 party policies or of high political personalities is
 permitted. All publications are government controlled and
 Western publications generally are not available. Some
 entities, such as religious groups, publish in -a
 relatively independent manner, but always within limits
 set by the government.
 The Romanian constitution guarantees freedom of religion
 and the government recognizes and supports financially 14
 religious groups. The Department of Cults must issue-
 permits to churches to organize, build or expand. If this.
 permission has not been granted, the government then
 closes a church it considers illegal. Smaller religous
 denominations, particularly the Baptists, complain of lack
 of government response to repeated requests for building
 permits to construct churches.
 The vast majority of Romanians belong to the Romanian
 Orthodox Church. Among the other recognized groups are
 the Jewish and the Islamic religions as well as the
 Latin-Rite Catholics, Baptists, Unitarians, and
 Lutherans. People belonging to these recognized religions
 may attend religious services freely. There is no
 rabbinical seminary and rabbis must be trained in foreign
 countries. The Communist Party advocates atheism and as a
 result a Party member who attends religious services is
 unlikely to progress within the Party structure.
 The Eastern-Rite Catholic, or Uniate Church, which was
 once well represented in Transylvania, was crushed when
 the Communist Party first came to power after World War
 II, and still has not been recognized by the state. Its
 activities are thus proscribed, although the state now
 tends to ignore its existence and the fact that some
 people still practice Uniate forms of worship. Many of
 its former adherents have been absorbed into the Romanian
 Orthodox or the Latin-Rite Catholic churches. Other
 groups, such as the Nazarenes and the Jehovah's Witnesses,
 are also unrecognized and encounter restrictions in the
 practice of their faith.
 There are documented reports that some Protestant groups,
 e.g., Baptists, Pentecostalists and Seventh Day
 Adventists, even those recognized by the government, have
 difficulties with the authorities whenever they seek to
 gain converts outside of church edifices or when they
 resist laws which they believe are in violation of their
 faith. Some of their ministers and members have been
 imprisoned or permitted to emigrate.
 No assemblies of large groups can be held or organizations
 or associations formed without the approval of the
 government. The government discourages unregulated
 contacts with foreigners. Romanians who have such a
 contact are required by law to report it to the
 authorities.
 b.    Freedom of Movement Within the Country,
 Foreign Travel, Emigration and Repatriation.
 Romanians can travel freely throughout their country.
 Should they decide to change residence, however, they have
 to obtain official approval. Passports for foreign travel
 are difficult to obtain, and relatively few Romanians are
 allowed to travel abroad.
 
 
 871
 The Romanian government discourages emigration and
 contends that a Romanian does not have the right to move
 permanently from his native land. It attempts to
 discourage emigration through administrative, social and
 economic constraints, which can often impose a heavy
 burden upon individuals, including loss of job, demotions,
 reductions in salary, and other forms of discrimination
 during the lengthy period when an application to emigrate
 is pending. Leaving or attempting to leave the country
 without official permission is a crime.
 The government's policy allows for family reunification
 and for the emigration of Jews and ethnic Germans.
 Largely due to emigration, the Jewish population of
 Romania has declined from approximately 450,000 people at
 the close of World War II to about 35,000 today according
 to the records of the Romanian Jewish community.
 c.    Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 Political power is a monopoly of the Communist Party.
 While no one is barred from consideration for Party
 membership (the Romanian Communist Party is
 proportionately the largest in Eastern Europe -- numbering
 almost three million) rank and file members have little
 influence in the decision making pr6grams. Opposition to
 the Party is prohibited. Power is centered at the top and
 especially in the person of the Secretary General, who is
 also President of the Republic. An effort is made to have
 various ethnic groups represented proportionately at every
 I-1 -- he Party structure.
 Rnmanian wnmpn participate at all levels of the Party and
 state structure. At present four Cabinet level positions
 out of 46 are held by women. Five women are full members
 of the Party's 27-member hiqhest decision-makinq body.
 Women's representation in the Central Committee of the
 Party has increased to one quarter of the membership.
 The continuing under-representation of women in the
 political process reflects Romania's historical and social
 traditions. The government is addressing this issue with
 specific policies in the areas of education, access to
 employment and comparable wages in an effort to upgrade
 the role of women in the society. As a result women are
 employed in virtually all sectors of the economy.
 Equality of educational opportunity is also guaranteed.
 The constitution expressly forbids any discrimination on
 the basis of ethnic background and guarantees the use of
 minority languages in books, newspapers, magazines,
 theaters and education, and, when a minority group is
 present in large numbers, the use of its language in
 governmental and economic institutions as well as in the
 courts.
 Hungarian and German radio broadcasts are carried daily;
 television in these languages is limited to three and two
 hours weekly respectively. The importation of all
 publications, including those in the Hungarian language,
 is strictly controlled. Schools for minority groups may
 be established if there are 16 students; only 6 students
 
 
 872
 are required to establish a Romanian language school. Bi-
 and tri-lingual signs are uncommon even in areas where
 non-Romanian ethnic groups are in the majority. Signs in
 more than one language in some communities are for
 streets, schools, museums, churches and monuments. The
 number of Hungarian and German language schools has been
 reduced in recent years and the one solely Hungarian
 language University ceased to exist in that form when it
 was merged with a Romanian one in 1965. Nonetheless, it
 is still possible to study in Hungarian and German through
 the university level in parts of the country where there
 are large Hungarian and German ethnic minorities, although
 educational opportunities at the university level in major
 disciplines are limited to Romanian speakers.
 Amnesty International and the International Human Rights
 Law Group believe that the Romanian government
 discriminates actively against minorities in Romania,
 particularly against the Hungarian minority. The
 Government of Romania does not discriminate against its
 minorities as a matter of policy. Nevertheless, although
 programs and rights for ethnic minorities exist, a number
 of limitations on the free exercise and expression of
 their cultural heritage continue.
 Trade unions are permitted under Article 27 of the
 constitution. But Article 29 forbids any association with
 an "anti-democrat or fascist character". Joining such an
 organization is punishable under law. One of the few
 attempts to organize workers into independent unions, the
 Free Trade Union Movement of Romanian Workers (SLOMR), was
 begun in 1979 and resulted in the imprisonment of SLOMR's
 leaders.
 4.    Government Attitude and Record Regarding International
 and Non-governmental Investigation of Alleged
 Violations of Human Rights
 The Romanian government has responded to numerous
 international queries regarding individuals who have
 applied for emigration or have been taken into custody for
 political reasons. It invited and cooperated with the
 Amnesty International team which visited Romania in
 February 1978. It did not agree to a visit by the
 International Human Rights Law Group in the latter half of
 1980, however.
 The United States and Romania participated in a bilateral
 human rights discussion in Bucharest in February 1980.
 The Romanian government also cooperated with a United
 States congressional staff study mission which visited the
 western area of the country to learn more about the status
 of minorities in Romania, particularly the Hungarian
 minority. An ecumenical group of American religious
 leaders from the Appeal of Conscience Foundation visited
 Romania in 1980 to discuss religious issues with
 government officials and representatives of religious
 groups in Romania. A similar group of Romanian religious
 leaders had visited the United States in 1979.
 
 
 873
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: ROMANIA
 1978     1979     1980
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTALo.          12.3     OT       0.0
 LOANS........ ....          0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS,.......           12.3      0.7      0.0
 A.AIO ............            12.3      0.7      0.0
 LOANSo.....oe.....          0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS,............         12.3      0.7      0.0
 (SEC.SUPPASSST.)..,          0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.FOOD FOR PEACEE....          0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS 0..........           0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS.,N.........          0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE I-TOTAL0.........          0.0      0.0      0.0
 REPAY* IN S-LOANS..oeo          0.0      0.0      0.0
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR.....          0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE IITOTAL   TAL...          0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.RELIEF.EC.OEV & WFP.          0.0      0.0      00
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY...            0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST*            0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS....... 0 ...         0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS...........          0.0      0.0      0.0
 CONTR. TO IFIoeoo          0.0      0.0      0.0
 PEACE CORPS ...           0.0      0.0      0.0
 OTHERo.*0........          0.0      0.0      0.0
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL...          0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANSo.o............0.0               0.0      0.0
 GRANTS........s....          0.0      0.0      0.0
 A.MAP GRANTS..........          0.0      0.0      0.0
 B.CREOIT SALES-FMS....          0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.INTL NIL.EO.TRNG....          0.0      0.0      0.0
 DeTRAN-EXCESS STOCK...          0.0      0.0      00
 E.OTHER GRANTS........          0.0      0.0      00
 IiI.TOTAL ECON. L MIL...         12.3      0.7      0.0
 LOANS......e.....          0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS.............         12.3      0.7      0.0
 OTHER US LOANS..........         31.4    138.3     550
 EX-IN BANK LOANS....eo.          8.4     31.1     30.0
 ALL OTHERo.............         23.0    107.2     25.0
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
 1978 -   1979     1980      1946-80
 ----------------------------------------------
 TOTAL........     189.5    296.1    325.3   1521.1
 IBRD             185.6     295.0    325.0   1502.6
 IFC                0.0       0.0      0.0      0.0
 IDA                0.0       0.0      0.0      0.0
 IOB                0.0       0.0      0.0      000
 ADB                 0.0      0.0      0.0      000
 AFDB                0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 UNDP                3.9      1.1      0.3     18.5
 OTHER-UN            0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 EEC                 0.0      0.0      0.0      0.0
 
 
 874
