 ROMANIA
 Romania is a highly centralized Communist state. The
 Constitution describes the Romanian Communist Party as "the
 leading political force in the whole of society." Nicolae
 Ceausescu,'Secretary General of the party, is also President
 of the Republic, Chairman of the Council of State, and
 Chairman of the Romanian Defense Council. Through the
 Government, the party seeks to control every significant
 aspect 6f the country's life.
 The Ministry of Internal Affairs administers the powerful
 Department of State Security, among whose major functions are
 providing security for the leadership and suppressing dissent
 and opposition of any kind.
 Pursuing President Ceausescu's policy of repaying Romania's
 foreign debt obligations as soon as possible, the Government
 in 1987 continued to make drastic efforts to increase exports
 and reduce imports. A program of harsh austerity was enforced
 domestically, causing great hardship for the population.
 Shortages of food and consumer items were widespread and
 particularly severe during the winter months. Basic
 foodstuffs continued to be rationed but were frequently
 unavailable. Electricity was rationed, and stiff surcharges
 were assessed if usage exceeded prescribed limits, while
 cooking gas and heating facilities often ceased to function at
 all in many areas. Austerity on this scale, combined with
 wage reductions when industrial production targets are not
 met, appears to be causing serious damage to the physical and
 psychological health and welfare of the population.
 The poor human rights picture in Romania in 1987 showed no
 improvement. Although the Constitution provides for freedom
 of speech, assembly, and the press, it states that these
 freedoms may not be used "against the Socialist order or the
 workers' interests." Vigorous use of these open-ended
 limitations by the authorities together with constant
 harassment by security forces have stifled formation of any
 opposition or dissident groups which might take issue with or
 question party policy.
 Religious practice, although widespread and growing, is
 controlled and circumscribed by the enforcement of tegulations
 governing the licensing of pastors, the importation and
 distribution of religious materials, and the granting of
 church building permits. The Government approved some
 applications, albeit after a lengthy and difficult process,
 for the construction of new churches or the renovation of old
 ones, while withholding approval in other cases. It also
 permitted, as promised, the delivery of 5,000 Cornilescu
 Bibles to the Baptist General Union.
 Members of the Hungarian ethnic minority in Transylvania
 continued in 1987 to object to government policies designed,
 in their view, to promote the minority's assimilation. The
 Government countered that it does not discriminate against
 members of the Hungarian minority.
 The Government permitted 16,543 Romanian citizens to emigrate
 to the United States, Israel, and the Federal Republic of
 Germany in 1987, an increase over the 15,222 who emigrated to
 these three countries in 1986. At the same time, Romania
 continued to be granted Most-Favored-Nation (M.N) tariff
 treatment for its exports to the United States under the terms
 of the Jackson-Vanik amendment (1974 Trade Act) which ties MFN
 
 
 1007
 ROMANIA
 to the country's performance on emigration. A special case
 was that of Ioan Ruta who, in the opinion of outside
 observers, was convicted unfairly of accepting bribes and
 imprisoned in 1986 after applying to emigrate. Released in
 July 1987, he was permitted to join his wife and daughter in
 the United States. The Government's October 1987 amnesty may
 benefit some persons imprisoned on political grounds.
 On the whole, despite Romania's adherence to various
 international accords related to human rights, its human
 rights abuses remained pervasive.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 There were no substantiated claims of political killings
 during 1987. However, allegations continue to be made that
 prisoners are mistreated, sometimes to the point of causing
 their death.
 b. Disappearance
 There have been some unconfirmed reports of politically
 motivated disappearances. Family and friends of persons
 arrested on political charges are frequently left unawar  of
 their arrest, their circumstances, and their location for long
 periods of time.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 There were numerous reports that persons are mistreated while
 in Romanian prisons or police custody and that police
 authorities act brutally to obtain information. Romanian
 authorities also use physical and mental degradation to
 intimidate those caught or suspected of wrongdoing. Persons
 detained for questioning are often held incommunicado and kept
 for long periods without sleep, food, or access to toilet
 facilities. Those caught attempting to leave the country
 illegally, for example, are reportedly subject to physical and
 mental harrassment, often prior to being given only relatively
 light sentences if they are first offenders. Reliable
 witnesses also report incidents in which police administered
 severe beatings to persons being arrested for minor
 infractions.
 The most common complaints about mistreatment cite long
 periods of isolation, excessive use of force by guards, cells
 which are badly ventilated and poorly heated, bad food in
 small quantities, difficult working conditions, and
 segregation of prisoners deemed "dangerous to the State"
 because of their religious beliefs or for other reasons.
 Political prisoners who do not cooperate with their jailers
 reportedly are treated with great cruelty. They are generally
 kept apart from other offenders and restricted to their
 cells. Prison guards are said to engage in abusive behavior
 and allow, and in some cases even encourage, favored prisoners
 to punish those less favored. While most political prisoners
 are reportedly kept in local jails and released when
 
 
 1008
 ROMANIA
 authorities believe their behavior has been corrected, those
 who are not cooperative are kept for longer periods of time.
 Amnesty International reported ("Romania - Human Rights
 violations in the Eighties," July 1987) that there has been a
 decline in the abuse of psychiatric treatment as a form of
 punishment in recent years. Other sources, however, note that
 the practice continues, in particular through administration
 of drugs to prisoners. Some prisoners claim that they have
 been denied needed medical treatment; the evidence suggests
 that medical care in prisons is poor at best.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, Exile, or Forced Labor
 Romanian law provides for either a judge or a prosecutor to
 issue an arrest warrant. Once arrested, a person may be held
 without trial for up to 1 month before a hearing, but the
 prosecutor may obtain an extension for an additional 3 months.
 After this, the court may order further extensions in 30-day
 increments. There is no limit set by law on the cumulative
 length of. time a person may be held prior to trial. There is
 no provision for bail.
 The law also provides for preventive detention. Persons
 detained for investigation often are held incommunicado. They
 are detained for varying periods of time, usually a matter of
 hours, and then released without charge. Such arbitrary
 detention may be repeated several times, and subjects may be
 called back for additional lengthy interrogation and
 threatened with further harassment or punishment. This
 treatment is particularly common for religious activists.
 Among those detained in December were Radu Filipescu and Doina
 Cornea, reportedly for having spoken out concerning the state
 of human rights in Romania on a French television program.
 Romanian citizens are required to perform involuntary labor,
 but for the most part this seems to fall within the area of
 "civic obligations." For example, a 1971 law, amended in
 1985, required up to 6 days' unpaid labor per year from each
 citizen, although an additional tax may be substituted for
 labor. Some men have reportedly been called up to work in
 undesirable industrial or agricultural jobs for periods of
 from 4 to 6 months, apparently in connection with each male
 citizen's duty to serve in the military and remain in the
 reserves.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Most trials are held in public, though secret trials are.
 common where state security is involved and may also be
 permitted in certain other cases. The law states that a trial
 may be held in secret if a public trial would be contrary to
 the interests of the State, Socialist morals, or the dignity
 of the individual. Some former prisoners have reported they
 were tried in secret by military courts on essentially
 political charges.
 The ability of an accused individual to defend himself
 effectively can be severely limited, especially in politically
 sensitive cases. Acquittals in such cases are extremely
 rare. Defendants are often represented by state-appointed
 attorneys whose role appears to be that of apologizing for
 defendants' offenses. The law requires in most cases that a
 defendant be represented by counsel, although some sources
 claim that defendants do not always have an opportunity to
 
 
 1009
 ROMANIA
 consult with their attorneys before trial. The court may
 appoint an attorney to represent a defendant. The defendant
 has the right, in theory, to choose another attorney, but in
 practice this right is severely restricted. When defendants
 pursue their right to appeal, they sometimes receive longer
 prison terms from the higher courts, thus discouraging
 defendants from exercising this right. In the past, Western
 observers have also reported clear cases of suborning and
 intimidating witnesses by prosecuting attorneys, although no
 such cases were reported in 1987.
 In 1987 one case reflecting apparent abuse of the right to a
 fair trial was that of Victor Opris. Opris, a Pentecostal
 pastor from Satu Mare, was initially imprisoned in 1985 on
 charges of bribery after he allegedly assisted four members of
 his congregation who were attempting to leave the country
 illegally. Sentenced to 5 years' imprisonment, Opris benefited
 from the June 1986 amnesty and was released from prison.
 However, in January 1987, he was retried on the same charge,
 reportedly by a military court, and was sentenced to 9 years'
 imprisonment. His case has been appealed to the Supreme Court.
 Many who are familiar with the case maintain that Opris was
 retried and given a harsh sentence because he was a popular,
 active pastor, suspected by the Government of involvement in
 smuggling Bibles and other unauthorized activities.
 A number of Romanian criminal laws are open-ended enough to
 insure that persons coming under official scrutiny may be
 charged with some offense. Examples of typical charges are
 "defaming the Socialist order" for speaking frankly to a
 foreigner; "disturbing the peace" or "illegal" assembly for
 private prayer meetings in the home; "social parasitism" if
 unemployed but technically guilty of no other offense; or
 "distributing literature without a license"--a felony--if
 caught attempting to transport or hand out free Bibles.
 Although a June 1986 presidential decree, which granted
 amnesty for certain offenses to most Romanians sentenced to
 prison terms of less than 5 years, freed a number of persons
 imprisoned on relatively minor charges related to their
 religious activities, some of those released have reportedly
 been retried and again imprisoned.
 It is impossible to estimate accurately the number of
 political prisoners in Romania. Some former prisoners have
 estimated the number at several hundred. If the estimate
 includes those tried with apparent political motivation for
 common crimes and those convicted of attempting to leave the
 country illegally, the number could be several thousand.
 On October 26, 1987, a new amnesty was announced, in honor of
 the 40th anniversary of the proclamation of the Republic.
 Those sentenced to less than 3 years' imprisonment, or a fine,
 were amnestied, and those sentenced to up to 5 years had their
 sentences remitted. Other sentences were shortened. Certain
 categories of violent and economic crimes were excluded, such
 as deadly assault, robbery, influence peddling, and giving or
 receiving bribes. It is not yet clear how many prisoners may
 be affected by this amnesty, or if it will affect people who
 could be considered "political prisoners."
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Romanian laws and regulations governing the security apparatus
 sanction a high degree of interference with the individual and
 
 
 1010
 RO4ANIA
 the family. The interference is somewhat mitigated by the
 limitations on the resources of state security forces, by
 uneven application of regulations, and by official corruption.
 Deliberate and arbitrary interference with the privacy of the
 family, home, and correspondence is a frequent occurrence.
 Searches are made of private homes, persons, and personal
 effects without search warrants or probable cause that a crime
 may have been committed. The authorities occasionally enter
 homes on the pretext of looking for building code violations,
 excessive consumption of electricity, illegal use 9f
 electrical appliances, etc. These searches facilitate the
 discovery of other items, such as forbidden books and
 publications, religious materials, or any other evidence of
 "wrohgdoing." Militiamen at checkpoints located on most roads
 leading out of the cities and at major highway intersections
 in the countryside randomly stop and search vehicles as a
 matter of course.
 Violation of privacy of the person also arises from the
 antiabortion campaign. Regular pregnancy tests and physical
 examinations are mandatory every 2 months for many female
 workers in order to insure that pregnancies are discovered and
 carried to term.
 Complaints about interference with both domestic and
 international correspondence continue. Letters to or from
 persons'of interest to the authorities often never arrive at
 their destination. People have reportedly been questioned by
 the security police about topics discussed in letters which
 were delivered seemingly unopened. On other occasions, people
 have been questioned about statements made in letters sent
 abroad but never received by the addressees.
 The Gogernment has the capability to monitor domestic and
 international telephone calls and appears to do so frequently.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 These freedoms are severely restricted. Public expression of
 viewpoints at variance with official policy is almost always
 severely punished. While the Constitution provides for
 freedom of speech and press, it prohibits their use for any
 purpose "hostile to the Socialist system and the interests of
 the working people," as defined by the State and party.
 Similarly, the penal code prohibits "propaganda with a Fascist
 (as defined by the State) character delivered in public by any
 means... (or).. .the undertaking of any action for the changing
 of the Socialist system...." It also prohibits acts "which
 would result in a danger to state security." These offenses
 are punishable by prison terms of up to 15 years.
 The Government seeks to control the domestic dissemination of
 informafion in a variety of ways. Although official
 censorship was abolished some years ago, all media are state
 owned, rigidly controlled, and used primarily as vehicles for
 government and party propaganda. Publications from the West
 or from other Communist countries are not generally available,
 although foreign cultural centers and libraries are open to
 the public and are allowed to distribute limited quantities of
 Western periodicals with government approval. The unauthorized
 importation or distribution of foreign publications is
 forbidden. In 1987 there were frequent reports of
 
 
 '1011
 ROMANIA
 confiscations of foreign-source materials, especially
 religious materials, at the border. Tourists from the West
 regularly report that customs officials have confiscated video
 and audio cassettes. Romanian libraries carefully control
 access to "restricted" materials such as prewar historical
 texts. For live theater, official boards must approve all new
 productions before the opening performance. Serial numbers
 and type-face samples of all typewriters must be registered
 with the authorities, and the use of duplicating machines is
 strictly regulated. On the positive side, Western radio
 broadcasts in the Romanian language are not jammed and are a
 major source of both foreign and domestic news for the
 Romanian people.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 The Government attempts to control all group activity. No
 organization independent of government or party influence is
 permitted to exist. Peaceful assembly and association without
 permission are usually short-lived and may bring severe
 penalties to those involved. Citizens are required to obtain
 permission in advance to attend functions held by
 non-Romanians. Secret decrees promulgated late in 1985 (never
 officially published and often not obeyed) further discourage
 contacts with foreigners and strengthen the requirement that
 all such contacts be reported to the authorities within 24
 hours. In particular, Romanian writers, scientists, and
 professionals are geportedly forbidden to speak with their
 foreign counterparts without government permission.
 The Constitution stipulates the right to join a union. As
 noted earlier, however, it also enshrines the Communist party
 as "the leading political force in the whole of society,"
 which applies with respect to unions and other "mass and
 public organizations." Trade unions independent of the party
 are thus prohibited, and workers do not have the right to form
 their own associations, elect representatives, or affiliate
 with international organizations except through the official
 unions.
 Workers do not have the right to organize or bargain
 collectively. While they nominally have a direct voice in the
 management of the workplace through the unions that all must
 join, in most factories the union's chief executive is also
 the senior party official, and a primary function of the
 unions is to channel party doctrine and directives to the
 workers. Unions also dispense social benefits, such as
 vacations at union-owned hotels (for which the member pays
 only a fraction of the real cost), low-interest loans, and
 access to cultural, educational, and other leisure activities.
 Romania's labor code is silent on the right to strike, except
 to elaborate procedures by which the union leadership is
 required to mediate disputes between the workers and
 management, with recourse to the courts when the dispute
 cannot be settled. In practice, sanctions available to the
 party and the union make it unlikely that such disputes will
 reach the courts. In the past, the Government's reaction to
 actual strikes, or to advocacy of the worker's right to
 strike, has been harsh repression.
 Brutal suppression of miners' strikes in the late 1970's led
 to an investigation by the International Labor Organization
 (ILO). Inadequate responses, failure to respond further to
 charges, and refusal to accept a direct-contact mission led
 
 
 1012
 ROMANIA
 the ILO to find Romania substantially in violation of
 generally accepted labor standards.
 In 1987 Romania lost its eligibility for the U.S. Generalized
 System of Preferences (GSP) tariff treatment after the U.S.
 Government found under the standards of revised legislation
 that.Romania was not taking steps to afford its workers
 internationally recognized workers' rights.
 The institution of unrealistic production and sales quotas and
 penalties in the form of salary deductions for failure to meet
 them has increased worker dissatisfaction. In November
 several thousand people, led by industrial workers in Brasov,
 demonstrated in the main square in protest against sharp pay
 cuts'as a result of production shortfalls and stiff new
 restrictions on the use of gas and electricity. With
 frustations high because of the harsh austerities enforced by
 the Government, the demonstration turned violent. Scores of
 workers were reportedly detained after the demonstrators were
 dispersed. More minor incidents were reported in other
 Romanian cities.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 The Constitution provides for freedom of conscience, and the
 penal code prescribes a penalty of up to 6 months'
 imprisonment or a fine for anyone who impedes or disrupts any
 recognized religious sect. However, the Communist Party
 officially promotes atheism, and the Government exercises
 broad control over religious practice. Although many
 Romanians fear that open exercise of their beliefs would
 inhibit chances of social or professional advancement,
 religious practice remains very active throughout the country
 and at all levels of society. There are 14 recognized
 religions, of which by far the largest is the Romanian
 Orthodox Church, to which about 80 percent of the population
 belongs. The Government subsidizes clerical salaries (which
 some denominations do not accept), issues licenses to preach,
 controls permits for church construction or renovation,
 severely limits the number of new admissions to seminaries,
 and controls the importation and printing of religious
 materials, including Bibles. These powers are often used
 arbitrarily, especially against groups that arouse official
 concern.
 Government restrictions are applied more severely to groups
 whose beliefs, in the Government's view, inspire "antisocial"
 or "antigovernment" behavior. Several of these are
 unrecognized religious groups, such as the Nazarenes and
 Jehovah's Witnesses. In 1987, however, there were no reports
 of signifi-ant restrictions on meetings held by these groups.
 But local and national newspapers carried articles criticizing
 these groups and alleging that, outside Romania, some of these
 sects are involved in intelligence-gathering for foreign
 intelligence agencies or in drug trafficking.
 The Government does not recognize the Uniate Church, also
 known as the Catholic Church of the Byzantine Rite. This
 branch of the Catholic Church was outlawed in 1948, and many
 of its leaders were imprisoned. Despite its unrecognized
 status, there remain adherents to this faith throughout the
 country. The Government also has taken active measures to
 suppress a revival movement within the Romanian Orthodox
 Church known as "The Lord's Army." Members of this group
 often meet in small gatherings for prayer and Bible study, and
 
 
 1013
 ROMANIA
 they report being fined for holding illegal assemblies. They
 also report being subject to other harassment, such as loss of
 jobs or surveillance.
 The Government remains in disagreement with the Roman Catholic
 Church, most of whose members are ethnic Hungarians, on a
 number of issues, and the church technically remains without a
 government-approved charter. However, the church enjoys de
 facto recognition and operates as if it were fully recognized.
 The rapid growth of evangelical denominations has led to
 pressures for more religious training, more printing of
 religious materials, and the expansion and construction of
 more churches. Conflicts between evangelical groups and the
 authorities have arisen frequently, and the Government's
 response has at times been harsh. Activists who are vocal are
 kept under surveillance and often are subject to loss of jobs
 and social benefits, police intimidation or arrest, and in
 some cases beatings. In December, Nelu Prodan, a Baptist
 lawyer who had defended those accused of illegally
 distributing Bibles and had helped church groups obtain
 bulding permits or avoid demolition of their churches, was
 arrested and held for about 2 weeks before being released. He
 remains under threat of being charged with accepting bribes.
 Prodan and his wife had been repeatedly warned by officials to
 stop involving themselves in the legal problems of church
 members.
 The 1986 amnesty led to the release of a number of religious
 activists from prison, and some of them have been allowed to
 emigrate. Others, like Victor Opris, however, reportedly have
 been retried and imprisoned again. Still others, like Ilie
 Neamtu, an elder of the Ploiesti Evangelical Brethren Church,
 are still awaiting permission to emigrate.
 Five thousand Protestant Bibles were printed for the  aptist
 General Union, the first such printing since 1921.  1
 Negotiations have begun regarding another printing. The
 shortage of religious materials overall has led some Romanians
 to risk severe penalties for smuggling Bibles and other
 religious literature.
 Many religious denominations are able to publish a newspaper
 or newsletter on a regular basis. They are also permitted
 from time to time to publish other religious materials,
 although usually in small quantities.
 All religious groups continue to be concerned over issues of
 maintenance, repair, and construction of church buildings.
 Extensive urban renewal projects undertaken in Bucharest and
 other cities, have resulted in demolition of a number of
 churches of various faiths. Several noted Romanian Orthodox
 churches in Bucharest of historic and cultural significance
 were demolished, including Sfintu Vineri and the 18th century
 Sfintu Spiridon. Members of the congregations and other
 citizens protested these actions.
 The Government has often been slow to approve the purchase or
 construction of replacement buildings for the affected
 congregations. A large Seventh-Day Adventist congregation in
 Bucharest, whose church was demolished in August 1986, has
 still not received approval for a new site and has had to meet
 in a temporary, tent-like structure inadequate to its needs.
 The Government claims the church -leaders have not yet proposed
 a suitable new site, although in fact over a dozen suitable
 
 
 1014
 ROMANIA
 alternatives have been proposed. The Government's Department
 of Religious Affairs gave oral approval for one site in April
 but has not followed through on its commitment.
 The country's largest Baptist church, in Oradea, was not
 demolished, as had earlier been threatened, but approval
 previously granted for construction of a new church on land
 purchased by the congregation was revoked, leaving the
 several-thousand-member congregation in an overcrowded
 building with a decaying foundation.
 Any repair or addition to a church building requires a
 building permit approved by both the local city council and
 the Government's Department of Religious Affairs. Church
 membdrs state there are unreasonable delays in obtaining these
 approvals. 'A church may be demolished, or the congregation
 fined large sums, for infractions of the building codes. In
 past years, churches of various denominations have been
 demolished or threatened with demolition under these
 regulations.
 Reconstruction of the Baptist church in Bistrita was started.
 The authorities did not proceed with demolitions begun or
 approved in the cases of the Pentecostal church in Bistrita or
 the Baptist church in Hlipiceni, thus giving the congregations
 time to negotiate a more moderate solution. A Baptist
 congregation in Timisoara was given permission to purchase a
 new and larger replacement for its current church, and a new
 Baptistochurch to serve ethnic Hungarian members opened in
 Tirgu Mures. Another Baptist church, in Baia Mare, underwent
 significant renovation and enlargement. The congregation of a
 Hungarian Reformed church in Oradea, which had faced
 destruction as a result of urban renewal, was allowed to
 "trade" its old building for a new and larger one.
 Seminary admissions remain extremely limited. In 1987 the
 Baptists were allowed only four new students. Admissions for
 the Seventh-Day Adventists and Pentecostals are similarly
 restricted. By comparison, the Baptists were permitted an
 average of 40 per year in the late 1970's. Their current
 needs are estimated at over 100 new seminarians each year.
 There is an active Jewish community organization which provides
 religious education to its members and enjoys relatively
 unrestricted freedom of emigration. Jewish leaders also
 continue to be able to travel freely outside Romania. Jewish
 leaders emphasize that, due to the level of emigration to
 Israel permitted by the Romanian Government, their numbers are
 declining, and they are permitted to maintain enough
 synagogues to meet their needs.
 Leaders of religious denominations generally receive
 permission to travel abroad on official business without
 difficulty, and most visitors to Romanian churches in 1987
 were able to travel around the country without interference.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Except for certain very limited military or other restricted
 areas (access prohibited) and border areas (access limited to
 residents of the areas and those with economic need to travel
 there), there are no official restrictions placed on travel
 within Romania. Most foreigners, including Western diplomats,
 
 
 1015
 ROMANIA
 are permitted to travel freely but often are kept under
 surveillance.
 The right of a citizen to change his place of residence is
 restricted. All citizens are required to have residence
 permits and may not legally move from one town to another, or
 between districts within a city, without official permission.
 Implementation of residence permit regulations and
 antiunemployment laws has had the effect of diluting the
 ethnic mixture of the population in parts of the country with
 a heavy concentration of ethnic minorities, especially
 Hungarians. Workers are technically free to change jobs,
 although antiunemployment laws and governmental controls limit
 this freedom in practice.
 Travel outside Romania is treated as a privilege, frequently
 arbitrarily withheld, even for those who can "guarantee" their
 return by leaving a close family member behind. Older persons
 wishing to visit their children resident abroad generally have
 few problems.
 In principle, the Government continues to oppose emigration
 for any purpose but family reunification and seeks to
 discourage those wishing to emigrate. The waiting period for
 Romanian emigration approval is still long: successful
 applications generally take between 1 and 5 years. The
 authorities sometimes refuse arbitrarily to accept emigration
 applications from some Romanians. However, the Government has
 permitted significant numbers of citizens to emigrate to the
 United States, Israel, and the Federal Republic of Germany,
 In 1987 emigration from Romania to these three countries
 increased to 16,543, as compared to 15,222 in 1986.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Though the Constitution assures the right of Romanians to
 change their government and leaders, in practice the
 individual citizen has virtually no voice in shaping public
 policy or choosing public officials. The Romanian Communist
 Party, led by the President and a few advisers, rules the
 country. No actual or potential alternatives to this present
 rigidly centralized control are apparent, and no meaningful
 opposition exists or would be tolerated. Public criticism of
 the President, the Government, the party, and the state
 leadership is forcefully suppressed.
 The Communist Party comprises about 13.5 percent of the total
 population of the country. Women officially represent 52
 percent of the general membership, and minorities are
 reportedly represented in proportion to their numbers within
 the general population but they are underrepresented at the
 middle and higher levels.
 National parliamentary elections by secret ballot are held
 every 5 years. For about 60 percent of the positions, there
 are two candidates, both of whom are chosen by the Front for
 Democracy and Social Unity, a large organization whose
 president is Nicolae Ceausescu. Over 75 percent of its
 officers are members of the Communist Party's Central
 Committee. The Parliament approves the President's decisions
 by unanimous vote.
 In Romania, the chief party executive for each city, county,
 or enterprise is also the chief civil executive. Internal
 
 
 1016
 ROMANIA
 party elections were held for the new Communist Party
 leadership late in 1984. Though these preceded the national
 general election by several months, those chosen for senior
 party posts the previous fall were universally "elected" to
 the corresponding government or enterprise posts the following
 spring.
 In November, elections for city councils were held throughout
 the country; 80 percent of the seats being sought were
 contested by two or more candidates. However, actual
 differences on policy among the candidates were negligible.
 In 1987 there was at least one attempt to revive one of
 Romania's historical political parties. A former leader of
 the dutlawed National Peasant Party, Ion Puiu, wrote to
 President Ceausescu and to Western media, urging that the
 National Peasant Party be allowed to reemerge as a loyal and
 democratic opposition to the Communist Party. Puiu has been
 arrested twice within the past year, most recently immediately
 before the visit of Soviet General Secretary Mikhail Gorbachev
 in May. The purpose of his arrest was reportedly to prevent
 him from communicating with the Soviet leader. Puiu was
 released after about 1 month, but he has been prevented from
 contacting foreigners since then.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of. Human Rights.
 There are no human rights monitoring organizations operating
 in Romania. The Government has not commented officially on
 reports issued by governmental or nongovernmental
 -organizations such as the Council of Europe, Amnesty
 International, or Freedom House, all of which have been
 critical. Romania continues officially to proclaim that
 discussion and examination of its human rights situation is
 "unwarranted interference in domestic affairs," despite its
 professed support for human rights standards embodied in the
 United Nations Charter and the Final Act of the Conference on
 Security and Cooperation in Europe (CSCE). At the same time,
 discussion of human rights issues is a regular feature of
 diplomatic exchanges between the U.S. and Romanian
 Governments. In August Romania received a delegation from the
 U.S. Congress' CSCE Commission, which was invited to certain
 areas with high concentrations of ethnic minorities and which
 met with national and local officials, as well as with
 individuals concerned with human rights issues.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status.
 According to official figures, about 12 percent of the
 country's population of nearly 23 million are members of
 ethnic minorities, including Hungarians, Germans, Gypsies
 (Csangos), and many smaller groups. These total about 2.7
 million,' with Hungarians, according to the Government,
 comprising the largest group at 1.7 million. The Government
 takes its figures from a 1977 census based on
 self-declaration. Various Hungarian sources claim that the
 true figure for the Hungarian minority is actually between 2
 and 2 1/2 million.
 Most minority groups are concentrated in Transylvania, the
 central and northwestern part of Romania. In recent years,
 opportunities for minorities to have periodicals, theaters,
 
 
 1017
 ROMANIA
 and schools in their native language have been eroding. The
 ability of members of the minority groups to visit friends and
 relatives in nearby countries is limited. Minority groups
 protest that government controls and restrictions constitute
 discrimination. Many observers maintain that the Government
 is pursuing a program of "Romanianization" in order gradually
 to absorb the minority groups into one unified Romanian
 culture, although the Government denies this.
 While the economic situation of the Hungarian minority in
 Romania is difficult, especially by comparison with that of
 Hungarians in Hungary, a pattern of economic discrimination
 against ethnic Hungarians as a group is not evident.
 There are no longer any television or radio broadcasts in the
 Hungarian language. Most Hungarian-language theaters now have
 Romanian-language sections, and some ethnic Hungarians claim
 that Romanian eventually will replace Hungarian completely.
 In the field of education, primary schooling remains available
 in Hungarian and German, and even in the native language of
 tiny minorities, such as the Czechs in western Romania,
 although opportunities are shrinking. The number of ethnic
 Hungarian children being educated in the Hungarian language
 has declined significantly. Several German-language high
 schools still operate, although declining enrollment due to
 emigration may soon compel a change in their language of
 instruction. Several sources indicate that Hungarian-language
 sections in Romanian high schools have largely replaced
 entirely Hungarian-language high schools. Students can no
 longer take university entrance examinations in minority
 languages, except in a few- faculties, and the opportunities
 for university study in Hungarian have also gradually
 decreased. Babes-Bolyai University in Cluj, formerly a
 Hungarian-language institution, has increased its intake of
 ethnic Romanian students over the years and made Romanian the
 language of instruction in most subjects.
 Members of the Hungarian minority claim that the Government
 uses its controls over residence permits, employment, and
 study opportunities to dilute the concentration of the
 Hungarian population in its traditional centers. The
 Government maintains that demographic changes in Transylvania
 are natural and result in part from increased industrialization
 which has drawn ethnic Romanian workers into urban areas
 formerly inhabited predominantly by ethnic Hungarians.
 The Government recently released from prison several ethnic
 Hungarians, including Erno Borbely, Laszlo Buzas, and Bela
 Pal, who were reportedly imprisoned for promoting minority
 rights. On the other hand, the authorities in 1987 prevented
 foreign diplomats from making any contact with Karoly Kiraly,
 a former senior party official and leading defender of
 Hungarian minority rights.
 Women are constitutionally accorded the same rights and
 privileges as men. The Government seeks to upgrade the role
 of women in society with specific policies in the areas of
 education, access to employment, and comparable wages. As a
 result, women are employed in virtually all sectors of the
 economy, and there is equal opportunity in education, but at
 the senior levels of responsibility and authority, they appear
 in far smaller numbers. The higher ranks of the party are
 occupied predominantly by male Romanians.
 
 
 1018
 ROMANIA
 CONDITIONS OF LABOR
 The Constitution stipulates the right to work. Unemployment
 is a crime ("social parasitism"). The Government closely
 controls the labor market, sets the wage rates for different
 occupations, and claims that there is no unemployment. A
 number of sources note, however, that economic dislocations
 and shifts may require transferring workers from one factory
 or region to another, with attendant long periods of
 inactivity among large numbers of workers.
 The Constitution provides for an 8-hour workday (or a 6-hour
 day for arduous occupations), a 24-hour rest period each week,.
 paid vacations, and the "right to leisure." Labor law
 elab6rates these promises but allows employers to override
 them "if conditions warrant." In 1987 there were widespread
 reports of workers required to perform extra, uncompensated
 labor to make up for lagging production or for official
 holidays. During two important national holidays (May 1-2 and
 August 23-24), many were required to report to work as
 factories and stores were kept open. Workers also reported
 that wages and salaries were cut when an enterprise failed to
 meet its production quota, even though production shortfalls
 were often due to the lack of raw materials or insufficient
 electrical energy.
 There is no specific minimum employment age, although Romanian
 law requires schooling to the age of 16. Exceptions, however,
 are allowed for youths 14 years of age in temporary jobs and
 for youths of 15 employed in industrial work, so long as the
 employer provides continuing educational opportunities and
 shows that the work being performed is "appropriate for the
 age and condition" of the employee. In such cases, the law
 limits work to 6 hours per day. Children from age 11 may work
 in the fields or in other "patriotic work," usually as part of
 a school or other group activity.
 The labor code ensures Romanian workers a safe environment.
 The Ministry of Labor has established safety standards for
 most industries and is responsible for enforcing these
 standards. In practice, however, observers report that
 conditions in many factories present substantial health and
 safety hazards. Although management is reportedly aware of
 these deficiencies in most cases, government emphasis on
 meeting production goals clearly takes precedence over safety
 and health factors in light of the party leadership's
 insistence on rapidly paying off the foreign debt and on
 pursuing industrial and economic development at all cost.
 
 
 1019
