ROMANIA
Despite the fact that the U.S. maintains a special relationship with Romania — based on Romania's seemingly independent foreign policy and reflected in its enjoyment of "most favored nation" trade benefits — the Report gives an excellent account of Romania's harsh human rights practices, and is considerably stronger than the 1982 Report. This Report is a model that might be used with respect to other countries with which the U.S. enjoys friendly relations; it suggests that there is no fundamental incompatibility between a forthright assessment of human rights conditions and the pursuit of other important objectives with respect to friendly nations. Indeed, the Reagan Administration's overall policy toward Romania suggests that a candid critique of human rights violations by governments with which the United States enjoys good relations can be particularly constructive; expressions of concern by the U.S. over the Romanian government's plan to implement an "education tax" on would-be emigrants in 1983 apparently helped influence the government to halt its implementation.
The Report contains a comprehensive and balanced account of several rights problems, including harassment of prospective emigres; crushing of any independent initiatives, such as free trade union groups; persecution of religious believers; tight control over publication by forced registration of citizens' typewriters; and forceful obstruction of communication
-51-
between Romanian citizens and foreigners. Most significant, the Report improved its coverage of the problems of the Hungarian minority in Romania. For the first time, the Report acknowledges the disappearance of ethnic Hungarian activists in Transylvania.
The expansion of the section on interference with privacy, home and family enables the Report to provide new material about the security forces "pressuring citizens to inform . . . which tends to inhibit parents from teaching their cultural, ethnic, and religious heritage to their children."
The Report's acknowledgement that membership in the Romanian Communist party is "a prerequisite to promotion beyond the junior levels in many fields" and as "important to job security" is particularly valuable information. It assumes special importance in light of information needed to process applications for political asylum in the U.S. Often, applicants are asked to furnish proof that they were not members of the Communist Party out of conviction, but to advance their careers.
Despite these positive trends, we have noted several respects in which the Report could be strengthened. The Report on occasion tends to make statements that excuse or seek to justify Romanian human rights abuses by citing social, historical or economic difficulties. For example, the Report explains that
-52-
Government efforts to centralize and to economize by combining educational, social, and cultural activities frequently affect minority groups disproportionately and are often interpreted as the "Romanianization" of these groups.
The statement that "the government actively discourages emigration but generally allows more of its citizens to emigrate . . . than does any other Eastern European country" is certainly true, but it is important to add that this is not liberalization on the part of the Romanian government, but rather evidence of harsh conditions that force so many people to wish to leave.
Mention should have been made in the Report of the effect of a cut-back on bus service between Hungary and Romania, allegedly for reasons of a gas shortage, and the regulation that foreigners may not stay overnight in the homes of Romanian citizens. The latter applies to both Westerners and visitors from other Eastern Bloc countries, particularly Hungary.
When dealing with sensitive issues, the Report sometimes speaks through third parties instead of stating facts directly. For example:
Amnesty International has also continued to seek the release of Fr. Gheorghe Calciu-Dumitreasa, sentenced for "conspiracy" in the founding of the Free Trade Union of Romanian Workers in 1979.
-53-
Finally, since the Report for 1982 mentioned the Goma-Tanase assassination attempt in Paris, it is surprising to find in the Report for 1983 the vague statement that "there are occasional allegations but no documented cases of officially-inspired" killing.
-54-
