 ROMANIA
 Romania pursues a policy of internal orthodoxy on economic
 and political issues, with very strict limits on the
 exercise of civil and political rights and economic
 decision-making. At the same time, since the early 1960's
 Romania, while remaining a member of the Warsaw Pact, has
 asserted a policy of independence from the Soviet Union in
 such areas as foreign policy and diversified foreign trade.
 While considerable economic advances have been made in the
 last 35 years and the nation has changed from an almost
 entirely agricultural country to one with a significant
 industrial sector, its present per capita gross national
 product is the second lowest in Europe. The government
 attempts to provide work for all citizens and to make
 available a wide range of social services. Romania
 maintains an extremely tight emigration policy and strict
 limitations on political expression and religious
 proselytizing outside of church buildings.
 Romania has invited Amnesty International to visit Romania
 and to carry on discussions pertaining to human rights with
 Romanian officials. Romania generally has shown receptivity
 to concerns expressed by the international community about
 its human rights practices.
 1.   Respect Tor the Integrity of the Person Including
 Freedom from:
 a.   Torture
 Torture does not appear to exist at the present time,
 although reports of "police brutality" are still relatively
 frequent. Amnesty International reports that it has
 received information that beatings are a normal practice
 with regard to political prisoners.
 b.   Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment
 Conditions of confinement are poor for all prisoners in what
 appears to be a relatively primitive prison system.
 Prisoners, particularly those involved in political crimes,
 are reportedly sometimes treated harshly in the pre-trial
 investigation phase of their incarceration. In addition,
 these prisoners are at times allowed only the most limited
 access to their families. There is no separate juridical
 category of political prisoners in Romania.
 There are also work camps, to which some people are assigned
 because of their political activities, which impose
 "rehabilitation" through work. Romanians generally regard
 this as a more lenient form of treatment than trial and
 incarceration. In addition, there are reports that some
 people taken into custody for political reasons are confined
 in psychiatric hospitals. Amnesty International cites
 several such occurrences. The Department of State has
 received reports of persons being confined briefly to
 clinics for observation, but has no information on any cases
 of long-term confinement.
 Capital punishment exists in Romania. It does not appear
 however, to have been applied to political crimes for many
 years. In criminal cases, it appears to have been imposed
 only after due process of law.
 
 (652)
 
 
 653
 c.   Arbitrary Arrest or Imprisonment
 Those who are politically active beyond the limits set by
 the Communist Party or who proselytize for religious
 converts are likely to be arrested or imprisoned. Since
 there is no separate category of political prisoners, such
 persons are normally charged with a crime under the penal
 code and, in a formal sense, treated as any other
 lawbreaker. It is nct possible to estimate accurately how
 many persons, at present imprisoned by the Romanian
 Government, would be classified as political prisoners by
 international standards. There have been reports that on
 rare occasions persons are confined for prolonged periods
 without charges. There is no effective legal remedy for
 such persons. There is no habeas corpus in Romania.
 Amnesty reports have charged that Decree 24/1976 and 25/1976
 dealing with "parasitism" are used to control dissidents and
 to provide an additional means of recruiting seasonal work
 forces and mobilizing workers to carry out unpleasant
 economic projects. There is no sufficient evidence
 available to the Department of State to confirm the extent
 of these practices.
 d.   Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The government can hold trials in camera when it believes it
 necessary to do so. Defendants apparently are allowed
 access to counsel some time before their trial. There are
 reports, however, that sometimes inadequate time is given in
 which to prepare a defense. In a few cases, "emergency
 trial" procedures are used and arrest, trial and sentencing
 may all take place in one or two days.
 e.   Invasion of the Home
 The constitution guarantees the inviolability of the home.
 It also provides, however, that in accordance with the law a
 person's dwelling can be entered by the authorities. A
 judicial warrant is required.
 2.   Governmental Policies Relating to the Fulfillment
 of Such Vital Needs as Food, Shelter, Health Care
 and Education:
 Virtually all means of production, including agricultural
 land, are owned by the state or by cooperatives. About one
 percent of agrarian land is given over to small private
 farms, mostly in the mountains, where it would be difficult
 to collectivize. In addition, collective farmers are each
 allowed 250 square yards of land which they may exploit for
 their own profit. People can also own their own homes or
 apartments as well as other personal property. The
 government is making a considerable effort to provide
 adequate shelter, health care and education. It has
 attempted to do so in a way which will not favor its urban
 citizens over those in rural areas, though the standard of
 living of collective farmers still lags behind that of other
 sections of society. The difference in monetary incomes
 between the lowest and the highest paid is relatively small.
 It does not reflect, however, the perquisites available to
 high and middle level officials of the party and the state
 which enable them to live more comfortably than their wages
 suggest. The tax system is of no significance in the
 redistribution of income.
 
 
 654
 At atmosphere of corruption is a part of Romania's
 historical legacy which still persists. Ordinary citizens
 often must offer bribes to obtain goods and services. When
 this corruption is brought to the attention of higher
 authorities the parties involved are normally prosecuted and
 punished.
 3.   Respect for Civil and Political Liberties, Including:
 a.   Freedom of Speech, Press, Religion and Assembly
 Freedom of speech, the press and assembly is sharply
 limited; no one, according to the constitution, may use
 these freedoms "for aims, hostile to the socialist system."
 Criticism of corruption or lower level administrative
 inadequacies is permitted as long as it is in conformity
 with the party's general view but no independent criticism
 or discussion of changes in basic party policies or of high
 political personalities is permitted. All publications are
 government controlled. Some entities, such as religious
 groups, publish in a relatively independent manner, but
 always within limits set by the government.
 The Romanian constitution guarantees freedom of religion and
 the government recognizes, and supports financially, 14
 religious groups. The vast majority of Romanians belong to
 the Romanian Orthodox Church., Among the other recognized
 groups are the Jewish and the Islamic religions as well as
 Latin-rite Catholic, Baptists, Unitarians, and Lutherans.
 People belonging to these recognized religions may attend
 religious services freely. There is no rabbinical seminary
 and rabbis must be trained in foreign countries. The party
 advocates atheism and as a result a party member who attends
 religious services is unlikely to progress within the party
 structure.
 The Eastern-rite Catholic, or Uniate Church which was once
 well represented in Transylvania, was crushed when the
 communists first came to power after World War II, and has
 still not been recognized by the state. Its activities are
 thus proscribed, although the state now tends to ignore its
 existence and the fact that some people still practice
 Uniate forms of worship. Many of its-former adherents have
 been absorbed into the Romanian Orthodox or the Latin-Rite
 Catholic Churches. Other groups, such as the Nazarenes and
 the Jehovah's Witnesses, are also unrecognized and encounter
 restrictions in the practice of their faith.
 There are documented reports that some Protestant groups,
 e.g., Baptists, Pentecostals and Seventh Day Adventists,
 even those recognized by the government, have difficulties
 with the authorities whenever they seek to proselytize
 outside of church edifices or when they resist laws which
 they believe are in violation of their faith. Some of their
 ministers and members have been imprisoned or permitted to
 emigrate.
 No assemblies of large groups can be held, or organizations
 or associations formed, without the approval of the
 government. The Government discourages unregulated contacts
 with foreigners. Romanians who have such a contact are
 required by law to report it to the authorities.
 b.   Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel and Emigration
 Romanians can travel freely throughout their country.
 Should they decide to change their residence, however, they
 have to obtain official approval. Passports for foreign
 
 
 655
 travel are difficult to obtain, and relatively few Romanians
 are allowed to travel abroad. Leaving or attempting to
 leave the country without official permission is a crime.
 The Romanian Government discourages emigration and contends
 that a Romanian does not have the right to move permanently
 from his native land. It attempts to discourage emigration
 through social and economic constraints which can often
 impose a heavy burden upon individuals, including demotions,
 reductions in salary, and other forms of discrimindtion
 during the period when an application to emigrate is
 pending. The government's policy does allow for family
 reunification and for the emigration of Jews and ethnic
 Germans. Due to emigration, the Jewish population of
 Romania has declined from approximately 450,000 people at
 the close of World War II to about 38,000 today.
 c.   Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 Political power is a monopoly of the Communist Party. While
 no one is barred from consideration for party membership
 (the Romanian Communist Party is proportionately the largest
 in Eastern Europe -- numbering almost three million) rank
 and file members have little influence in the decision
 making programs. Opposition to the party is prohibited.
 Power is centered at the top and especially in the person of
 the Secretary General, who is also President of the
 Republic. An effort is made to have various ethnic groups
 represented proportionally at every level of the party
 structure.
 Romania is making an effort to increase the participation of
 women at all levels of the party and state structure. At
 present four cabinet level positions out of 46 are held by
 women. Five women are full members of the party's 27 member
 highest decision-making body. Women's representation in the
 Central Committee of the Party has increased to one quarter
 of the membership. In the society as. a whole the role of
 women is being upgraded. Continuing under-representation of
 women reflects Romania's historical and social traditions
 which the present government is addressing with specific
 policies in the areas of education, access to employment and
 comparable wages.
 Romania's treatment of its ethnic minorities, especially the
 Hungarians, is a controversial subject. The Department of
 State follows the situation with great care and discusses it
 as part of its human rights dialogue with the government of
 Romania. There are substantial difficulties for linguistic
 and ethnic minorities in the centralized Romanian state, in
 wnich the vast majority of the population belongs to the
 Romanian nationality. The constitution expressly forbids
 any discrimination and guarantees the use of minority
 languages in books, papers, magazines, theaters and
 education, and, when a minority group is present in large
 numbers, the use of its language in governmental and
 economic institutions as well as in courts. It is possible
 to study in Hungarian and German up through the university
 level in parts of the country where there are large
 Hungarians and German ethnic minorities. It is,
 nevertheless, true that educational opportunities at the
 university level in some disciplines are limited unless one
 speaks Romanian. Moreover, any career outside the
 geographic area in which Hungarians are in a large majority
 requires a knowledge of Romanian. Amnesty International and
 the International Human Rights Law Group believe that the
 Romanian Government discriminates actively against
 minorities in Romania, particularly the Hungarian minority.
 The Department has no conclusive evidence of such a policy.
 
 
 656
 Trade unions are entirely entities of the government. No
 right of strike is recognized nor do trade unions have an
 effective role in determining wages and working conditions.
 An illegal strike was organized by coal miners in the Jiu
 Valley in August 1977 which the government broke through a
 combination of concessions and toughness. An effort in 1979
 by a small group to form a "free trade union" was crushed.
 The activists involved in it are either in prison or have
 left Romania.
 4.   Government Attitude and Record Regarding International
 and Non-governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights:
 The Romanian Government has responded to queries from the
 United States Government regarding individuals who have
 applied for emigration or have been taken into custody for
 political reasons. The Government of Romania invited and
 cooperated with the Amnesty International team which visited
 Romania in February 1978. Romania is an active participant
 in the Helsinki CSCE process. It accepts that discussion of
 human rights implementation is an appropriate part of the
 CSCE process at multilateral gatherings such as the 1977-
 1978 Belgrade follow-up meeting.
 
 
 657
 U.S.OVERSEAS -LOANS AND GRANTS- OULIGATIONS AND LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 CU.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 
 COUNTRY: ROMANIA
 
 1977     1978     1979
 
 I.ECON. ASSIST.-TOTAL...
 LOANS ..............
 GRANTS.............
 A.AIO ..................
 LOANS..............
 GRANTS.............
 (SEC.SUPP.ASSIST.)...
 B.FOOD FOR PEACE......
 LOANS..............
 GRANTS.............
 TITLE I-TOTAL..........
 REPAY. IN S-LOANS.....
 PAY. IN FOR. CURR.....
 TITLE II-TOTL,.....
 E.RELIEF.EC.DEV & WFP.
 VOL.RELIEF AGENCY.....
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST...
 LOANS ..............
 GRANTS.............
 CONTR. TO IFI....
 PEACE CORPS......
 OTHER........ .
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL...
 LOANS..............
 GRANTS............
 A.MAP GRANTS..........
 B.CREDIT SALES-FMS....
 C.INTL HIL.ED.TRNG....
 D.TRAN-EXCESS STOCK...
 E.OTHER GRANTS .......
 III.TOTAL ECON. & MIL...
 LOANS..............
 GRANTS..............
 OTHER US LOANS..........
 EX-IM RANK LOANS...
 ALL OTHER..............
 ASSISTANCE FROM INTERNATIONAL
 
 0.4     12.3      0.7
 0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.4     12.3      0.7
 0.0     12.3      0.7
 0.0      0.0      0.0
 0.0     12.3      0.7
 0.0      0.0      0.0
 0.4      0.0      0.0
 0.0      0.0      0.0
 0.4      0.0      0.0
 0.0      0.0      0.0
 0.0      0.0      0.0
 0.0      0.0      0.0
 0.4      0.0      0.0
 0.4      0.0      0.0
 0.0      0.0      0.0
 0.0      0.0      0.0
 0.0      0.0      0.0
 0.0      0.0      0.0
 0.0      0.0      0.0
 0.0      000      0.0
 0.0      0.0      0.0
 0.0      0.0      0.0
 0.0      0.0      0.0
 0.0      0.0      0.0
 0.0      0.0      0.0
 0.0      0.0      0.0
 0.0      0.0      0.0
 0.0      0.0      0.0
 0.0      0.0      0.0
 0.4     12.3      (.7
 0.0      0.0      0.0
 0.4     12.3      0.7
 6.3     31.4    139.1
 5.3      8.4     31.9
 1.0     23.0    107.2
 AGENCIES-COMMITMENTS
 
 1977     1978     1979    1946-79
 
 238.2
 237.3
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.9
 0.0
 0.0
 
 189.5
 185.6
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 3.9
 0.0
 0.0
 
 296.1
 295.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 1.1
 0.0
 0.0
 
 1196.1
 1177.9
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 0.0
 18.2
 0.0
 0.0
 
 TOTAL**...
 ISRD
 IFC
 IDA
 IDB
 ADB
 AFDOB
 UNDP
 OTHER-UN
 EEC
 
 ----------------------------------------------------------
 
 
