 ROMANIA
 Romania is a highly centralized Communist state. The Romanian
 Communist Party, led since 1965 by President Nicolae
 Ceausescu, is constitutionally described as "the leading
 political force in the whole of society." Through the
 Government, the party seeks to control every significant
 aspect of the country's life. In practice, an imperfect
 bureaucratic system leaves varying degrees of latitude to
 local officials to carry out central directives as well as to
 abuse their powers in violation of constitutional rights.
 Almost all aspects of life proceed within narrow bounds
 defined by the party and its leader. Political dissent is not
 tolerated. Criticism of the regime and its policies is
 suppressed by the ubiquitous Department of State Security
 (DDS).
 Continuing its policy of repaying its foreign debt obligations
 as soon as possible, Romania in 1985 made strenuous efforts to
 increase productivity and conserve energy and raw materials.
 Severe weather during the winter of 1984-1985 aggravated the
 domestic economic situation and increased consumer hardships.
 Food shortages were more pronounced in 1985. Energy
 conservation measures included government-sanctioned fuel and
 power stoppages to nonindustrial and some industrial
 consumers. Many homes in Bucharest and elsewhere were without
 heat or cooking gas. There has been generally milder weather
 so far in the winter of 1985-86, but hardships have
 continued. Many basic foodstuffs are still rationed. The
 supply of other items not universally rationed, such as meat,
 has decreased and at times has been unavailable.
 In the area of human rights, major discrepancies exist between
 generally accepted standards, for example as embodied in the
 Helsinki Final Act of the Conference on Security and
 Cooperation in Europe, and Romanian practice. Though many
 rights are guaranteed by the Romanian Constitution, both that
 document and Romanian law impose party control or set
 standards so vague as to make guarantees meaningless. The
 party, through the Government, continues to restrict and
 control the right to free speech, free assembly and
 association, and the practice of one's religion.
 In 1985 the Government took several significant human rights
 steps, which included freeing a celebrated "prisoner of
 conscience" and permitting or facilitating both private and
 official factfinding visits by U.S. religious activists to
 Romania. Numerous American religious travelers reported that
 they were able to visit persons and places of their choosing,
 although they or their contacts may have been closely
 questioned by authorities. In early fall, Rev. Billy Graham
 spent 10 days in Romania and, with government monitoring
 throughout his tour, preached to crowds totaling over 110,000.
 In 1985 the Government continued its "principled opposition"
 to emigration. Nevertheless, 1985 departures for the United
 States, Israel, and the Federal Republic of Germany totaled
 17,312, mainly under the rubric of "family reunification."
 Serious problems remain with respect to emigration procedures.
 Departure--whether for purposes of emigration, family
 reunification, or binational marriage--is strongly discouraged
 by complicated, slow-moving procedures and coercive tactics.
 Potential emigrants often wait several years after applying
 before receiving exit permits. During this period, reductions
 
 
 1076
 ROMANIA
 in job status, dismissals from universities, and other
 sanctions are common.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 There have been no substantiated reports of political killings
 in Romania during 1985. In November, a deta nee died while n
 pretrial custody. Romania officials attributed the death to
 complications following surgery for a serious medical
 problem. Other sources have expressed concern that the
 prisoner had suffered beatings at the hands of the police,
 which may have led to his death. Amnesty International
 reported the death of a Romanian convict but gave no cause of
 death.
 b. Disappearance
 There have been no substantiated reports of politically
 motivated disappearances during 1985. Several sources,
 however, have reported disappearances in circumstances which
 seem clearly to indicate that those who disappeared were in
 police custody; the authorities denied this (see Section Id).
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 In 1985 there have been a number of credible reports of
 torture. A Roman Catholic priest in western Romania was so
 severely beaten by DSS functionaries that he temporarily lost
 the use of his hands. A leading member of a religious group
 under heavy pressure from local authorities reportedly was
 detained and beaten over a period of some 16 hours, frequently
 losing consciousness. After release, the victim was examined
 by a physician and reportedly found to have suffered extensive
 internal injury. Amnesty International reported that in late
 1984 a Baptist was arrested on suspicion of helping a relative
 emigrate illegally. The DSS searched his apartment and found
 religious literature. Amnesty International reported that
 while in detention the victim was hung by his wrists and
 beaten.
 Romanian authorities reportedly also use physical and mental
 degradation to intimidate those caught or suspected of
 wrongdoing. Persons detained for questioning are often kept
 for long periods without sleep, food, or toilet facilities, as
 well as being held incommunicado. Numerous reports say those
 caught attempting to leave the country illegally, for example,
 are subject to extreme physical and mental harassment, often
 prior to being given only relatively light sentences if they
 are first offenders. Prisoners also report that, in the case
 of those who have received long sentences for political
 offenses, wives are sometimes pressured to divorce their
 spouses.
 In its 1985 Report (covering the year 1984), Amnesty
 International stated that "prison conditions under which
 prisoners of conscience were held were reported to be harsh,
 with poor food, hygiene and medical care." The report claimed
 that, at the Calea Rahovei prison in Bucharest, prisoners were
 
 
 1077
 ROMANIA
 "shackled with handcuffs and leg-irons to a ring fixed into a
 concrete pyramid, approximately 40 centimetres high, in such a
 way that it was only possible for the prisoner to squat."
 Among numerous other reports of cruel, inhuman, or degrading
 treatment, the most common complaints concern cells which are
 badly ventilated and poorly heated, bad food in extremely
 small quantities, difficult working conditions, long periods
 of isolation, excessive use of force by guards, overcrowding.
 and segregation of persons deemed "dangerous to the State"
 because of religious belief or for other reasons. By law some
 Romanian convicts are not required to work; the State uses
 this provision to keep some prisoners effectively in solitary
 confinement, whereas others in this category, whom the State
 does not wish to segregate, reportedly are made to sign
 "voluntary" requests to be allowed to work.
 Several cases of alleged incarceration of dissidents in
 psychiatric institutions were reported in 1985. Although
 corrobatory information has not been received, some
 independent evidence tends to support the allegations.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 There are no provisions for habeas corpus or bail in Romanian
 law. Prisoners under investigation often are held
 incommunicado. Detention of varying duration, usually a
 matter of hours, and then release without charge, continues to
 be widespread. Such arbitrary detention may be repeated, with
 subjects called back for additional lengthy interrogation
 several times.
 Typically, persons detained for political or other offenses
 disappear abruptly, and family and friends are left unaware of
 their circumstances or whereabouts. In two substantiated
 cases of such disappearance in 1985, the subject later was
 found to have been arrested, tried, and convicted the same
 day, reemerging only some days later when his family was
 notified of his prison sentence. In another current case,
 authorities deny knowledge of the subject's whereabouts, but
 Western sources report the family has been ordered regularly
 to appear at a detention facility, bringing clean clothing
 which is exchanged for a set of the subject's soiled clothes.
 The scope of Romanian criminal law is broad enough to insure
 that persons coming under official scrutiny may be convicted
 of some offense. Examples of typical charges are "defaming
 the Socialist order" for speaking frankly to a foreigner;
 "disturbing the peace" or "illegal assembly" for private
 prayer meetings in the home; "social parasitism" if unemployed
 but technically guilty of no other offense; or "distributing
 literature without a license"--a felony--if found attempting
 to hand out free Bibles.
 "Exile" is not a punishment found in Romanian law. The
 authorities, however, have used residence permit requirements
 to harass religious activists, in one case in 1985 seeking to
 banish a Baptist minister to the provinces. There have also
 been substantiated cases of persons "temporarily exiled" by
 being taken to a remote location and detained, for example,
 during the time Western visitors interested in their cases
 were in the country.
 
 
 1078
 ROMANIA
 Romanian practice requires involuntary labor from citizens
 but, for the most part, this seems to fall within the area of
 "civic obligations" and thus outside the International Labor
 Organization's definition of "forced or compulsory labor."
 For example, a law passed after the 1977 earthquake required
 up to 6 days' unpaid labor per year (and cash contributions)
 from each citizen. Though still widely applied, sanctions for
 nonperformance are light. In some jurisdictions, the work
 requirement is automatically converted to an additional cash
 payment. Students 11 years and older perform "patriotic work"
 in agriculture or elsewhere, sometimes 8 to 10 hours daily for
 several weeks, especially during the harvest. The Union of
 Communist Youth organizes "youth brigades" for this purpose.
 Some religious groups reportedly have been "encouraged" by
 local authorities to perform unpaid labor in the fields on
 Sundays as a means of securing official approval for church
 building permits or other benefits for their congregations.
 These types of labor contributions are general throughout the
 population, not selectively applied as a "means of political
 coercion or education, or as a sanction against free
 expression of political or ideological opinions." There are
 no reports of "gulags" or other practices which fall within
 the ILO definition of "forced or compulsory labor."
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 In Romania, an accused person is considered guilty until
 proven innocent. The ability of the accused to defend himself
 effectively in a fair trial, however, is severely
 circumscribed. Although the authorities in 1985 seemingly
 displayed increasing regard for correct procedure and due
 process of law, Western observers often gained the impression
 that being brought to trial in Romania is an almost sure
 guarantee of conviction. In 1985 there were clear cases of
 fabrication of evidence and suborning of witnesses by
 prosecuting authorities, as well as of what appeared to be
 violations of Romanian law regarding court procedures.
 Defendants are often tried without counsel or are represented
 by state-appointed attorneys whose role appears to be that of
 apologizing for defendants' offenses. Members of the
 judiciary, like other officials, are subject to the authority
 of the Communist Party.
 A notable example in 1985 both of an unfair trial and of an
 unsuccessful attempt to obtain justice through appeal
 prodecures was the case of Constantin Sfatcu. A Baptist from
 eastern Romania, Sfatcu was charged with "attempted murder of
 a policeman" after a chance search of his car revealed some
 600 copies of Bibles and other religious literature in the
 trunk. Despite what even a government prosecutor later called
 highly questionable evidence, Sfatcu was convicted and given a
 sentence close to the maximum. On appeal to the Supreme
 Court, the prosecutor recommended returning the case to the
 lower court for retrial because of the character of the
 evidence and the failure of the State to sustain its charge.
 The Supreme Court instead found Sfatcu guilty of a lesser
 offense and reduced his sentence to 4-1/2 years.
 The majority of trials are held in public, though secret
 trials are common where state security is involved and may
 also be permitted in certain other cases. Foreign observers
 face some difficulties in attending public trials with high
 local or international interest. In at least one case,
 
 
 1079
 
 ROMANIA
 Western interest caused the judge arbitrarily and abruptly to
 order a routine trial closed over the objection of defense
 attorneys. The alleged offense did not fit any of the
 categories for which the law permits closed trials.
 It is impossible accurately to estimate the number of
 political prisoners in Romania, though the number could be
 several thousand, including those who have attempted to leave
 Romania illegally.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Romanian laws and regulations governing the security apparatus
 sanction a high degree of interference with the individual and
 the family. The interference is somewhat mitigated by the
 impossibility of total control, by uneven application of
 regulations, and occasionally by corruption of officials.
 Deliberate and arbitrary interference with the privacy of the
 family, home, and correspondence is a frequent occurrence.
 Searches are made of private homes, persons, and personal
 effects without search warrants or probable cause that a crime
 may have been committed. Militiamen at checkpoints located on
 most roads leading out of the cities and at major highway
 intersections in the countryside randomly stop and search
 vehicles as a matter of course. Persons on tram cars and city
 buses often are asked for identity documents and have shopping
 bags and personal belongings checked by the authorities.
 The authorities often enter homes on the pretext of looking
 for building code violations, excessive consumption of
 electricity (60 watt bulbs maximum), illegal use of electrical
 appliances, etc. These searches facilitate the discovery of
 other items, such as forbidden books and publications,
 religious materials, or any other evidence of "wrongdoing."
 Violation of privacy of the person also arises from the
 ongoing antiabortion campaign. Some female workers undergo
 mandatory bimonthly pregnancy tests and physical examinations
 to insure that pregnancies are discovered and carried to term.
 Complaints about interference with both domestic and
 international correspondence continue. Letters to or from
 persons considered "of interest" often never arrive at their
 destination. People have reportedly been questioned by the
 security police about topics discussed in letters which were
 delivered seemingly unopened. On other occasions, people have
 been questioned about statements made in letters sent abroad
 but never received by the addressees.
 The Government has the capability to monitor domestic and
 international telephone calls closely and appears frequently
 to do so.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 The Constitution guarantees freedom of speech and of the press
 but prohibits their use for any purpose "hostile to the
 
 
 1080
 ROMANIA
 Socialist system and the interests of the working people," as
 defined by the State and party. Similarly, the Penal Code
 prohibits "propaganda with a Fascist (as defined by the State)
 character delivered in public by any means... (or).. .the
 undertaking of any action for the changing of the Socialist
 system...." It also prohibits acts "which would result in a
 danger to state security"; these offenses are punishable by
 prison terms of up to 15 years.
 The Government seeks to control the domestic dissemination of
 information in a variety of ways. Though official censorship
 was abolished some years ago, all media are state-owned,
 rigidly controlled, and used primarily as the vehicle for
 government and party propaganda. Western radio broadcasts in
 the Romanian language are not jammed and are a major source of
 both foreign and domestic news for the Romanian people.
 Western publications are not available to the general public,
 and unauthorized import or distribution of foreign
 publications is forbidden. In 1985 there were frequent
 reports of confiscations of foreign-source materials,
 including Hungarian-language publications, at the border.
 Romanian libraries carefully control access to "restricted"
 materials such as prewar historical texts. In 1985 there was
 reportedly an increase in the number of books banned or
 restricted. For live theater, censorship boards must approve
 all new productions before the opening performance. Serial
 numbers and type-face samples of all typewriters must be
 registered with the authorities, and the use of duplicating
 machines is strictly regulated.
 Foreign cultural centers and libraries enjoy open access to
 the public and are allowed to distribute limited quantities of
 Western periodicals.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 The Government attempts to control all group activity. No
 organization independent of government or party influence is
 permitted to exist. Peaceful assembly and association without
 permission are usually short-lived and may bring severe
 repercussions to those involved. Citizens are strongly
 discouraged from making contact with foreigners, and the law
 requires that all such contacts be reported to the authorities
 within 24 hours.
 The Constitution guarantees the right to join a union. As
 noted earlier, however, it also enshrines the Communist Party
 as "the leading political force in the whole of society,"
 which applies specifically with respect to labor unions and
 other "mass and public organizations." Trade unions
 independent of the party are thus prohibited, and workers do
 not have the right independently to form associations, elect
 representatives, or affiliate with international organizations.
 Workers do not have the right to organize or bargain
 collectively. While they nominally have a direct voice in the
 management of the workplace through the unions that all must
 join, in most factories the senior party official is also the
 union's chief executive, and the primary function of the
 unions is to channel party doctrine and directives to the
 workers. Unions also dispense social benefits, such as
 
 
 1081
 ROMANIA
 vacations at union-owned hotels, for which the member pays
 only a fraction of the real cost, low-interest loans, and
 access to cultural, educational, and other leisure activities.
 Romania's labor code is silent on the right to strike, except
 to elaborate procedures by which the union leadership is
 required to mediate disputes between the workers and
 management, with recourse to the courts where the dispute
 cannot be settled. In practice, sanctions available to the
 party and the union make it unlikely that such disputes would
 reach the courts. In the past, the Government's reaction to
 actual strikes, or to advocacy of the worker's right to
 strike, has been harsh repression.
 Based on complaints by the World Federation of Labor about
 Romanian suppression of widespread strikes in the Jiu valley
 coal mines in 1977 and the 1979 suppression of an attempt to
 establish an independent trade union, the International Labor
 Organization (ILO) in 1980 began an investigation of Romania's
 labor practices. In 1984, the ILO found that Romania's
 response to allegations made against it and to charges that
 its Constitution violated international labor standards was
 inadequate.   The Committee on the Application of Standards
 and Conventions recommended that Romania accept a
 direct-contacts mission from the ILO." In 1985, Romania
 refused both to consider a direct-contacts mission and to
 appear before the Committee to respond further to charges
 about its labor policies.
 There continue to-be unconfirmed reports about work stoppages
 and labor unrest caused by dissatisfaction about food
 shortages, pay, or lack of heat.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Despite constitutional guarantees of religious freedom, the
 practice of religion in Romania continues to be closely
 controlled by the Government. The Communist Party advocates
 atheism, and religious activism by state officials and party
 members is strongly discouraged. The Department of Religious
 Affairs recognizes religious denominations, including Romanian
 Orthodox (the largest), Roman Catholic, Lutheran, Calvinist,
 Unitarian, Baptist, Pentecostal, Seventh-Day Adventist,
 Jewish, and Muslim. The 14 officially approved faiths
 encompass an estimated 95 percent of all Romanians claiming
 religious affiliation.
 The Government, through the Department of Religious Affairs,
 subsidizes clerical salaries, issues licenses to preach,
 approves.permits for church construction or renovation,
 establishes the number of new admissions to seminaries, and
 controls the importation or printing of religious materials,
 including Bibles.
 Attempts by members of officially unrecognized faiths to
 gather for worship generally are treated by local authorities
 as "illegal assemblies" or "disturbing the peace," with
 participants arrested and fined. Among the denominations
 refused recognition by the Government are the Church of Jesus
 Christ of Latter-day Saints (Mormons), the Nazarenes, and
 Jehovah's Witnesses. The latter two faiths were singled out
 for strong attacks in government periodicals in 1985.
 
 
 1082
 ROMANIA
 The Romanian Orthodox Church has from historic times been able
 to coexist with a series of governments. It tends to accept
 government policy and did not, for example, take public issue
 with the authorities over the destruction of a number of
 churches and monasteries in 1985 which caused some public
 outcry. The church is believed, however, to have registered
 quiet objections which led to the physical relocation of
 several structures outside of the area of urban redevelopment
 plans. Government policy toward the Orthodox Church appears
 less restrictive than toward the more Evangelic
 congregations. Orthodox Church officials claim they are able
 to build churches as needed and have no pressing need for new
 churches, despite major urban and rural redevelopment programs
 which are causing a substantial percentage of the population
 to move into new high-rise apartment communities.
 The remarkable growth of what the Government calls
 "neo-Protestant" denominations--Pentecostals, Evangelical
 Brethren, and especially the Baptists--has led to repeated
 confrontations with the Government during the last 15 years.
 Government animosity towards these groups is strengthened by
 their insistence on the primacy of religious belief over state
 authority in matters of conscience.
 In what was seen as a positive step in 1985, the Government
 promised Baptist leaders additional badly needed seminary
 entry positions and building permits. So far, these promises
 remain substantially unfulfilled. The country's largest
 Baptist church in Oradea is scheduled for demolition in an
 urban renewal program but has been allowed to stand pending
 completion of a replacement. On the other hand, a Baptist
 church in Bistrita was partially demolished by the authorities
 in November, 1984, and has not been repaired. A Baptist
 church in Blaj was destroyed because of building code
 violations in October 1985, and a large Baptist church in
 Bucharest was substantially demolished during the summer for
 the same reason. A Baptist church in the village of Gaujani
 was confiscated in 1984 for use as a nursery school; the
 congregation has been unable to obtain either a replacement or
 compensation.
 The Government in late 1984 permitted the consecration of the
 Administrator of Bucharest's Roman Catholic Archdiocese, Msgr.
 loan Robu, as a bishop. The Archdiocese had been without a
 prelate since the death of Archbishop Cisan in 1954.
 Government officials attended Bishop Robu's consecration in
 Rome, and a number of Catholic clergy were permitted to travel
 there for the ceremonies as well. The Government, however,
 continues to disagree with the Roman Catholic Church over the
 number of dioceses to be allowed in the country, and the
 church technically remains without an approved government
 charter. In 1985 Bucharest's largest Roman Catholic Church,
 St. Joseph's, was partially renovated inside, and a small, new
 Catholic church was consecrated in the resort town of Baile
 Tusnad.
 The Government continues to support a widespread and active
 Jewish community organization throughout the country. Jewish
 cemeteries in Romania are typically well maintained; the
 organization runs some 11 kosher restaurants throughout the
 country. When city redevelopment plans threatened the smaller
 of two Jewish old people's homes in Bucharest in 1985, Jewish
 community leaders were able to gain government support for the
 construction, mostly with funds contributed by groups in the
 
 
 1083
 
 ROMANIA
 United States, of a new facility now nearing completion.
 Though current redevelopment work has destroyed a number of
 the Jewish organization's buildings in Bucharest, including
 former synagogues, the organization maintains that these
 buildings were no longer necessary. The organization's
 headquarters, the main ("Choral") synagogue, and the Jewish
 museum--all in the redevelopment area--have been left
 untouched. There have been no repetitions of the anti-Semitic
 literature which troubled relations in 1984 between the
 Government and the Jewish community. Jewish leaders are
 allowed to travel outside the country and do so frequently.
 The apparent severe shortage of Bibles continue to lead some
 Romanians to risk harsh penalties for smuggling them into the
 country. In 1985 persons were convicted for offenses stemming
 from smuggling Bibles. Four of these, Evangelical Christians,
 were sentenced to penal work programs for about 1 year for
 "distributing literature without a license" when they
 attempted to give out Romanian-language Bibles. The
 Government has indicated, however, that it would be willing to
 permit the importation of Bibles, if a need were demonstrated
 which could not be met from within the country. Many
 religious leaders say privately that they need Bibles, but
 apparently no denomination has put forward a formal request
 for the import of Bibles. Various problems are said to have
 delayed implementation of a government offer, now some years
 outstanding, to have more Bibles printed locally for several
 Protestant faiths.
 In what was perceived as a significant positive step, Father
 Gheorghe Calciu, a Romanian Orthodox priest imprisoned from
 1979 to 1984 for sermons critical of the Government, was
 allowed to emigrate in July 1985. Upon his arrival in the
 West, Calciu told of several other prisoners of conscience who
 were in prison with him and presumably remain there for
 "offenses" similar to his own.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Except for certain military or other restricted areas (access
 prohibited) and border areas (access limited to residents of
 the areas and those with economic need to travel there), there
 are no official restrictions placed on travel within Romania.
 Because of economic problems, however, travel within Romania
 can be difficult for the average citizen. A national ban on
 the use of private cars was in effect during the first quarter
 of 1985. During this time public transportation was
 curtailed. A ban on driving on alternate Sundays, based on
 license numbers, remained in effect throughout the year.
 Gasoline rationing also severely inhibited automobile travel.
 Reports continue that the authorities seek to discourage
 citizens from traveling to meet foreign visitors or to attend
 particular functions, notably of a religious character.
 During the visit of Rev. Billy Graham to Romania in 1985,
 reports were received of government efforts to discourage
 attendance at his appearances. When these efforts proved
 unsuccessful, despite a total clampdown on domestic publicity,
 the Government threw heavy cordons of security troops and
 police around his public appearances in Bucharest, the last
 stop on his tour.
 
 
 1084
 ROMANIA
 The right of a citizen to change his place of residence or
 work is restricted. Residence permits are required, and
 citizens may not legally move from one town to another, or
 between districts within a city, without official permission.
 Official denial of residence permits has been used to hamper
 and harass religious activists, in one case requiring a
 minister to live in a city many miles distant from his
 congregation. Residence-permit and antiunemployment laws have
 been used to dilute the ethnically homogeneous nature of some
 parts of the country heavily populated by national minority
 groups. Workers are technically free to change jobs although
 antiunemployment laws and government controls limit this
 freedom in practice. A government declaration of a "state of
 necessity" in the energy industry in the fall of 1985 froze
 all energy workers in their jobs.
 Travel outside Romania is a privilege usually reserved for
 those who hold relatively high positions in the party or
 Government, or those who can "guarantee" their return, usually
 by leaving a close family member behind. Older persons
 wishing to visit their children resident abroad generally have
 few problems.
 Officially, Romania encourages tourism by making visas
 available for most visitors at the border. In 1985, however,
 a number of Hungarian travelers--including some with valid
 Romanian entry visas--were turned away at the border; usually
 no reason is given for such entry denials. In other cases the
 Government has indicated that certain U.S. citizens who
 formerly visited Romania as tourists would neither be given
 visas for future visits nor allowed to reenter the country; in
 most cases the visitors are alleged to have engaged in
 Bible-smuggling or religious activities unacceptable to the
 authorities. Others visiting coreligionists report they
 encountered little or no difficulty in entry and movement
 about the country.
 Official policy continues to oppose emigration for any purpose
 but family reunification. Those who seek to leave Romania
 continue to face harassment designed to dissuade them and
 others who might be considering permanent departure. To avoid
 enlarging the figure of "passport denials," the Government
 refuses to accept passport applications until a decision to
 issue has been made. Successful applications take one year or
 more before passport approval. Once emigration passports have
 been issued, applicants are required to show they have
 divested themselves of almost all property, including currency
 assets. Those in state- or employer-supplied apartments
 typically face eviction and must find accommodation in the
 already overcrowded dwellings of family or friends while they
 await foreign visas necessary for departure from Romania.
 During this period, which was often very lengthy until recent
 changes in procedures, applicants were nearly always demoted
 or dismissed from their jobs although most were offered other
 employment, such as digging ditches in a distant city, cutting
 wood in forests, or farm labor positions in the provinces with
 no provision for family accommodation at the proffered job
 site.
 In 1985 an understanding was reached between the United States
 and Romanian Governments on passport and visa procedures which
 has reduced these humanitarian costs for intending emigrants
 to the United States who have received the Romanian
 
 
 1085
 ROMANIA
 Government's permission to depart. The understanding provides
 that the Romanian Government will issue certificates of
 passport approval to those citizens approved for permanent
 departure for the United States. Passports are then issued to
 them after they receive letters from the American Embassy
 indicating that they are eligible for prompt issuance of U.S.
 visas or other travel documentation. In this way, the
 understanding delays the application of Romanian predeparture
 requirements (relinquishment of previous employment, housing,
 access to social services) until the emigrants are assured of
 early departure.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Though the Constitution guarantees the right of Romanians to
 change their government and leaders, in practice the
 individual citizen has almost no voice in shaping public
 policy or choosing public officials. The Romanian Communist
 Party, led by the President, his wife, and a few advisers,
 rules. No actual or potential alternatives to this present
 rigidly centralized control are apparent, and no meaningful
 opposition exists or would be tolerated. Public criticism of
 the Government, the party, and the state leadership is
 suppressed.
 The Communist Party comprises more than 13.5 percent of the
 total population of the country. Women officially represent
 52 percent of the general membership, and minorities are
 reportedly represented in proportion to their numbers within
 the general population. The higher echelons of the party,
 however, are predominantly male Romanians.
 National parliamentary elections by secret ballot are held
 every 5 years. The public has no effective voice in the
 nominating process; candidates are chosen by the Front for
 Democracy and Socialist Unity, a mass organization whose
 president is Nicolae Ceausescu. Over 75 percent of its
 officers are Communist Party central committee members.
 Official statistics published after the March 1985 general
 election claimed that 99 percent of those registered actually
 voted, and 97.3 percent of these voted for the Front's
 candidates. Western observers closely watching the elections
 consider these figures highly suspect.
 In Romania the chief party executive for each city, county, or
 enterprise is also the chief civil executive. Internal party
 elections were held for the new Communist Party leadership
 late in 1984. Though these preceded the national general
 election by several months, those chosen for senior party
 posts the previous fall were universally "elected" to the
 corresponding public posts the following spring.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights.
 There are no human rights monitoring organizations operating
 in Romania. The Government has permitted Western observers
 seeking to investigate the human rights situation here to
 visit Romania but discourages such visits and seeks to
 control, screen, and orchestrate such visits when they do
 occur. The Government has not commented officially on the
 reports issued by other governmental or nongovernmental
 
 
 1086
 ROMANIA
 organizations such as the Council of Europe, Amnesty
 International, or Freedom House, all of which have been
 critical. On the other hand, the Government organized a visit
 in 1985 for a human rights observer group led by three U.S.
 Congressmen, who traveled freely about the country and had
 contacts with virtually everyone--including religious
 dissidents--of interest to them. The group included a team of
 television newsmen, who produced two programs on religious
 freedom in Romania later broadcast in the United States.
 Romania continues officially to proclaim that discussion and
 examination of its human rights situation is "unwarranted
 interference in domestic affairs," despite its professed
 support for human rights standards embodied in the United
 Nations Charter and in the Final Act of the Conference on
 Security and Cooperation in Europe.
 In its 1985 Report (covering the year 1984), Amnesty
 International was concerned about the incarceration of
 prisoners of conscience, including religious believers, and
 about reports which indicated that defendants in political
 cases did not receive fair trials. Amnesty International also
 received allegations that political prisoners had been
 ill-treated. Freedom House rated Romania "not free."
 ECONOMIC, SOCIAL, AND CULTURAL SITUATION
 Romania's population, according to World Bank figures, was
 22,734,000 in 1985, and the annual growth rate was 0.4
 percent. Per capita gross national product in 1982 was
 $2,558. Romania reached its present semi-industrialized level
 by maintaining extremely high rates of industrial investment
 financed by the earnings of agriculture and the petroleum
 industry, the restructuring of consumption, and foreign
 borrowing. The agricultural sector, at one time a major
 supplier of grain to Central Europe, has received relatively
 little investment emphasis.
 In 1985, the national economy continued to confront rising
 costs, energy shortages, and stringent efforts by the
 Government to reduce the country's foreign debt as quickly as
 possible. Both agriculture and industry continued to suffer
 during 1985 from lack of needed imports, though less than in
 1984. The harsh winter of 1984-85 and the Government's
 inability to solve the energy problem aggravated the economy's
 poor performance. Many factories closed due to lack of fuel
 or to failure by subcontractors to deliver needed input stock
 or subassemblies for the same reasons. Workers laid off or
 working reduced hours received no assistance from the state to
 balance their lost wages, causing considerable hardship.
 Inadequate energy supplies left many homes with little or no
 heat, no cooking gas, and a severely restricted electrical
 supply. Use of private cars was banned for several months,
 and public transport was curtailed at the same time.
 To meet energy needs during the 1985-86 winter, the Government
 in October declared a "state of necessity and militarized
 regime" in the national energy system. The government decree
 assigned military commanders to coal-fired power plants and
 other installations and made them coequal in responsibility
 with management and union leadership.
 Although food supplies expanded during the harvest period,
 basic foodstuffs remained rationed. Food availability was, in
 
 
 1087
 ROMANIA
 general, slightly reduced from previous years because of the
 reduced flow of goods from private plots to farmers' markets,
 stricter government controls on the sale of produce from
 private plots which discourage private farming, and the
 Government's policy of increasing food sales abroad as a major
 source of foreign exchange earnings.
 Education is universal and mandatory for the first 10 school
 years. Romania has almost total adult literacy. The quality
 of technical and scientific instruction is considered good.
 Adult and continuing education is available once neccessary
 permission has been obtained.
 Over the past two decades, the Government has made a
 determined effort to provide adequate housing for its urban
 population. As a result, large new multistory apartment
 developments abound throughout the country, and the practice
 of several families sharing apartments, kitchens, and
 toilets--common only a few years ago--is gradually
 disappearing.
 The urban and rural redevelopment program was accelerated
 considerably in 1985, especially in the countryside. One
 result of this was the wholesale destruction of small farm
 villages around Bucharest and elsewhere. This campaign,
 according to those who felt its effects, was carried out with
 little advance warning. Residents were sometimes given no
 more'than 24 hours to vacate their homes in severe winter
 weather and find alternate shelter. Western observers report
 many instances of families, dispossessed the day before,
 picking through the ruins of their houses to salvage what
 little they could. The purpose of this program, according to
 government statements, was to eliminate inefficient
 single-family traditional rural housing and to increase the
 amount of land available for tillage. While some evictees
 were given city apartments, others were offered housing in
 "farm complex" rural apartment developments which they said
 had not yet been built.
 In Bucharest, the accelerated urban renewal program
 encompassed several additional areas in 1985. Thousands of
 older houses and other buildings, some of historical value,
 were demolished to make way for new development. President
 Ceausescu announced a new program to move some older people
 out of the cities to agro-industrial complexes scheduled for
 construction in rural areas. Some movement in this direction
 reportedly has already begun.
 Romania seeks to provide free medical care for all its
 citizens. According to 1984 statistics, average Romanian life
 expectancy is 71.6 years, and infant mortality is 27 per 1,000
 live births. Romanian statistics claimed 9.3 hospital beds
 per 1,000 inhabitants, and one physician per 507 inhabitants
 in 1984.
 President Ceausescu in late 1984 declared that culture must be
 devoted totally to serving the needs of society, by
 contributing to the development of the "new Socialist man."
 Though literature and the arts remain active, government
 policies leave many Romanians concerned for their country's
 cultural future.
 The Romanian Constitution guarantees the right to work.
 Unemployment is a crime ("social parasitism"). The Government
 
 
 1088
 ROMANIA
 closely controls the labor market and claims that there is no
 unemployment.
 The Constitution guarantees equal pay for equal work.
 Government statistics claim the average monthly net wage in
 all sectors in .1984 was about $245. Government statistics
 indicated the losses in real earnings in 1982-83 were
 compensated by wage hikes in 1984, returning individual
 earnings to their 1980 level; there were no wage increases in
 1985. A new system of wage determination, introduced in 1984,
 tied most wages to overall enterprise output, with no
 allowance for underperformance due to factors beyond the
 workers' control. As a result, despite the Government's
 claims, there were numerous reports in 1985 of greatly reduced
 worker pay, with widespread "moonlighting" required to reach
 minimum needed levels of income. A similar government plan
 announced late in 1985 established special bonuses (up to 20
 percent of base pay) for managers in the export and extractive
 industries as well as a schedule of penalties (up to 50
 percent) for underfulfillment of performance quotas.
 The Constitution guarantees an 8-hour workday (or a 6-hour day
 in "arduous" occupations), a 24-hour rest period each week,
 paid vacations, and the "right to leisure." Labor law
 elaborates these guarantees but allows employers to override
 these standards "if conditions warrant." In 1985 there were
 numerous reports of workers required to perform extra,
 uncompensated days of labor to make up for lagging production
 or for some official holidays. Shift schedules and workdays
 have been arbitrarily adjusted, in some cases, to rationalize
 machinery use or energy consumption patterns.
 There is no specific minimum employment age, although Romanian
 law requires schooling to the age of 16. Exceptions, however,
 are allowed for 14-year-olds in temporary jobs and for youths
 of 15 employed in industrial work, so long as the employer
 provides continuing educational opportunities and shows that
 the work being performed is "appropriate for the age and
 condition" of the employee. In such cases, the law limits
 work to 6 hours per day. Children from age 11 may work in the
 fields, or in other "patriotic work," usually as part of a
 school or other group activity.
 The Romanian Labor Code guarantees Romanian workers a safe
 environment. The Ministry of Labor has established safety
 standards for most industries and is responsible for enforcing
 these standards. In practice, however, observers report that
 workplace conditions in many factories present substantial
 health or safety hazards. Although management is reportedly
 aware of these deficiencies in most cases, emphasis on meeting
 production goals clearly takes precedence over safety and
 health in light of the Government's insistence on rapidly
 paying off the foreign debt and on pursuing industrial and
 economic development.
 Women are constitutionally guaranteed the same rights and
 privileges as men. The Government seeks to upgrade the role
 of women in society with specific policies in the areas of
 education, access to employment, and comparable wages. As a
 result, women are employed in virtually all sectors of the
 economy, and there is equal opportunity in education, but at
 the senior levels of responsibility and authority they appear
 in far smaller numbers. Many women are still found in the
 
 
 1089
 ROMANIA
 most menial jobs, such as agricultural stoop labor, street
 cleaning, and snow removal.
 According to official figures, the country's population
 includes about 2.7 million members of ethnic minorities, of
 whom 1.7 million are ethnic Hungarians. Hungarian sources
 claim that the true figure is closer to 2-2.5 million ethnic
 Hungarians. Hungarians, Germans, Gypsies, and members of many
 smaller groups constitute about 12 percent of the total
 population. The Constitution forbids discrimination on the
 basis of ethnic background. Although the Government claims it
 does not discriminate against minorities, there nonetheless
 are limitations on minority groups' freedom to express and
 maintain their cultural heritage. Government efforts to
 centralize and economize by combining education, social, and
 cultural facilities frequently affect minority groups
 disproportionately. For example, the mergers of schools,
 theaters, or other such institutions often result in the loss
 of the minority group's ethnic characteristics as the
 institutions become predominantly Romanian. Moreover, strict
 government control of private organizations, which-might be
 dedicated to the preservation.of ethnic cultural practices,
 are often viewed by members of minority groups as
 discriminatory. Both Romanian and non-Romanian television and
 radio broadcasting have been cut as an economy measure.
 Despite government limitations, Hungarian- and German-language
 daily papers still outstrip their Romanian-language
 equivalents in circulation in heavily ethnic areas.
 
 
 1090
