 ROMANIA
 Romania is a constitutional republic with a multiparty parliamentary system and
 a directly elected president as chief of state. In the 1992 presidential election, Ion
 Iliescu was reelected President with 61 percent of the popular vote. A minority Gov-
 ernment led by Prime Minister Nicolae Vacaroiu and supported by the Party of So-
 
 
 927
 cial Democracy of Romania (PDSR) has held power since the 1992 parliamentary
 elections despite the fact that the PDSR holds only 34 percent of the parliamentary
 seats. After the Government withstood a vote of no confidence on June 30 by a nar-
 row margin, the Prime Minister in Augst brought the nationalistic Party of Roma-
 man National Unity (PUNR) into the Government, giving it two Cabinet seats. On
 September 12, the sit"  Minister of Justice declared that he had joined the PUNR,
 bringing its total of Cabinet seats to three. On December 23, the Government more
 comfortably withstood another no-confidence vote.
 The Ministry of Internal Affairs supervises the operations of the police. While
 there were fewer reports in 1994 of police misconduct or failure to enforce the law,
 the military prosecutor's office, which has legal responsibility in such cases, was lax
 in prosecuting instances of police abuse. Political and religious activists continued
 to assert credibly that unknown agents subjected them to surveillance and harass-
 ment.
 Romania has a mixed economy, with industrial production based on metal and
 mineral products, textiles, and electric machinery, and a rich agriculture. The Gov-
 ernment continued to struggle with the painful transition to a market economy. Eco-
 nomic growth resumed in 1993 and continued at a slow pace in 1994. Progress on
 structural economic reform has been mixed, although observers expect it to acceler-
 ate following parliamentary approval of the Government's mass privatization bill.
 About one-third of gross domestic product now originates in the private sector. A
 tough International Monetary Fund-backed economic stabilization plan cut inflation
 from 10 percent to 1.5 percent per month and helped stabilize the currency. The
 phasing out of all consumer subsidies (except those on bread and milk) and strict
 government austerity allowed the national budget to run a small surplus by mid-
 1994. The unemployment rate, a little over 10.5 percent, is expected to rise as the
 state-owned industrial sector is privatized.
 The Government generally respected most internationally recognized human
 rights, although the police continued to abuse detainees physically, and the Govern-
 ment often faied to try and punish those responsible appropriately. Discrimination
 and violene against Roma continued, generally with impunity for those responsible.
 At year's end, 14 people charged with offenses in the May outbreak of violence
 against the Roma community in Raesa were still awaiting trial, now set for January
 1995. The Government's Council for National Minorities, widely hailed in 1993, ap-
 peared largely ineffective in 1994. Societal discrimination and violence against
 women remained a problem, frequently unrecognized by the Government.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudiclal Killing.-There were no reports of political or
 other extrajudicial killings. A railway police officer charged in 1993 with abusive
 treatment leading to the death of a beggar was still awaiting trial in Timisoara at
 the end of 1994. In the 1993 case of an arrestee in Dorohol who died, ostensibly
 of heart failure, after a week in police custody, the military prosecutor dropped
 charges against the police because of a lack of evidence. In May a Bucharest mili-
 tary court sentenced two police officers charged with torture and murder in a 1992
 case to 15 years' imprisonment. Upon judicial review, this sentence was upheld in
 November.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of disappearance.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punfshment.-
 The Constitution prohibits torture and inhuman or degrading punishment or treat-
 ment, and these prohibitions were generally respected in practice. However, police
 continue to use excessive force during arrest and to beat detainees. The military
 rosecutor's office is charged with legal oversight of the police, a situation that
 human rights organizations allege inhibits aggressive prosecution or discipline of po-
 lice misconduct.
 Meanwhile, there was a credible report from the Romanian Helsinki Committee
 of a prisoner kept in solitary confinement with handcuffs on, as well as credible re-
 ports of regular handcufing to beds as a form of extra restraint.
 Several human rights organizations reported, credibly, that abuses persisted in
 overcrowded prisons, which continued to use the "cell boss" system in which some
 prisoners are designated to be in semiofficial charge of other prisoners. Prisoners
 also suffered from lack of medical care. Only the Jilava penitentiary has its own in-
 firmary, and prisoners from around the country requiring medical care are sent
 there. But even at Jilava medical standards are low. One 14-year-old prisoner, sen-
 tenced in 1992 to the sole facility for minors in Gaiesti, contracted tuberculosis
 there. In August 1993, he was transferred to Jilava and in April 1994 was finally
 
 
 moved to a civilian hospital. It took 3 months to effect his transfer to the civilian
 hospital from Jilava after the medical determination to do so had been made. A few
 days later, at age 16, he died. Apparently recognizing the dearth of adequate medi-
 cal care, Jilava in 1994 released at least one pretrial detainee from custody for med-
 ical reasons, pending trial.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-Romanian law forbids the detention of
 anyone by police for more than 24 hours without an arrest order from a prosecutor,
 who may order detention for 30 days. Detainees have the right to apply for bail and
 may ask for a hearing before a judge. The case must be heard within 24 hours of
 such a request. In the absence of a request, however, the authorities may hold a
 person for up to 65 days without a court order, and they do not adequately inform
 many citizens of their rights.
 The law requires the authorities to inform an arrestee of the charges. He or she
 also has the right to have an attorney present at all stages of the legal process, and
 police must notify the defendant of this right, in a language the defendant under-
 stands, before obtaining any statement from the arrestee. However the prosecutor's
 office may delay action on a request for a lawyer for up to 5 days from the date
 of arrest. The local bar association provides attorneys to indigents and is com-
 pensated by the Ministry of Justice.
 Both court-appointed counsel and privately hired lawyers, however, were report-
 edly negligent in some instances in defending their client's rights. One prison com-
 mandant noted that lawyers had visited his several hundred prisoners only seven
 times in 1 month. This is significant because prisons house not only prisoners serv-
 ingsentences but also most detainees awaiting trial.
 Exile was not used as a means of punishment.
 e. Denial of Fair Public TriaL-The 1992 law on the reorganization of the judici-
 ary, which officially took effect in 1993, provides for the establishment of a four-tier
 legal system, including appellate courts, which ceased to exist under Communist
 rule in 1952. Final recourse is to the Supreme Court or, for constitutional matters,
 to The Constitutional Court, established in 1992.
 Cases involving military personnel and the police (who are still subordinated to
 the military prosecutor) and criminal acts against the State (including treason and
 espionage cases) are tried in a three-tier military court system. Local and inter-
 national human rights groups criticize this system, especially investigations con-
 ducted by the military prosecutor's office against police personnel accused of abuses.
 They claim these investigations are unnecessarily lengthy and often purposefully in-
 conclusive (see Section 1..).
 Under the terms of the 1992 law, the courts are supposed to be independent of
 the executive branch, but in fact the Minister of Justice controls the selection and
 promotion of judges. In some cases, court decisions supported private individuals
 and groups against government institutions in matters such as the restitution of
 roperty and injunctions against government action. Some labor unions alleged,
 however, that the courts side with the Government when they rule on the legality
 of strikes and other labor actions. They charged further that no Romanian court has
 ever ruled in favor of the workers in a labor action against a governmental entity.
 To date, the judicial system has yet to demonstrate that it is fyindependent and
 free of executive branch interference.
 Defendants benefit from a presumption of innocence. The Criminal Code requires
 that, if a defendant cannot afford legal representation or is otherwise unable to se-
 lect counsel, an attorney will be appointed for him. Either plaintiff or defendant
 may appeal. In practice, these provisions of the law are respected. While it is prob-
 able that some confessions are still extracted through police brutality, every accused
 person has the right, and is afforded the opportunity, to withdraw such confessions
 in court, telling the judge that he or she was beaten, threatened, or otherwise forced
 to provide the confession under duress. There is evidence, moreover, that progress
 is being made in the legal scrutiny of police activity. The Romanian human rights
 organization SIRDO has reported that the military prosecutor in Suceava district
 has aggressively investigated even old cases involving allegations of confessions ob-
 tained through torture, including reopening convictions from 1989 and 1990.
 There were no reports of political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Constitution provides for legal protection against the search of a residence without
 a warrant but this protection is subordinate to "national security or public order."
 The 1992 National Security Law defines national security very broadly and lists as
 threats to national security not only crimes such as terrorism, treason, espionage,
 assassination, and armed insurrection but also totalitarian, racist, and anti-Semitic
 actions or attempts to change the existing national borders. Security officials may
 
 
 929
 enter residences without proper authorization from a prosecutor if they deem a
 threat to national security Cjmminent.7
 The Constitution further states that the privacy of legal means of communication
 is inviolable; thus, the Romanian Intelligence Service (SRI) is legally prohibited
 from engaging in political acts (e.g., mntorg the communications of a political
 party). However, the laws on national security allow it to engage in such monitoring
 on national security grounds. Similarly, although the law mcnres the SRI to obtain
 a warrant from a prosecutor to carry out intelligence activities involving "threats
 to national security," it may engage in a wide variety of operations, including "tech-
 nical operations," in order to determine if a situation meets the legal definition of
 a 'threat to national security."
 In 1994 arbitrary interference with individual citizens' rights to privacy was infre-
 quent; however, some nongovernmental organizations (NGO's) and Protestant
 church groups alleged that current or former government intelligence services
 opened their mail and tapped their telephones. The tenor of official responses to
 such complaints was always that the SRI itself was not involved, -but that
 unreconstructed agents of the Securitate, the Communist-era internal intelligence
 service, or independent individuals were involved. In addition, both Romanian citi-
 zens and foreign diplomats credibly reported opened mail, personal surveillance, and
 harassment.
 The Government took some measures to investigate reports of such continuing
 abuses. In September the prosecutor's office brought to trial the former head of the
 SRI in Maramures county, accused of illegally tapping wires for the PUNR in the
 1992 local elections. The SRI had dismissed the accused immediately following the
 alleged incident, but his trial attracted increased public attention after the appoint-
 ment of the new Minister of Telecommunications, who is a member of the PUNR
 and was head of the telecommunications service in Maramures at the time of the
 alleged infraction. However, the court dismissed the case in October on procedural
 grounds before trying it.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Presa.-Although the Constitution provides for freedom
 of expression and prohibits censorship, the same provision qualifies freedom of ex-
 pression by prohibiting "defamation of the country." Moreover, Romania's current
 Penal Code punishes acts of 'defamation" and "outrage" with several years in pris-
 on. Thus while the independent media generally criticize political and governmental
 leaders ireely and openiy, several journalists were tried and sentenced to fines or
 prison terms for slander. The police detained a journalist from Craiova, Nicolae
 Andrei, for 5 days in March for writing two satirical articles on President Ilies-ci
 neither his case nor the suit he subsequently ified against the police had been tried
 by year's end.
 U~ntil Noveer, it appeared that the government monopoly of printing and of
 newsprint suppies was eroding; several private printing houses were in operation,
 and some pubihera had found private sources of paper as well as other supplies.
 However, the nationwide newsprint shortage in November, accompanied by the pro-
 hibitively high import tax on newsprint, forced some papers to curtail their circula-
 tion temporarily and emphasized the dependence of the Romanian press on the sin-
 gle, government-controlled domestic source of newsprint. The state distributor re-
 mains the only organization generally capable of delivering newspapers and maga-
 zines nationwide, although at least one Bucharest daily has undertaken its own das-
 tribution to distant parts of Romania.
 The independent electronic media continued their rapid growth, although most op-
 erate under circumstances that limit their audience. Romanian State Television
 (RTV) and Radio Romania remained the only national broadcasters. Parliament
 passed a long-awaited administrative law in 1994 which established beards of direc-
 tors, to be appointed by Parliament, for both RTV and Radio Romania in an attempt
 to assure their editorial independence. The effect of this law in practice remains to
 be seen.
 Private broadcasters expanded greatly. As of December, 25 independent television
 stations and 65 radio stations were broadcasting. Romanians have extensive and
 g gaess to foreign broadcasts due to the proliferation of cable television
 throughout the country.
 Foreign news publications may be imported freely and distributed, but their high
 cost limits their circulation. Academic freedom both inside and outside the class-
 room is respected.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution provides for
 freedom of assembly. The law on public assembly provides for the right to assemble
 peacefully while unarmed but states that meetings must not interfere with other
 
 
 economic or social activities and may not be held near locations such as hospitals
 airports, or military installations. Organizers of demonstrations must inform loca
 authorities and police before the event. The authorities may forbid a public gather-
 hg by notifing the organizers in writing within 48 hours of receipt of the request.
 The law prohibits the organization of, or participation in, a counterdemonstration
 held at the same time as a scheduled public gathering.
 The law forbids public gatherings to espouse Communist, racist, or Fascist
 ideologies or to commit actions contrary to public order or national security. It pun-
 ishes unauthorized demonstrations or other violations by imprisonment and fines.
 Constitutional prvisions and laws on free assembly were generally respected in
 1994.
 Romanians may form associations, including political parties, and may obtain
 legal status for them by proving membeshp of at least 251 persons.          ,
 c. Freedom of Relgon.-The Constitution provides for religious freedo and the
 Government does not generally impede the oliservance of re  *ous belief. However,
 several small Protestant denominations have occasionally made credible allegations
 that low-level government officials harassed them and impeded their efforts at pros-
 elytism, worship, and construction of church buildings..                     _
 A 1948 decree officially recognizes 15 religions whose cergy may receive state fi-
 nancial support. The State Secretariat for Religious Affairs has license d another .120
 faiths and denominations under a 1930's law on clubs and associations, entitlng
 them to juridical status as well as to exemptions from income and customs taxes.
 The Romanian Orthodox Church, to which approximately 86 percent of the popu-
 lation at least nominally adhere is predominant. Approval of new applications for
 official registration is very slow due to bureaucratic poblems.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign TaveZ, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Government places no restrictions on travel within Romania, ex-
 cept in the case of certain small areas used for military purposes, nor do citizens
 who wish to change their places of wok or residence face any official barriers. The
 law stipulates that citizens have the right to travel abroad freely, to emigrate, and
 to return. In practice, Romanian citizens freely exercise these rights.
 In 1992 Germany and Romania agreed that 60,000 Romaniancitizens (40 percent
 of them ethnic Roma according to German government statistics), whose .reques
 for refugee status in Germany had been rejected, be repatriated to Romani_. Thi
 return began in 1992, and while substantial numbers have been repatriated during
 the ensuing period, by the end of 1994 a significant portion still remained in Ger-
 many. Those    a  ave returned have received little or no resettlement assistance,
 and reintegration is complicated by various types of discrimination against Roma
 (see Section 5).
 In 1991 Romania signed the 1951 Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees
 and the 1967 Protocol but still does not have legislation or an effective program to
 implment the Convention. Of some 60,000 to 80,000 illegal migrants believed to re-
 ide in Roania, less than 2,000 were registered as asylum seekers in 1994, and
 even for them government assistance beyond legal entitlements to basic education
 and medical assistance is minimal. Such migrants are overwhehningy singe males
 who regard Romania primarily as a way staion to oter adesinations.
 Meanwhile, the Government repatriated to their hom countries approximately
 150 illegal migrants. In February the Government repatriated or forci  returned
 102 Tams toSri Lanka, despite the stated concern ofthe U.N. High Commissioner
 for Refugees (UNHCR) that these people had a legitimatefear of  persecution in
 their home country. However, the UNHCR has monitored the conditio n of the re-
 turnees in Sri    c and is satisfied that they have not been persecuted since their
 return. Currently, there are slightly over 100 recognized refugees in Rmania.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 Citizens have the right to change their e government.
 The Constitution and electoral legislation grant each reognized ethnic minsorit
 one representative in Parliament's Chamber of Deputies, provided ptat the mori-
 ty's political organization obtains at least 5 percent of the average number of valid
 votes needed to elect a deputy outright (only some 1,100 votes in the 1992 elections).
 Organizations representing 13 minority groups elected deputies under this provision
 in 1992. The ethnic Hungarians, represented by the Hungarian Democratic Union
 of Romania (UDMR) besides receiving 1 allocated representative under this provi-
 sion, obtained 27 aditional seats in the Chamber anl12 in the Senate through the
 normal electoral process. Rona are underere sented in Parliament, partly due to
 their low turnout and their internal divisions, which work against the consolidation
 of votes for one Ris candidate, organization, or party, and they have not been able
 
 
 931
 to achieve any parliamentary representation beyond the one seat provided through
 the Constitution and electoral legislation.
 There are no legal restrictions on the participation of women in government or
 politics, but societal attitudes constitute a significant impediment. There are only
 a few women in Parliament and none in the current Cabinet.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Domestic human rights monitring groups include the Romanian Helsinki Com-
 mittee (APADOR-CH), them Independent Romanian SoeWty for Human Rights
 (SIRDO) the League for the Defense of Human Rights, the Romanian Institute for
 Human Rights, and several issue-specific groups such as the Young Generation of
 Roma and the Center for Crisis Intervention and Study, also a Roma NGO. Other
 groups, such as political parties and trade unions, continued to have sections mon-
 itoring observance of human rights.
 These groups, as well as international human rights organizations, functioned
 freely without government interference and visited prisoners and detainees. How-
 ever, the authorities were not always cooperative. In January RTV aired a prime-
 time 2-hour documentary prepared by the Helsinki Committee on police abuses and
 investigations of such claims. The Ministry of Internal Affairs responded with a pro-
 gram listing the number of police who had been disciplined and informed the Hel-
 sinki Committee that the human rights bureau of the police directorate was "freez-
 ing" its relations with the Committee.
 Romania was accepted into the Council of Europe (COE) in October 1993, with
 several recommendations attached to membership and with the provision that COE
 rapporteurs would visit Romania every 6 months. When rapporteurs published their
 fi-st assessment in March, the Government responded in a lengthy memorandum
 that the report was inaccurate, and asked to be released from the rapporteur mech-
 anism. The COE refused and has not released Romania from this mechanism. In
 May Parliament ratified the European Convention on Human Rights.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Se, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution forbids discrimination based on race, nationality, ethnic origin,
 language, religion, sex, opinion and political allegiance, wealth, or social back-
 ground. It also states that citizens are equal before the law and public authorities.
 npractice, however, Roma and other minorities are subject to various forms of ex-
 tralegal discrimination (see below).
 Women.-Both the Constitution and international conventions which Romania has
 signed grant women and men equal rights. In practice, however, the Government
 does not enforce these provisions, nor 9oes the Government focus attention or re-
 sources on women's problems.
 The rate of unemployment for women is up to three times higher than that for
 men, and women occupy few influential and decisionmaking positions in either the
 private sector or government. There is no law on sexual harassment, which appears
 to be a widespread practice. In 1994's most celebrated instance, the deputy director
 of the SRI and rector of its Higher Institute for Intelligence resigned under pressure
 without pubic explanation. Press reports alleged that he had    specifically ac-
 cused by one of his students of asking for sexual favors, and that this specific accu-
 sation was a central cause of his reignton
 Violence against women continued to rise. In the first 9 months of 1994, 1,833
 assaults against females were reported to police in Romania. Of these, 868 were
 cases of rape or attempted rape, 7 of which resulted in the death or the suicide of
 the victim. Prosecution of rape is difficult because both a medical certificate and a
 witness are required to prove rape legally. In addition, a rapist will not be punished
 if he marries the victim. Despite the evidentiary difficulties, prosecutors in 1994 ob-
 tained a sigicant number of convictions for rape, which carries a penalty of be-
 tween 2 and 10 years in prison. There are no functioning crisis centers, shelters,
 or hot lines for female victims of violent crime.
 The Government in 1994 failed by and large to address the problem of domestic
 violence, though it is widespread by many estimates. While some authorities and
 doctors acknowledged the existence of family violence, many denied that it was a
 major issue. They invoked Romania's strong family tradition, a safeguard belied
 however by traditional and widely held attitudes that are reflected by such proverbs
 as "a woman unbeaten is a woman unloved."
 Children.-Infant mortality remained high, actually rising to 23.6 per 1,000, par-
 tially due to low standards and scant resources in the heath sector. Private adop-
 tions of abandoned or orphaned children increased, while the number of children
 
 
 932
 housed in public institutions with poorly trained staff remained alarmingly high.
 Some physicians and Western experts attribute the low adoption rates from public
 institutions to the labyrinth of laws and bureaucracy surrounding the national Ro-
 manian Adoption Committee, supervised by the Minister of Health.
 Although there was no apparent pattern of societal abuse against children in
 1994, large numbers of impoverished-and apparently homeless but not necessarily
 orphaned children ramed the streets of the arger cities. The Government does not
 have statistics showing the scope of the problem, but youth organizations remain
 acutely concerned with the deteriorating economic conditions which contribute to
 rises in juvenile delinqency and vanalism     Some NGO's cited special concern
 about the number of minors detained in jail and prison and were seeking alternative
 solutions, such as parole, for juveniles.
 Natonal RacialEthnic Minorities .-The Government created a consultative
 Council for National Minorities in 1993 to provide a forum for dialog between the
 Government and all official minorities and to make recommendations to the Govern-
 ment regarding minority issues. Many minorities and other observers state that the
 Government seldom acts on the Council's recommendations.
 Ethnic Hungarians constitute the largest and most prominent of Romania's mi-
 norities. The UDMR--the ethnic Hungarians' political voice-holds 40 seats in the
 Parliament. As in all years since the 1990 Tirgu Mures riots, 1994 witnessed no vio-
 lence associated with ethnic Hungarian issues, despite several potentially incendi-
 ary incidents, such as the archaeological excavation in Cluj, plans to erect statues
 of World War H dictator Antonescu in Transylvania, and a highly controversial edu-
 cation bill.
 Roma continued to be subject to acts of discrimination, harassment, beatings, and
 even death, with mixed reaction on the part of the Government. In May angry vil-
 lagers in Racsa set fire to all 11 Roma homes in retaliation for the murder of an
 ethnic Romanian shepherd by two young Roma, even though the Roma had already
 been arrested. Police arrested 14 people who are free awaiting trial. However, the
 Government has failed to prosecute those responsible for the lynching of 3 Roma
 and the burning of 13 Roma houses in Hadareni in September 1993, despite claims
 by the county prosecutor's office that sufficient evidence existed to arrest several
 suspects. There were credible accusations that the authorities had pressured the
 Roma to rescind their accusations in return for having their homes reconstructed.
 Roma representatives also claim, credibly, that they are discriminated against in
 the workplace as well as in the government allotment of land to individuals.
 Religious Minorities.-There were no reports in 1994 of physical attacks directed
 against Jewish persons or institutions or of the desecration of graves or synagoges.
 However, the extreme nationalist press continued its anti-Semitic harangues, w *ch
 caused discomfort to the remainder of a once-large Jewish population, now number-
 ing less than 10,000. Both the President and Prime Minister have publicly con-
 demned anti-Semitism, other types of racism, and xenophobia. In April President
 fliescu repeated his historic attendance of the year before at a ceremony to com-
 memorate Holocaust Day at a Bucharest synagogue. He also issued a message con-
 demning efforts to rehabilitate Marshal Antnescu, Romania's World War I dic-
 tator, as well as all other manifestations of anti-Semitism.
 People With Disabilities.-Difficult economic conditions and serious budgetary con-
 straints contributed to very poor living conditions for people with physical or mental
 disabilities. Many disabled people cannot use government-provided transportation
 discounts because public means of transportation have no facilitated access. Acces-
 sibility, including handicapped parking, is not mandated by law.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-All workers except public employees, police, and
 military personnel, have the right to associate freely, to engage in collective bargain-
 ing, and to form and join labor unions without previous authorization. There are
 legal limitations on the right to strike only in industries such as defense, health
 care, transportation, and telecommunications which the Government considers criti-
 cal to the public interest. No worker may be forced to join or withdraw from a union,
 and union officials who resign from elected positions and return to the regular work
 force are protected against employer retaliation. The majority of Romanian workers
 are members of about 18 nationwide trade union confederations and smaller inde-
 pendent trade unions.
 Union members complain that unions must submit grievances to government-
 sponsored conciliation before initiating a strike and are frustrated with the courts'
 propensity to declare illegal the major strikes on which they were asked to rule (also
 see Section .e.). Past studies have indicated that the 1991 labor legislation falls
 short of International Labor Organization (ILO) standards in several areas, includ-
 
 
 933
 ing the free election of union representatives, binding arbitration, and financial li-
 ability of strike organizers. Although the 1991 legislation is supportive of collective
 bargaining as an institution, the contracts that result are not enforceable in a con-
 sistent manner. However, in 1994, the Government moved to promote a new tri-
 partite collective bargaining relationship among government, labor, and employers.
 Unions representing divergent sectors of the economy carried out strikes, or threat-
 ened to strike, throughout 1994.
 The 1991 legislation stipulates that labor unions should be free from government
 or political party control, and the Government has observed that in practice. Unions
 are free, however, to engage in political activity and have done so.
 Labor unions may freely form or join federations and affiliate with international
 bodies. The Alfa Cartel and CNSLR-Fratia are affiliated with the World Confed-
 eration of Labor and the International Confederation of Free Trade Unions, respec-
 tively. Representatives of foreign and international organizations freely visit and ad-
 vise Romanian trade unionists.
 The ILO Committee of Experts at the 1994 ILO conference noted that the Govern-
 ment, which asserted there was no discrimination against Roma, had reported that
 some 22 percent of Roma men and 71 percent of Roma women were unemployed.
 Referring to the Government's establishment in 1993 of the Council for National Mi-
 norities, the Committee requested information about steps being taken to provide
 education, training, and employment for the minority population.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-Workers have the right to
 bargain collectively under the 1991 legislation, but collective bargaining efforts are
 complicated by continued state control over most industrial enterprises and the ab-
 sence of independent management representatives. Basic wage scales for employees
 of state-owned enterprises are established through collective bargaining with the
 State (see Section 6.e.). In addition, most workers and pensioners receive thrice-
 yearly increases indexed to prospective price increases.
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The Constitution prohibits forced
 or compulsory labor. The Ministry of Labor and Social Protection (MOLSP) effec-
 tively enforces this prohibition.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The minimum age for employment
 is 16, but children as young as 14 or 15 may work with the consent of their parents
 or guardians, although only according to their physical development, aptitude, and
 knowledge." Working children under 16 have the right to continue their education,
 and the law obliges employers to assist in this regard. The MOLSP has the author-
 ity to impose fines and close sections of factories to enforce compliance with the law,
 which it enforces effectively.
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-Most wage rates are established through col-
 lective bargaining at the enterprise level However, they are based on minimum
 wages for given economic sectors and categories of workers which the Government
 sets after negotiations with industry representatives and the labor confederations.
 Minimum wage rates are generally observed and enforced. In 1994 the minimum
 monthly wage (nominally about $35 in December) did not keep pace with inflation
 and did not provide a decent standard of living for a worker and family. However,
 the Government still partly subsidizes basic necessities such as housing and medical
 care.
 The Labor Code provides for a standard workweek of 40 hours or 5 days, with
 overtime to be paid for weekend or holiday work or work in excess of 40 hours. The
 Labor Code does not specifically include a requirement for a 24-hour rest period, al-
 though this is implied in the provision for a standard workweek of 5 days. Paid holi-
 days range from 15 to 24 days annually, depending mainly on the employee's length
 of service. The law requires employers to pay additional benefits and allowances to
 workers engaged in particularly dangerous or difficult occupations.
 Some labor organizations press for healthier, safer working conditions on behalf
 of their members. The MOISP has established safety standards for most industries
 and is responsible for enforcing them. However, it lacks sufficient trained personnel
 for inspection and enforcement, and employers generally ignore its recommenda-
 tions. Although they have the right to refuse dangerous work assignments, workers
 seldom invoke it in practice, appearing to value increased pay over a safe and
 healthful work environment. Neither the Government nor industry, still mostly
 state-owned, has the resources necessary to improve health and safety conditions in
 the workplace significantly.
 
 
 934
