 ROMANIA
 Romania is a highly centralized communist state. The Communist
 Party, led since 1965 by Romania's current President, Nicolae
 Ceausescu, directs every significant aspect of life in the
 country.
 Romania, with an annual per capita GNP of approximately $2,100,
 has made considerable economic progress over the last four
 decades, changing from a largely agricultural country to one
 with a significant industrial sector. Romania has suffered
 serious economic setbacks in recent years, however, and in the
 last two years the standard of living has declined.
 In the area of human rights there are major discrepancies
 between Romanian law and the nation's international commitments
 on the one hand and the Government's internal practices on the
 other. Political dissent and deviation from the party's
 policies are not tolerated. The use of intimidation and, to a
 lesser extent, physical pressure to discourage such activities
 is well-documented. The Romanian population is convinced of
 the omnipotence, capriciousness, and relentlessness of the
 Government's extensive security apparatus, and most Romanians
 either resort to private intrigues to circumvent the system or
 respond apathetically to it rather than pursue active
 resistance to the Government's policies and practices. The
 Government maintains a firm anti-emigration policy, but allows
 relatively large numbers of its citizens to emigrate, mainly
 for family reunification. It exercises close supervision over
 religious and cultural activities. The official Romanian
 response, thus far, to international concerns regarding
 Romania's human rights practices generally has been limited to
 action on individual cases.
 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, including
 Freedom from:
 a. Killing
 There are no documented cases of officially-inspired murder for
 political motives within Romania. However, there have been
 several reports of Romanian security personnel attacking or
 threatening individuals resident outside of the country. The
 most recent report involves a plot, revealed on August 31,
 1982, to assassinate two expatriate Romanian writers in France,
 Paul Goma and Virgil Tanase, because of their criticism of
 President Ceausescu and his Government.
 b.   Disappearance
 Reports of politically-motivated disappearances in Romania
 occasionally appear in the West. Many of these reports are
 from international organizations concerning well-documentea
 cases. There has been, however, no confirmation or refutation
 of any of these reports due in part to obstruction by the
 Romanian security authorities of efforts to investigate such
 disappearances.
 c. Torture
 There are no credible reports of the use of torture.
 
 
 984
 d. Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment
 Reports continue of verbal threats, strong psychological
 coercion, and physical abuse of Romanian citizens by the
 Government, particularly in cases of political dissidents,
 intending emigrants, and religious activists. Conditions of
 confinement reportedly are poor and deteriorating, with
 continuing reports of physical abuse, overcrowding and
 unsanitary conditions, inadequate diets, long working hours,
 and minimal medical care. Prisoners occasionally are kept in
 near or complete isolation and at times are refused access to
 their families for as long as six months.
 Rehabilitation through work is common under the Romanian system
 of justice, and the vast majority of prisoners must work while
 in prison. There are reports that labor camps exist in
 Romania, despite frequent denials by the Government. In
 addition, the so-called 'forced domicile system' is a common
 form of punishment. This may involve work without wages and
 transfer to a workplace far from the prisoner's home. Because
 'forced domicile' rarely involves incarceration, it is
 generally considered a more lenient form of punishment by
 Romanians.
 At least one execution for an "economic crime" took place in
 1982. There continue to be reports that some prisoners and
 dissidents are confined and treated in psychiatric hospitals
 because of their political and religious beliefs. Confirmation
 (or credible refutation) of these reports, however, has been
 extremely difficult to obtain.
 e. Arbitrary Arrest and Imprisonment
 Police harassment and threats are a common feature of life in
 Romania, especially for those who are politically or
 religiously active beyond the narrow limits permitted by the
 Communist Party and the Government. Such activists are often
 subjected to arbitrary arrest, long periods of interrogation,
 confinement without charge, and occasionally even physical
 abuse. R' ports that individuals are dismissed from their jobs
 and subsequently accused of "parasitism" (not having a job) or
 other lesser offenses not directly tied to their political or
 religious activities, are not uncommon. Political prisoners
 are rarely allowed to work outside of prison and are generally
 segregated from other prisoners. Romanian law does not provide
 for habeas corpus, and no effective legal remedy exists for
 persons held without charge. Detention without charge for
 short periods (2-4 days) occurs frequently.
 On December 29, in honor of the 35th anniversary of the
 founding of the Socialist Republic of Romania, the Romanian
 Government for the first time since the early 1970's issued a
 full pardon for a large number of those incarcerated in the
 country's prisons. With certain exceptions, all those with
 sentences of up to five years are reported to have received
 full pardons.
 f. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 By law the Government may hold trials closed to the public and
 often does so, particularly in cases involving dissidents,
 religious activists, or others, when it wishes to minimize
 national or international publicity. Defendants are allowed
 access to counsel before their trial, although sufficient time
 for preparing an adequate defense is seldom given. It is a
 
 
 985
 common practice for the Government to open the prosecution's
 case to the defense only a day or two before the trial.
 *Emergency trials' may be used to try and sentence a defendant
 in less than 48 hours.
 g. Invasion of the Home
 Despite the constitutional guarantee of the inviolability of
 the home, there continue to be numerous reports of forced entry
 into homes without a warrant. A substantial number of these
 reports involve political and religious dissidents.
 2. Respect for Civil and Political Rights, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 In practice, there are no civil or political liberties beyond
 those allowed by the Communist Party and Government. The
 Constitution guarantees the full range of political and civil
 liberties, but prohibits the use of such liberties 'for aims
 hostile to the socialist system," and thus restricts their
 practice to conform strictly with the views of the Government
 and the party. All civil and political expression is closely
 monitored. Independent criticism, open discussion of
 political, social, or economic conditions, or advocacy of
 change in any of those spheres is not tolerated. Any overt
 challenge to basic party policies or senior political
 personalities is normally met with harsh reprisal.
 The printed word is government-controlled, and Western
 publications are only rarely available. Some entities, such as
 certain religious groups, are allowed to publish
 non-government-sponsored materials, but such publications are
 few in number and always within the guidelines set by the
 Government. Unauthorized importation or distribution of
 literature of any sort is strictly forbidden and has resulted
 in substantial fines and prison terms, particularly in cases
 involving Bibles and other religious literature. Several
 Romanian Christians were imprisoned during 1982 for
 distributing Bibles without the authorities' consent. Eleven
 ethnic Hungarians allegedly were arrested in November for
 publication of an underground journal, "Ellenpontok" or
 *Counterpoint." The eighth issue reportedly was sent to the
 Madrid Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe and
 claimed that Hungarians in Romania were threatened with
 cultural extinction.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 No assemblies may be held, or organizations or associations
 formed, without government approval. There are no
 organizations or associations which actively encourage thought
 or expression beyond that permitted by the Communist Party and
 the Government. Although trade unions exist and play a limited
 role in management-labor relations, they are controlled by the
 party and Government and have little latitude or influence in
 defending the interests of the workers. Efforts to establish
 the independent SLOMR labor union in 1979 were harshly
 suppressed. As economic conditions have worsened and public
 concern regarding government-policies and practices has
 increased, official controls on public assembly and
 associations have become more restrictive. The Government
 discourages unregulated contacts with foreigners and requires
 such contacts to be reported to the authorities within 24
 hours. Two American pastors were expelled from Romania in 1982
 
 
 986
 for unauthorized contact with their co-religionists.
 Attendance at functions sponsored by foreigners is carefully
 controlled, and regular attendance has led to interrogation,
 detainment, and occasionally to physical abuse. Telephone
 calls, particularly international calls, are monitored, and
 there is evidence that international mail is routinely opened,
 perused, and sometimes destroyed. In the last year there have
 been indications that the Government has increased its efforts
 to discourage Romanian contacts with foreigners at all levels.
 In 1982, a tax equivalent to 20 percent of an average monthly
 salary was added to citizens' telephone bills when more than
 one call was made to a destination outside of Romania.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Both the Government of Romania and the Communist Party
 staunchly support atheism and, despite constitutional
 guarantees of freedom of religion, regularly discourage
 religious activity. Nevertheless, the Government recognizes
 and financially supports the activities ot 14 officially-
 registered religious denominations active in the country.
 Among these are the Romanian Orthodox, Roman Catholic,
 Lutheran, Calvinist, Unitarian, Baptist, Pentecostal, and
 Seventh Day Adventist churches, and the Jewish and Muslim
 faiths. The vast majority of Romanian believers belongs to the
 Romanian Orthodox Church. Despite government opposition, the
 open expression of religious beliefs is widespread throughout
 the country. Although people belonging to the 'recognized"
 denominations may attend services freely according to the law,
 some of those who are religiously active experience government
 harassment and discrimination, such as transfer or loss of
 jobs, reduced salaries, demotions, arbitrary detention, and
 prolonged interrogation by the police.
 Non-recognized denominations active in Romania include the
 Jehovah's Witnesses, the Mormons, and the Christian
 Scientists. The Romanian Uniate Church (affiliated with the
 Roman Catholic Church) was proscribed in 1948 and is not
 officially permitted to function today. Some of its members
 try to participate in the Roman Catholic Church, where
 possible. Members of non-recognized denominations are not
 permitted to practice their faith in public and face greater
 government repression than do members of the recognized
 religious groups.
 There are well-documented reports that some Protestant groups,
 such as Baptists, Pentecostalists, and Seventh Day Adventists,
 although recognized by the Government, are frequently harasseo
 when they seek to gain converts outside of church buildings or
 when they resist laws which they believe are in conflict with
 their faith. Some of their ministers and members have been
 jailed, abused in prison, and forced into exile. Sectors of
 other recognized denominations, most notably the 'Lord's Army*
 renewal movement within the Romanian Orthodox Church, have been
 subjected to equally severe official treatment for their
 failure to comply with government policies and practices.
 The Department of Cults, which serves as the government liaison
 with recognized churches at the national, regional and local
 levels, requires permits for churches to organize or for the
 construction or expansion of church buildings. Few such
 permits are issued. Smaller religious denominations,
 particularly the Baptists, complain of government
 unresponsiveness to repeated requests for building permits,
 even to allow congregations to construct or repair church
 buildings at their own expense. Church buildings constructed
 or repaired without government permission have been closed or
 occasionally torn down.
 
 
 987
 The Romanian Orthodox Church has slightly more than 10,000
 priests and slightly fewer than 10,000 churches. The Church's
 six seminaries have between 1,600 and 1,800 students. The
 country's only Baptist seminary, which normally accepts new
 students every two years and currently has five students
 enrolled, reportedly has not admitted students this year, as
 .scheduled. According to-current estimates, fewer than 300
 Baptist pastors serve over 1,000 churches. The Pentecostal
 Church has approximately 200 pastors for: about 1,000 churches.
 It also has five students in its four-year seminary, and no new
 students have been admitted in the past two years. The Seventh
 Day Adventist Church has an average of one pastor for each four
 or five of its more than 500 congregations. The Adventist
 seminary, which currently has ten students, has been instructed
 not to accept new students. Since there is no rabbinical
 seminary, Jewish rabbis must be trained abroad.
 d. Freedom of Movement within the Country, Foreijn
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Romanians may travel freely throughout the country. However,
 they must obtain official approval to change their permanent
 residence. Passports for foreign travel are difficult to
 obtain, and relatively few Romanians are allowed to travel
 abroad, especially to non-socialist countries, The.Government
 maintains a strong anti-emigration policy and contends that
 Romanian citizens do not have the right to move permanently
 from their native land. The Government regards emigration as a
 betrayal of the country and uses a wide variety of means to
 discourage it. The administrative, social, and economic
 sanctions which have been imposed against intending emigrants
 include forced transfers or loss of jobs, demotions, reductions
 in salary, and other forms of discrimination. Under Romanian
 law, leaving or attempting to leave the country without
 official permission is a crime punishable by six months to
 three years in prison. According to government data, the total
 number of applications for emigration approved each year has
 about doubled since 1972, exceeding 18,000 in 1981. However,
 in October 1982 the Government announced the enactment of a
 decree requiring emigrants to repay in convertible currency the
 cost of their education from the secondary level on. This and
 other provisions of the decree, which had not been fully
 implemented by the end of 1982, have as one apparent aim the
 slowing of Romania's *brain drain'.
 The Romanian Government permits some emigration for family
 reunification and in *humanitarian cases". It also allows the
 emigration of Jews to Israel and ethnic'Germans to the Federal
 Republic of Germany, mostly on a family reunification basis.
 Largely due to emigration, the Jewish population of Romania has
 declined from approximately 450,000 people at the end of World
 War II to about 32,uU0 today. Approximately 10,000 ethnic
 Germans have departed annually for the Federal Republic of
 Germany since 1977.
 e. Freedom to Participate in the Political Process
 Political power is the monopoly of the Communist Party.
 Opposition to the party is strictly prohibited. The Romanian
 Communist Party is proportionately the largest in the world,
 numbering over three million in a population of 22.4 million,
 and virtually no one is barred from consideration for party
 membership. However, rank-and-file members have little
 influence in the decision-making process. Power in the party
 is concentrated at the top and especially in its
 
 
 *988
 secretary-general, Nicolae Ceausescu, who is also the president
 of the country. The various ethnic minority groups in Romania
 are represented at every level of the party structure. Their
 numbers are generally proportional to their share of the total
 population, but their influence, especially at the higher
 levels, is slight.
 Romanian women participate at all levels of the party and state
 structure, but at the higher levels of government, party, and
 the economy their numbers are small. The Government is seeking
 to upgrade the role of women in the society, especially in the
 areas of education, access to employment, and comparable
 wages. As a result, women are employed in virtually all
 sectors of the economy, and there is equal opportunity in
 education.
 The Romanian Constitution forbids any discrimination on the
 basis of ethnic background and guarantees the use of minority
 languages in books, newspapers, magazines, theaters, and
 education. When a minority group is present in large numbers
 in a geographic region, the use of its language in government
 and economic institutions is also protected. The Government
 claims it does not discriminate against the minorities, which
 comprise about 12 percent of the population. Nonetheless,
 there are limitations on minority groups' free expression of
 their cultural heritage. Government efforts to centralize and
 to economize by combining educational, social, and cultural
 activities frequently affect minority groups disproportionately
 and are often interpreted as the *Romanianization' of these
 groups. For example, the mergers of schools, theaters, or
 other such institutions often result in the loss of the
 minority ethnic groups' characteristics as the institutions
 become predominantly Romanian. This movement is viewed as
 cultural extinction by ethnic Hungarians, several of whom were
 arrested in November for publishing the underground
 'Ellenpontok,* which attacked the Government's minority
 policies and practices.
 Provision of government services for Romania's minority groups
 reflects these limitations. German and Hungarian-language
 radio programs are broadcast for several hours daily; however,
 television broadcasts in these languages are limited to three
 hours or less per week. German and Hungarian-language theaters
 and a Hungarian-language opera also exist. Minority language
 newspapers are readily available in Bucharest and in areas
 where minority groups are concentrated, although fewer such
 newspapers are published than in previous decades. The
 importation of all publications, including those in the
 Hungarian and German languages, is strictly controlled.
 Bilingual signs are uncommon even in areas where non-Romanian
 ethnic groups are in the majority, except for occasional street
 signs or those identifying public buildings.
 3. Government Attitude Regarding International and Non-
 governmental Investigation of Alleged Violations of
 Human Rights
 The Romanian Government does not regard its treatment of its
 citizens as a subject for international discussion. Amnesty
 International has noted its concern about Romanians arrestea
 for attempts to leave the country illegally and imprisoned for
 religious dissent. Amnesty International has also continued to
 seek the release of Father Gheorghe Calciu-Dumitreasa,
 sentenced for "conspiracy' in the founding of the SLOMR labor
 
 
 989
 union in 1979. The Romanian Government does not answer
 inquiries regarding Father Calciu's conditions of
 imprisonment. The World Confederation of Labor (WCL) in
 Brussels filed a complaint in July 1981 with the International
 Labor Organization's Committee on Freedom of Association,
 requesting an ILO investigation into the arrests of SLOMR
 members, the whereabouts of the SLOMR leadership, and the
 alleged transfer of 3,000 miners in the 1977 Jiu Valley
 strike. During 1982, the ILO reported that it did not have
 sufficient information to answer the WCL's request, and that it
 was asking the Government of Romania for further information on
 the questions raised by the WCL. In October 1982, a joint
 US-Romanian consultation 'on emigration procedures held in
 Bucharest included discussion of human rights matters.
 4. Economic, Social, and Cultural Situation
 Romania is officially designated a 'developing country' by the
 World Bank. With a population of 22.4 million at the end of
 1981, Romania's per capita GNP was just over $2,100. From a
 largely agrarian economy at the end'of World War II, the
 country has reached its present semi-industrialized state
 principally by maintaining extremely high rates of capital
 investment and by restricting consumption. By 1982, faced with
 rising costs for imports, energy shortages, and the requirement
 to repay large foreign debts, the national economy began to
 shift slightly from its previous heavy emphasis on rapid
 industrialization to a somewhat lower investment rate and
 increased attention to agriculture.
 In 1981, 47 percent of the population lived in cities ana
 towns. Rapid population shifts since 1948 have contributed to
 housing problems in urban areas, and the construction of
 apartments lags behind the Government's announced and highly
 ambitious targets. In 1980, average living space per
 inhabitant was reported as 9.7 square meters, with 1.41 persons
 per room.
 According to Romanian law, all land belongs to the state.
 There are, however, provisions under which 9.4 percent of the
 country's agricultural land is allowed to be held by private
 citizens. In 1980, 60.6 percent of the agricultural land was
 used by agricultural cooperatives and 30 percent by state
 farms. Other property, including personal property and
 housing, may be privately owned, although there are a number of
 restrictions on the:right to property. Economic enterprises
 are state-owned, except for a few services and handicraft shops.
 The Romanian Constitution guarantees employment to all citizens
 and equal pay for equal work. While official records show full
 employment, in practice there is chronic underemployment,
 especially in the agricultural sector.
 Romanian data indicate that in 1981, $6.75 billion was
 allocated from the budget for education, culture, sports,
 health, social assistance, pensions, family allocations and
 social security. According to 1980 statistics, average life
 expectancy was 71.1 years. In 1981 infant mortality was 30.3
 per 1,000 live births. There were 9.3 hospital beds per 1,000
 inhabitants (excluding maternity hospitals and sanitaria), and
 the,-number of.doctors per inhabitant stood at one per 538. Ten
 years of. education is compulsory and provided without charge by
 the state. -.Beginning with-the third.year of secondary
 education, competitive examinations.are.held for the limited
 .places available at both the secondary and-the university
 
 
 990
 levels. Evening courses and work-study programs are available
 to students at technical institutes. The World Bank reported a
 literacy rate of 98 percent as of 1976. An official government
 estimate in July 1982 placed the average daily caloric intake
 in Romania at 3,300 calories. The Government's report called
 for a reduction to 2,800-3,000 calories per day by 1985 in
 order to promote more healthful diets, reduce average weight,
 and prolong lifespans. Romanian food markets are frequently
 plagued with severe shortages, especially of meat, eggs, fish,
 and dairy products, including milk. This raises the question
 of nutritional deficiencies, particularly for infants, the
 elderly, and homebound, who are also affected by long food
 lines for many essential foods. Shortages have intensified in
 recent years because of poor harvests and distribution,
 inadequate storage facilities, and the increasing need to
 export food to finance imports. Measures now exist to punish
 those who hoard food. Certain food items are rationed, but
 this varies from region to region. The foodstuffs and consumer
 goods kept for the domestic market are inferior in quality to
 those exported for hard currency.
 
 
 991
 U.S.OVERSEA5 -LOANS ANO GRANTS- OBLIGATIONS ANO LOAN AUTHORIZATIONS
 (U.S.FISCAL YEARS - MILLIONS OF DOLLARS)
 COUNTRY: ROMANIA
 1980     1981     1982
 I.ECON. ASSIST-TTAL,.           0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS ..............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ................   0.0      0.0      0.0
 A.AID, .................  .     0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS .............,.        0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS .............  .     0.0      0.0      0.0
 (SEC.SUPP.ASSIST.).,.          0.0      0.0      0.0
 i. FOO0 FOR PEACE .......        0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS..............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ...............     0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE I-TOTAL .........0.0               0.0      0.0
 REPAY. IN $!LOANS .....         0.0      0.0      0.0
 PAt. IN FUR. CUkR,,             0.0      0.0      0.0
 TITLE IT-TOTAL .........         0.o      0.0      0.0
 E.RELILF.EC.3V ' WFP.           0.0      0.0      0.0
 VOL.RELLEP AGENCY,.            0.0      0.0      0.0
 C.OTHER ECON. ASSIST..           0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS ..............        0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS.. ..........         0.0      0.0      0.0.
 PEACE CORPS ......        0.0       0.0      0.0
 NARCOTICS ........        0.0       0.0      0.0
 OTHER,...... ......       0.0       0.0      0.0
 II.MIL. ASSIST.-TOTAL...          0.0      0.0      0.0
 LOANS ..............         0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS.........  ......       ;O      0.0      0.0
 A.MAP GRANTS .......            0.0      0.0      0.0
 S.CREOIT SALES-FMS....          0.0      0..0     0.0:
 C.INTL MlLEOTRNG ....         0.0      0.0      0.0
 O.TRAN-hXLESS STOCK...          0.0      0.0      0.0
 E.OTHER GRANTS,.,.....          0.0      0.0     .0.0
 III.TOTAL ECON. t MIL...          0.0      0.0      0,0
 LOANS ........ ......        0.0      0.0      0.0
 GRANTS ...............      0.0      0.0      0.0
 OTHER US LOANS ..........        55.0    120.7      0.0
 EX-IM LANK LOANS .......        30.0    120.7      0.0
 AL OTHER........,....      .. 25.0      0.0      0.0
 ASSISTANCE PROM INTERNDTICNAL AGENCIES
 1 ?;     19d1     1952      1946-32
 TOTAL ........  325.3     4 5.0    196.5   2202.1
 IRD             i25.0     435.0    1o5.5   2183.6
 IFC                0.0      O.Q       0.0      0.0
 LOA                0.0       O.0      0.0      0.0
 106                0.0       0.0      0.0      o.,
 AG6                0.0       0.0      0.0      0.0
 AF 0.0                     0.1      0.0      0.0
 UNUP               0.3       0.0      0.0    18.5
 OTHER-UN           0.0       0.0      0.0      0.0
 EEC                0.0      0.0       0.3      0.0
 
 
 992

 