ROMANIA
Human rights violations by the Romanian government were widespread in 1988. The secret police - the Securitate - is a feared and powerful force in Romanian sodety, which has crushed most independent initiatives. The level of intimidation that pervades Romania makes gathering information about human rights conditions extremely difficult. The country report, though generally acciu'ate and persuasive, suffers from the common difficulty of establishing direct contact with Romanian dtizens and activists. Much of the information is necessarily couched in such terms as "there were reports," "reliable witnesses report," and "evidence eîdsts," presimiably because Embassy personnel were unable to confirm these accounts.
In one area where first-hand information was readily available, however ~ the plight of the Hungarian minority in Romania -- the State Department proved equally unwilling to speak definitively. In 1988, some 18,000 ethnic Himgarians fled from Romania to Hungary, and many of them willingly provided fresh testimony about the government's campaign to assimilate them. Information gathered from these refugees by Helsinki Watch, as well as by numerous journalists and other human rights activists, indicates that the Hungarian minority's efforts to retain their ethnic identity are diametrically opposed to the government's campaign of forced assimilation or "homogenization." Due both to its size and to its strong ties to Hungarian culture, the Hungarian minority has been particularly victimized by this campaign. That so many thousands of ethnic Hungarians have taken the risks inherent in trying to escape from Romania indicates the level of despair that is found in their communities.
The State Department should have made better use of these available witnesses to Romanian repression. Although the report has expanded its discussion of the Hungarian minority of Romania, it still does not present an adequate rendering of the situation. The report continually undercuts the legitimacy of the Hungarians' claims, avoiding the use of its own voice in describ-
147
Critique
ing the problems, and uncritically presenting the government's contentions. The report states, for »cample:
Members of the Hungarian ethnic minority in Transylvania continued to object to government polides which, they claim, erode their ethnic identity. The Government maintained that it does not discriminate against minority groups. In highlighting the plight of ethnic Hungarians, we do not mean to suggest th^ the Romanian population as a whole is exempt from this same "homogenization" campaign. Indeed, Romanian culture is being cut off from its own past and from outside influences, as the report describes. Bm a more thorough discussion of the particular problems faced by the Hungarian and other minorities, based on available information, would have enhanced the overall quality of the report.
148
