 ROMANIA
 The National Salvation Front (NSF), a group of former
 Communists, dissidents, intellectuals, students, and army
 generals who took power after the violent overthrow of
 Communist dictator Nicolae Ceausescu on December 22, 1989,
 proclaimed Romania a parliamentary democracy based on the
 institutional separation of executive, legislative, and
 judicial powers. The NSF ruled as the Provisional Government
 until February 9, 1990, when it joined with representatives of
 political parties, many of them newly formed, to become the
 Provisional Council for National Unity (CPUN). On May 20,
 Romania held its first multiparty elections since 1946. Ion
 Iliescu and the NSF, transformed into a political party with �
 most of. the former Communist party membership as its base, won
 elections in which the overwhelming majority of voters were
 able, freely and without visible coercion, to cast their
 ballots. However,.serious distortions and irregularities
 marred the electoral process, which unfairly favored the NSF
 to the disadvantage of its competitors.
 After the fall of Ceausescu, the NSF decreed the dissolution
 of the powerful Department of State Security, known as the
 Securitate. The Securitate had among its major functions the
 suppression of all forms of dissent and opposition to
 Ceausescu's rule. On March 26, the Government created a new
 security organization, the Romanian Intelligence Service
 (SRI). Many Romanians continue to believe that a number of
 the Securitate's former officers retained positions inside the
 Government. The army, which played a mator role in the
 overthrow of Ceausescu, refrained from active participation in
 the election campaign. Although the -Minister of Defense is an
 army general, the army remains nominally under the civilian
 control of the Prime Minister.
 The Government has stated its commitment to economic reform
 and the establishment of a free market system, and laws
 permitting the establishment of small private enterprises,
 calling for the privatization of most public enterprises and
 agricultural land, and encouraging foreign investment were
 proposed or enacted. In November Prime Minister Petre Roman
 removed price controls on all but certain basic goods, such as
 fuel, electric power, food, and housing, as part of his
 economic reform program. Later, faced with labor strikes and
 potential widespread unrest, the Government postponed further
 price liberalization until April 1991.
 Observance of human rights and civil liberties improved
 significantly in 1990, including in the areas of freedom of
 speech, press, assembly, association, religion, and travel.
 Reform of the criminal procedures code and the labor code was
 in progress at year's end. However, there were abuses, for
 example, the failure to deal effectively with ethnic violence
 in Tirgu Mures in March, the use of excessive force during the-
 June events (see Sections 2.b. and l.c.), the mistreatment of
 the June detainees, and the inadequacy of procedural
 safeguards at the time of arrest. Some issues pertaining to
 the rights of minorities remain to be resolved, especially the
 rights of the ethnic Hungarian minority.
 
 
 1254
 ROMANIA
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing
 There were no reports of political or other extrajudicial
 killings by government forces. However, five people were
 killed on March 20 in clashes between ethnic Romanians and
 Hungarians in Tirgu Mures, in part instigated by elements of a
 Romanian nationalist organization, Vatra Romaneasca. Although
 the riots were not the result of deliberate actions by
 government forces, the Government was late in responding
 effectively and unable to maintain order. No one was charged
 with these deaths. A commission to investigate these events
 was established by the Government but had not released its
 report as of year's end.
 Six people were killed--three by gunshot wounds--on June 13 in
 Bucharest during rioting and attacks on the buildings housing
 the Interior Ministry and the former Securitate archives. In
 addition to the deaths, more than 500 persons were injured.
 No one has been charged or is under investigation in these
 deaths. A parliamentary commission that includes members of
 the opposition is investigating the incidents. Its report had
 not been released as of year's end.
 b. Disappearance
 According to the Bucharest-based League for the Defense of
 Human Rights, two people, Viorel Horia and Popiolus Ursu,
 disappeared during the events of June 13-15. In addition,
 Stefan Dumitrescu was allegedly arrested on August 15 for his
 participation in the violent street demonstrations of February
 18. The League has made repeated requests to the Interior
 Ministry and the Bucharest police on behalf of their families,
 but to date has received no information regarding their
 whereabouts.
 c. Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading
 Treatment or Punishment
 During the June 13-15 disturbances in Bucharest, vigilante
 miners severely beat many persons, and more than 1,000 were
 detained, most of them temporarily. As was widely shown on
 international television, many of the more than 1,000 persons
 taken into custody by vigilante groups were subjected to
 severe beatings. There were credible reports that some of
 those detained were beaten and denied medical treatment while
 in police custody. There were also reports that female
 arrestees were forced partially to disrobe in front of male
 jailers and other prisoners, and there was one report of rape
 by progovernment vigilantes.
 The Government in 1990 took some steps to eradicate torture
 and other degrading punishments that characterized the
 Ceausescu regime. International and domestic human rights
 organizations were granted the right to visit detainees and
 question them about abuses. In September the Parliament
 ratified the U.N. Convention Against Torture.
 
 
 ROMANIA
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Romanian law provides for either a judge or a prosecutor to
 issue an arrest warrant. Warrants may be issued at any time
 up to 24 hours after a person has been detained. Once
 arrestedi a person may be held without trial for up to 1 month
 before a hearing, but the prosecutor may obtain an extension
 for an adaitional 3 months. Thereafter, a court may order
 further extensions in 30-day increments. There is no legal
 limit on the time a person may be held prior to trial. There
 is no provision for bail.
 The Government proposed a number of changes to the criminal
 code which at year's end were being debated in Parliament.
 These include: the right to inform family or friends of one's
 arrest within 24 hours; the right to legal counsel after
 arrest; limitation on the detention period prior to a hearing;
 the right to protest an arrest to a court within 24 hours and
 to receive the court's ruling within an additional 24 hours;
 the right to bail, except for recidivists and in the case of
 capital crimes; and the right to be informed of these rights
 by the arresting authorities.
 Anticipating adoption of these reforms, the Prosecutor
 General's office began to implement some of them, e.g.,
 granting prisoners access to attorneys before the criminal
 investigation is complete. Prior to these changes, many of
 those arrested in June had complained that they were not
 allowed to contact their families until days or weeks after
 they were arrested. Eventually, all the persons on trial or
 still facing charges had access to their families and had
 retained attorneys.
 The Government no longer employs preventive detention or
 internal or external exile.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 The judicial system consists of local courts, county courts,
 and a Supreme Court. In addition, there are military. courts
 which have jurisdiction in cases involving military personnel,
 both active duty and reserve, and civilians who commit crimes
 with military personnel, and cases involving military premises
 or objectives, including police stations. The Office of the
 Prosecutor General is independent of the Ministry of Justice
 and supervises both civilian and military prosecutors.
 Civilians and military personnel are subject to the same laws
 and penalties. The judiciary is no longer charged with
 defending the Socialist order as it was under the previous
 regime. Pending adoption of a new constitution, there is no
 court charged with reviewing the constitutionality of laws or
 decrees implemented since December 1989.
 Most trials since December 1989, except that of Nicolae and
 Elena Ceausescu, were public, although the Government reserves
 the'right to hold secret trials in national security cases.
 The trials of the youngest son of the former dictator and four
 members of the former Communist Political Executive Committee
 were televised live, and other trials of former ranking
 government officials were open. Trials of persons arrested in
 the wake of demonstrations in Bucharest in February and June
 and in Tirgu Mures in March were also open.
 Most of the limitations imposed by the former regime on the
 ability of an accused person to present a defense were lifted
 
 
 1256
 ROMANIA
 in law or in fact. A defendant now has the right to defense
 counsel, and, if indigent or otherwise unable to select
 counsel, an attorney is appointed for him. Complaints are
 made by defendants of their attorneys' passivity or failure
 aggressively to construct a reasonable defense, but there is
 no evidence that defense attorneys are operating out of a fear
 of political or criminal repercussions from government
 agencies.
 There were press allegations that persons who were committed
 to medical institutions during the Ceausescu era for the
 expression of views unacceptable to that regime are still
 confined. The four cases reported in the press were
 investigated by a team including a Western physician and were
 found to be legitimate mental cases. At year's end, there
 were no known political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Pending the drafting of a new constitution and the revision of
 criminal laws and regulations, the Government still has wide
 -discretionary'powers to interfere with privacy and the family
 and appears to do so when it perceives a threat to it.
 Following the restructuring of the security apparatus, the SRI
 is required to obtain a judicial warrant prior to engaging in
 surveillance activities. Whether or not this requirement is
 met in practice, the SRI monitors the activities of the
 regime's political opponents through reading private mail,
 physical surveillance, and wiretapping.
 The contacts of Romanian citizens with foreigners are no
 longer restricted, but the law requiring citizens to report
 overnight visits by foreigners within 24 hours has not been
 repealed.
 The Government terminated Ceausescu's coercive population
 growth program and the regular compulsory medical examinations
 for women of child-bearing age to determine if they were
 pregnant or had had an abortion.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 Freedom of speech is generally respected.
 Freedom of the press is also respected, but the exceptions to
 the rule are significant. Censorship of the press was lifted,
 as was the requirement that all newspapers be state owned, and
 the-law prohibiting "propaganda against the Socialist order"
 was abrogated in January. The Government did not restrict the
 licensing of new publications, and dozens of privately
 sponsored newspapers and periodicals were started in 1990.
 Nevertheless, there were allegations that the authorities
 manipulated the supply of newsprint to the disadvantage of
 opposition newspapers. During and after the election
 campaign, the authorities were accused of interfering with the
 distribution of independent and opposition newspapers outside
 Bucharest. Vigilante groups, guided by persons believed to be
 current or former intelligence officers, ransacked the offices
 of the independent Romania Libera and two opposition
 newspapers during the June 13-15 disturbances and threatened
 their editors. Within a few days, the newspapers were able to
 
 
 1257
 ROMANIA
 resume publication, but no one was charged with any offense
 except theft in these attacks.
 There is no law regulating the press at present. 'A
 government-sponsored draft press law, which would facilitate
 government restrictions on the content of the press, was
 sharply criticized and subsequently withdrawn for revision.
 The parliamentary committee on mass media and culture is
 considering a new draft press law. No indication has been
 given when this proposal will be submitted for open
 parliamentary debate.
 The sole television station with nationwide broadcasting
 capabilities remains under state control. During the violent
 events in Tirgu Mures in March and Bucharest in June,
 television coverage was one-sided in favor of the Government.
 A few independent stations began operating in provincial
 cities, such as Oradea and Timisoara, which are permitted to
 use the national system only on a limited regional basis and
 only after regular programming hours, i.e., after I a.m. The
 Government allowed political parties very limited access to
 television broadcasts during the election campaign. In
 October it initiated a policy of giving two 40-minute prime
 time programs a week on a rotating basis to all political
 parties represented in Parliament.
 There are no longer any restrictions on the importation and
 distribution of foreign publications or on the operation of
 foreign news agencies. Academic freedom is generally
 respected. Students took an active part in reviewing the
 professional qualifications of faculty members during 1990,
 and some Communist professors with inadequate professional
 qualifications were dismissed or retired. Three universities
 not owned by the State were opened in 1990: Atheneum,
 Ecological University, and University 90. Licensing and
 accreditation remain a problem, and it is not certain whether
 the Government will recognize the degrees awarded by these
 private institutions.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly
 The Government recognizes in law and in fact the rights of its
 citizens freely to associate and to form political parties.
 These rights in the main were observed. Except for the
 crackdown on demonstrators in mid-June, the right to peaceful
 assembly was also respected.
 According to the decrees of January 3 and January 24, mayors
 and local police authorities must be notified at least 48
 hours in advance of any assemblies. Assemblies may not
 interfere with other economic or social activities, are
 limited to holidays or nonworking hours, and may not be held
 near various types of institutions such as hospitals,
 airports, or military installations. In some instances, the
 Mayor of Bucharest denied organizations the right to hold
 assemblies, although he is not empowered by law to do so.
 Nonetheless, a number of demonstrationswere held without
 authorization in Bucharest and other cities. The Government
 did not prosecute organizers and participants in those
 demonstrations, although the law provides for short jail terms
 or fines for failure to register.
 On June 13, the Government forcefully broke up a 7-week-old
 demonstration in Bucharest's University Square., To protest
 what they felt was the continued presence of Communist
 
 
 1258
 ROMANIA
 officials and structures in the Government, demonstrators had
 gathered daily at an encampment of opponents of the Government
 blocking one of the city's major thoroughfares. Following
 police action on June 13 against the demonstrators, violence
 erupted, with demonstrators attacking police stations and
 television headquarters. Six persons were killed and over 100
 injured. President-elect Iliescu appealed on radio and
 television for citizens to defend the Government. In response
 to the appeal, thousands of coal miners and others rampaged
 through the streets of Bucharest on June 14-15. They beat up
 many people in the streets who looked to them like opponents
 of the Government. Altogether, some 500 persons were injured,
 about 1,000 were initially taken into custody by miners or
 police, and 191 were arrested. Among those arrested were
 Marian Munteanu, President of the Students' League, and Leon
 Nica, President of the Free Democratic Party. Both had made
 antigovernment speeches at University Square. After almost 2
 months of detention without charges, they were released
 pending trial. Six persons (miners and others) were arrested
 later for their part in the June 14-15 rampage.
 A decree of December 31, 1989, permits the formation of all
 types of political parties except those that are Fascist or
 that "spread conceptions contrary to the state order and law
 of Romania." Despite these rather ambiguous exceptions, there
 appear to be no political organizations that were denied the
 right to form a party. The decree stipulates that all
 political parties and social organizations must provide a list
 of at least 251 members in order to be granted juridical
 status. It further provides that any political party denied
 registration rights may appeal to the Supreme Court. There
 are now over 100 legally recognized political parties in
 Romania. Political parties and other social organizations are
 permitted to maintain relations with international bodies.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 The Government no longer impedes the free observance of
 religious belief. In September the Government instituted
 religious instruction in public schools. Religious education
 courses are offered in grades 1 through 8 for 2 hours a
 month. These classes are taught by representatives of the
 respective religions, and attendance is not obligatory.
 There are 15 officially recognized religions and no bars to
 the organization of other religions. The Romanian Orthodox
 Church, to which approximately 70-80 percent of the population
 belongs, is the predominant religion. Each religion must be
 licensed by the State Secretariat for Religious Affairs, a
 nonministerial-level institution. This confers juridical
 status and exemptions from income and customs taxes.
 Restrictions on the importation and dissemination of religious
 materials, on the printing of Bibles and denominational
 newsletters, and on the ability of Romanian citizens to meet
 with coreligionists from abroad were eliminated.
 The 1948 ban on the Uniate Church was lifted in December
 1989. The disposition of approximately 1,800 Uniate churches
 and other properties nationalized in 1948, most of which
 eventually became the property of the Romanian Orthodox
 Church, remains in question. The.Government proposed the
 creation of mixed commissions of Romanian Orthodox and Uniate
 representatives to resolve this question in individual cities
 and towns and stated that the two religious groups should
 resolve the question without government interference. The
 
 
 1259
 ROMANIA
 Uniate Church is dissatisfied with this arrangement, however,
 believing that, since the State seized the properties in 1948,
 the State has the obligation to guarantee their return.
 Under Ceausescu's program of urban and rural systematization,
 a number of churches throughout the country were destroyed.
 An effort is now under way to rebuild or renovate destroyed or
 damaged churches.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 There are no official restrictions on travel within Romania,
 except-in very limited areas restricted for military purposes,
 nor on Romanian citizens who wish to change their places of
 work or residence.
 The right to travel abroad is no longer restricted. In 1990
 the Government issued 3,635,369 tourist passports, more than
 four times the number issued in all of 1989.
 The right to emigrate freely is no longer denied, and
 emigration has increased markedly since 1989. The official
 number of emigrant passports issued in 1990 was 129,714. All
 requests to emigrate by Romanians with ties to American
 citizens (spouses, fiancees, and adopted children)-, who were
 eligible to enter the United States but whose emigration had
 been blocked by the Ceausescu regime, were granted in 1990.
 Romania recognizes de facto dual citizenship and no longer
 revokes citizenship.
 All who lost Romanian citizenship may apply to regain it. In
 principle, all former Romanian citizens seeking to return are
 entitled to do so. A Romanian citizen who emigrates must
 obtain the approval of the Government before resuming
 residence in Romania. This approval was not withheld in
 1990.
 In April Romania's ex-King Michael, who was forced by the
 Communists to abdicate in 1947 and now resides in Switzerland,
 was denied permission to enter the country. On December 25,
 he entered Romania on a Danish diplomatic passport but was
 expelled about 12 hours later, ostensibly for lack of a proper
 visa.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government.
 In lieu of a new constitution, which is still being written,
 the Romanian people's right and ability peacefully to change
 their government is governed by a decree issued on March 14
 which provides for'the direct election of the President and
 the Members of Parliament by universal suffrage (18 years of
 age and above). The President, who appoints the Prime
 Minister, the members of the Supreme Court, and the Prosecutor
 General, is elected by a nationwide vote, while 387 members of
 the Chamber of Deputies and 119 senators are elected by
 proportional voting in electoral districts.
 More than 80 political parties and organizations contested the
 first multiparty pluralistic elections since 1946. NSF
 candidates, many of them former members of the Romanian
 Communist Party, which disappeared as an organization in 1989,
 won about two-thirds of the seats in Parliament. Seventeen
 other parties elected representatives and senators. The NSF's
 
 
 1260
 ROMANIA
 presidential candidate, Ion Iliescu, won 86 percent of the
 vote. New national elections are to be called by the
 President not later than 1 year after the ratification of the
 new constitution.
 The opposition and the U.S. Government sharply criticized the
 NSF for unfair election campaign practices, including using
 government resources, interfering with opposition rallies and
 meetings, impeding the distribution of opposition newspapers
 and literature, threatening and harassing opposition
 candidates, and unfairly dominating television. Election day
 activity was monitored by several hundred international
 observers, who concluded that the voting was essentially free
 and fair, although this was not true of the campaign.
 A serious setback to the effort to open the political process
 was administered by the coal miners and others who, responding
 to an appeal by President-elect Iliescu to defend the
 Government, rampaged through Bucharest on June 14-15,
 destroyed the headquarters of two opposition parties and some
 university property, and ransacked the home of an opposition
 leader, the offices of various nongovernmental organizations,
 and the editorial offices of several newspapers. These events
 raised questions about the Government's commitment to genuine
 pluralism and democratic procedures and goals, which the
 Government sought to address.
 Since the fall of the Ceausescu regime, no local elections
 have been held at the county or municipal level, where
 prefects appointed by the Prime Minister and mayors appointed
 by those prefects now run local affairs.
 Political parties are free to organize, publish, recruit
 members, and criticize the Government. The parties and
 individuals who were targets of the vigilantes in June
 continued to function.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 A number of domestic human rights monitoring groups were
 established after December 1989, including the Association for
 the Defense of Human Rights, the League for the Defense of
 Human Rights, a local chapter of Helsinki Watch, the
 Independent Romanian Society for Human Rights, and the
 Association of Former Political Prisoners. All of these
 groups are based in Bucharest; some have local branches.
 Similar groups may be found in most of Romania's largest
 cities.
 Two international organizations, Helsinki Watch and the
 International Committee of the Red Cross, now maintain
 observers in Romania. Other international groups such as
 Amnesty International, the International Human Rights Law
 Group, and the United Nations Human Rights Commission sent
 representatives to Romania during 1990. The elections in May
 were actively monitored by international observer groups from
 the United States and Western Europe.
 International groups encountered no impediments in meeting
 with the Government and Romanian hu&man rights organizations
 and were able, albeit with delays in some instances, to meet
 with arrested individuals and to visit prisons. The
 Government was often slow to respond to requests for
 
 
 1261
 ROMANIA
 information on alleged human rights violations. The Romanian
 human rights organizations lack the means or the public
 profile to compel responses.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 The Government repudiated the efforts undertaken by the
 Ceausescu regime at forced assimilation of ethnic minorities
 and took steps to improve their situation. For example, the
 forced resettlement of members of ethnic minorities and
 restrictions on the ability of minority group members to visit
 relatives and friends in neighboring countries were ended in -
 1990. - Foreign language radio and television broadcasts are no
 longer banned.
 Ethnic Hungarians are the largest of Romania's more than 10
 ethnic minorities. Although no reliable statistics exist,
 between 1.7 and 2.2 million people are believed to be ethnic
 Hungarians. They are concentrated in Transylvania, the
 central and northwestern part of Romania, but more than
 200,000 ethnic Hungarians are estimated to live in Bucharest.
 The bases for many of the Hungarian claims of government
 discrimination were removed in 1990, including restrictions on
 language use and on the ability to organize politically and
 travel freely. The Government emphasized that its policy is
 to guarantee and protect the rights of all citizens regardless
 of ethnic, cultural, or religious background. However, it
 regards Romania as a unitary state and not, as the Hungarians
 claim, a multinational state.
 Shortly after the revolution, the Government relaxed policies
 of the Ceausescu regime restricting education in the Hungarian
 language. Ethnic Hungarians, particularly in the parts of
 Transylvania .where they compose a majority or near-majority of
 the population, reassumed control of numerous schools. Some
 schools were turned into separate Hungarian-language schools,
 Jand Romanian students were required to find other facilities.
 The Hungarian community continues to press for the reopening
 of a formerly Hungarian-language university in Cluj, but the
 Government has not agreed to this.
 Some ethnic Romanians allege that "reverse discrimination" has
 occurred. Romanian nationalist groups reacted negatively to
 efforts to promote increased Hungarian-language education,
 particularly the creation of separate schools. They staged
 protests and on occasion, for example in Bucharest's High
 School 33, intimidated Hungarian students and teachers and
 forced lockouts and temporary suspension ofoclasses.
 Another manifestation of Romanian nationalist sentiment was
 the rise of Vatra Romaneasca (Romanian Hearth), a
 chauvinistic, anti-Hungarian organization. Local elements of
 Vatra Romaneasca are widely believed to have been the leading
 instigators of the Tirgu Mures violence in March, in which 5
 persons were killed and more than 300 were injured from both
 ethnic communities, but legal charges stemming from the
 violence targeted predominantly ethnic Hungarians and
 Gypsies. After the Tirgu Mures violence, ethnic Hungarian
 leaders alleged that the Government conspired with
 ultranationalist Romanian organizations, such as Vatra
 Romaneasca, against the interests of the Hungarian minority.
 Societal prejudices fueled by historical ethnic animosities
 persist.
 
 
 1262
 ROMANIA
 Hungarians, Germans, Gypsies, and other minorities established
 political organizations, and the Government set aside seats in
 the Chamber of Deputies for those minorities (nine of them)
 that did not gain seats on the basis of either individual
 candidacies or party lists.
 Gypsies, whose estimated population ranges from 220,000 to
 perhaps as many as 2 million, continue to suffer
 discrimination. Public opinion about Gypsies is nearly
 universally negative, and they are frequently portrayed as
 shiftless beggars and thieves with no fixed domiciles. They
 are cited in newspapers as generic "suspects" in the rising
 incidence of crime and black marketeering. A large majority
 of those investigated following the riots in Tirgu Mures were
 Gypsies; of a reported 39 persons sentenced to prison terms or
 correctional labor by the end of the year, 28 were Gypsies.
 During the June 13-15 events, Gypsy neighborhoods in Bucharest
 were singled out by vigilante coal miners; many Gypsy homes
 were ransacked and looted, and several persons were beaten.
 Latent anti-Semitism rose to the surface in 1990 as evidenced
 by the publication of the "Protocols of Zion" and by the
 appearance of anti-Semitic articles in the National Peasant
 Party newspaper Dreptatea and in other papers. In February
 the synagogue in Oradea was desecrated, apparently by vandals,
 and the Government launched an investigation of the incident.
 No incidents of anti-Semitic violence were reported.
 Women are accorded the same legal rights and privileges as
 men, and the Government has not altered those policies
 -designed to upgrade the role of women in society with specific
 attention to the areas of education, access to employment, and
 comparable wages.
 There is no evidence of extensive violence against women,
 including wife beating. There has been no significant
 interest in the subject to date shown by the Government, the
 political parties, the press, or the few women's organizations
 that have arisen since the revolution.
 Section & Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association
 Prior to the December 1989 revolution, the only legal
 nationwide trade union confederation was the General
 Confederation of Trade Unions (UGSR). The UGSR was under
 Communist Party control, and all Romanian workers were forced
 to belong to it. The UGSR was dissolved as a result of the
 revolution and succeeded by the NSF-sponsored National
 Confederation of Free Trade Unions (CNSLR).
 After Ceausescu's fall, Romanian workers began to form and
 join free trade unions. As of October 1, roughly 75 percent
 of the approximately 10 million working people in Romania were
 affiliated with the CNSLR and five new nationwide trade union
 organizations, including the Fraternity Confederation of
 Independent Trade Unions ("Fratia"). An additional 10 percent
 of the work force is organized in local trade unions which are
 not affiliated with any national federation or confederation.
 Independent trade unions were organized by factory, by
 industry, and on a territorial basis. There is no longer a
 requirement for a single trade union structure, no significant
 restrictions on who may be a union official, and no cumbersome
 
 
 ROMANIA
 registration requirements that limit the formation of trade
 unions.
 While the Ceausescu-era labor code and other labor legislation
 are being extensively rewritten, the legal status of the new
 unions is unclear. In 1990 some independent unions were
 alleged to be under surveillance, had their documents or
 correspondence interfered with, or received threatening calls.
 At present there is no law on the right to strike. In April
 the Government put forward a draft law that would have limited
 the right of most Romanian workers to strike but quickly
 withdrew it after sharp criticism from the trade unions. In
 July the Government, under the pressure of a deteriorating
 economy, proposed a 6-month moratorium on strikes for wage and
 salary increases and promised to consult the unions on all
 future labor legislation, to abstain from banning strikes, to
 draft a law on trade union organization and recognition, and
 to create a commission to settle the disposition of UGSR
 assets. Most of the trade. unions agreed to this moratorium.
 Nonetheless, there were major strikes in Brasov and Constanta
 and many smaller ones. Both major strikes were settled
 peacefully with  government mediation. In mid-December,
 strikes by unions of teamsters, health care workers, and
 teachers ended quickly after government negotiators, including
 the President and Prime Minister, promised to meet the
 strikers' demands.
 Whereas the UGSR was affiliated with the Communist-controlled
 World Federation of Trade Unions, its successor, the CNSLR, is
 not affiliated internationally. Romanian trade unions are
 attempting to affiliate with international organizations but
 are often constrained by their lack of hard currency. One of
 the labor.confederations, Fratia, is preparing to apply for
 membership in the International Confederation of Free Trade
 Unions (ICFTU), and a number of its members have already been
 accepted as members of international trade secretariats. The
 Government does not deny the trade unions the right to
 affiliate internationally, and representatives of foreign and
 international labor organizations freely visit and advise
 Romanian trade unionists
 In November 1989, the Governing Body of the International
 Labor Organization (ILO) established a Commission of Inquiry
 to look into a complaint filed by the ICFTU against Romania
 for employment discrimination against its ethnic minorities,
 primarily the Hungarian minority. Denied access by the
 Ceausescu regime, the Commission after December 1989 was
 allowed to continue its investigation and to interview
 witnesses. The plaintiff expressed the desire to widen the
 scope of the inquiry to include events since the fall of
 Ceausescu, allegations of employment discrimination against
 Gypsies, and allegations of discrimination based on political
 views. No report is expected from the Commission of Inquiry
 before mid-1991.
 As an outgrowth of the ICFTU complaint, an ILO direct contacts
 mission visited Romania in April and issued a report on, among
 other things, the status of former detainees, the repeal of
 legislation imposing the single trade union system,
 disposition of the UGSR's assets, and the state of new
 legislation. In June the Committee on Freedom of Association
 reached definitive conclusions regarding the ICFTU complaint,
 welcoming the Government's cooperation with the ILO mission
 and expressing satisfaction with the release of detained
 
 
 1264
 ROMANIA
 unionists and the reinstatement of dismissed workers, but
 noting outstanding problems regarding the reinstatement of
 seniority rights and expressing hope that the Government would
 consult with unions and management as well as with the ILO
 before adopting proposed legislation on trade unions,
 collective labor disputes, and the right to strike.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively
 No law currently exists allowing Romanian workers to bargain
 collectively. The Ministry for Labor and Social Protection
 has drafted such a law for introduction in the Parliament.
 Wages, meanwhile, continue to be'set by central planning
 boards.
 There are no export processing zones in Romania.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor
 There is currently no legal prohibition of forced or
 compulsory labor, but the new constitution being drawn up is
 expected to prohibit forced labor. A 1976 law requiring all
 Romanian citizens to do "useful work," which was used as a
 basis for compulsory labor, was abrogated by the new
 Government in January. According to a Romanian report to the
 ILO's Conference Committee on the Application of Standards,
 laws which effectively bound a worker to his workplace have
 been repealed. For example, the Government abrogated a 1976
 law that required all workers to register with the Ministry of
 Labor and Social Protection for assignment to a workplace.
 Also repealed was a law that required a worker who desired to
 leave a job to apply first to the administration of the
 enterprise he was leaving as well as to the enterprise's local
 trade union organization. University graduates are no longer
 assigned by the Government to workplaces following graduation,
 and the Government has lifted the requirement that soldiers
 and retired career military personnel report for work "for the
 national economy" (usually agricultural harvesting or building
 construction) as needed. Noting these changes, the ILO's
 Committee of Experts in early 1990 judged Romania to be a
 "case of progress"; the Committee on the Application of
 Standards likewise welcomed the changes in the legislation but
 stressed the need to apply the new legislation in practice.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children
 According to a decree of May 11, the minimum age for
 employment is 16. Children as young as 14 and 15 may work in
 industrial enterprises but only with the consent of their
 parents or guardians and only "according to their physical
 development, aptitude, and knowledge." Children under 16 who
 are working have the right to continue their schooling, and
 enterprises that employ them are obliged to assist them in
 this endeavor. The Ministry of Labor's Directorate for Labor
 and Social Protection, which employs an average of 50
 inspectors in each of Romania's 40 counties, imposes fines and
 has the right to close sections of factories to enforce
 compliance with the law. Given the presence of hidden
 unemployment and the good enforcement of minimum wage laws, it
 is doubtful that enterprises have the economic incentive to
 employ children.
 
 
 1265
 
 ROMANIA
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work
 Following the Government's November 1 decree that all workers
 receive a supplement to their monthly wage to offset price
 increases, the effective minimum wage is approximately $80 per
 month. Wages are set according to a complex scale by
 profession, taking into account experience, time on the job,
 age, and education; the lowest wage on this scale, including
 the Government subvention, is approximately $80 per month.
 The average wage of Romanian workers is approximately $115 per
 month, according to official figures for July 1990. The
 lowest wage offered was not changed in 1990. Basic living
 necessities are heavily subsidized, but it is unlikely that
 this lawest wage provides for a decent living for a worker and
 his family. The Government has decreed that as of January 1,
 1991, all wages will be indexed to prices.
 The 1985 Labor Code is the basic document concerning working
 conditions, but it is being rewritten. The standard legal
 workweek of 48 hours under the old code has been reduced to 40
 hours. Obligatory work on Saturdays has not been reinstated.
 Those who work on Saturdays or Sundays are now paid double
 time. Paid holidays range from 15 to 24 days annually.
 Workers may not work more than 120 hours of overtime annually,
 although the Labor Code allows for up to 360 annual hours of
 overtime in special cases. This additional overtime, however,
 is legally permissible only with the consent of the UGSR,
 which no longer exists.
 The labor code promises Romanian workers a safe working
 environment, and the Ministry of Labor and Social Protection
 has established safety standards for most industries and is
 responsible for enforcing them. The new independent trade
 unions now also offer a means by which workers can act to
 improve health and safety standards. Enforcement of these
 standards is not good. The Government lacks trained personnel
 for inspection and enforcement; industry, which remains almost
 entirely state-owned, lacks the resources necessary to improve
 significantly health and safety conditions in the workplace.
 Industrial accident rates reportedly declined compared to-
 previous years, but-without accurate data from the Ceausescu
 era this conclusion cannot be verified. Workers receive
 supplementary benefits (higher wages and longer vacations) in
 some hazardous occupations.
 
 
 1266
