ROMANIA
HUMAN RIGHTS DEVELOPMENTS
Despite making progress toward European Union accession, Romania’s human
rights record in 2001 remained uneven. Rights groups continued to receive reports
of excessive use of force by police. The state response to domestic violence against
women and trafficking remained inadequate. No action was taken to remedy constitutional
restrictions on free speech. Legislation designed to enhance minority
rights was not implemented. Roma continued to experience discrimination in
housing, education, medical care, employment, and access to goods and services.
Legislative efforts to outlaw discrimination against gays and lesbians had mixed
results. Romania came under pressure to improve arms export controls, but
enforcement of existing laws continued to be a problem.
There were credible reports of excessive use of force and other misconduct by
police officers, including against children. On March 14, fourteen-year-old Vasile
Danut was detained and beaten severely by police in Vladesti. On April 5, police in
Oradea reportedly attacked sixteen-year-old Ioana Silaghi, and also reportedly
intimidated witnesses. Two police officers were accused of beating a suspect to
death in Cugir in early July. The introduction of new guidelines on the use of
firearms in June, intended to bring police practice into line with U.N. and Council
of Europe standards, appeared to have had little effect. After September 11, Parliament
suspended consideration of a draft bill curbing police powers to detain citizens
for up to twenty-four hours without charge.
Legal protections for victims of domestic violence and trafficking remained
inadequate.The Romanian Domestic Violence Victims’Assistance Center reported
that a long, complicated procedure and probation system discouraged domestic
violence victims from pressing charges against perpetrators.Despite the high level
of trafficking through Romania, the Romanian government did little to address the
problem.
Constitutional curbs on free expression remained in force in 2001 and were used
by authorities to interfere with the work of journalists. Journalists also ran afoul of
broad criminal defamation laws, under which prosecutions for slander of public
officials could bring imprisonment or fines.
Romania continued to show a half-hearted commitment to the rights of
national minorities.The National Minorities Council,meeting for the first time on
July 10, 2001, criticized the legislation creating the council for failing to require the
executive to consult with it on all legislation pertaining to national minorities.
Access to media by national minorities remained limited.
Extremist nationalist parties fueled hostility toward national minorities. The
November 2000 elections demonstrated the emerging popularity of the nationalist
Greater Romania Party (Partidul România Mare, PRM),which captured one-third
of the parliamentary seats. The party leader, Corneliu Vadim Tudor, who received 26 percent of the vote for president in the final round of elections, promised to
destroy the “Gypsy mafia.” In August the Romanian Prosecutor-general’s office
began an investigation into the publication of The Nationalist, a book that minority
leaders said incited racial hatred and anti-Semitism.Although the PRM denied
any connection to the book’s publication, it was written by a party deputy and
endorsed by a top PRM aide.
The problem of discrimination against the Roma population—estimated to
number as many as two million—continued to permeate society. A January 2001
European Roma Rights Center investigation found that violations of Roma rights
were highly unlikely to be prosecuted, and authorities retaliated against complainants.
Roma had their houses raided, and were detained, beaten, and threatened
by private citizens and police. On February 1 and 9, 2001, police stopped
trains headed for Brasov and detained, fingerprinted, and intimidated some one
hundred Roma passengers, and warned them not to enter the city.
On April 25, the government published an ambitious plan for improving conditions
for Roma, but Roma activists questioned its lack of detail on reaching the
goals identified.
The government took steps to enact legal guarantees for gays and lesbians, but
at the time of writing opposition from the Chamber of Deputies cast doubt as to
whether sexual orientation would remain protected under pending antidiscrimination
legislation.
Notwithstanding legislative efforts to decriminalize homosexuality and ensure
the rights of gays and lesbians, gays and lesbians continued to face police harassment.
In December 2000,Romanian citizen Adrian Georgescu was called to a police
station without explanation. There he was questioned about his sexuality by police
officers.After Georgescu publicized this event in January, a police officer admitted
on Romanian television that Georgescu had been detained and questioned solely
because of his sexual orientation.
A U.N. investigative panel determined in 2000 that Romania was a source of
weapons illegally supplied to embargoed rebel forces in Angola from 1996 to 1999.
It noted that reforms were needed in Romania to improve controls, as the weapons
were authorized for sale to Burkina Faso and Togo on the basis of falsified documents.
After taking the important step in mid-2000 of arresting and initiating the
prosecution of a Romanian-Israeli arms dealer accused of illegal arms sales,
Romanian authorities unexpectedly released him in February and he left the
country for Israel. Romanian officials denied he was linked to the Angola case and
said the prosecution would continue in his absence. Romania began a major push
to export more weapons after sales slumped but said it would revise its arms export
laws. Romania ratified the Mine Ban Treaty on November 30, 2000, and the treaty
entered into force on May 1. It declared in June that it would destroy stockpiled
antipersonnel landmines, which numbered just over one million.
DEFENDING HUMAN RIGHTS
Human Rights Watch received no reports of interference with the work of rights
groups in 2001.
THE ROLE OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE)
Despite holding the chairmanship of the OSCE during 2001, Romania’s penal
and civil codes continued to violate the standards of free expression set by that
body. Romania hosted the OSCE Conference on Roma and Sinti Affairs from September
10 to 13.
European Union
The European Parliament’s report on Romania’s application for E.U. accession
welcomed Romania’s intention to accelerate negotiations concerning membership
but sharply criticized its lack of progress in meeting human rights standards,
notably on the rights of children and minorities.The European Commission’s 2001
regular report on Romania’s progress toward accession recognized significant
reforms since the 2000 report, but also urged continued progress, particularly
toward implementation of the Roma strategy and antidiscrimination legislation.
United States
The U.S. State Department’s first annual report on trafficking in persons categorized
Romania as a “Tier-3” country, an indication that it had failed to make significant
efforts to bring itself into compliance with minimum international
standards. In May, the U.S.Agency for International Development awarded a grant
to help fight domestic violence and child abuse in two counties in Romania.