 ROMANIA
 Romania is a constitutional democracy with a multiparty, bicameral parliamen-
 tary system, a head of government (Prime Minister Radu Vasile), a directly elected
 head of state (President Emil Constantinescu), and a separate judiciary. Although
 the judiciary is a separate branch of the government, in practice the executive
 branch exercises influence over the judiciary.
 
 
 1426
 
 Several different security-forces are responsible for preserving law and order and
 protecting against external threats. The laws that established these organizations
 are somewhat vague, and their security responsibilities overlap. All security and in-
 telligence organizations operate under the authority of civilian leadership. The Min-
 istry of Internal Affairs supervises the national police, which have primary respon-
 sibility for security, and the border guards. Some police officers committed serious
 human rights abuses.
 Romania is a middle-income developing country in transition from a centrally
 planned to a market economy. The private sector accounted for about 60 percent of
 gross domestic product (GDP) and employed 56.6 percent of the work force in 1998,
 primarily in agriculture and services. Although privatization is under way, govern-
 ment ownership remains dominant in heavy industry. The economy grew slowly be-
 fore a contraction of 6.6 percent in 1997. GDP in 1997 was $34.842 billion (or about
 $1,547 per capita), and 1998 GDP was expected to drop 5.5 percent. Exports rose
 4.2 percent from 1996 to 1997 and increased 3.5 percent in 1998. Inflation reached
 151 percent in 1997 as the marketplace rather than the Government began to deter-
 mine the price of goods. In 1998 inflation fell to 41 percent. Official statistics signifi-
 cantly understated economic activity because of the size of the informal economy.
 The Government generally respected the rights of its citizens; however, several se-
 rious problems remained. Some police officers continued to beat detainees. The Gov-
 ernment investigated police officers suspected of abuse and in some cases indicted
 those accused of criminal activities in military courts. However, investigations of po-
 lice abuses are generally lengthy and inconclusive and rarely result in prosecution
 or punishment. The Government improved the poor living conditions in prisons and
 implemented vocational training programs. The judiciary remains subject to execu-
 tive branch influence but is becoming increasingly independent. In September key
 members in the general prosecutor's office were replaced, and an effort was made
 to improve the professionalism of prosecutors. Violence and discrimination against
 women remained serious problems. A large number of impoverished and apparently
 homeless children are visible in large cities. Societal harassment of religious minori-
 ties was a problem and religious groups not officially recognized by the Government
 sometimes complain that they receive discriminatory treatment from the authori-
 ties. Discrimination and violence against Roma continued.
 In May the Goveirnment established the Ombudsman's Office provided for in the
 1991 Constitution, and it began to register complaints.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Political and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no reports of political or
 other extrajudicial killings.
 In 1997 Amnesty International issued a report questioning the use of firearms by
 police against unarmed petty criminal suspects in 11 incidents between 1995 and
 1997. Fatalities resulted in three cases, and only two police officers were indicted.
 In 1996 Gabriel Carabulea died after 3 days in police custody, during which he
 reportedly was beaten severely. After initially ruling that there were no grounds for
 an indictment of the police, the military prosecutor's office reopened its investiga-
 tion; however, in March the prosecutor's office dropped the case based on allegedly
 insufficient evidence.
 According to the Government, the chief of police in Valcele was indicted in June
 for the illegal use of his weapon in the 1996 killing of Mircea-Muresul Mosor, a Rom
 from Comani who was shot and killed while in police custody. A lower court found
 the police not guilty, but the prosecutor's office appealed the verdict in May; the su-
 perior court's decision was pending at year's end. The military prosecutor's office
 during the year reopened the investigation into the case of Istvan Kiss, an ethnic
 Hungian allegedly beaten to death by police in 1995. In June the prosecutor's of-
 fice found the death to be accidental and did not ifie charges.
 In several earlier cases of deaths in custody or deaths reportedly due to police
 brutality, investigations and trials are still dragging on, years later.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of poitically motivated disappearances.
 c. Torture or Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment.-The
 Constitution prohibits torture and inhuman or degrading punishment or treatment,
 and these prohibitions were generally respected in practice. Nevertheless, there
 were credible reports that police beat detainees and improperly used firearms.
 APADOR-Helsinki Watch/Romania, a nongovernmental organization (NGO) af-
 filiated with the Helsinki Committee, reported several cases of police brutality and
 beatings. On April 13, a policeman with whom he had refused to share a pool game
 beat Nicolae Iloaiei of Tandareni. Iloaiei was hospitalized for 90 days. When he
 
 
 1427
 asked for a certified medical report for the forensic laboratory, the physician in
 charge refused to issue it. The case is under investigation. On August 24, Fitzeg Se-
 bastian, a student at the Catholic Theological College in Bucharest and his older
 friend were arrested as burglars while inquiring in an unfamiliar neighborhood
 about a distant relative. The boys were not informed of their rights nor allowed to
 explain their presence in the neighborhood. They were taken to the police precinct
 where they were beaten and forced to give a statement. The case was closed after
 the police reached a financial settlement with the family. On May 24, Marian Ciulei
 from Brasov was shot in the leg by a policeman while he was running from a con-
 frontation in a discotheque. The case is under investigation.
 In April the Government responded to the 1997 report of the United Nations Spe-
 cial Rapporteur on Torture and other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment. The Special Rapporteur received allegations of torture and mistreat-
 ment of detainees by the police. The Government in its response promised to make
 modifications to the Criminal Code and to detention regulations, but no such modi-
 fications had been made by year's end.
 Judicial cases involving military personnel and the police are tried in military
 courts. Local and international human rights groups criticize this system, claiming
 that the military prosecutor's investigations are unnecessarily lengthy and often
 purposefully inconclusive and that the military courts sometimes block proper inves-
 tigation of alleged police abuses. The Government declined to provide updated infor-
 mation on cases of alleged police abuse from 1997 and 1996.
 The prison system is improving slowly as efforts increase to bring prisons in line
 with minimum international standards. The 1998 prison budget increased 25 per-
 cent over 1997. Living conditions reportedly improved. A modern penitentiary
 opened in January in Bucuresti-Rahova that houses 1,400 inmates. Each 8-person
 cell is equipped with a shower, toilet, and two basins. Medical facilities were mod-
 ernized in some prisons, and inmates were allowed to exercise outside their cells.
 By July 31, six civilian magistrates were appointed as prison directors, replacing
 military officers.
 Human rights organizations continued to report the abuse of prisoners by other
 prisoners and prison authorities. Prisons continued to use the "cell boss" system, in
 which some prisoners are designated to be in semiofficial charge of other prisoners.
 However, prison guards wore firearms only when guarding prisoners working out-
 side the prison, correspondence was no longer opened routinely, and inmates had
 the right to telephone calls. Prison authorities introduced some vocational training
 programs to assist inmates' future integration into society. A probation pilot pro-
 gram financed by the Open Society Foundation opened in Iasi at year's end to pro-
 vide such assistance to minors and other young 'irst offenders. Other training pro-
 grans were sponsored by the Netherlands Helsinki Committee.
 The Government permitted visits by human rights monitors, and several NGO's
 made such visits.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The law forbids the detention of anyone
 for more than 24 hours without an arrest order from a prosecutor, who may order
 detention for up to 30 days. Authorities generally respect this provision in practice.
 Detainees have the right to apply for bail and may ask for a hearing before a judge.
 Such a request must be granted within 24 hour. However, in the absence of a re-
 quest, the authorities may hold a person for up to 65 days without a court order.
 Police often do not inform citizens of their rights. The law requires the authorities
 to inform arrestees of the charges against them and of their right to an attorney
 at all stages of the legal process. Police must notify defendants of this right in a
 language they understand before obtaining a statement. However, the prosecutor's
 office may delay action on a request for a lawyer for up to 5 days from the date
 of arrest.
 Under the law, minors detained by police and placed under guard in a center for
 the protection of minors are not considered by judicial authorities to be in detention
 or under arrest. Since the Penal Code does not apply to minors in these centers
 until their cases are referred to a prosecutor, police are permitted to question them
 without restriction and may hold those suspected of criminal offenses for up to 30
 days in such centers. This law appears to be in conflict with the Constitution, and
 both Amnesty International and local human rights groups have called on the Gov-
 emnent to change it.
 There were no political detainees during 1998, although a number of officials asso-
 ciated with the former government, who were investigated on charges of corruption
 or treason, publicly complained that they had been targeted on political grounds.
 Exile was not used as a means of punishment.
 e. Denial of Fair Public TriaL-Under the terms of a 1992 law, the judicial branch
 is independent of other government branches; however, it is subject to influence by
 
 
 1428
 
 the executive branch. A 1997 revision of the law provided that members of the Supe-
 rior Council of the Magistrature, which controls the selection, promotion, transfer,
 and sanctioning of judges, be appointed by the justice minister. However, the judici-
 ary is becoming increasingly independent.
 The 1992 law reestablished a four-tier legal system, including appellate courts,
 which had ceased to exist under Communist rule. Defendants have final recourse
 to the Supreme Court or, for constitutional matters, to the Constitutional Court.
 The 1992 law that reorganized the judicial system divided the Prosecutor General's
 Office into 16 local offices (paralleling the appeals court structure) and established
 an office at the Supreme Court; the law also curtailed certain powers of the Prosecu-
 tor General, including the right to overturn court decisions and bypass appeals
 courts by going directly to the Supreme Court.
 The law provides for fair public trial and the presumption of innocence. The Penal
 Code requires that an attorney be a ppointed for a defendant who cannot afford legal
 representation or is otherwise unable to select counsel. In practice the local bar as-
 sociation provides attorneys to the indigent and is compensated by the Ministry of
 Justice. Either a plaintiff or a defendant may appeal. These provisions of the law
 are respected in practice. The law provides that confessions extracted as a result
 of polic brutality may be withdrawn by the accused when brought before the court.
 A court in Isa sentenced two journalists to a year in prison each and a large fine
 for reporting that a police inspector would lose his job. The inspector's wife, daugh-
 ter, and son-in-law were employees of the court (see Section 2.a.).
 There were no reports of political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Interference With Privacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Constitution provides for protection against the search of a residence without a war-
 rant, but this protection is subordinate to "national security or public order." The
 1992 National Security Law defines national security very broadly and lists as
 threats not only crimes such as terrorism, treason, espionage, assassination, and
 armed insurrection but also totalitarian, racist, and anti-Semitic actions or attempts
 to change the existing national borders. Security officials may enter residences with-
 out proper authorization from a prosecutor if they deem a threat to national security
 "imminent."
 The-Constitution states that the privacy of legal means of communication is invio-
 lable; thus, the Romanian intelligence Service (SRI) is prohibited legally from en-
 gaging in political acts (for example, wiretapping on behalf of the government for
 political reasons). However, the law allows the security services to monitor commu-
 nications on national security grounds after obtaining authorization. The law re-
 quires the SRI to obtain a warrant from the "public prosecutor specially appointed
 by the General Public Prosecutor" in order to carry out intelligence activities involv-
 ing "threat to national security." It may engage legally in a wide variety of oper-
 ations to determine if a siatition meets the legal definition of a threat to national
 security.
 During the year there were no reported instances of interference with individual
 citizens' right to privacy.
 Legislation that would permit access to secret police files kept by the Communist
 Government was passed by the Senate in June and at year's end awaited action in
 the Chamber of Deputies.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press.-Although the Constitution provides for freedom
 of expression and prohibits censorship, it limits the bounds of free expression by
 prohibiting "defamation of the country." The Government respected the constitu-
 tional provisions in practice. An amended Penal Code passed by Parliament in 1996
 rectified many of the shortcomings of the former, Communist-era code. However, the
 new version is criticized by human rights organizations and professional journalists
 for retaining jail terms for those convicted of libel or slander, including journalists.
 In the spring, an attempt by Parliament to amend the Penal Code and remove jail
 terms from among penalties for libel failed because of disputes over an unrelated
 matter. Consequently, Articles 205 and 206 concerning libel and Articles 237 and
 238, concerning offense to authority and defamation of the country are still in force.
 Many libel suits were brought against journalists during the year under these
 provisions. In August the lower courts in the northeast found four journalists of the
 Monitorul press group guilty of libel and sentenced them to fines and jail terms. A
 court in the city of Iasi in August sentenced two journalists from the independent
 daily Monitorul de Iasi to a year in prison and $165,000 "moral damages" to be paid
 to the plaintiffs. The case prompted criticism due to the fact that the plaintiffs wife,
 daughter, and son-in-law were employees of the Iasi court that indicted the journal-
 ists. The Supreme Court refused to move the trial to another jurisdiction. The case
 
 
 1429
 
 is being appealed. In April a journalist from the Cluj-based daily Ziua de Nord-Est
 was the first person convicted under Article 206 (concerning calumny).
 The independent media continued to grow. Several hundred daily and weekly
 newspapers are published. Several private television stations broadcast nationwide,
 with the largest reaching approximately 20 percent of the rural and 80 percent of
 the urban market. As of September, 72 private television stations and 162 private
 radio stations were broadcasting. Approximately 2.8 million households were wired
 for cable, giving significant portions of the population access to both private and for-
 eign broadcasts. While Romanian State Television (RTV) and Radio Romania re-
 mained the only national broadcasters capable of reaching the bulk of the rural pop-
 ulation, independent stations continued to enlarge their coverage throughout the
 country by over-the-air, cable, and satellite transmissions.
 The 1994 law establishing a parliamentary appointed board of directors for RTV
 was implemented in June. The new chairman of the board, Christian Hagi-Culea,
 was elected by Parliament in October.
 Foreign news publications may be imported and distributed freely, but high costs
 limit their circulation.
 Academic freedom is respected.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution provides for
 freedom of assembly, and the Government respected that right in practice. The law
 on public assembly provides for the right of citizens to assemble peacefully while
 unarmed but states that meetings must not interfere with other economic or social
 activities and may not be held near locations such as hospitals, airports, or military
 installations. Organizers of demonstrations must inform local authorities and police
 before the event. Authorities may forbid a public gathering by notifying the organiz-
 ers in writing within 48 hours of receipt of the request. The law prohibits the orga-
 nization of, or participation in, a counterdemonstration held at the same time as a
 scheduled public gathering.
 The law forbids public gatherings to espouse Communist, racist, or Fascist
 ideologies or to commit actions contrary to public order or national security. Unau-
 thorized demonstrations or other violations are punished by imprisonment and
 fines.
 The Constitution provides for freedom of association, and the Government re-
 spects this right in practice. Political parties gain legal status if they have at least
 10,000 members. (The minimum membership required was increased in 1996 in
 order to reduce the number of small parties.) Associations may be granted legal sta-
 tus with proof of only 251 members.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for religious freedom, and the
 Government generally does not impede the observance of religious belief. However,
 several denominations continued to make credible allegations that low-level govern-
 ment officials and Romanian Orthodox clergy impeded their efforts at proselytizing.
 Members of religious communities not officially recognized by the Government dur-
 ing the year again accused government officials of harassment-allegations denied
 by the Government. Proselytizing that involves denigrating established churches is
 perceived as provocative.
 Under the provisions of a 1948 decree, the Government recognizes 15 religions;
 only the clergy of these recognized religions are eligible to receive state financial
 support. The State Secretariat for Religious Affairs has licensed 385 other faiths,
 organizations, and foundations as religious associations under 2 1924 laws on juridi-
 cal entities, thereby entitling them to juridical status as well as to exemptions from
 income and customs taxes. However, religious associations may not build churches
 or other buildings designated as houses of worship and are not permitted to perform
 rites of baptism, marriage, or burial. The Romanian Orthodox Church, to which ap
 proximately 86 percent of the population nominally adheres, predominates. The offi-
 cial registration of religious associations is extremely slow because of bureaucratic
 delays; in this regard, smaller religious groups have criticized the State Secretariat
 for Religious Affairs for its obstructionist tactics in favor of the Romanian Orthodox
 Church. Members of some religious minorities complain that the revised law on
 cults, if enacted, would not recognize their status as religious groups.
 The Catholic Church of the Byzantine Rite, or Greek Catholic Church, which suf-
 fered discrimination in years past from the Romanian Orthodox Church and the
 State Secretariat for Religious Affairs, made progress in 1998 in recovering some
 of its former properties. The Greek Catholic Church was disbanded by the Com-
 munists in 1948 and forced to merge with the Romanian Orthodox Church. The lat-
 ter received most of its properties, including over 2,000 churches and other facilities.
 Since 1990 Greek Catholics have recovered a number of their churches. In the
 Banat region some of the churches were returned to the Uniate Church by the Or-
 thodox Archbishop of Timisoara. In several counties in Transylvania local Orthodox
 
 
 1430
 leaders voluntarily have given up smaller country churches. The Episcopal seat in
 Cluj was returned to the Greek Catholic Church by a court order on March 13. In
 August the Government adopted an ordinance on returning buildings belonging to
 ethnic minorities, such as Jewish schools in Bacau and Cluj, and the Presbyterian
 Theology Institute in Cluj.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.-The Government places no restrictions on travel within the country, ex-
 cept for certain small areas reserved for military purposes. Citizens who wish to
 change their place of work or residence do not face any official barriers. The law
 stipulates that- citizens have the right to travel abroad freely, to emigrate, and to
 return. In practice citizens freely exercise these rights.
 In 1996 a refugee law was passed, implementing the provisions of the 1951
 United Nations Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees and its 1967 Protocol.
 This legislation established a refugee office in the Interior Ministry to receive, proc-
 ess, and house asylum seekers.
 The Government cooperates with, the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees
 (UNHCR) and other humanitarian organizations. Beginning in mid-1998 the Inte-
 rior Ministry and the Labor Ministry began funding programs to assist asylum seek-
 ers and refugees. The Government provides temporary accommodation in only a few
 locations; more facilities are to open as funds are made available. Programs for inte-
 grating refugees into society are developing slowly. The issue of first asylum did not
 arise in 1998. An increasing number of transiting illegal migrants regard the coun-
 try as a springboard to the West.
 Between January 1 and August 31, a total of 1,247 refugees were registered in
 the country. Of these, 724 depended on the UNHCR for their subsistence, including
 food, accommodation, clothing, medical assistance, and language or vocational train-
 m'here were no reports of the forced return of persons to a country where they
 feared persecution.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 The Constitution provides citizens with the right to change their government
 through periodic and free elections held on the basis of universal suffrage.
 In the wake of the 1996 democratic general elections, the government coalition
 formed by the Romanian Democratic Convention (CDR) and the Union of Social
 Democrats (USD) joined forces with the Hungarian Democratic Union of Romania
 (UDMR). These parties, along with a number of smaller constituent parties, make
 up the governing coalition.
 The Government respects legislation passed in 1996 that prohibits government-
 appointed prefects from dismissing elected mayors and local council members for al-
 leged abuses of authority prior to a binding legal ruling on the charges.
 No legal restrictions hinder the participation of women in government or politics,
 but societal attitudes are a significant impediment. Women hold only 5.9 percent of
 the seats in Parliament and one ministerial position.
 The Constitution and electoral legislation grant each recognized ethnic minority
 one representative in the Chamber of Deputies, provided that the minority's politi-
 cal organization obtains at least 5 percent of te average number of valid votes
 needed to elect a deputy outright (1,784 votes in the 1996 elections). Organizations
 representing 15 minority groups elected deputies under this provision in 1996. Eth-
 nic Hungarians, represented by the UDMR, obtained parliamentary representation
 through the normal electoral process. Roma are underrepresented in Parliament be-
 cause of low Roma voter turnout and internal divisions that worked against the con-
 solidation of votes for one candidate, organization, or party. They have not increased
 their parliamentary representation beyond the one seat provided through the Con-
 stitution and electoral legislation.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Domestic human rights monitoring groups include the Romanian Helsinki Com-
 .mittee (APADOR-CH), the independent Romanian Society for Human Rights
 (SIRDO), the League for the Defense of Human Rights (LADO), the Romanian Insti-
 tute for Human Rights, and several issue-specific groups such as the Young Genera-
 tion of Roma and the Center for Crisis Intervention and Study, also a Romani NGO.
 Other groups, such as political parties and trade unions, continued to maintain sec-
 tions monitoring the observance of human rights. These groups, as well as inter-
 national human rights organizations, functioned freely without government inter-
 ference.
 
 
 1431
 The Government cooperates with local and international monitoring groups, al-
 though some offices are slow to respond to inquiries. Local human rights monitoring
 agencies have found it difficult to obtain statistics concerning police abuses. The
 General Inspectorate of Police, which is responsible for investigating such abuses,
 responds uneveniy to inquiries from monitors. Often victims are reluctant to come
 forward, and the Government does not promote transparency in this regard.
 With the aim of protecting citizens against abuses or capricious acts of public offi-
 cers, the Ombudsman's office envisioned under the 1991 Constitution was instituted
 by law in March 1997, and its first appointee, Paul Mitroi, took office in June 1997.
 However, due to a lack of office space, the office began working at normal capacity
 only at the beginning of 1998: by the end of August, it had received 2,700 com-
 plaints. The Office is registering these complaints and is obliged by law to provide
 an initial response within a year of the date they were recorded. It deals not just
 with human rights but with all facets of citizens' interaction with the government.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution forbids discrimination based on race, nationality, ethnic origin,
 language, religion, sex, opinion and political allegiance, wealth, or social back-
 ground. However, in practice the Government does not enforce these provisions ef-
 fectively, and women, Roma, and other minorities are subject to various forms of
 extralegal discrimination. Homosexuals are reportedly the victims of widespread po-
 lice brutality.
 Women.-Violence against women, including rape, continued to be a serious prob-
 lem. Both human and women's rights groups credibly reported that domestic vio-
 lence is common. Under a government pilot project begun in 1997, a shelter for vic-
 tims of domestic violence opened in Bucharest in 1997. The shelter can accommo-
 date only four persons. It received 490 calls for help during the year on a hot line,
 and registered 230 walk-in victims. According to government statistics, 967 rapes
 were reported during the first half of the year. Prosecution of rape is difficult e-
 cause it requires both a medical certificate and a witness, and a rapist can avoid
 punishment if he marries the victim. There is no specific legislation dealing with
 spousal abuse or rape, and successful prosecution of spousal rape is almost impos-
 sible. Police are often reluctant to intervene in instances of domestic violence.
 Trafficking in women appears to be an underreported but growing problem. Sev-
 eral domestic prostitution rings are active.
 The Constitution grants women and men equal rights. However, in practice the
 Government does not enforce these provisions, nor do the authorities focus attention
 or resources on womencs issues.
 Few resources are available for women who experience economic discrimination.
 Despite existing laws and educational equality, women have a higher rate of unem-
 ployment than men, occupy few influential positions in the private sector, and earn
 lower than average wages. In 1996 the Government created a department in the
 Ministry of Labor and Social Protection to advance women's concerns and family
 policies. This department organizes programs for women, proposes new laws, mon-
 itors legislation for sexual bias, targets resources to train women for skilled profes-
 sions, and addresses the problems of single mothers, especially in rural areas. In
 1998 this department organized with the United Nations Development Program a
 series of conferences on "promoting gender politics."
 Children.-The Government administers health care and public education pro-
 grams for children, despite scarce domestic resources. International agencies and
 NGO's supplement government programs in these areas.
 There was no perceptible societal pattern of abuse against children. Nevertheless,
 large numbers of impoverished and apparentiy homeless, but not necessarily or-
 phaned, children were seen on the streets of the larger cities. The Government does
 not have statistics defining the scope of the problem. NGO's working with children
 remained particularly concerned about the number of minors detained in jail and
 prison. These NGO's continued to seek alternative solutions, such as parole for juve-
 niles. Because time served while awaiting trial counts as part of the prison sentence
 but does not count towards teto be served in a juvenile detention center, some
 minors actually requested prison sentences.
 The sexual exploitation of children continued to attract press attention, and the
 police staged a few high-publicity arrests of foreign pedophiles. Other issues, such
 as adequate legislation to protect children, received less attention. The law does not
 expressly outLaw pedophilia; instead, pedophiles are charged with rape, corporal
 harm, and sexual corruption.
 People With Disabilities.Difficult economic conditions and serious budgetary con-
 straints contributed to very difficult living conditions for those with physical or men-
 
 
 1432
 
 tal disabilities. Many disabled people cannot make use of government-provided
 transportation discounts because public transport does not have facilitated access.
 The law does- not mandate accessibility for the disabled to buildings and public
 transportation.
 - - Religious Minorities.-Most mainstream politicians publicly have condemned anti-
 Semitism, racism, and xenophobia. However, the fringe press continued to publish
 anti-Semitic harangues. The Romanian Orthodox Church has attacked the "aggres-
 sive proselytism" of Protestant and neo-Protestant groups. In April a group of Bap-
 tist missionaries was attacked by a mob in Cornereva until their van was rescued
 by the police and escorted out of the area.
 National/RaciallEthnic Minorities.-The Government created a Consultative
 Council for National Minoi-ities in 1993 to monitor the specific problems of persons
 belonging to-ethnic minorities, to establish contacts with minority groups, to submit
 proposals for draft legislation and administrative measures, to maintain permanent
 inks with local authorities, and to investigate complaints. This council was up-
 graded to a government department with ministerial status after the November
 1996 general elections and renamed the Department for the Protection of National
 Minorities (DPNM).
 Ethnic Hungarians, numbering more than 1.6 million, constitute the largest and
 most vocal minority, and their UDMR Party holds 36 seats in the Parliament. Many
 of the issues addressed in the Romanian-Hungarian treaty of 1996 were imple-
 mented. Progress was made on economic issues, high-level visits, and infrastructure
 improvements such as border crossings. A government decree on Hungarian-lan-
 guage minority education was ruled unconstitutional in December, after which each
 house of Parliament passed a different version of a new minority education law,
 leaving the issue unresolved at year's end.
 The Romani population, estimated at approximately 2 million persons, continues
 to be subject to societal discrimination. The Minister of Education announced in
 April a series of initiatives designed to improve Roma education. New programs will
 provide caravan classrooms to follow the migrant Romani population and will open
 additional classrooms at the request of Roma in several high schools throughout the
 country. Credible reports of anti-Roma violence continued, as did the harassment of
 Roma. In July a court in Mures sentenced 11 persons who in 1993 burned 13
 Romani houses-resulting in the deaths of 3 Roma-to 3 to 72 years' imprison-
 ment. Other cases dating to 1993 involving Romani deaths and property destruction
 still are under investigation by prosecutors or under reviewby the courts.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-All workers except public employees have the right
 to associate freely, engage in collective bargaining, and form and join labor unions
 without previous authorization. Limitations on the right to strike apply only to in-
 dustries that the Government considers critical to the public interest and to other
 public employees. No workers may be forced to join or withdraw from a union, and
 union officials who resign from elected positions and return to the regular work
 force are protected against employer retaliation. The majority of workers are mem-
 bers of about 18 nationwide trade union confederations and smaller independent
 trade unions.
 Union members complain that unions must submit their grievances to govern-
 ment-sponsored conciliation before initiating a strike, and they are frustrated with
 the courts' propensity to declare illegal the majority of strikes on which they have
 been asked to rule. Past studies indicated that the labor legislation adopted in 1991
 falls short of International Labor Organization (ILO) standards in several areas, in-
 cluding the free election of union representatives, binding arbitration, and the finan-
 cial liability of strike organizers. Although the 1991 legislation supports collective
 bargaining as an institution, the contracts that result are not always enforceable in
 a consistent manner.
 Unions representing divergent sectors of the economy carried out strikes in 1998,
 -often protesting wage indexation levels that did not match the rate of inflation. A
 strike by health care workers suspended services at state-run hospitals for all but
 emergency cases, but the result was a much smaller pay hike than the workers de-
 manded. Miners struck several times for short, periods over delays in paying back
 wages.
 The Government has not followed up on a 1995 ILO recommendation to the pre-
 vious government to rescind all measures taken against suspended union leaders in-
 volved in a 1993 strike by railway locomotive engineers. Only 2 of the 10 engineers
 fired in 1993 were offered their old jobs back; most of the others were offered retire-
 ment pensions. The union leaders, who defied a Supreme Court ruling to suspend
 
 
 1433
 the strike for 170 days, were fired by the national railway company when the strike
 ended.
 The law stipulates that labor unions should be free from government or political
 party control, a provision that the Government has honored in practice. Unions are
 ree to engage in political activity and have done so.
 Labor unions may form or join federations and affiliate with international bodies.
 The National Confederation of Trade Unions-Fratia and the National Union Bloc
 are affiliated with the International Confederation of Free Trade Unions and the
 European Trade Union Confederation. The Confederation of Democratic Trade
 Unions of Romania is affiliated with the World Labor Confederation. Representa-
 tives of foreign and international organizations freely visit and advise Romanian
 trade unionists.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-Workers have the legal right
 to bargain collectively, but collective bargaining efforts are complicated by continued
 state-control of most industrial enterprises an the absence of independent manage-
 ment representatives. Basic wage scales for employees of state-owned enterprises
 are established through collective bargaining with the government (see Section 6.e.).
 Antiunion discrimination is prohibited by law.
 Labor legislation is applied uniformly throughout the country, including in the
 four free trade zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The Constitution prohibits forced
 or compulsory labor, including that performed by children. The Ministry of Labor
 and Social Protection generally enforces this prohibition.
 d. Status of Child Labor Practices and Minimum Age for Employment.-The mini-
 mum age for employment is 16 years, but children as young as the ages of 14 or
 15 may work with the consent of their parents or guardians, although only "accord-
 ing to their physical development, aptitude, and knowledge." Working children
 under the age of 16 have the right to continue their education, and the law obliges
 employers to assist in this regard. The Ministry of Labor and Social Protection has
 the authority to impose fines and close sections of factories to ensure compliance
 with the law, which it enforces effectively. The Constitution prohibits forced and
 bonded child labor, and the Government generally enforces this provision (see Sec-
 tion 6.c.).
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-Most wage rates are established through col-
 lective bargaining at the enterprise level. However, they are based on minimum
 wages for specific economic sectors and categories of workers that the Government
 sets after negotiations with industry representatives and the labor confederations.
 Minimum wage rates are generally observed and enforced. In 1998 the minimum
 monthly wage of $40.00 (Lei 360,000) did not keep pace with inflation and did not
 provide a decent standard of living for a worker and family. Prices for utility serv-
 ices such as water and heating have risen dramatically. However, basic foodstuffs
 and pharmaceutical products are still subject to price ceilings. Housing is no longer
 subsidized. -
 The Labor Code provides for a standard workweek of 40 hours or 5 days, with
 overtime to be paid for weekend or holiday work or work in excess of 40 hours. It
 also includes a requirement for a 24-hour rest period in the workweek, although
 most workers receive 2 days off. Paid holidays range from 18 to 24 days annually,
 depending on the employee's length of service. The law requires employers to pay
 additional benefits and allowances to workers engaged in particularly dangerous or
 difficult occupations.
 Some labor organizations lobby for healthier, safer working conditions on behalf
 of their members. The Ministry of Labor and Social Protection has established safe-
 ty standards for most industries and is responsible for enforcing them. However, it
 lacks sufficient trained personnel for inspection and enforcement, and employers
 often ignore its recommendations. Although they have the right to refuse dangerous
 work assignments, workers seldom invoke it in practice, appearing to value in-
 creased pay over a safe work environment. Neither the Government nor industry,
 which is still mostly state owned, has the resources necessary to improve signifi-
 cantly health and safety conditions in the workplace.
