ROMANIA
Overall, the State Department report on Romania presents an accurate portrayal of human rights conditions in 1993. There are, however, important áiortcomings in the report's description of Romania's human rights problems, which gives a more optimistic impression of the situation than is warranted and which neglects a disturbing trend in the introduction of regressive legislation in the Romanian parhament during 1993.
The report's description of the current political situation fails to convey the potential for political insecurity in the near future, especially in the context of a declining economy including a significant increase in inflation and unemployment. Romania's recent history of four violent incursions into the capital by thousands of coal miners and others demonstrates the potential threat to human rights posed by unstable political and economic conditions.
The report notes that subsequent to the 1992 election of President Iliescu, his designee for Prime Minister, economist Nicolae Vacaroiu, won a vote of confidence with a government composed of technocrats and members of the Party of Social Democracy of Romania (PDSR), formerly the Democratic National Salvation Front. However, it should have noted that the ruling party's failure to win an overall majority in the parliament meant that it was dependent on the parliamentary backing of the ultranationalist and neo-Communist parties including the Party of Romanian National Unity (PRNU), the Greater Romanian Party (GRP), the Socialist Labor Party (SLP, the reborn Communist Party) and the Democratic Agrarian Party (DAP). All four parties increased their support during the 1992 elections, and the PRNU presidential candidate, Gheorghe Funar, placed third with over 10% of the vote. Not only have these results given extremists a greater voice in the national parliament, but they have increased their control significantly in Transylvania, further polarizing an already uneasy environment between extreme nationalists and some ethnic Hungarians. The report should have noted that power at the local level is largely concentrated in the hands of prefects appointed by the central government, not by elected local councils and mayors, and that to secure support from the PRNU, the government was forced to give the party increasing control over the appointment of local officials in Transylvania.
The report appropriately notes advances in Romania's human rights situation in 1993, pointing to the reorganization of the judiciary, the establishment of a consultative Council for National Minorities, and the growth of human rights monitoring groups and other NGOs. The report also appropriately points to human rights problems of continuing concern including: credible reports of police abuse of detainees and prisoners, violent attacks and entrenched discrimination against the Roma (gypsy) population, and the use of vaguely worded libel law to limit freedom of speech and of tiie press.
287
CRITIQUE 1993
The report gives a generally accurate portrayal of the justice system and its flaws. It notes the January 1993 Human Rights Watch/Helsinki report documenting the widespread beating of detainees during arrest or when first taken to police stations and finding that the investigation of these cases by the Office of the Military Prosecutor, responsible for legal oversight of the police, rarely yields results. The report also notes the persistence of abuses in Romanian prisons, such as the continued use of leg irons. As it emphasizes, it is clear that many citizens are not adequately informed of their ri^t to apply for bail and request a hearing before a judge and that the case must be heard within 24 hours. The report fails to note, however, that Amnesty International has received reports of cases where the Romanian courts have used confessions as evidence, although these were later retracted as having been extracted under torture.
The report accurately describes the New Law on the Reorganization of the Judiciary, which came into force on July 1, and points out that cases involving military persotmel, criminal acts against the state and acts committed by the police are still tried in a three-tiered military court system. The report could also have cited studies by human rights groups such as the Romanian Independent Society for Human Rights (SIRDO), which have demonstrated the inadequacy of the current system by illustrating how it shields prosecutors and the police fi"om scrutiny. The report concentrates on two cases in the Suceava District where there are allegations of serious abuses by the police and the prosecutor's office. The SIRDO report documents how the Ministry of the Interior and the Office of the Military Prosecutor, the sole organs available to investigate police abuse, have failed to respond to such credible claims.
The report neglects to mention that despite significant reform of the justice system, there was little or no replacement or retraining of existing justice ministry personnel, magistrates and judges to bring them up to internationally recognized professional standards. This has resulted in a highly politicized justice and court system that has often refused to deliver potentially unpopular judgments ~ thus sending mixed signals, at best, to the public about the determination of the justice system to implement the rule of law.
The report does not mention the fact that independent advocacy — essential for the implementation of the rule of law — has yet to take root. While a bill drafted by the Romanian Bar Association awaits approval by the Chamber of Deputies, Romanian advocates continue to operate under a Communist law that forbids advocates to establish themselves individually or in partnership with colleagues.
The report describes the status of the Romanian Intelligence Service (SRI), noting the effects of the legacy of abuses carried about by the Ceausescu-era security apparatus, the 1992 law governing the SRI and some of its drawbacks. However, while the report mentions that the Prosecutor's General's office began an
288
ROMANIA
investigation of the Hunedoara branch of the SRI for illegal wiretapping, it fails to note that some newspapers have asserted that the unauthorized monitoring of telephone communication persists. It also fails to mention the establishment of a "Special Telecommunication Service" with duties that include "radio-electronic surveillance" and that call for "introducing the necessary secrecy equipment." These provisions may allow the SRI to circumvent parliamentary control.
The report also neglects to mention a draft of the Romanian Law for the Protection of State Secrets under consideration by the Romanian Senate in 1993. The draft law makes it a criminal offense to divulge information about state-owned or private companies, energy generation and distribution systems, communications networks and geological surveys. In addition, it prohibits the disclosure of information about "any kind of external relations and activities of the Romanian state, except for the ones which may and must be publicized according to the law. To effectively guarantee all these so-called "job secrets," companies and individuals could hire the SRI — a scenario eerily reminiscent of the Ceausescu-era, in which the secret police were omnipresent. The wording of the draft law is so vague that its implementation would constitute a serious assault on freedom of speech and of the press, and on the right to privacy.
The draft law makes "the defense of the state secret... a legal obligation and a moral duty of all citizens of Romania, by means of which they express their loyalty to the country." However, the Romanian public did not learn about the possibility of such a law until Radio Free Europe broadcast a report on the heated discussion that ensued when the US delegation to a CSCE seminar in Warsaw in November 1993 called attention to the draft.
The report describes the situation of freedom of speech and the press in Romania, appropriately pointing out that while Article 30 of the Constitution provides for freedom of expression and prohibits censorship, the same article qualifies freedom of expression by prohibiting "defamation of Ûie country." While the report notes that Romanian libel law is vague and potentially subject to abuse, and that Law 61 of 1991 makes it an offense to use vulgar or insulting language when referring to public personalities, it should also have commented that certain provisions of Articles 238 and 239 of the Penal Code place unnecessary and excessive restrictions on freedom of expression. Article 238, paragraph 1,punishes with six months to three years imprisonment anyone who "cast slurs upon the honor or publicly threatens" a "person engaged in an important state or public activity." Article 239, paragraph 1 states:
"Insults, libel, slander or threats made directly or by direct means of communication against a frinctionary whose duties involve the exercise of state authority, and who is performing his duties, or such insults made with regard to acts accomplished during the
289
CRITIQUE 1993
performance of his duties are punishable by three months to two years imprisonment."
These provisions violate the right to freedom of expression enumerated in Article 19 of the ICCPR, to which Romania is a state party.
The report says that constitutional provisions and laws on free assembly were generally respected in 1993. It does not mention a draft law initiated by the government at the beginning of 1993, which attempted to modify Law 60/1991 on public assemblies and would have made illegal any public assembly at which two or more persons carried objects that could be used as weapons. Romanian and international human rights groups lobbied against the law. They made written comments and distributed them to almost all members of parliament; organized round-tables with jurists, other NGOs and parliamentarians; asked foreign experts to express their views on the draft; and compared the draft with laws from other countries. These actions resulted in several parliamentary commissions concluding that the proposed draft constituted a danger to freedom of assembly, of association and of speech, and gave them a negative recommendation. The draft remains on the agenda of parliament, although a draft law that has received a negative reading from the parliamentary commissions will usually not be passed by the plenum of the parliament,
The report accurately portrays the situation of women and children in Romania, including the adverse effects of economic decline, such as increased unemployment among women and an increase in the numbers of impoverished and apparently homeless sfreet children in the larger cities.
The report appropriately notes the creation of a consultative Council for National Minorities and gives a good description of its structure and its inability to act on some of its recommendations in view of public objections by the nationalist parties. The report should have presented the political context in which the council was created in order to give a more accurate picture of the challenges it faces. It should have noted that the creation of the council was and remains unpopular with the ruling party, and that it only resulted after a long series of meetings— supported by recommendations from US State Department officials and officials of the CSCE with President Iliescu and other high-ranking government leaders. Even when the council has been able to enlist the backing of President Iliescu and some of the conservative leaders of the ruling party — for instance, in support of amendments to the Education Law advocated by the Hungarians — the ruling party has opposed it. Conservatives hold the upper hand in the ruling party and in most instances where they or their extremist allies demonstrate sfrong opposition, the Prime Minister has rejected the council's recommendations.
The report correctly states that discrimination against the Roma continued. It refers to a September 20 outbreak of mob violence in the village of Hadareni,
290
ROMANIA
which resulted in the deaths of three Roma, and notes that this was quickly condemned by the government, which took disciplinary action against the police for their passivity. However, it should have noted that on November 2-3, a 25-member commission of Hadareni residents decided that 21 of the 25 Roma familes living in the village must leave or risk forcible expulsion. Officials of the County Council, the Deputy Prefect, a representative of the Romanian government, and the Mayor, Deputy Mayor and Chief of Police of Chetan were all present at the meeting. The report is negligent in failing to comment on such instances of official involvement in anti-Roma activity.
291
CRITIQUE 1993
