 ROMANIA
 Romania is a constitutional republic with a multiparty system and a directly
 elected president as chief of state. In the November election, opposition candidate
 Emil Constantinescu was elected President, and a new government headed by Victor
 Ciorbea was installed in December. The judicial system has been subject to execu-
 tive branch influence, although it is increasingly independent.
 The Ministry of Internal Affairs supervises the police. The national police have
 primary responsibility for security, but in times of national disorder the Government
 may call on the army and the border guard to assist the police. Sporadic reports
 of human rights abuse by the police continued.
 Romania is a middle-income developing country in transition from socialism to a
 market economy. In 1995 the private sector accounted for about 45 percent of gross
 domestic product (GDP) and employed 49.1 percent of the work force, primarily in
 agriculture and services. Although privatization is well under way, government own-
 ership remains dominant in industry, where about 86 percent of output is produced
 by state-owned enterprises. Major industries include steel and metal products, auto-
 mobiles, shipbuilding, textiles and apparel, electrical machinery, and energy produc-
 tion. Following a severe contraction in 1989-92 (when GDP fell by nearly one-quar-
 ter), the economy has continued to grow, increasing 6.9 percent in 1995 and a fore-
 cast 3.5 percent in 1996. Projected GDP is about $37 billion in 1996 (or about $1,635
 per capita). Exports have risen over 20 percent in the past 2 years, although they
 fell $400 million for the first 6 months of 1996 compared with the same period in
 1995. Inflation, at 62 percent in 1994, was down to 27.8 percent in 1995 and is ex-
 pected to be about 40 percent in 1996.
 The Government generally respected the rights of its citizens. However, several
 serious problems remained. Although the police have become more cognizant of
 human rights, reports of their abuse of detainees continued, and the Government
 does not take effective action to punish abusers. Prison conditions remained poor.
 The judicial system has been subject to executive branch influence, although it is
 increasingly independent. There were reports of occasional infringements on citi-
 zens' right to privacy. New legislation is designed to ensure that the widespread dis-
 missal of democratically elected mayors by government-appointed prefects that oc-
 curred in 1995 can no longer take place without due legal process. Discrimination
 and violence against Roma continued, and discrimination and violence against
 women remained serious problems. A growing number of impoverished and appar-
 ently homeless children continued to roam the streets of large cities.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1. Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including Freedom From:
 a. Politcal and Other Extrajudicial Killing.-There were no reports of political
 killings.
 In April Gabriel Carabulea died after 3 days in police custody during which he
 reportedly was severely beaten. After initially ruling that there were no grounds for
 an indictment of the police, the military prosecutor's office reopened its investigation
 at the urging of the Romanian Helsinki Committee and the deceased's relatives.
 According to Human Rights Watch, Mircea-Muresul Mosor, a Rom from Comani,
 was shot and killed in May while in police custody in Valcele.
 The case of Istvan Kiss, an ethnic Hun arian allegedly beaten to death by police
 in 1995, is still being investigated by a military prosecutor.
 In several earlier cases of deaths in custody or deaths reportedly due to police
 brutality, investigations and trials are still dragging on, years later.
 b. Disappearance.-There were no reports of politically motivated disappearances.
 c. Torture or Other Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or Punishment .-The
 Constitution prohibits torture and inhuman or degrading punishment or treatment,
 and these prohiitions were generally respected in practice.
 
 
 1076
 
 There were nevertheless, reports that police continued to beat detainees, espe-
 cially Roma. For example, Amnesty International reported that in July police ofi-
 cers in Targu-Mures mistreated three Romani minors, Gheorghe Notar Jr., loan
 Otvos, and Rupi Stoica, who were held for 5 days in a Center for the Protection of
 Minors on suspicion of theft of a watch. A representative of a local human rights
 organization observed bruises on the youths' arms and legs, which he said ap-
 peared very similar, as if they resulted from beatings with the same object." None-
 theless, requests for medical treatment were rejected.
 Judicial cases involving military personnel and the police (who fall under the ju-
 risdiction of the military prosecutor) are tried in a military court system. Local and
 international human rights groups criticize this system, especially investigations
 conducted by the military prosecutor's office of police personnel accused of abuses.
 These critics claim that the investigations are unnecessarily lengthy and often pur-
 posefully inconclusive, that the military courts sometimes block proper investigation
 of police abuses, and that these mechanisms inhibit prosecution or discipline of po-
 lice misconduct.
 Prison conditions are poor, facilities are overcrowded and unhealthy, and medical
 assistance is meager. Several human rights organizations credibly reported that
 abuses occurred in prisons. Prisons continued to use the "cell boss" system in which
 some prisoners are designated to be in semiofficial charge of other prisoners. During
 four visits in 1996, members of the Romanian Helsinki Committee observed over-
 crowding and precarious hygienic conditions. The single penitentiary hospital also
 suffers from overcrowding and too few doctors. Prisoners who are pregnant gen-
 erally are not transferred to the penitentiary hospital until the sixth month of preg-
 nancy, and they suffer from an inadequate diet.
 The Government permits prison visits by human rights monitors.
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile.-The law forbids the detention of anyone
 for more than 24 hours without an arrest order from a prosecutor, who may order
 detention for up to 30 days. Detainees have the right to apply for bail and may ask
 for a hearing before a judge. Such a request must be granted within 24 hours. In
 the absence of a request, however, the authorities may hold a person for up to 65
 days without a court order.
 Police often do not inform citizens of their rights. The law requires the authorities
 to inform arrestees of the charges against them and of their right to an attorney
 at all stages of the legal process. Police must notify defendants of this right in a
 language they understand before obtaining a statement. However, the prosecutor's
 office may delay action on a request for a lawyer for up to 5 days from the date
 of arrest.
 Under the law, minors detained by police and placed under guard in a Center for
 the Protection. of Minors are not considered by judicial authorities to be "in deten-
 tion or under arrest." Since the provisions of the Penal Code do not apply to minors
 in these centers until their cases have been referred to a prosecutor, police are per-
 mitted to question them without restrictions and may hold those suspected of crimi-
 nal offenses in such centers for up to 30 days. This law appears to be in conflict
 with the Constitution, and both Amnesty nternational and local human rights
 groups have called on the Government to change it.
 Exile was not used as a means of punishment.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial.-Under the terms of a 1992 law, the judicial branch
 is independent of other government branches. However, 5 of the 15 members of the
 Superior Council of the Magistrature, which controls the selection, promotion, trans-
 fer, and sanctioning of judges, are prosecutors subordinate to a presidentially ap-
 pointed Prosecutor General, and all Council members are nominated by Parliament.
 Certain labor unions have alleged that the courts side with the Government in rul-
 ing on the legality of strikes and other labor actions. The courts have ruled in favor
 of the workers in a labor action against a government entity only once. Although
 the judicial system was at times subject to executive branch influence, it dem-
 onstrated increasing independence.
 The 1992 law reestablished a four-tier legal system, including appellate courts,
 which had ceased to exist under Communist rule. Defendants have final recourse
 to the Supreme Court or, for constitutional matters, to the Constitutional Court es-
 tablished in 1992.
 The law provides for fair public trial, and defendants benefit from a presumption
 of innocence. The Criminal Code requires that an attorney be appointed for a de-
 fendant who cannot afford legal representation or is otherwise unable to select coun-
 sel. In practice, the local bar association provides attorneys to indigents and is com-
 pensated by the Ministry of Justice. Either a plaintiff or defendant may appeal.
 These provisions of the law are respected in practice. The law provides that confes-
 
 
 1077
 
 sions extracted as a result of police brutality may be withdrawn by the accused
 when brought before the court.
 There were no reports of political prisoners.
 f. Arbitrary Inteference With Prvacy, Family, Home, or Correspondence.-The
 Constitution provides for protection against the search of a residence without a war-
 rant, but this protection is subordinate to "national security or public order!' The
 1992 National Security Law defines national security very broadly and lists as
 threats not only crimes such as terrorism, treason, espionage, assassination, and
 armed insurrection but also totalitarian, racist, and anti-Semitic actions or at-
 tempts to change the existing national borders. Security officials may enter resi-
 dences without proper authorization from a prosecutor if they deem a threat to na-
 tional security "imminent."
 The Constitution further states that the privacy of legal means of communication
 is inviolable; thus, the Romanian Intelligence Service (SRI) is legally prohibited
 from engaging in political acts (for example, monitoring the communications of a po-
 litical party).-However, the law allows security services to engage in such monitor-
 ing on national security grounds.
 Similarly, although the law requires the SRI to obtain a warrant from a Rrosecu-
 tor to carry out inteligence activities involving "threats to national security, it may
 engage in a wide variety of operations, including "technical operations," to deter-
 mine if a situation meets the legal definition of a threat to national security.
 In 1996 there were occasional instances of interference with individual citizens'
 right to privacy. A number of citizens and diplomats from two foreign countries
 credibly reported opened'mail or baggage, personal surveillance, and harassment.
 Protestant church groups also continued to allege that current or former govern-
 ment intelligence services' agents entered their members' homes and offices, opened
 their mail, and tapped their telephones.
 Section 2. Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Pres.-Although the Constitution provides for freedom
 of expression and prohibits censorship, it limits the bounds of free expression by
 prohibiting "defamation of the country." An updated Penal Code passed by Par-
 liament in September rectified many of the shortcomings of the former Communist-
 era code, although the new version was criticized in some quarters because it re-
 tains jail terms for those convicted of libel or slander.
 Journalists Tana Ardeleanu and Sorin Rosca-Stanescu of Ziua, a then-pro-opposi-
 tion daily, were convicted of seditious libel and sentenced to serve prison terms. The
 charges were filed in connection with an article that claimed former President Ion
 Iliescu was recruited by the Soviet KGB intelligence service when he was a student
 in Moscow. Freepress advocates were concerned that the outcome may set a prece-
 dent, since the Ziua journalists were the first well-known reporters convicted for
 defamation of the authorities.
 Radu Mazare and Constantin Cumpana, two journalists who published an article
 in the Constanta daily Telegraf about an illegal contract in the city council, were
 sentenced for libeling local elected authorities, one of whom, a member of an opposi-
 tion party, brought a private criminal suit against the journalists. They lost their
 appeal and received 7-month sentences. Prior to leaving office, President lliescu par-
 doned them. Lesser-known cases involving journalists and Penal Code provisions for
 libel were also active before the November elections.
 The independent media continued to grow. Several hundred daily and weekly
 newspapers are published. Several private television stations broadcast nationwide,
 with the largest reaching approximately 46 percent of the country and 72 percent
 of the urban market. As of September, 53 private television stations and 110 radio
 stations were broadcasting. A sizable number of households are wired for cable, giv-
 ing significant portions of the population access to both private and foreign broad-
 casts.7lowever, Romanian State Television (RTV) and Radio Romania remained the
 only national broadcasters capable of reaching the bulk of the rural population.
 The ability to broadcast nationwide by satellite allowed stations to make a signifi-
 cant impact on the June local elections; electoral campaigns were conducted in a di-
 verse and competitive media market. The media's new role in nationwide election
 campaigns made them the target of some heated debates and public complaints re-
 garding biased reporting from politicians on both sides.
 The 1994 law that established a bard of directors for RTV, appointed by Par-
 lianent, was still not fully implemented by year's end. In 1995 and 1996, Par-
 liament, led by the opposition, refused to approve one of RTV's two candidates for
 the bard, and new elections to choose another nominee failed to attract the nec-
 essary number of voters. The board cannot convene to choose a director for RTV
 until all 13 of its members have been confirmed by Parliament; at present the board
 
 
 1078
 lacks the 1 aforementioned RTV representative. The new Government, with Par-
 liamentary approval, has appointed an interim director, who began his tenure by
 replacing a number of department heads and news directors. Prior to the November
 elections, studies indicated that state newscasts covered the President, the Govern-
 ment, and the ruling party significantly more than the opposition parties, leaving
 state broadcasters open to criticism.
 Foreign news publications may be imported and distributed freely, but high costs
 limit their circulation.
 Academic freedom is respected.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association.-The Constitution provides for
 freedom of assembly, and the Government generally respected that right in practice.
 The law on public assembly provides for the right for citizens to assemble peacefully
 while unarmed but states that meetings must not interfere with other economic or
 social activities and may not be held near locations such as hospitals, airports, or
 military installations. Organizers of demonstrations must inform local authorities
 and police before the events The authorities may forbid a public gathering by notify-
 ing the organizers in writing within 48 hours of receipt of the request. The law pro-
 hibits the organization of, or participation in, a counterdemonstration held at the
 same time as a scheduled public gathering.
 The law forbids public gatherings to espouse Communist, racist, or Fascist
 ideologies or to commit actions contrary to public order or national security. It pun-
 ishes unauthorized demonstrations or other violations by imprisonment and fines.
 Constitutional provisions and laws on free assembly were generally respected in
 1996.
 To reduce the number of small political parties, a new law approved by Par-
 liament raised the number of members a arty needs to obtain legal status from
 251 to 10,000. Associations may still obtain legal status with proof of only 251 mem-
 bers.
 c. Freedom of Religion.-The Constitution provides for religious freedom, and the
 Government does not generally impede the observance of religious belief. However,
 several Protestant denominations, including Jehovah's Witnesses, made credible al-
 legations that low-level government officials harassed them and impeded their ef-
 forts at proselytizing and worship. In particular, foreign missionaries often experi-
 enced delays in obtaining long-term visas. An international conference of Jehovah's
 Witnesses, scheduled for June in Bucharest, was banned by the Government follow-
 ing public attacks by the Romanian Orthodox Church; a national conference later
 took place without incident in Cluj.
 Under the provisions of a 1948 decree, the Government recognizes 15 religions
 whose clergy may receive state financial support. The State Secretariat for Religious
 Affairs has licensed 385 other faiths, oranizations, and foundations as religious as-
 sociations under two 1924 laws on juriical entities, entitling them to juridical sta-
 tus as well as to exemptions from income and customs taxes. But religious associa-
 tions may not found churches and are not permitted to perform rites of baptism,
 marriage, or burial. The Romanian Orthodox Church, to which approximately 86
 percent of the population nominally adheres, predominates. The official registration
 of faiths and organizations is extremely slow because of bureaucratic delays.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign Travel, Emigration, and Re-
 patriation.r-the Government places no restrictions on travel within the country, ex-
 cept in the case of certain small areas used for military purposes. Citizens who wish
 to change their places of work or residence do not face any official barriers. The law
 stipulates that citizens have the right to travel abroad freely, to emigrate, and to
 return. In practice, citizens freely exercise these rights.
 In 1991 Romania signed the 1951 U.N. Convention Relating to the Status of Refu-
 gees and its 1967 Protocol, and in March a Refugee Law was passed, providing im-
 plementing legislation. The new Law established a refugee office within the General
 Directorate of Border Police, Passpot, Aliens, and Migration Issues to determine
 eligibility for refugee status. The nistry of the Interior, in which the refugee office
 is found, was also assigned responsibility for providing accommodations for asylum
 seekers and refugees.
 The'Government cooperates with the U.N. High Commissioner for Refugees
 (UNHCR) and other humanitarian organizations in assisting refugees but does not
 provide any direct monetary or physical support for them. The issue of first asylum
 did not arise in 1996. There was one report of forced return of persons to a country
 where they feared perecution: In March a Syrian citizen was forced to return to
 Syria, where Amnesty International had reported that he was previously imprisoned
 for political reasons.
 
 
 1079
 
 As of July 31, a total of 887 refugees and asylum seekers depended on the
 UNHCR for their subsistence, including food, accommodation, clothing, medical as-
 sistance, and language or vocational training.
 Section 3. Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens to Change Their Govern-
 ment
 The Constitution provides citizens with the right to change their government
 through periodic and free elections held on the basis of universal suffrage.
 Legilation passed in June prohibits government-a ppointed prefects from dismiss-
 ing elected mayors and local council members for alleged abuses of authority prior
 to a binding legal ruling on the charges. (In recent years, government-appointed pre-
 fects had dismissed from office for various alleged abuses 133 freely elected mayors,
 116 of whom were politically independent or from opposition parties.)
 The general elections in Noveniber saw the first genuinely democratic transfer of
 power since 1928 and resulted in a victor for the two main allied opposition coali-
 tions, the Romanian Democratic Convention (CDR) and the Union of-Social Demo-
 crats (USD). Out of 343 seats in the Chamber of Deputies and 143 in the Senate,
 the two opposition coalitions together won 175 and 76, respectively. The two coali-
 tions also have the support of the Hungarian Democratic Union of Romania
 (UDMR), which controls 25 seats in the Chamber and 11 in the Senate. The local
 elections in June also gave the former opposition greater representation in city halls
 and county councils. Both elections were generally free and fair.
 There are no legal restrictions on the participation of women in government or
 politics, but societal attitudes constitute a significant impediment. Women hold only
 5.9 percent of the seats in Parliament and no ministerial positions.
 The Constitution and electoral legislation grant each recognized ethnic minority
 one representative in the Chamber of Deputies, provided that the minority's politi-
 cal organization obtains at least 5 percent of the average number of valid votes
 needed to elect a deputy outright (only some 1,784 votes in the 1996 elections). Or-
 ganizations representing 15 minority groups elected deputies under this provision
 in 1996. The ethnic Hungrians, represented by the UDMR, obtained parliamentary
 representation through the normal electoral process. Roma are underrepresented in
 Pa~rliament, due to a low turnout of Roma at the polls and internal divisions that
 worked agint the consolidation of votes for one Romani candidate, organization,
 or party. They have not increased their parliamentary representation beyond the
 one seat provided them through the Constitution and electoral legislation.
 Section 4. Governmental Attitude Regarding International and Nongovernmental In-
 vestigation of Alleged Violations of Human Rights
 Domestic human rights monitoring groups include the Romanian Helsinki Com-
 mittee (APADOR-CH), the independent -Romanian Society for Human Rights
 (SIRDO) the League for the Defense of Human Rights (LADO), the Romanian Insti-
 tute for human Rights and several issue-specific groups such as the Young Genera-
 tion of Roma and te Center for Crisis Intervention and Study, also a Romani non-
 governmental organization (NGO). Other groups, such as political parties and trade
 unions, continued to have sections monitoring the observance of human rights.
 These groups, as well as international human rights organizations, functioned
 freely with out government interference and visited prisoners and detainees. How-
 ever, the authorities have not been cooperative with all human rights groups. The
 General Inspectorate of the police in the Ministry of Interior has refused to cooper-
 ate with the Romanan Helsinki Committee since January 1994, when RTV aired
 a prime-time 2-hour documentary prepared by the Committee.
 Section 5. Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion, Disability, Language, or So-
 cial Status
 The Constitution forbids discrimination based on race, nationality, ethnic origin,
 language religion, sex, opinion and political allegiance, wealth, or social back-
 ground. in practice, however, the Government does not effectively enforce these pro-
 visions, and women, Roma, and other minorities are subject to various forms of ex-
 tralegal discrimination.
 Women.-Violence against women, particularly rape, continued to be a serious
 problem. Both human rights groups and women's rights groups credibly reported
 that domestic violence also is common. There are no support facilities for victims,
 and media coverage is virtually nonexistent. According to government statistics, 613
 women were raped during the first 6 months of 1996. o secution of rape is difficult
 because it requires both a medical certificate and a witness. A rapist will not be
 punished if he marries the victim.
 Both the Constitution and international conventions that Romania has signed
 grant women and men equal rights. In practice, however, the Government does not
 
 
 1080
 enforce these provisions, nor do the authorities focus attention or resources on wom-
 en's issues.
 Few recourses are available for women experiencing economic discrimination. The
 Government acknowledged in 1995 that despite existing laws women have experi-
 enced a higher rate of unemployment than men and have earned lower average
 wages since 1989, despite educational e     Women occupy few influential posi-
 tions in the private sector. In 1996, to aaes tese conerns, the Government cre-
 ated a department in the Ministry of Labor and Social Protection (MOLSP) to ad-
 vance women's concerns and family policies. The department organizes programs for
 women, proposes new laws and monitors legislation for sexual hiss. It also targets
 resources to train women for skilled professions, especially in rural sreas, and to
 address problems of single mothers.
 Chidren.-The Government administers health care and public education pro-
 grams for children, despite scarce domestic resources. Most resources for children
 still flow mainly from international agencies and NGO's.
 There was no perceptible societal pattern of abuse against children. Nevertheless,
 large numbers of impoverished an apparently homeless but not necessarily or-
 phaned children roamed the streets of the larger cities-2,000 to 2,500 in Bucharest
 alone. The Government does not have statistics defining the scope of the problem,
 but some NGO's remain acutely concerned that deteriorating economic conditions
 contribute to increased juvenile delinquency and vandalism. NGO's working with
 children continued to cite special concern aut the number of minors detained in
 jail and prison and were seeking alternative solutions, such as parole for juveniles.
 Because time served while awaiting trial counts as part of the prison sentence but
 does not count towards time to be served in a juvenile detention center, some mi-
 nors actually requested prison sentences. The sexual exploitation of children, for ex-
 ample, child pornography and child prostitution, has attracted domestic press atten-
 tion, and the police reported 676 cases of sexual abuse involving minors through the
 end of August. The law does not expressly outlaw pedophilia; instead pedophiles are
 charged with rape, corporal harm, and sexual corruption. Due to the minimal pun-
 ishment given to _p   ies, police have little incentive to investigate cases of child
 prostitution or child pornography.
 People With Disabllities.--ifficult economic conditions and serious budgetary con-
 straints contributed to very difficult living conditions for those with physical or men-
 tal disabilities. Many disabled people cannot make use of government-provided
 transportation discounts because public transport does not have facilitated access.
 Accessibility for the disabled to buildings and public transportation is not mandated
 by law.
 Religious Minorities.-After the signing of the Romanian-Hungarian bilateral
 treaty in September, the extreme wing of the nationalist press focused its attention
 on the Hungarian minority. However, the fringe press continued to publish anti-Se-
 mitic harangues, to the discomfiture of the small Jewish co unity (numbering less
 than 15,000). Former President Iliescu and most mainstream politicians have pub-
 licly condemned anti-Semitism, other types of racism, and xenophobia.
 National/Racial/Ethnic Minorities.-The Government created a Consultative
 Council for National Minorities in 1993 to monitor specific problems of persons be-
 longing to ethnic minorities, to establish contacts with minority groups, to submit
 proposals for draft legislation and administrative measures, to maintain permanent
 linkcs with local authorities and the Government, and to investigate complaints.
 Many minorities and other observers have claimed that the Government seldom
 a=     on the Council's recommendations. There was no action by year's end on a bill
 restoring nationalized, nonreligious communal property to minority communities,
 since the authorities had not yet received a catalog of the properties in question
 from these communities. The new Government has promoted the director of the
 Council to ministerial status: the new Minister for National Minorities is an ethnic
 Hungarian parliamentarian from the UDMR.
 The 1.6 million ethnic Hungarians constitute the largest and most vocal minority,
 and the UDMR holds 36 seats in the Parliament. There was no violence in 1996
 associated with ethnic Hungarian issues, despite the usual extremist rhetoric from
 the Party of Romanian National Unity (PUNR) and the signing of the Iomanian-
 Hungarian Treaty, an act that was unpopular with the extremist political parties.
 The treat ended 5 years of negotiations and included commitments on observance
 of the Helsi Final Act and the status of Romania's ethnic Hungarians. Hungary
 dropped demands for ethnic autonomy for Romania's Hungran minority in ex-
 change for provisions that provide for national minorities to be educated in their na-
 tive language at all levels (according to local needs), to use the minority language
 with administrative and judicial authorities, to display road and street signs inthe
 minority language in areas where the minority constitutes a substantial number of
 
 
 1081
 the local population (percentage undefined), and respect for the rights of national
 minorities in conformity with pertinent international documents.
 A 1995 Law on Education deals with the right of the Hugra     ethnic minority
 to be educated in their own language. Although the law was deemed by the Organi-
 zation for Security and Cooperations's High Commissioner for National Minorities
 to be in line with European and international standards, it rescinded the rights of
 Hungarians to take university entrance examinations in Hungarian for those sub-
 jects not taught in Hungarian. It also dictated that certain vocational schools use
 only Romanian, which some Hungarians charge would disadvantage ethnic Hungar-
 ians who work in these areas. However, implementation of the law has been post-
 poned until 1997, and the Government has accepted OSCE review of the implemen-
 tation process.
 Roma continued to be subjected to discrimination, harassment, beatings, and vio-
 lence. The cases of those responsible for the burning of 11 Romani homes in May
 1994 and the beating of Roma and burning of 3 Romani houses in January 1995
 are still being reviewed by the courts.
 Section 6. Worker Rights
 a. The Right of Association.-All workers except public employees have the right
 to associate freely, to engage in collective bargaining, and to form and join labor
 unions without previous authorization. Limitations on the right to strike apply only
 in industries that the Government considers critical to the public interest. No work-
 ers may be forced to join or withdraw from a union, and union officials who resign
 from elected positions and return to the regular work force are protected against
 employer retaliation. The majority of workers are members of about 18 nationwide
 trade union confederations and smaller independent trade unions.
 Union members complain that unions must submit grievances to government-
 sponsored conciliation before initiating a strike and are frustrated with the courts'
 propensity to declare illegal the majority of strikes on which they have been asked
 to rule. Past studies have indicated that the labor legislation adopted in 1991 falls
 short of International Labor Organization standards in several areas, including free
 election of union representatives, binding arbitration, and financial liability of strike
 organizers. Although the 1991 legislation is supportive of collective bargaining as an
 institution, the contracts that result are not always enforceable in a consistent man-
 ner. Unions representing divergent sectors of the economy carried out strikes, or
 threatened to strike, throughout 1996. The Vacaroiu Government did not follow up
 on the 1995 ILO recommendation that the Government take steps to rescind all
 measures taken against suspended union leaders involved in a 1993 strike by rail-
 way locomotive engineers. The union leaders, who had initially defied a Supreme
 Court ruling to suspend the strike for 170 days, were fired by the national railway
 company when the strike ended.
 The 1991 legislation stipulates that labor unions should be free from government
 or political party control, and the Government has honored this in practice. Unions
 are free to engage in political activity and have done so.
 Labor unions may freely form or join federations and affiliate with international
 bodies. The National Confederation of Trade Unions-Fratia (CNSLR-Fratia) and the
 National Union Bloc (BNS) are affiliated with the International Confederation of
 Free Trade Unions and the European Trade Union Confederation. The Confed-
 eration of Democratic Trade Union of Romania (CSDR) is affiliated with the Euro-
 pan Trade Union Confederation. Alfa cartel is affiliated with the World Labor Con-
 ederation. Representatives of foreign and international organizations freely visit
 and advise Romanian trade unionists.
 b. The Right to Organize and Bargain Collectively.-Workers have the right to
 bargain collectively under the 1991 legislation, but collective bargaining efforts are
 complicated by continued state control over most industrial enterprises and the ab-
 sence of independent management representatives. Basic wage scales for employees
 of state-owned enterprises are established through collective bargaining with the
 State (see Section 6.e.).
 There are no export processing zones.
 c. Prohibition of Forced or Compulsory Labor.-The Constitution prohibits forced
 or compulsory labor. The MOLSP effectively enforces this prohibition.
 d. Minimum Age for Employment of Children.-The minimum age for employment
 is 16 years, but children as young as the ages of 14 or 15 may work with the con-
 sent of their parents or guardians, although only "according to their physical devel-
 opment, aptitude, and knowledge." Working children under the age of 16 have the
 right to continue their education, and the law obliges employers to assist in this re-
 giad. The MOISP has the authority to impose fines and close sections of factories
 to ensure compliance with the law, which it enforces effectively.
 
 
 1082
 e. Acceptable Conditions of Work.-Most wage rates are established through col-
 lective bargaining at the enterprise level. However, they are based on minimum
 wages for given economic sectors and categories of workers which the Government
 sets after negotiations with industry representatives and the labor confederations.
 Minimum wage rates are generally observed and enforced. In 1996 the minimum
 monthy wage of $28 did not keep pace with inflation and did not provide a decent
 standad of    g   or a worker and family. However, the Government still partly
 subsidiz es basic necessities such as housing and medical care. The Labor Codepr.-
 vides for a standard workweek of 40 hours or 5 days, with overtime to be paid for
 weekend or holiday work or work in excess of 40 hours. It also includes a requir-
 ment for a 24-hour rest period in the workweek, although most workers receive 2
 das off. Paid holidays range from 18 to 24 days annually, depending on the employ-
 _ee a length of service. The law requires employers to pay addiional  nefits and a-
 lowances t workers engaged i particulary dangerous or difficult occupations.
 Some labor organizations press for healthier, safer working conditions on behalf
 of their members. The MOLSP has established safety standards for most industries
 and is responsible for enforcing them. However, it lacks sufficient trained personnel
 for i    ion and enforcement, and employers generally ignore its recommenda-
 tions. Although they have the right to refuse dangerous wor asinenta, workers
 seldom invokve it in practice, appearing to value increased pay over a safe and
 healthful work environment. Neither the Government nor industry, still mostly
 state owned, has the resources necessary to improve significantly health and safety
 conditions in the workplace.
