 ROMANIA
 Romania is a highly centralized Communist state. The Romanian
 Communist Party, led since 1965 by President Nicolae Ceausescu,
 is described by the Constitution as "the leading political
 force in the whole of society." Through the Government, the
 party seeks to control every significant aspect of the
 country's life. In practice, the bureaucratic system leaves
 varying degrees of latitude to local officials to carry out
 central directives as well as to abuse their powers in
 violation of constitutional rights. Almost all aspects of
 life proceed within narrow bounds defined by the party and its
 leader. Political dissent is not tolerated. Criticism of the
 regime and its policies is suppressed by the ubiquitous
 Department of State Security.
 Maintaining its policy of repaying its foreign debt
 obligations as soon as possible, Romania in 1986 continued to
 make drastic efforts to increase productivity and conserve
 energy and raw materials. Domestic shortages of consumer and
 food items have continued to worsen, especially during the
 winter months. Many basic foodstuffs are rationed, and meat
 is largely unavailable. Mandatory energy conservation
 measures result in many Romanian homes being without heat or
 cooking gas for much of the winter.
 In the area of human rights, major discrepancies exist between
 generally accepted standards, for example as embodied in the
 Helsinki Final Act of the Conference on Security and
 Cooperation in Europe, and Romanian practice. Although
 Romania is a signatory of the Final Act and the Romanian
 Constitution guarantees many rights, the standards set in both
 documents are not precise on many issues, so that the
 guarantees are often meaningless in Romanian practice. The
 party, through the Government, continues to limit and often
 deny the right to free speech and free assembly and
 association, and to apply restrictions to religious practice.
 However, the Government has, within severely circumscribed
 limits, moved to accommodate some human rights concerns.
 In 1986 the Government acted on several longstanding human
 rights issues. It agreed to permit the printing of some 5,000
 Bibles for Baptist churches in Romania, with the promise of
 more in subsequent years based on need. It declared an
 amnesty in June for persons convicted of relatively minor
 crimes and also released several longer-term prisoners
 identified with issues of religious freedom and allowed them
 to emigrate to the United States. American religious
 travelers reported that they remained able to visit persons
 and places of their choosing, although they or their contacts
 subsequently have been questioned by the authorities. At the
 same time, other aspects of the Government's treatment of
 religious groups and the demolition of a number of places of
 worship, including a major Jewish synagogue and a large
 Seventh-Day Adventist church, in the name of urban
 reconstruction, caused major concern.
 In 1986 the Government continued its "principled opposition"
 to emigration, discouraging individual cases by complicated,
 slow-moving procedures and coercive tactics. Potential
 emigrants often must wait several years before they receive
 exit approval, although the hardships endured by such
 intending emigrants have been reduced considerably by a 1985
 U.S.-Romanian understanding on emigration procedures.
 Departures for the United States, Israel, and the Federal
 Republic of Germany in 1986 totaled 15,222, mainly under the
 
 
 1013
 ROMANIA
 rubric of family reunification. This figure represents a
 decline from the 1985 total of 17,350.
 RESPECT FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
 Section 1 Respect for the Integrity of the Person, Including
 Freedom from:
 a. Political Killing
 There were no substantiated reports of political killings in
 Romania during 1986. There were allegations that the death of
 an ethnic Hungarian actor, Arpad Visky, was caused by the
 security police, but there is other information contesting
 this charge. At the same time, no Romanian investigation was
 ever made public in the case of Gheorghe-Emil Ursu, a detainee
 who died in November 1985 under unexplained circumstances.
 Some sources claim the prisoner suffered beatings at the hands
 of the police which led to his death. The available
 information, though not definitive, appears to lend credence
 to these reports.
 b. Disappearance
 There were no substantiated reports of politically motivated
 disappearances. However, family and friends of persons
 arrested on political charges are frequently left unaware of
 their circumstances and location for long periods of time.
 c. Torture and Cruel, Inhuman, or Degrading Treatment or
 Punishment
 There were numerous reports of mistreatment of persons while
 in Romanian prisons or police custody. Acts of violence
 perpetrated by police authorities attempting to obtain
 information are frequently reported. Romanian authorities
 also use physical and mental degradation to intimidate those
 caught or suspected of wrongdoing. Persons detained for
 questioning are often held incommunicado and kept for long
 periods without sleep, food, or toilet facilities. Numerous
 reports say those caught attempting to leave the country
 illegally, for example, are subject to extreme physical and
 mental harassment, often prior to being given only relatively
 light sentences if they are first offenders. Prisoners also
 report that, in the case of those who have received long
 sentences for political offenses, wives are sometimes
 pressured to divorce their spouses.
 Among numerous other reports of mistreatment, the most common
 complaints concern cells which are badly ventilated and poorly
 heated, bad food in extremely small quantities, difficult
 working conditions, long periods of isolation, excessive use
 of force by guards, overcrowding, and segregation of persons
 deemed "dangerous to the State" because of religious belief or
 for other reasons. Several prisoners reportedly have been
 denied outside medical care or even the use of medicines
 brought to their prison by family members. By law, some
 Romanian convicts are not required to work; the State uses
 this provision to keep some prisoners effectively in solitary
 confinement, whereas others in this category, whom the State
 does not wish to segregate, reportedly are made to sign
 "voluntary" requests to be allowed to work.
 
 
 1014
 ROMANIA
 d. Arbitrary Arrest, Detention, or Exile
 Persons detained for investigation often are held
 incommunicado. Detention of varying duration, usually a
 matter of hours, followed by release without charge, continues
 to be widespread. Such arbitrary detention may be repeated
 several times, with subjects called back for additional
 lengthy interrogation and threatened with further harassment
 or punishment for their actions. This treatment is
 particularly common for those religious activists who are
 detained. There is no provision for bail.
 The scope of Romanian criminal law is broad enough to insure
 that persons coming under official scrutiny may be convicted
 of some offense. Examples of typical charges are "defaming
 the Socialist order" for speaking frankly to a foreigner;
 "disturbing the peace" or "illegal" assembly for private
 prayer meetings in the home; "social parasitism" if unemployed
 but technically guilty of no other offense; or "distributing
 literature without a license"--a felony--if found attempting
 to hand out free Bibles. A June 1986 presidential decree
 granted amnesty for certain offenses to most Romanians
 sentenced to prison terms of less than 5 years and also
 reduced longer sentences. This action freed a number of
 persons imprisoned on relatively minor charges related to
 their religious activities.
 Exile is not a sanction under Romanian law, although there
 have been cases of persons "temporarily exiled" by being taken
 to a remote location and detained.
 Romanian citizens are required to perform involuntary labor,
 but for the m3st part this seems to fall within the area of
 "civic obligations." The labor exactions are general
 throughout the population. For example, a 1971 law, amended in
 1985, requires up to 6 days' unpaid labor per year from each
 citizen. The 1985 amendment, however, specifically provides
 that additional tax payments can be substituted for days not
 worked. Sanctions for nonperformance are light, and in many
 jurisdictions the requirement for contributions of work (or
 additional tax payments for days not worked) is apparently not
 enforced. Students 11 years of age and older perform
 "patriotic work" in agriculture or elsewhere, sometimes 8 to
 10 hours daily for several weeks, especially during the
 harvest. The Union of Communist Youth organizes "youth
 brigades" for this purpose. Some religious groups reportedly
 have been "encouraged" by local authorities to perform unpaid
 labor in the fields on Sundays as a means of securing official
 approval for church building permits or other benefits for
 their congregations.
 e. Denial of Fair Public Trial
 Although Romanian law sets standards for proving guilt, in
 practice an accused person often is considered guilty until
 proven innocent. The ability of the accused to defend himself
 effectively in a fair trial can be severely limited, especially
 in politically sensitive cases. Although authorities
 occasionally take pains to display an appearance of regard for
 correct procedure and due process of law, Western observers
 continue to gain the impression that being brought to trial in
 Romania is in many cases an almost sure guarantee of
 conviction. In 1986 there were clear cases of fabrication of
 evidence and suborning and intimidation of witnesses by
 prosecuting authorities, as well as of what appeared to be
 
 
 1015
 
 ROMANIA
 violations of Romanian law regarding court procedures.
 Defendants are often tried without counsel or are represented
 by state-appointed attorneys whose role appears to be that of
 apologizing for defendants' offenses. Members of the
 judiciary, like other officials, are subject to the authority
 of the Communist Party.
 An example in 1986 of a trial which appeared politically
 motivated was the case of loan Ruta. Shortly after Ruta, the
 head of an enterprise employing 150 people, applied to join his
 wife, who had elected to remain permanently in the United
 States while on a business trip, he was charged with accepting
 bribes. Observers found the evidence questionable and
 inconclusive, with defense witnesses too intimidated to appear
 in court. Ruta was convicted and sentenced to 7 years in
 prison.
 Most trials are held in public, though secret trials are
 common where state security is involved and may also be
 permitted in certain other cases. Foreign observers in 1986
 continued to be able to attend public trials of high local or
 international interest.
 It is impossible accurately to estimate the number of
 political prisoners in Romania, though the number could be
 several thousand. This includes those convicted for
 attempting to leave Romania illegally, "parasitism" (no
 visible legal means of support), illegal economic activities,
 and protesting against the political or social system.
 f. Arbitrary Interference with Privacy, Family, Home, or
 Correspondence
 Romanian laws and regulations governing the security apparatus
 sanction a high degree of interference with the individual and
 the family. The interference is somewhat mitigated by the
 impossibility of total control, by uneven application of
 regulations, and by official corruption.
 Deliberate and arbitrary interference with the privacy of the
 family, home, and correspondence is a frequent occurrence.
 Searches are made of private homes, persons, and personal
 effects without search warrants or probable cause that a crime
 may have been committed. Militiamen at checkpoints located on
 most roads leading out of the cities and at major highway
 intersections in the countryside randomly stop and search
 vehicles as a matter of course. Persons on tram cars and city
 buses often are asked for identity documents and have shopping
 bags and personal belongings checked by the authorities.
 The authorities frequently enter homes on the pretext of
 looking for building code violations, excessive consumption of
 electricity, illegal use of electrical appliances, etc. These
 searches facilitate the discovery of other items, such as
 forbidden books and publications, religious materials, or any
 other evidence of "wrongdoing."
 Violation of privacy of the person also arises from the
 antiabortion campaign. Mandatory pregnancy tests and physical
 examinations take place bimonthly for many female workers in
 order to insure that pregnancies are discovered and carried to
 term.
 Complaints about interference with both domestic and
 international correspondence continue. Letters to or from
 
 
 1016
 ROMANIA
 persons of interest to the authorities often never arrive at
 their destination. People have reportedly been questioned by
 the security police about topics discussed in letters which
 were delivered seemingly unopened. On other occasions, people
 have been questioned about statements made in letters sent
 abroad but never received by the addressees.
 The Government has the capability to monitor domestic and
 international telephone calls and appears to do so frequently.
 Section 2 Respect for Civil Liberties, Including:
 a. Freedom of Speech and Press
 These freedoms are severely restricted. While the Constitution
 guarantees freedom of speech and press, it prohibits their use
 for any purpose "hostile to the Socialist system and the
 interests of the working people," as defined by the State and
 party. Similarly, the Penal Code prohibits "propaganda with a
 Fascist (as defined by the State) character delivered in
 public by any means.. .(or)... the undertaking of any action for
 the changing of the Socialist system.... " It also prohibits
 acts "which would result in a danger to state security;" these
 offenses are punishable by prison terms of up to 15 years.
 The Government seeks to control the domestic dissemination of
 information in a variety of ways. Though official censorship
 was abolished some years ago, all media are state owned,
 rigidly controlled, and used primarily as the vehicle for
 government and party propaganda. Western radio broadcasts in
 the Romanian language are not jammed and are a major source of
 both foreign and domestic news for the Romanian people.
 Western publications are not generally available, although
 foreign cultural centers and libraries are open to the public
 and are allowed to distribute limited quantities of Western
 periodicals. The unauthorized importation or distribution of
 foreign publications is forbidden. In 1986 there were
 frequent reports of confiscations of foreign-source materials,
 including Hungarian language publications, at the border.
 Romanian libraries carefully control access to "restricted"
 materials such as prewar historical texts. For live theater,
 official boards must approve all new productions before the
 opening performance. Serial numbers and type-face samples of
 all typewriters must be registered with the authorities, and
 the use of duplicating machines is strictly regulated.
 b. Freedom of Peaceful Assembly and Association
 The Government attempts to control all group activity. No
 organization independent of government or party influence is
 permitted to exist. Peaceful assembly and association without
 permission are usually short-lived and may bring severe
 penalties to those involved. Citizens are strongly
 discouraged from making contact with foreigners and are
 required to obtain permission in advance to attend functions
 held by non-Romanians.   New decrees promulgated late in 1985
 but never officially published (and often not obeyed) further
 discourage contacts with foreigners and strengthen the
 requirement that all such contacts be reported to the
 authorities within 24 hours.
 The Constitution guarantees the right to join a union. As
 noted earlier, however, it also enshrines the Communist Party
 as "the leading political force in the whole of society,"
 which applies specifically with respect to labor unions and
 
 
 1017
 ROMANIA
 other "mass and public organizations." Trade unions
 independent of the party are thus prohibited, and workers do
 not have the right to form associations, elect
 representatives, or affiliate with international organizations
 except through the official unions.
 Workers do not have the right to organize or bargain
 collectively. While they nominally have a direct voice in the
 management of the workplace through the unions that all must
 join, in many factories the senior party official is also the
 union's chief executive, and the primary function of the
 unions is to channel party doctrine and directives to the
 workers. Unions also dispense social benefits, such as
 vacations at union-owned hotels (for which the member pays
 only a fraction of the real cost), low-interest loans, and
 access to cultural, educational, and other leisure activities.
 Romania's labor code is silent on the right to strike, except
 to elaborate procedures by which the union leadership is
 required to mediate disputes between the workers and
 management, with recourse to the courts where the dispute
 cannot be settled. In practice, sanctions available to the
 party and the union make it unlikely that such disputes would
 reach the courts. In the past, the Government's reaction to
 actual strikes, or to advocacy of the worker's right to
 strike, has been harsh repression.
 Brutal suppression of miners' strikes in the late 1970's led
 to a complaint by the World Federation of Labor and an
 investigation by the International Labor Organization (ILO).
 Inadequate responses, failure to respond further to charges,
 and refusal to accept a direct-contact mission led the ILO to
 find Romania substantially in violation of generally accepted
 labor standards. In 1986 Romania reportedly resumed
 discussions with the ILO, but no resolution of the matter has
 been reached.
 Work stoppages and labor unrest caused by dissatisfaction
 about food shortages, pay, or lack of heat have increasingly
 been reported. The institution of unrealistic production and
 sales quotas and penalties in the form of salary deductions
 for failure to meet them has increased worker dissatisfaction.
 c. Freedom of Religion
 Religious practice is active and widespread, yet closely
 controlled and circumscribed by the Government. The
 Government subsidizes some religious groups, but actions by
 central and local authorities which abridge basic religious
 rights are a continuing source of concern. The Communist
 Party advocates atheism, and religious activism by state
 officials and party members is not permitted.
 Schoolchildren are taught to be wary of religious
 "superstition." Newspapers and other party-controlled media
 regularly portray religious believers as ignorant or backward.
 Article 30 of the Constitution provides for "freedom of
 conscience" for all citizens, with freedom for individuals to
 share or not to share a religious belief and for churches to
 "function freely," subject to laws governing church
 organization and operation. Those who do not challenge the
 limits imposed by the Government on church activities may
 practice their religion quietly. With such "freedom" comes
 the disadvantage that those who exercise it are less likely to
 
 
 1018
 ROMANIA
 advance far in their trade or to enter such professions as law
 or medicine.
 The Government recognizes 14 religious denominations and,
 through the Department of Religious Affairs, exercises broad
 discretionary powers over the various religious groups. The
 Government subsidizes clerical salaries (which some
 denominations do not accept), issues licenses to preach,
 approves permits for church construction or renovation,
 establishes the number of new admissions to seminaries, and
 controls the importation or printing of religious materials,
 including Bibles. These powers often are used arbitrarily,
 especially against groups that arouse official concern.
 Government restrictions are aimed most intensely at groups
 whose beliefs, in the Government's view, inspire "antisocial"
 or "anti-Government" behavior. Press articles periodically
 criticize these groups for being "fanatic," or "antisocial,"
 or for professing beliefs that conflict with Romanian law. In
 recent times, however, the unrecognized religious groups have
 been tolerated by the Government, although their worship
 services occasionally are treated by local authorities as
 "illegal assemblies," with the participants arrested or fined.
 The rapid growth of the evangelical denominations has led to
 pressures for more religious training, more printing of
 religious materials, and the expansion and construction of
 more churches. Conflicts between evangelical groups and the
 authorities have arisen frequently, and the Government's
 response has been harsh. Activists who are devout and vocal
 are kept under surveillance and often are subject to loss of
 jobs and social benefits, police intimidation or arrest, and
 in some cases beatings.
 The shortage of Protestant Bibles has led some Romanians to
 risk harsh penalties and even imprisonment for smuggling them
 into the country. In 1986, however, a number of imprisoned
 religious activists were released. Constantin Sfatcu,
 convicted in 1985 of attempting to murder a police officer
 after Sfatcu was caught transporting "illegal" Bibles, was
 released and allowed to emigrate to the United States, as were
 a number of others, including Dorel Catarama, a Seventh-Day
 Adventist, and three Baptist pastors. An elder of a Ploesti
 Evangelical Brethren Church, Ilie Neamtu, was convicted in
 1986 and given a severe sentence, although the circumstances
 suggest that Neamtu's real offense was organizing a series of
 Evangelical meetings among his co-workers. Neamtu's
 conviction, however, was overturned in November by an appeals
 court which ruled the charges against him were incorrect.
 In a positive development in 1986, Romanian authorities agreed
 to the printing of 5,000 new Bibles for the Romanian National
 Baptist Union, the first such printing since the 1920's.  They
 also agreed to the printing of several thousand additional
 Bibles in subsequent years, depending upon the need. At the
 end of the year, arrangements for the printing of the first
 group of Bibles had not been completed.
 Concerns remain regarding the maintenance, repair, and
 construction of church buildings. A large Seventh-Day
 Adventist Church in Bucharest, located in a renovation zone,
 was demolished in August. Although the Government has
 promised to allow the purchase of a replacement facility, none
 of the sites proposed by the Church have been approved. Since
 August, the congregation has been meeting in a temporary
 
 
 1019
 ROMANIA
 structure totally inadequate for its needs. A Baptist Church
 in Hunedoara is making its final appeal on an alleged building
 code violation; if it loses, a substantial part of the church
 building will be demolished. Several other congregations
 whose churches were destroyed in previous years are still
 awaiting approval to rebuild. An Evangelical Brethren Church
 in Brinceni recently lost a court case involving the validity
 of the sales contract for its building and now must find new
 quarters. The country's largest Baptist Church, in Oradea,
 has been told that approval previously granted for
 construction of a new church, on land purchased at great
 expense, has now been revoked, leaving the several
 thousand-member congregration in an overcrowded building with
 a decaying foundation and no sewer facilities.
 Seminary admissions remain extremely limited. In 1985 the
 Baptists were allowed only four new students, the Seventh-Day
 Adventists and Pentecostals, three each. By comparison, the
 Baptists were permitted an average of 40 per year in the late
 1970's.
 The Government remains in disagreement with the Roman Catholic
 Church on a number of issues, and the church technically
 remains without an approved government charter. However, the
 church is allowed to operate as if it were fully recognized.
 The Government continues to permit the operation of an active
 Jewish community organization throughout the country. Jewish
 leaders also continue to be able to travel freely outside
 Romania. However, there were a number of problems in 1986.
 In the course of a major urban renewal project in Bucharest, a
 large old age home was demolished before a replacement
 facility was ready, and a major synagogue was torn down
 despite earlier indications from the Government that this
 would not occur. Responsible Government authorities have
 since given assurances that the remaining key Jewish community
 facilities will not be disturbed. The Jewish community also
 has been distressed by anti-Semitic overtones in two recent
 publications. Community leaders protested vigorously and were
 told that those responsible would be punished. Recent reports
 indicate that the editor of one of the publications has been
 dismissed. The Government did allow the Chief Rabbi to
 respond publicly in the Jewish community newspaper to one of
 the pieces, but neither of the offending publications has
 printed the Rabbi's letters of rebuttal. A fire in October
 which damaged the synagogue in Buhusi, in northeastern
 Romania, has given rise to new concerns about anti-Semitism in
 Romania. However, the Government quickly denounced the act,
 and within several days arrested four suspects who were later
 convicted on charges of robbery and arson and imprisoned.
 d. Freedom of Movement Within the Country, Foreign
 Travel, Emigration, and Repatriation
 Except for certain military or other restricted areas (access
 prohibited) and border areas (access limited to residents of
 the areas and those with economic need to travel there), there
 are no official restrictions placed on travel within Romania.
 Because of economic hardships, however, travel within Romania
 can be difficult for the average citizen. The authorities
 sometimes reportedly seek to discourage citizens from
 traveling to meet foreign visitors or to attend particular
 functions.
 
 
 1020
 ROMANIA
 The right of a citizen to change his place of residence is
 restricted. All citizens are required to have residence
 permits and may not legally move from one town to another, or
 between districts within a city, without official permission.
 Implementation of residence permit regulations and
 antiunemployment laws has had the effect of diluting the
 ethnically homogeneous nature of some parts of the country
 heavily populated by national minority groups. Workers are
 technically free to change jobs, although antiunemployment
 laws and governmental controls limit this freedom in practice.
 Travel outside Romania is treated as a privilege, frequently
 arbitrarily withheld, even for those who can "guarantee" their
 return by leaving a close family member behind. Older persons
 wishing to visit their children resident abroad generally have
 few problems.
 Officially, Romania encourages tourism by making visas
 available for most visitors at the border. The Government has
 indicated, however, that certain U.S. citizens who formerly
 visited Romania as tourists would not be given visas for
 future visits, nor would they be allowed to reenter the
 country. In 1986 two American visitors were arrested and
 expelled from the country after attempting to contact
 prominent ethnic Hungarians. The Government refused to give
 -the grounds for the expulsion except to insist, with no
 apparent justification, that their activities were
 inconsistent with tourist status.
 Official policy continues to oppose emigration for any purpose
 but family reunification. Those who seek to leave Romania
 continue to face harassment designed to dissuade them and
 others who might be considering permanent departure.
 Successful applications take between 1 and 5 years before exit
 approval is granted. The Government refuses to allow some
 Romanians to apply for emigration passports at all.
 The United States and Romanian Governments reached an
 understanding in 1985 on new procedures for processing persons
 seeking to emigrate to the United States. These procedures
 have substantially reduced the hardships formerly faced by
 Romanians given permission to leave permanently for the United
 States. They represent one area of progress by Romania toward
 fulfilling its commitments, under the Madrid Concluding
 Document of the Conference on Security and Cooperation in
 Europe, regarding treatment of intending emigrants.
 Section 3 Respect for Political Rights: The Right of Citizens
 to Change Their Government
 Though the Constitution guarantees the right of Romanians to
 change their government and leaders, in practice the
 individual citizen has almost no voice in shaping public
 policy or choosing public officials. The Romanian Communist
 Party, led by the President and a few advisers, rules the
 country. No actual or potential alternatives to this present
 rigidly centralized control are apparent, and no meaningful
 opposition exists or would be tolerated. Public criticism of
 the Government, the party, and the state leadership is
 suppressed.
 The Communist Party comprises more than 13.5 percent of the
 total population of the country. Women officially represent
 52 percent of the general membership, and minorities are
 
 
 1021
 ROMANIA
 reportedly represented in proportion to their numbers within
 the general population.
 National parliamentary elections by secret ballot are held
 every 5 years. The public has no effective voice in the
 nominating process; candidates are chosen by the Front for
 Democracy and Socialist Unity, a mass organization whose
 president is Nicolae Ceausescu. Over 75 percent of its
 officers are Communist Party Central Committee members.
 Official statistics published after the March 1985 general
 election claimed that 99 percent of those registered actually
 voted, and 97.3 percent of these voted for the Front's
 candidates. Western observers closely watching the elections
 consider these figures highly suspect. The Parliament itself
 rubber-stamps the Government's proposals.
 In Romania, the chief party executive for each city, county,.
 or enterprise is also the chief civil executive. Internal
 party elections were held for the new Communist Party
 leadership late in 1984. Though these preceded the national
 general election by several months, those chosen for senior
 party posts the previous fall were universally "elected" to
 the corresponding public posts the following spring.
 Section 4 Governmental Attitude Regarding International and
 Nongovernmental Investigation of Alleged Violations
 of Human Rights
 There are no human rights monitoring organizations operating
 in Romania. The Government has not commented officially on
 reports issued by governmental or nongovernmental
 organizations such as the Council of Europe, Amnesty
 International, or Freedom House, all of which have been
 critical. In 1986 Romanian authorities refused to approve a
 long-proposed visit by the International Human Rights Law
 Group. It did allow travel to Romania by American human
 rights attorney-observers at the bribery trial of loan Ruta
 described above.
 Romania continues officially to proclaim that discussion and
 examination of its human rights situation is "unwarranted
 interference in domestic affairs," despite its professed
 support for human rights standards embodied in the United
 Nations Charter and in the Final Act of the Conference on
 Security and Cooperation in Europe. At the same time,
 discussion of human rights issues is a regular feature of
 diplomatic exchanges between the U.S. and Romanian Governments.
 Section 5 Discrimination Based on Race, Sex, Religion,
 Language, or Social Status
 According to official figures, the country's population
 includes about 2.7 million members of ethnic minorities, of
 whom 1.7 million are ethnic Hungarians. Hungarian sources
 claim that the true figure is closer to between 2 and 2 1/2
 million ethnic Hungarians. Hungarians, Germans, Gypsies, and
 members of many smaller groups constitute about 12 percent of
 the total population. Romania's minorities live in a country
 infused with Romanian nationalism. School texts, history
 books, and mass media purvey a version of history which often
 ignores or belittles the role these minorities have played in
 Romanian history. Although there is no clear evidence of
 economic discrimination against minorities, the Government,
 despite public pronouncements to the contrary, appears to
 
 
 1022
 ROMANIA
 encourage the integration and absorption of minority groups
 into one unified Romanian culture.
 Although the Constitution forbids discrimination on the basis
 of ethnic background, and the Government claims it does not
 discriminate against minorities, there nonetheless are
 limitations on minority groups' freedom to express and
 maintain their cultural heritage. The principal groups which
 feel such limitations are the Hungarian and, to a lesser
 degree, the German minorities. Government efforts to
 centralize and economize by combining educational, social, and
 cultural facilities frequently affect minority groups
 disproportionately. For example, the mergers of schools,
 theaters, or other such institutions often result in the loss
 of the minority group's ethnic characteristics as the
 institutions become predominantly Romanian.
 Strict government control of private organizations which are
 dedicated to the preservation of ethnic cultural practices is
 often viewed by members of minority groups as discriminatory.
 Both Romanian and non-Romanian television and radio
 broadcasting have been cut as an economy measure. However,
 despite government limitations, Hungarian- and German-language
 daily papers still outstrip their Romanian language
 equivalents in circulation in heavily ethnic areas.
 In the field of education, reports from several sources
 indicate that there are no longer Hungarian-language high
 schools, but only Hungarian sections in Romanian high
 schools. Under longstanding rules, the minimum number of
 Romanian-speaking students required to form a Romanian class
 is far less than the minimum number of minority children
 required to form a class in their language. There continue to
 be reports that government practice is to assign mainly
 Romanian-speaking teachers to predominantly Hungarian areas,
 and most Hungarian-speaking teachers to predominantly Romanian
 areas. Although basic schooling still is available in
 minority languages such as Hungarian and German, students can
 take university entrance examinations and courses in minority
 languages only in a few disciplines.
 Women are constitutionally guaranteed the same rights and
 privileges as men. The Government seeks to upgrade the role
 of women in society with specific policies in the areas of
 education, access to employment, and comparable wages. As a
 result, women are employed in virtually all sectors of the
 economy, and there is equal opportunity in education, but at
 the senior levels of responsibility and authority, they appear
 in far smaller numbers. The higher ranks of the party are
 occupied predominantly by male Romanians.
 CONDITIONS OF LABOR
 The Constitution guarantees the right to work. Unemployment
 is a crime ("social parasitism"). The Government closely
 controls the labor market and claims that there is no
 unemployment.
 The Constitution guarantees an 8-hour workday (or a 6-hour day
 in "arduous" occupations), a 24-hour rest period each week,
 paid vacations, and the "right to leisure." Labor law
 elaborates these guarantees but allows employers to override
 these standards "if conditions warrant." In 1986 there were
 numerous reports of workers required to perform extra,
 uncompensated days of labor to make up for lagging production
 
 
 1023
 ROMANIA
 or for some official holidays. Shift schedules and workdays
 have been arbitrarily adjusted, in some cases, to rationalize
 machinery use or energy consumption patterns.
 There is no specific minimum employment age, although Romanian
 law requires schooling to the age of 16. Exceptions, however,
 are allowed for youths 14 years of age in temporary jobs and
 for youths of 15 employed in industrial work, so long as the
 employer provides continuing educational opportunities and
 shows that the work being performed is "appropriate for the
 age and condition" of the employee. In such cases, the law
 limits work to 6 hours per day. Children from age 11 may work
 in the fields, or in other "patriotic work," usually as part
 of a school or other group activity.
 The labor code guarantees Romanian workers a safe
 environment. The Ministry of Labor has established safety
 standards for most industries and is responsible for enforcing
 these standards. In practice, however, observers report that
 workplace conditions in many factories present substantial
 health or safety hazards. Although management is reportedly
 aware of these deficiencies in most cases, emphasis on meeting
 production goals clearly takes precedence over safety and
 health in light of the Government's insistence on rapidly
 paying off the foreign debt and on pursuing industrial and
 economic development.
 
 
 1024
