ROMANIA
As in previous years, the Report on Romania gives an accurate picture of the bleak human rights conditions in that country. Nevertheless, a number of shortcomings in the Report warrant attention.
The Report claims that the Romanian government "took several significant human rights steps" in 1985 a considerable overstatement. It is true that the government has allowed U.S. religious groups to visit the country, but the Report itself acknowledges that the citizens with whom they met "may have been closely questioned by authorities." Further on, the Report states that the government "seeks to control, screen, and orchestrate such visits when they do occur." Such actions can hardly be considered as "facilitating" factfinding visits. Given the Romanian laws which require all contact with foreigners to be reported within 24 hours, it is fairly certain that anyone meeting with the religious groups would be interrogated.
The Report uses many appropriate cases to illustrate the various categories of repression, but curiously, does not supply names. In fact, the only two names given in the Report are Constantin Sfatcu, who appealed his case to the Supreme Court and received a reduced sentence, and Father Gheorghe Calciu, who was allowed to emigrate in July 1985. On the other hand, the Report briefly discusses the case but does not mention by name Gheorghe Emil Ursu, an engineer and poet who died in police custody under suspicious circumstances in November. Ursu had been subjected to a seven-month investigation on the basis of personal diaries he had kept for 40 years. Similarly, the Report does not name Father Janos Csilik, but states that a Roman Catholic priest was so severely beaten that he temporarily lost the use of his hands. The Report also discusses "substantiated cases" of persons detained for political offenses who
89
seemed to have disappeared, but refrains from giving names. Though discretion is required when dealing with sensitive cases, publicizing the names of political prisoners -- especially when they died under suspicious circumstances — is an important part of the information that should be contained in the Country Reports.
The Report does not mention Dorin Tudoran, a dissident writer and poet who was subjected to years of harassment and persecution for his political views. In April, he staged a 40-day hunger strike for permission to emigrate; his home was virtually cordoned off; his telephone was cut off; and no one was permitted to contact him. Tudoran and his family were ultimately allowed to emigrate to the United States in July 1985.
Finally, as in past years, the Report is not as strong as it should be when dealing with the Hungarian minority in Romania. While acknowledging "limitations on minority groups' freedom to express and maintain their cultural heritage," the Report does not cite specific cases of violations of minority rights, as it does under other categories. For example, no mention is made of the Hungarian Press of Transylvania, which is virtually the only samizdat publication in Romania. Nor does the Report discuss the case of Geza Szocs, an ethnic Hungarian poet, who has been subjected to lengthy and repeated house searches, interrogations and house arrest for his minority rights activities.
90
