ROMANIA
The report on Romania accurately and forcefully describes the devastating human rights situation in that coimtry. It details the government's control over "every significant aspect of the country's life," including "pervasive restrictions on the freedom of expression, assembly, religion and movement." The report has several failings, however: its inattention to the consequences of the workers' riots in Brasov, its inadequate portrayal of the extreme suffering caused by the government's harsh economic policies, and its lack of appreciation of the discrimination suffered by the Hungarian minority.
In discussing the Brasov riots, the report correctly notes:
In November several thousand people, led by industrial workers in Brasov, demonstrated in the main square in protest against sharp pay cuts as a result of production shortfalls and stiff new restrictions on the use of gas and electricity. With frustrations high because of the harsh austerities enforced by the Government, the demonstration turned violent. Scores of workers were reportedly detained after the demonstrators were dispersed.
Missing from this account, however, is any mention of the unconfirmed reports that the whereabouts of many of those who participated in the uprising is im-known, and that they may still be in detention or have been forcibly relocated to other areas of the country.
In addressing the persecution of the Hungarian minority, the report describes a series of cultural and educational restrictions, but then concludes that "a pattern of economic discrimination against ethnic Hungarians as a group is not evident." This conclusion is refuted, however, by the very persecution that the report itself describes. For example, the report notes that educational opportunities in the Hungarian language are diminishing, particularly at the university level. Since educational opportimities directly affect the possibility of economic advancement, this observation seems at odds with the State Department's conclusion that there is no economic discrimination.
127
Critique
Similarly, the report describes the "claim" by the Hungarian minority that "the Government uses its controls over residence permits, employment, and study opportunities to dilute the concentration of the Hungarian population in its traditional centers." Once again, this charge goes to the heart of the reported lack of economic discrimination. Rather than address in its own voice the factual basis for the charge, however, the State Department merely repeats the Romanian government's position that "demographic changes in Transylvania [where the Hui^arian minority is concentrated] are natural and result in part from increased industrialization which has drawn ethnic Romanian workers into urban areas formerly inhabited predominantly by ethnic Hungarians." This reliance on the government's imsubstantiated line is inappropriate, particularly after the State Department has chosen to report a purported lack of discrimination in its own voice. We believe that a more thorough examination of the charges raised by the Hungarian minority would have led the State Department to the opposite conclusion on the issue of economic discrimination.
128
