UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS
The report on the USSR is generally accurate concerning the issues it covers, but there are numerous critical omissions. Overall, the report fails to give an adequate account of the continued abuses of human rights and the lack of laws and legal institutions capable of addressing such violations. The apparent reluctance of the State Department to criticize the USSR neglects the efforts and gains of Soviet human rights advocates. The previously strong U.S. support for human rights activists in the USSR should be revived. The present opportunity to build respect for the human rights constituency there is not promoted by the understated approach of this report.
The report is striking for its circumscribed description of human rights in the USSR which fails to give the full picture of the continuing human rights abuses throughout the country. As in last year's report, the State Department tends to accept as fact statements of intention to improve rights practices and to "respect" basic human rights, but insufficiently reports the actual practice of continued human rights violations and the lack of legal remedies and protections from such violations. This tendency is more pronounced in this year's report than the 1988 report which also focused on "official statements" of Soviet proposed changes in human rights policy rather than documenting actual practices.
This year the Department of State praises the same draft laws praised last year. The human rights draft laws which last year's report predicted would be passed in 1989 are still draft laws, now predicted to be passed in 1990. These include draft laws on freedom of conscience, religion, emigration and association. Little or no mention is made of new laws which further restricted human rights. The report mistakenly describes the limit on the length of pretrial detention as only nine months; the period was increased to 18 months in 1989 pursuant to an amendment to Article 34 of the Russian Republic Code of Criminal Procedure. This new law was a set-back for human rights and violates the internationally recognized right to a "trial within a reasonable time or release," guaranteed by Article 9(3) of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), to which the USSR is a party. The late Andrei Sakharov characterized the new law on pretrial detention and the questionable procedure under which it was adopted as a law that would "plunge the country into a web of lawlessness" by giving the prosecutors "free rein."
238
USSR
An example of understating a widely known human rights abuse is the report's assertion that only "[s]ome human rights activists in 1989 were detained under the provisions of a Supreme Soviet decree on meetings and demonstrations," when the actual number of political detainees was easily in the hundreds. For example, on February 8 in Kishinev, the capital of Moldavia, nine people were detained for participating in a demonstration outside the Central Committee building of the Moldavian Communist Party to protest the arrival of Vladimir Chebrikov, a Communist Party Central Committee member and Chief of the Committee for State Security (KGB). On February 12,60 people were detained in Kishinev for participating in a demonstration calling for Moldavia to be declared the state language and for the Latin alphabet to be reinstated. On December 10, 20 people were detained after an unsanctioned demonstration on Pushkin Square in Moscow organized to commemorate International Human Rights Day. A large and unknown number of people were detained for demonstrating in areas under emergency law provisions, such as in Yerevan and Baku.
In the area of government interference with privacy, the report correctly states that interference is pervasive. However, the report asserts that there were "virtually no house searches for political materials" until late in the year and then only in "Leningrad, Tblisi, Saratov, and Sverdlovsk"; yet searches, in particular of samizdat distributors' homes, occurred throughout the year all over the USSR. For example, on May 12 in Moscow the apartment of Yelena Berezina was searched, on suspicion of being an independent library. During the search, around 700 publications, mainly samizdat, were confiscated. On May 1 during a search of a house in Moscow, political leaflets, a typewriter, paper and placards intended for a May Day demonstration were confiscated. Those present in the house were detained. The house was demolished the following day.
The report's limited and uncritical description of the government's justification for monitoring communications only "when the authorities consider vital political interests to be affected" fails to fulfill the State Department's obligation to evaluate human rights practices in accordance with internationally recognized human rights. Article 17(1) of the ICCPR states that "[n]o one shall be subjected to arbitrary or unlawful interference with his privacy, family, home or correspondence . . The (UN) Human Rights Committee has stated that "the term 'unlawful' means that no interference can take place except in cases envisaged by the law. Interference authorized by States can only take place on the basis of law, which itself must
239
USSR
comply with the provisions, aims and objectives of the Covenant." The State Department should promote the respect of law by the Soviet government to limit the interference of privacy rather than approving a changing standard according to political interests.
The case of Raoul Wallenberg, the Swedish diplomat who saved numerous Hungarian Jews from Nazi deportation to death camps and subsequently disappeared in 1944, is still considered a "disappearance" by Amnesty International and other human rights groups. The State Department does not mention this case even though it comes within the definition of "disappearance" in Appendix A to the report.
Several cases of political prisoners whose whereabouts are unknown are also not discussed by the State Department. One such case is that of Petro Nechayuk, who was convicted for his peaceful religious activities in the underground Ukrainian Catholic Church in 1982. Repeated attempts by Amnesty International to obtain information about whether he is still imprisoned have been futile.
The report's assessment of the abusive treatment of Soviet prisoners is accurate and consistent with reports from recently released prisoners. Not discussed in the report, however, is a law allowing Soviet citizens to bring a lawsuit to redress abusive state practices. The law was enacted in 1988, and further liberalized in 1989. (The liberalizations come into effect in July 1990.) This law has not been widely used due to procedural limitations and the absence of an independent judicial system. People are understandably reluctant to sue the government until the judiciary and the executive are truly separate.
The State Department's expectation that trial prison reforms will be included in the "draft penal code" is not useful when assessing actual law or practice. The report discusses several draft laws, although they have not been adopted. Significant changes frequently are made to draft laws during the lawmaking process prior to adoption. While it would be a positive step if laws were passed and enforced to protect the rights of prisoners, the report should note that these limited experimental prison reforms are by no means widespread and may just be attempts to impress foreigners. The improvements in certain prisons visited by Congressmen Frank Wolf and Christopher Smith, such as increased food rations, were reported to last only for as long as the visit.
240
USSR
The report's assertion that prisoners in 1989 had no right to a lawyer is not accurate. The Supreme Soviet passed a law in December 1989, the Fundamental Principles on Court and Procedure, which grants detainees the right to an attorney at the time of arrest, detention or presentation of charges. The implementation of this law should be monitored during 1990.
The discussion of the findings of the American delegation of psychiatrists and legal experts concerning Soviet psychiatric hospitals is accurate yet does not convey the complete picture of the serious abuses that continue to occur under the guise of psychiatric treatment. While the report accurately describes the increase in short term psychiatric confinement for political reasons and states that the delegation's findings "lend credence to continuing concerns about psychiatric abuse," the delegation actually gathered evidence of a pattern of systematic misdiagnosis and major shortcomings in drug prescriptions for patients. The delegation also found a number of people unnecessarily confined among the patients they examined.
Further, the report should have addressed the use of the painful drug sulphazine by Soviet psychiatrists. Sulphazine has not been used in other countries for more than 30 years because of its dangerous side effects and dubious therapeutic value. Despite the fact that the Soviets in 1989 reported at the World Psychiatric Association meeting in Athens that there was a Health Ministry directive prohibiting the use of sulphazine, shortly thereafter Helsinki Watch reported that Soviet psychiatric officials in a public meeting in Moscow admitted that sulphazine could continue to be prescribed.
Not reported are the longer term cases of people held in psychiatric hospitals against their will for political reasons during 1989. Human rights monitors have documented several such cases. During 1989, human rights monitors received information that six people are believed to be held in the Talgar clinic in Alma Ata, possibly for political reasons related to unrest in Kazakhstan in December 1986. This case should have been included in the report. Mstislav Yuzefovich Vink is also believed to have been confined against his will in a psychiatric hospital since at least 1979 solely for political reasons. Mr. Vink, an ethnic German, is believed to be held in a maximum-security psychiatric institution in the Ukrainian city of Dnepropetrovsk because he requested to emigrate to the Federal Republic of Germany and renounced his Soviet citizenship.
241
USSR
This year's report does not discuss the fact that the law enacted in 1988 which allows an appeal of a decision to confine someone in a psychiatric institution, highly praised in last year's report, has still not been successfully implemented. Foreign visitors, such as the U.S. delegation of psychiatrists and legal experts mentioned in the report, found that patients in Soviet psychiatric hospitals were unaware of the new law. The law has been criticized for the lengthy review process within the psychiatric medical bureaucracy before a case can be appealed to a court. The patient must remain in a psychiatric hospital during these appeals which may take several months.
Many human rights activists continued to be arbitrarily detained, not the limited numbers stated in the report. Most were either participants in meetings or demonstrations organized by unofficial organizations or independent newspaper-sellers arrested for "illegal trading." The report fails to mention this practice. Little evidence or justification exists to prosecute these cases and they usually result in what has been characterized as the phenomenon of the "vanishing acquittal." The detained or arrested person is not acquitted but rather is released while the case is sent back to the investigator for "further investigation"; the charges are not dropped, but generally no further action is taken. This occurred in the case of the "Armenian Karabakh Committee" but is not mentioned in the report's discussion of their arrests. Committee members were detained for six months and were then conditionally released. Amnesty International believes they were imprisoned for peacefully exercising their rights to freedom of expression and association. Although the Committee members were released, there is no information to suggest their charges were dropped.
The State Department correctly observes that there are no known prisoners serving sentences solely under Articles 142 and 227 of the criminal code, which require the separation of church and state and prohibit teaching religion and performing religious ceremonies, respectively. Yet there are still at least 32 confirmed prisoners, not mentioned in the report, who have been detained for their religious beliefs, many of them conscientious objectors. Citizens under the age of 26 must serve a minimum of two years in the Soviet armed forces. Until there is a civilian alternative to military service in the USSR, prisoners held solely for their religious beliefs will be a continuing problem.
242
USSR
Other criminal statutes not mentioned in the report are used to punish religious believers. For example, Pavel Solovyov, a 38-year-old Pentacostalist was arrested in 1989 for "malicious hooliganism" for holding an open-air religious meeting.
The State Department is too restrictive in its definition of political prisoners; it states that "no known political or religious prisoners have been serving sentences solely under Articles 70, 142, 190-1 or 227." The report should have included other cases where people are being punished for exercising rights guaranteed under international law. The State Department should judge these cases by international law standards and not whether their actions are "not now considered crimes by the current Government." For example, there are political prisoners who were originally arrested under one of the above listed articles and for additional political offenses, such as leaving the USSR without a visa. The right to leave one's own country is guaranteed in Article 12 of the ICCPR. Until recently, most Soviet citizens have found it difficult to leave the USSR legally. Leaving without permission is a crime punishable by up to 20 years imprisonment and exile, or even death. In March 1989 in Simferopol, Ukraine, Oleg Grigoryevich Pletnev was tried and convicted for trying to flee to Turkey across the Black Sea in a rubber boat. He was sentenced to one and a half years imprisonment.
Another political prisoner case not mentioned in the report is that of Bohdan Klymchak, a technician from the Ukrainian Republic, imprisoned since 1978. He was arrested for leaving the country without permission and for "anti-Soviet agitation and propaganda." Mr. Klymchak was sentenced to 15 years imprisonment to be followed by 5 years internal exile by a court in the Lvov region of the Ukraine in October 1979. He was convicted of treason for illegally crossing the border and also for taking abroad his literary works which had a "nationalist bias" under the Ukrainian article corresponding to article 70 of the Russian criminal code.
The report fails to discuss the denial of a fair trial to Arkady Manucharov, an Armenian Supreme Soviet deputy, who has been detained since November 1988, and was not charged until May 1989. The bases for his arrest have reportedly changed several times since he was initially arrested. Mr. Manucharov was ordered "released into the charge of a group of deputies of the Armenian Supreme Soviet" by the presiding court in January 1989. The court also found that the rules of procedure had been grossly violated during the investigation of his case. The release order was not carried out due to a protest by
243
USSR
the USSR procuracy to the Supreme Court of the Byelorussian Republic, which found that his release would "complicate the course of the investigation." Arkady Manucharov's 19 month detention appears to violate the right to "trial within a reasonable time or release" guaranteed by Article 9(3) of the ICCPR, and contravenes Soviet procedural law.
The report quotes the Soviet Constitution concerning guarantees on freedoms of speech, press and association and a draft law on the press as if these documents actually protect these rights, which they do not. (The draft Law on Public Associations passed its first reading in the Supreme Soviet in June 1990. It still will be debated and changed before it may enact unrealized rights of the 1977 Constitution. Only in June 1990 was the Law on the Press and Other Mass Media finally passed.) It must be emphasized that the report tends to overstate the laws and actual practice regarding freedom of expression in the USSR.
The report accurately describes the broad discretion permitted Soviet officials in regulating demonstrations. However, the report only mentions two situations where demonstrators were beaten by Soviet troops. It should have made it clear that brutal beatings were often used to disperse unsanctioned demonstrations. In addition, in its discussion of the repeated punishments directed against the Democratic Union, the report should have mentioned the frequent beatings its members endured. For example, Ministry of Interior special troops brutally attacked demonstrators participating in the unsanctioned rally organized by Democratic Union members to commemorate International Human Rights Day on December 10 in Moscow. This demonstration and the beatings were discussed in the Soviet press and should have also been included in the report.
In discussing states of emergency, the report should have noted that Moldavia also has been under a state of emergency with a prohibition on demonstrations. Further, it should have noted that no uniform legal standards exist to determine what constitutes a state of emergency and which rights should be limited in connection with the emergency.
The report's discussion of religious rights and practices should be commended for its thoroughness. The enjoyment of religious rights is still somewhat overstated in the report. Though certain activities are "tolerated" by the Soviet government, it should be emphasized strict regulations exist against religious teaching which are
244
USSR
not just "theoretical" as stated in the report, but are legally enforceable restrictions. For example, Baptist pastor Alexander Brover and parishioner Anna Vlasenkow were fined for holding a prayer meeting on January 8 in the Ukrainian town of Berislav. On April 4, a prayer house in Rostov-on-Don, belonging to an unregistered Baptist congregation and built in August 1988 on the land of former political prisoner Larisa Zaitseva, was destroyed.
Hare Krishna believers were frequently detained and beaten for conducting a "Kirtan" (religious singing). On August 29, 15 Hare Krishna believers were beaten by a detachment of special police with rubber clubs for conducting a Kirtan in Moscow. The participants were detained and taken to a police station, where the majority were released. Three were held overnight and fined before being released. Moslems from the Crimea and Central Asia have appealed for measures of religious autonomy to the governmental Council for Religious Affairs, for example, to register their congregations, to elect their own leaders, to build more mosques and for permission to print religious texts in the Arabic alphabet in the city of Buinaksk.
The report mentions that a draft law on emigration would provide "broad legal guarantees on the right to travel abroad (with some restrictions)." What is not mentioned is that these restrictions could still be used to violate individuals' human rights. For example, the draft law retains a restriction on emigration for people who have had access to "secrets." While the draft law in its present form provides that a person must be informed when starting a job that he or she will be exposed to "secret" information, no provision is made for people already determined to be working in such areas to allow them to emigrate.
The State Department thoroughly discusses the rights of workers and the new strike law. It should be noted that while the report correctly states that "fledgling independent union movements have sprung up" throughout the USSR these organizations have been denied legal status. For example, the request of the Workers Union of Kemerov to be registered was refused in September.
245
